<section>e</section>
Executive summary
Executive summary
This report presents a third party assessment and evaluation of the PHI/89/P16 Project on Improving the Status of Disadvantaged Women in Small-Scale Fishing Communities of Capiz and Pangasinan, Philippines. Specifically, the study was focused on the following:
* project's impact on the social and economic status of women beneficiaries with emphasis on economic activities, income and expenditures, credit and savings, living condition and fertility behavior and family planning practices;
* Project implementation and management efficiency
* Identification and documentation of the achievements as well as limitations and constraints of the Project; and
* Assessment of the sustainability and replicability of Project achievements and activities.
The study was completed with the use of both primary and secondary data. The secondary data were sourced from published and unpublished project reports and documents that were made available at the Project coordinating office in Manila and at the implementing Provincial offices of Capiz and Pangasinan. The primary data were gathered through interviews of key informants including project field staff, barangay officials, women group leaders and others and through an structured survey interviews of about 20% of all women who joined and remained members of the first batch of groups which were formed in Capiz and Pangasinan in 1990 and with another survey respondents consisting of 20% of the women who initially joined but drop-out from the Project.
Project Impact on the Socio-Economic Status of Women
The survey respondents that were used as basis for determining the Project impacts could be characterized as follows:
* Their ages range from 19 to 63 years with an average age of 41 years for participants and 36 years for drop-outs. The participants from Capiz are slightly older (43 years) than the participants from Pangasinan (36 years). The participants generally have passed the most fertile age of women,
* On the average, the women respondents have completed seven years of formal schooling or at leases have reached secondary education. A greater proportion of the Project participants completed high school than that of the dropouts.
* Household size of Project participants is slightly larger than the drop-outs.
Economic Activities
A clear indication of the Project impact is that all the women participants have engaged in at least one livelihood activity. This can be substantiated by the fact that many of the project drop-outs (29%) had remained plain housewives.
The most common economic activity the women participants have engaged in are fishery-based enterprises such as fish vending, processing and marketing, that are generally complementary to their respective husband's main source of income, i.e. fishing.
Income and Expenditures
A significant change on women's income and their share to total household's income was observed as a result of the Project. The women participants' average monthly income had increased by more than 200% from an average of P727 in 1990 to- P2,283 in 1993. Likewise, the proportional share of women's income to the total household income have also increased from less than 35% to at least 45%.
The average total household's annual income had increased from P28,551 in 1990 to P65,255 in 1993 for Pangasinan and from P22,122 in 1990 to P53,622 in 1993 for Capiz. For both provinces, the estimated increase in household annual income was about 133% which is quite significant. Even considering the effect of inflation' the real income of the households had increased by more than 100%.
The increase of the total household's income has been attributed to the greater contribution of women, as a result of their income generating projects that were supported by the Project.
In terms of household's expenditures, no significant changes have been observed. The basic food items remained to be a major household expenditure. The estimated total annual expenditures is comparatively less than the total annual income of the average household. The household's surplus income is either used as additional capital for IGPs or used for housing improvements as well as cash savings.
Credit and Saving Practices
Through the provision of guarantee funds, the Project was able to assist the disadvantaged women in coastal communities of Capiz and Pangasinan in establishing their respective IGPs. Through this assistance, the women were able to increase income contribution to their respective households and also they were able to acquire the habit of savings.
Fertility Behavior and Family Planning
The PHI/89/P16 Project has greatly contributed to improvements in family planning awareness and knowledge. But no significant impact on women fertility behavior and family planning practices may be expected considering that the first batch of Project participants have already passed the most fertile age of women. However, the IGPs of women in the coastal communities of Capiz and Pangasinan have supported the women's decisions to continue some form of family planning practices or in providing them a broader choice of methods or encouraging them to shift to more effective form of family planning.
Living Condition and Social Gains
Based on selected indicators such as ownership of land, residential houses, household facilities as well as transport, an observable improvements of living conditions of the women participants can be attributed to the Project. These are brought about by the increase of household income due primarily to the IGPs of women that were supported by the Project. Such an improvement in household income consequently enhanced family welfare.
In terms of social gains indicators, such as access to credit and social services, family welfare, self-confidence and self-esteem, respect to one's family, neighbors and community, among others, this present assessment and evaluation of the PHI/89/P16 confirms earlier reports. The Project contributed social gains in the targetted coastal communities.
Project Implementation and Management Efficiency
The PHI/89/P16 Project was implemented as a collaborative endeavor of various institutions such as UNFPA, FAO, GFIs, DOH, DABFAR, DSWD, DECS, POPCPM, CDA, NGOs and Provincial Governments of Capiz and Pangasinan. In the implementation, the role and functions of these participating institutions were clearly defined, and the complementary of functions to maximize efficiency had been emphasized.
The targetted women beneficiaries of Project interventions including group organizing, training assistance, technical assistance, credit assistance, family planning and health related services among others, have been successfully served.
In terms of the management of Project funds, particularly credit guarantee funds, the implementation of the Project appeared to be satisfactory. The credit fund utilization index was estimated to be 190%. As of August 1994, the total outstanding loans amounted to US$1103,367. Even if this amount will not be repaid, about US$105,478 of the total allocated guarantee fund of US$180,000 will still remain available.
Project Achievements and Limitations
The following have verified as achievements of the PHI/89/P16.
* Economic improvements in the selected coastal communities of Capiz and Pangasinan due to the introduction of IGPs, improvement of women's skills in the management of economic, enterprises, acquisition of capital assets and resources mobilization. Overall, the Project has influeced the increases of women's income and their contribution to total household income and family welfare;
* Social-related improvements which includes improved awareness of family planning and active participation in community activities;
* Formation of women groups and strengthening community relation and various group activities, e.g. community services as well as community political decision making.
Several but manageable limitations in the project implementation have been identified such as:
* Administrative problem on frequent replacement of Project staff may adversely affect smooth implementation of Project activities)
* Delay in the releases of credit assistance had created some doubts and disappointments among the targetted women beneficiaries;
* Inadequate monitoring and evaluation of Project activities, particularly the family planning interventions.
Sustainability and Replicability of Project Achievements '
* The sustainability of the, Project achievements will depend not only on the continued support of the Provincial Governments of Capiz and Pangasinan but also on the commitments of the women beneficiaries themselves., The creation of group volunteers formation of women group federation and the inclusion of the Project in the regular Provincial Governments programme will help sustain the Project achievements.
* The Project implementation strategy or approach through community-based participation can be replicated in other parts of both Provinces of Capiz and Pangasinan.
<title>An evaluation of project PHI/89/P16 - Improving the status of disavantaged women in small-scale fishing communities of Capiz and Pangasinan, Philippines. Improving the Status of Disadvantaged Women in Small-Scale Fishing Communities </title>
<section>1</section>
List of abbreviations/acronyms
List of abbreviations/acronyms
AB
- Allied Banking Corporation
ACPC
- Agricultural Credit Policy Council
SC
- Barangay Council
BHW
- Barangay Health Worker
BSPO
- Barangay Service Point Officer
CARD
- Center for Agricultural and Rural Development
CDA
- Cooperative Development Authority
CO
- Community Organization
CRS
- Catholic Relief Services
DA-BFAR
- Department of Agriculture - Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
DECS
- Department of Education, Culture and Sports
DENR
- Department of Environment and Natural Resources
DO
- Drop-outs
DOH
- Department of Health
DOST
- Department of Science and Technology
DSWD
- Department of Social Works and Development
FAO
- Food and Agriculture Organization
FP
- Family Planning
FPOP
- Family Planning Organization of the Philippines
FPV
- Family Planning Volunteer
FW
- Field Worker
GVO
- Group Volunteer Organizer
IEC
- Information-Education-Communications
IGP
- Income Generating Projects
INCH
- Institute of Maternal and Child Health
LBP
- Land Bank of the Philippines
LGUs
- Local Government Units
MCH
- Maternal and Child Health
MWRA
- Married Women of Reproductive Age
PAX
- Participants
POPCOM
- Population Commission
PPDO
- Provincial Planning and Development Office
RHU
- Rural Health Unit
TLRC
- Technology and Livelihood Resource Center
UNFPA
- United Nations Fund for Population Activities
UNICEF
- United Nations Children Fund
USAID
- United States Agency for International Development
WGs
- Women Groups
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
The evaluation team wishes to express their appreciation for the valuable assistance extended to them by the Project Team. In this case, some staff of the Project were exceptionally helpful and the team is grateful for their support and for the arrangements made to facilitate its task.
The team furthermore likes to place on record its gratitude for the warm and friendly welcome by officers and members of the Women Groups visited especially the survey respondents, both the participants and drop-outs who were very cooperative in giving useful information. Other persons worth mentioning are the Barangay Officials. Rural Health workers and husbands of respondents who gave valuable insights about the Project.
<section>3</section>
1. Introduction
1.1 Background
1.2 Rationale of the study
1.3 Objectives and scope of the assessment study
1.4 Methods and approaches of the study
1. Introduction
1.1 Background
On June 1988, the FAO Population Programme Office in Rome in coordination with the FAO Fisheries Department sent a mission to the Philippines to identify areas for possible integrated schemes taking into account population and fisheries related concerns.
The Philippine National Population Plan 1989-1993 emphasizes among other thrusts, the integration of population-related concerns into sectoral plans and programmes. This is based on two fundamental principles expressed in the social plan namely:
(a) that population-related matters must be seen by people as part of government's broader developmental concerns and are not to be pursued in isolation of other development efforts; and
(b) that strategically, such integrated approaches build a more lasting commitment on the part of people when both their economic and social development needs are addressed in a holistic manner.
In 1987, smaIl-scale fisherfolks contributed 49.4% of total fish production, and amounting to 18.5 billion pesos, to 44.4% of the total value of production. Inspite of this, small-scale fisherfolks belong to the economically and socially most depressed groups of society. Gender role analysis show, that women contribute essential functions to these basically household managed enterprises. Due to the heavy exploitation of marine fishing grounds, the fisherman's catch is progressively decreasing. The woman's small fish marketing business thus augments husband's income. But due to their low income, they are at the mercy of private moneylenders or "loansharks''.
Improving the income of these fisherfolks alone is not sufficient to raise the level of the quality of their lives. There is a need to intensify health, nutrition and family planning information and education. Equally important is the provision of basic social services. Traditionally, these communities are not reached by the services of government.
To improve their status, the Provincial Governments of Capiz and Pangasinan and- FAO formulated this project with funding from UNFPA. This was first implemented in February 1990 and was to last through December 1993, but the Project was extended for another year to allow time for sustainable impacts and for the newly-organized groups to build-up their capabilities.
1.2 Rationale of the study
The Project implementors, executing agency and funding agency assess the progress of this project through a Tripartite Review on a yearly basis. During the last quarter of 1992, the UNFPA conducted a case study of the project to examine the linkage between women's economic participation, empowerment and family planning practices. Moreover, in June 1993, "An Initial Assessment of Project Impact on Selected PHI/89/P16 Women Focusing on Specific Economic and Social Gains" was prepared by the former National Project Coordinator in response to UNFPA's request to gather more data on the results of the implementation of women's economic activities. However, impacts on fertility behavior and/or linkage to family planning practicies were not fully examined since it would require more time to get a reasonable assessment. In general, both studies found positive results in the economic and social benefits to women resulting from project assistance.
Even as UNFPA already conducted a study and the project coordinator prepared an internal preliminary asseesment, there is still a need for the third party evaluation as stated in the PRODOC. This evaluation was supposed to have taken place in December 1993, but with the one-year extension, it was deferred to this year to come up with a more reasonable and empirically objective assessment of hard statistical data.
This paper will also be used as input in the forthcoming Tripartite Evaluation Review in October 1994.
1.3 Objectives and scope of the assessment study
The main purposes of the evaluation as outlined in the Terms of Reference are as follows:
(a) to assess the impact of the project on the social and economic status of women participants in a statistically and empirically objective manner. Specifically, it focuses on changes in women's:
1. economic activities;
2. income for the past 4 years)
3. household expeditures;
4. credit and savings performance;
5. living conditions;
6. fertility behavior and family planning practices; and
7. perception of social gains.
(b) to assess the efficiency of project implementation and management by participating agencies,
(c) to identify and document project achievements as well as the constraints and shortcomings encountered by the project; and
(d) to assess the sustainability, replicability and durability of project achievements and activities.
A copy of the full Terms of Reference of the evaluation team is attached in Anne>: 1.
1.4 Methods and approaches of the study
The report of the evaluation team is based on a survey and a review of documentation available at the project's National and Provincial offices and on information provided by the Project staff- and key informants which include barangay officials, midwives, school teachers and selected leaders and members of women groups.
The impact assessment was done by comparing 20% of all women who joined and remained members of the first batch of groups which were formed in Capiz and Pangasinan in the second half of 1990 (107 women participants) and with another sample consisting of 20% of the women who initially joined but then dropped out from the project (34 drop-outs). Table 1 presents the distribution of the women respondents by province and by type of women's group.
The women included in the sample were interviewed individually using a questionnaire designed by project management with slight revisions integrated by the team. The information gathered from women respondents were supplemented through interviews with women's husbands and key informants, group discussions with the officers and members of women groups and through observations.
Field survey and project evaluation were conducted from July and August 1994. The survey was administered by field workers in the provinces and validated by the evaluation team through interviews of selected respondents.
Analysis of the data was done using some statistical tools (e.g. percentages, minimum, maximum, mean and growth rates). Data were presented in a tabular forms. The periods covered in this study are from February 1990, to December 1993.
The views expressed in the report are those of the authors. The report does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNFPA or FAO.
<section>4</section>
2. Project description
2.1 Objectives of the project
2.1.1 Long range objective
2.1.2 immediate objectives
2.2 Project scope and activities
2.2.1 Project participants
2.2.2 Activities/components
2.3 Project framework/approaches/method of implementation
2.4 Project inputs/interventions and accomplishments
2.4.1 Community/group organization
2.4.2 Training assistance
2.4.3 Technical assistance
2.4.4 Credit assistance
2.4.5 Social services/linkages to resource and service institutions
2.4.6 IEC materials support
2.4.7 Monitoring and evaluation
2. Project description
2.1 Objectives of the project
2.1.1 Long range objective
To contribute to the achievement of the goals and objectives of the National Population Plan through an integrated approach to improve the living conditions of small-scale fisherfolks, with particular emphasis on women.
2.1.2 immediate objectives
(a) By the end of project life, at least 50% of project participants would have increased their income; improved their skills in managing their micro-enterprises.
(b) By the end of project life, at least 50% of project participants would have manifested positive changes in attitudes, knowledge and practice in FP/POP-ED and MCH related matters.
(c) By the end of project life, a community-based/managed integrated system would have been developed and tested.
2.2 Project scope and activities
2.2.1 Project participants
An estimated 3,200 women in 13 coastal communities in Pangasinan and 7 coastal communities in Capiz will directly participate in the project.
2.2.2 Activities/components
The two major components, namely the economic and social development components will be managed as one inter-active whole. Both components will be supported by (a) participative problem needs identification survey; (b) a training system; and (c) ongoing technical assistance.
2.3 Project framework/approaches/method of implementation
The community organization principle is applied in introducing in an interactive manner, the economic and social development inputs, into the selected women participants.
Economic inputs will be provided in the form of revolving fund, to support income-generating activities of the women. Social development focus will be in areas related to population education, family planning, MCH and nutrition. Based on the same community organization principle, these groups will organize and manage their own concerns in both economic and social development concepts. The groups will manage their own motivation strategies and facilitate required services.
Technical guidance in various aspects of both the economic and social development aspects as well as in community organization will be provided by the project staff, supported by FAO. The key person at the barangay level is the Field Worker or Area Coordinator.
Figure 1 presents the project's conceptual framework.
2.4 Project inputs/interventions and accomplishments
2.4.1 Community/group organization
* 30 Women Groups (WGs) with 864 members were organized in 7 coastal municipalities of Capiz
* 48 Women Groups with 1185 members were organized in 13 coastal municipalities of Pangasinan
Annex 2 presents the total membership of WGs organized organized from 1990-1994.
2.4.2 Training assistance
* WGs were trained in the areas of team building, organizational skills, micro-enterprise development and family welfare. Refresher training activities were also conducted.
* A total of 332 training were conducted for 7,738 women participants.
Annex 4 presents the summary of training conducted by the project for women participants from 1990-1994.
2.4.3 Technical assistance
* Through project consultants and specialists, technical assistance provided to WGs in the preparation of project proposals for funding and specific fishery-related technologies
2.4.4 Credit assistance
* 1612 members received loans totalling P7,242,245.16 to finance income-generating projects in 1993. An additional loan of P1,863,668 was released as of August 1994.
* Repayment rate is 81/. for 1993 and 78% for 1994
* Percent utilization of Guarantee Fund for both provinces is 190% in 1994
Annex 4 shows the summary of credit assistance extended by the Project.
FIGURE 1
2.4.5 Social services/linkages to resource and service institutions
* Family welfare classes conducted
* Family planning referral system in place
* Linkages with DOH, POPCOM, FPOP, USAID, UNICEF and other line agencies established at local levels
* Social action projects in various stages of implementation
* Contraceptive prevalence rate for women participants increased from 20% in 1990 to 65% in 1994
Annex 4 presents the contraceptive prevalence rate from 1990-1994.
2.4.6 IEC materials support
* Produced 3-year calendar and comics for WGs
* Produced Field Worker's Manual and Diary for Project Staff
* Produced a Consolidated Manual of Training Activities for PHI/89/P16 WGs
2.4.7 Monitoring and evaluation
* Installation of client-based and gender-focused monitoring tools and evaluation
* Annual Tripartite Reviews
<section>5</section>
3. Project impact on the socio-economic status of women: an assessment
3.1 Profile of women respondents
3.2 Economic profile
3.2.1 Type of economic activities
3.2.2 Income profile
3.2.3 Household expenditure
3.2.4 Credit and savings practices
3.2.5 changes in level of living conditions
3.3 family planning knowledge and adoption among project participants
3.3.1 Knowledge of family planning methods
3.3.2 Adoption of family planning
3.3.3 Impact on fertility
3.4 Perception of gain
3.4.1 Project interventions
3.4.2 Significant changes on women
3.4.3 Social gains/effects
3. Project impact on the socio-economic status of women: an assessment
3.1 Profile of women respondents
The general profile of survey respondents representing the women project beneficiaries and drop-outs is presented in Table 2 Survey results revealed the following:
AGE. The age of all the respondents ranges from 19-63 years with an average age of 41 years for participants and 36 years for drop-outs. Average age of Capiz participants (43 years) is slightly higher than Pangasinan participants (36 years). The average age of participants has passed the most productive/fertile age as little emphasis has been given on age requirement during the selection process of the first batch of women groups (WGs).
CIVIL STATUS. Majority of the respondents are married. This is expected as the selection focussed on married women. There are WGs composed of all mothers only. However, a few WGs accepted single members in order to inculcate social and economic values at an early age.
RELIGION. Most of the respondents for both participants (85%) and drop-outs (94%) are Catholics. Respondents from Capiz have a more solid composition of Catholics.
EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT. On the average, all respondents completed seven years of schooling or at least have reached first year in High School. Between participants of Pangasinan and Capiz, the former has higher percentage of High School graduates (40% vs 27%). As far as all participants and drop-outs are concerned, majority (35%) of all participants finished High School while a majority (44%) of drop-outs had only completed an elementary schooling.
HOUSEHOLD SIZE. Size of the household ranges from 2-12 members. Of the total participants and drop-outs, the average size is 7 and 5 members respectively. Between Pangasinan and Capiz pax, the latter's average household size (9) is greater than the former by only one member.
NUMBER OF CHILDREN. This ranges from o to 10 children. On the average, all participants has 4 children while all drop-outs has 3 children. A very small percentage of married respondents is still childless because they are either newly married or have health problems.
Age and education of respondents hyphotesized to have an influence on the number of children were analyzed as presented in Tables 2a and 2b.
As expected, as the mother becomes older, the number of children increases. In general, younger women have lesser number of children, i.e. 1 to 3 children. This group of women should be the focus of the family campaign since they are still on the way of building a family.
With regard to educational attainment, it was found that women's number of children is related to their education. As educational attainment reaches a higher level, the number of children becomes smaller. This could be attributed to the fact that educated women are more knowledgeable about FP practices and realize the importance of planning for the future of their families.
3.2 Economic profile
3.2.1 Type of economic activities
Table 3 presents information on the economic activities of women respondents in Pangasinan and Capiz. The number and type of economic activities by both participants and drop-outs are presented.
Baseline data shows that 26% of all participants and 44% of all drop-outs were plain housewives doing their daily routine household chores. After 3 years, all participants have engaged in at least one economic activity but on the part of the drop outs, 29%. had remained plain housewives.
Majority of all the respondents were engaged in fish vending even before the project as it is about their only available source of daily income to complement their husbands earnings from fishing, as shown in Table 3a. Commodity trading, in the form of operating small sari-sari stores, selling native food or ready to-wear dresses (RTWs), is also a common source of income.
There are activities which are common only in one or the other project provinces, e.g. shell craft and salt production are adaptable in Pangasinan while mussel culture and crab fattening are common in Capiz. This can be attributed to the salinity of the water and availability of resources.
With women's reproductive work, i.e., child bearing and rearing and household chores, the economic activities they engage in are mostly home-based and require less of their time as compared to women with a regular wage employment. These kinds of work allow them to fulfill their family responsibilities.
3.2.2 Income profile
The income of the respondents depend on the type of economic activities they engage in, the amount of capital outlay, duration/frequency of harvest or sales, the management skills and other external factors (market, climate, etc.).
Below is the monthly income of some types of economic activities based on some of the IGP proposals in Capiz:
Capital
Monthly income
Fish marketing
(20 days/mo @ 50kgs/day)
P 4000
P 2059
Fish processing /marketing
P 4245
P 3467
Commodity trading
P 4100
P 2433
Food vending (5x/wk)
P 3800
P 1926
Acquisition of fishing gear/ fish coral (3 kgs/day scooped at 25 kgs)
P 5500
P 1519
The project's baseline data shows that majority of the participants (48%) and drop-outs (47%) have monthly incomes amounting to P1,000 and below. However, present data shows that several of the respondents, (40% of participants and 32% of dropouts) monthly income rose to P1,001 to P2,000 bracket. By province, average monthly income of Pangasinan participants (P2,478) is slightly higher than that of Capiz participants (P1,983), as shown in Table 4.
For all the respondents, it is observed that the current average monthly income of participants is more than double the average income of drop-outs. This is an indication of the positive effects of the Project.
The occupation of household members (other than respondents) who are economically active and their average monthly income are presented in Table S. Fishing, farming and hired labor are the most common occupation of household members.
Other sources of income of women in the project provinces are presented in Table 6. This includes hog fattening, dressmaking, caretaker of fishpond F pension allowances and others.
The contribution and changes in total annual income by household members are presented in Table 7. On the average, the contribution of women participants to their respective total household annual income was about 43% during the evaluation period ( 1991 to 1993) . In both provinces, the drop-outs on the other hand contributed only about 31% to their respective total household income.
It is also observed that there was an increase in the average total household income of participants from P28,551 in 1990 to P65,253 in 1993 for Pangasinan and from P22,122 (1990) to P53,622 (1993) for Capiz. Overall, the average household income per annum increased by 133% for both provinces. On the other hand, average total household income among the drop-outs increased from P20, 512 in 1990 to P47,216 in 1993 indicating a 130% growth rate. The present increase in the household income may be attributed in part to the greater contribution of the women participants as well as some of the drop-outs. Even considering the effect of inflation, the real income of the households had increased by more than 100%.
The different factors which contributed to the increase in household income in Pangasinan and Capiz are presented in Table 8 A majority of the participants attribute the increase of income to the IGP which has been supported by the Project.
3.2.3 Household expenditure
Table 9 presents the household expenditure by items. A major proportion of total household expenditure is on food items which is about 40%. Comparing the annual expenditure with the annual income, it was observed that the household expenditure is less than- income, and the balance is either used for IGP and household improvement as well as cash savings.
The utilization of increases in income with respect to household expenditures is summarized in Table 9a. For all respondents, increases in income are generally used for food consumption, followed by children's education. On the average, 72/. of total increases in income of participants was utilized for basic needs (food, medicine, education, clothing and transportation). Only 1% had used the income for recreation. The remaining proportion of the increases were utilized for house improvements, acquisition of home appliances and additional capital for their IGP.
3.2.4 Credit and savings practices
Credit Practices
The provision of credit is a major Project input in improving women's status, particularly women's income. Operated through a guarantee fund scheme administered by a government bank (Land Bank of the Philippines) in Pangasinan and a private commercial bank (Allied Banking Corporation) in Capiz, credit is provided to women to operate their small businesses.
Table 10 presents the credit practices of women in both provinces. A majority of the women participants have already availed of loans from the project more than once. In Pangasinan, one WG had already on its fourth round of lending while in Capiz, WGs are still on its second round of lending. The major purpose of loans was for use in fishery-based small businesses particularly fish vending/trading. Some of the women participants have utilized their loan on non-fishery related businesses such as commodity trading, rice farming and for housed hold related expenses.
On the average, the amount of loans borrowed by women participants was P9,226 per borrowing. The maximum amount per borrowing was P17,000.
Only about 22% of the women participants have availed of loans from sources other than the Project funds. Those who availed of loans from other sources used the loan as additional capital for their businesses. The average amount of loan from other sources was relatively small compared to the amount obtained from the project. Among all the women drop-outs, almost half of them were able to avail of project loans once at an average amount of P2,203. On the other hand, 21% availed of loans from either their neighbors, relatives or from DSWD. Their loans averaging to P1,101 were utilized for the acquisition of additional fishing gears, or for hog fattening and for personal expenses.
Between women participants and drop-outs, the former had higher amounts of loan which could be sufficient as capital of viable enterprises.
Savings Practices
Table 11 shows the savings practices of respondents. Overall, the number of women participants with savings from 1990 (27%) increased in 1993 (75%) by about 178%. On the other hand, dropouts with savings reflected an increase of only 46% from 1990 to 1993.
Between provinces, 82% of the participants in Pangasinan had savings in 1993 as compared with 64% of the participants in Capiz.
Average monthly savings of participants increased from P360 in 1990 to P941 in 1993, while drop-outs, savings increased from P10 in 1990 to P345 in 1993. Savings are either kept in the bank or just on hand for emergency purposes and future expenses (e.g. tuition fees of children, loan amortization, etc.).
Some respondents were not able to save because their income is either just enough to satisfy their basic needs, or because they incurred losses in their businesses. Whenever there is an increase in income, it is utilized for children's education, improvement of housing, and investments (c.f. Table 9a).
3.2.5 changes in level of living conditions
Improvements on the respondents, socio-economic well-being were also determined by looking into several living indicators, as shown in Table 12. Selected living indicators included are ownership of land (residential lot, farm lot), residential house, household facilities (lighting, water supply, cooking, toilet, appliances) and transportation facilities.
Ownership of Land. About half of Pangasinan participants owned a residential lot in 1993 while a majority (62%) of Capiz participants were still living in squatter areas. However, a positive change of 67% (from 14% in 1990 to 24% in 1993) in Capiz participants have progressed from renting a land into owning a land. This is a good indication that increase in income was put into better investment. Only a few participants owned a farm lot.
Residential House. Almost all (90%) of the participants had their own residential house which are mostly made of light materials (e.g. nipa, bamboo). About 40% had either semi-concrete or concrete houses.
Household Facilities. There is no remarkable change in the lighting facilities of both respondents. About 75% of all respondents already had electricity even before the project. An additional 10% participants and 15% drop-outs have afforded to acquire electricity at present. The rest continued to use either kerosene or LPG lamps.
Commonly, most of the respondents get their water supply from either a public artesian well or a deep well. It was also observed that the number of participants with NAWASA-supplied water is increasing. There is one barangay in Capiz where installation of piped water system wee facilitated by a Women's Group. Other groups are also initiating this project.
Cooking facilities of participants were mostly earthen stoves (charcoal, fuel wood). The users of LPG and gas stoves doubled in 1993.
The number of respondents with pit privy or no toilet at all decreased. Most of the respondents have water sealed toilet a. DOH and DSWD had distributed toilet bowls to some respondents. Moreover, to improve sanitation, some WGs constructed public toilets or latrines as part of their social action projects.
A greater improvement is noted particularly in the number of appliances presently owned. Before the project, around 14% of the participants had no appliances at all and 31% had at most two appliances. This was reduced to 2% and 26% respectively. The proportion of those participants having at least 5 appliances increased from 26% to 46%. Similarly, the proportion of dropouts having at least 5 appliances increased from 18% to 27%.
Transportation Facilities. Only about one-third of both participants and drop-outs have only one transportation facility which can either be a motorboat or a simple fishing boat (banca). Acquisition, of motorboat increased from 25% - in 1990 to 35% in 1993. The increase was brought about by the loan extended by the project and income derived from IGP.
In general, a remarkable improvement was noted from participant-respondents than drop-out respondents based on the selected living, indicators. Between Pangasinan and Capiz participants, the latter exhibits greater improvement in most of the indicators.
Based on the above findings, the loans extended by the project which were used in viable income generating projects have led to increase in income which consequently led to improved living conditions of the participants (c.f. Tables 7 and 9).
3.3 family planning knowledge and adoption among project participants
3.3.1 Knowledge of family planning methods
Available data on the family planning knowledge of women project participants in both Pangasinan and Capiz and of those women in both provinces who have earlier dropped out from the project suggest that involvement in Project PHl/89/P16 has increased women's knowledge of family- planning, as shown in Table 13. one notes that while knowledge of a family planning method was already high among project participants prior to the start of the Project (98%, the proportion knowing of as many as different family planning methods increased from 56% at the inception of the project to 90% at present. Among the project's women drop-outs, the proportion who knew of at least 6 different methods has similarly increased but at lower levels, beginning at 42% previously to 82% at present.
Moreover, knowledge of each of the specific form of family planning has increased over the duration of the project, and stands at universal or close to universal levels-among the women project participants. All are now aware of the IUD and the pills for instance, whereas a high 96% to 99% are familiar with the permanent surgical methods of family planning (vasectomy and ligation), and 96% to 98% are aware of natural family planning methods and the condom. Project drop-outs on the other hand, exhibit somewhat lower levels of awareness for specific methods. Only 82% are aware of permanent surgical methods, 88% to 97% know of reversible contraceptives (IUD and the pill), and 85% to 91% are aware of natural family planning methods and the condom.
There are also indications that the increased levels of family planning knowledge in the project areas is due to the family planning activities or component of Project PHI/89/P16.
Whereas local RHU personnel (i.e. midwife, nurse and doctor) served as the women's major sources of family planning information at the beginning of the project, there are substantially more of them now who report learning of family planning methods from the project staff and from the family planning trainings conducted by the project. At present, the proportion deriving their family planning information from the project staff or from project trainings is expectedly higher (79%) among the project's continuing women participants, than among the drop-out participants (59%).
Comparing the survey results between Pangasinan and Capiz, Pangasinan registers more gains in the family planning knowledge of project participants than in Capiz. The women beneficiaries in Pangasinan are shown consistently to exhibit higher proportions of 1) those knowing several(6) methods of family planning (95%) 2) those aware of specific forms of family planning (95% to 100%) and 3) those receiving their family planning information from project staff or training (82%). The corresponding proportions for the foregoing are a lower 81% 93% to 100%, and 74% in Capiz. The USAID assisted project in Pangasinan on population and family planning has helped the province in this regard.
3.3.2 Adoption of family planning
The data on the impact of Project PHI/89/16 on the adoption of family planning practices is less definitive owing to the confounding effects of the age and number of children of the project's women beneficiaries and drop-outs, and of their previous use of family planning even before the start of the project. As stated earlier, the project beneficiaries comprise of older women with a mean age of 41; when compared to the women drop-outs with a mean age of 36. The former also have more children on the average (4) than the drop-outs (3). These factors in turn would differentially affect the motivations of both groups of women to practice family planning.
The data in Table 14 reveals that over half of the project's continuing women beneficiaries (57%) and of the project drop-outs (53%) had been family planning users at one time or another prior to 1990 when the project began. In a sense therefore, Project PHI/89/P16 cannot be said to have influenced these women's adoption of family planning practice. Neither can women's adoption of family planning after the project began be attributed solely to project effort since the period of project implementation (and particularly after 1992) also corresponds to the period when government set-up its information campaign and delivery services for family planning.
The latest survey data collected on project participants and drop-outs indicate a slightly higher proportion of current family planning users among the project's beneficiaries than among it's drop-outs at 50% and 47% respectively. However, one notes that the 50% current- use level among project beneficiaries represent a smaller 7- percentage point increase over the 43% current-use level in 1990. On the other hand, the current-use level among project drop-outs has risen much more dramatically by 21 percentage points, from 26% in 1990 to 47% at present. possible explanation for this may lie in the systematic age differences between participants and drop-outs. Being older, there are more women in the beneficiaries group who are reaching or have reached menopause, and hence, one cannot expect a large increase in the number of current users among this group. In contrast, being younger and at a different stage in the lifecycle, there may be more project drop-outs *ho will
intermittently adopt family planning, until such time that they become menopausal or complete the number of children that they intend to have.
In terms of the family planning methods that the project participants and drop-outs are currently using, Table 16 shows that there are no substantial differences in the proportions who have opted for permanent surgical sterilization between the two groups. There are more of the project participants however who have adopted the pill (34%) and the IUD (17%) than among the dropouts (comparable proportions are 25%-and 13% respectively), whereas more of the drop-outs report using the condom (19%.) than participants (9%). About a fourth of each of the participant and drop-out groups are natural family planning practitioners.
Again partly reflecting their age differences, the data further indicate that women participants who are currently using some form of family planning are doing so to avoid further pregnancies (36%) and to help ensure a better future for their families (17%). Among the project drop-outs on the other hand, there are fewer who say that they are practicing family planning to avoid having anymore children or pregnancies (13%). Instead, there are more of them who are practicing family planning because they have become used to their methods (38%), or because they want to space their births (13%) or ensure their family's future (13%).
Complementarily, the data also show considerable differences in the reasons given by the remaining 50% of project participants and 53% of drop-outs who are not currently employing any means of fertility regulation for their non-use of family planning. Expectedly, among project participants, there are more who are not practicing family planning because they think they are menopausal (48% as 33% among drop-outs). There are considerably more drop-outs however, who say that they are not practicing family planning because they want to have another baby, are currently pregnant or have just given birth (28% vs. 12% among participants). There are also more drop-outs (17%) than participants (4%) who attribute their non-use of family planning to their husbands, objection to family planning. The objections of husbands at this time may be related to the fact that they still have fewer children than they would like to have. The proportions who are not currently using any family planning
because of side effects and health problems comprise an equal 22% each of project participants and drop-outs.
Finally, it should be mentioned that other than the systematic differences in the age, current family size and previous family planning experiences between the project's participants and drop-outs, and which affect their current adoption of family planning, another factor that impinges on this is the number of non-married women in both groups. One notes that because there are more widowed women among project participants than among the drop-outs, more of- the former are also shown not to be practicing family planning because they are not in need of this. Hence, in addition to the older ages of project participants the number of non-married (single, separated, and widowed) women also delimits the scope in which Project PHI/89/P16 can influence women's adoption of family planning.
3.3.3 Impact on fertility
Although the proportion of those who had gotten pregnant over the course of the project duration differs between the project participants and drop-outs, these differences cannot also be attributed to Project PHl/89/P16 for the same reasons noted above.
There are for example, more project drop-outs than participants who had gotten pregnant within the project period (44% vs. 31%), but the data also shows that most (93%) of the pregnancies occuring to drop-outs comprised of pregnancies planned by them and their husbands or desired by their husbands, whereas planned pregnancies comprise a lower 70% of the pregnancies occuring among project participants. It is also somewhat disturbing to note that the incidence of unexpected/accidental pregnancies or those which occured because the woman did not care whether she became pregnant or not is higher among project participants (30%) than among project dropouts (7%).
Looking at the project participants and drop-outs who did not become pregnant during the project period, Table 17 shows that there are considerably more drop-outs than participants who said they did not get pregnant because they were practicing family planning (47%) or because they did not wish to become pregnant (11%). The comparable proportions of participants giving similar responses are a lower 43% and 3% respectively. Again because of their older ages, there are comparatively more participants who did not get pregnant because they were reaching or reached the menopausal stage (32%) as against a lower 21% among drop- outs. The proportion of those who did not get pregnant as a result of their single, separated or widowed status comprise an equal 11% of both women's groups.
Briefly summarizing the impact of Project PHI/89/P16 on family planning, one notes that the project has contributed greatly to improvements in family planning awareness and knowledge, Knowledge of each of the various forms of family planning methods is close to universal or universal among project participants and a high 80% or more among drop-outs.
Compared to drop-outs, there are slightly more project participants who are still using some form of family planning and fewer also got pregnant during the project period. However, it is difficult to attribute this to project impact, in view of the systematic differences in the age, current family size, education and other characteristics between the project participants and drop-outs groups, and which characteristics are known to influence women's adoption and practice of family planning.
In general, the scope in which IGP projects such as PHI/89/P16 can affect women's family planning practice and fertility is delimited by the age of participants, since IGPs tend to be selective of older women who have reached their desired family sizes and who have more time to devote to IGPs. Additionally, it is not easy to isolate project impact in cases where several women participants had already been employing some means of fertility regulation prior to the start of the project. Finally, IGP projects also draw a considerable number of non-married women, thus delimiting further the number of participants on which the project can have family planning and fertility impacts.
Because women, regardless of age and civil status, have a right both to family planning services and to employment and income-earning opportunities, it would not be prudent to provide IGPs only to younger married women of reproductive age. It is more socially desirable to increase women's access to both IGPs and family planning, since both contribute to women's empowerment and the overall welfare of families in the longer term (as against the shorter periods or durations of projects). When family planning practice and women's involvement in economic activities become increasingly prevalent and acceptable, then we can expect the known negative association between women's employment and fertility to also become evident in the community.
The findings also suggest that family planning impact of IGP project may lie more in supporting women's decision to continue using some forms of family planning, or in providing them a broader choice of contraceptives, or in encouraging them to shift to more effective form of family planning. To note family planning or fertility impacts, therefore, IGP projects should maintain a separate monitoring system for MWRAs or those exposed to the risk of pregnancy or child bearing. These eligible women should be identified at the beginning of the project and continuously followed through to determine their acceptance of family planning, their continuous use of the practice, their shift to more effective or permanent forms of family planning, and whether or not they had become pregnant within the project period. Where a control group is desired to further assess project family planning impacts, efforts must be taken to match the age, marital status, family size, education and other
relevant characteristics of the control group and those of women project participants.
3.4 Perception of gain
3.4.1 Project interventions
The economic and social development inputs or interventions provided by the Project to women beneficiaries are discussed in detail in item II.4 of this report.
These integrated inputs have already resulted into significant positive changes in the lives of the women. Key result areas or effects expected by the Project are very much visible and felt not only by the project team and women themselves but also by people outside the Project such as the women's husbands, barangay officials, health workers and neighbors among others. The succeeding discussions will focus on the specific changes and social gains seen by the women respondents.
3.4.2 Significant changes on women
Aside from the economic indicators such as income, loan and savings which can be measured quantitavely as presented in the preceding sections, respondents were asked directly on the significant changes that occured to them as a result of project assistance. This is shown in Table 17. Majority (78%) of the women participants identified both improved income and improved personal attitudes and values as the most important changes that occured to them. Other changes observed include improvement in relationship with the group, family, neighbor and community (48%); improvement in skills in managing IGP (37%), and positive attitudes, knowledge and practice of family planning methods (27%), among others. These are exactly the key result areas in the project framework which is summed up as improvement in the role and status of women in social and economic spheres of their lives.
These prove that women are deemed entrepeneurs not only in managing family but also in undertaking small-scale livelihood projects.
Women's own assessment of the changes in their lives validate and support the findings of the team based on baseline and present statistical data gathered.
3.4.3 Social gains/effects
Assessment of the social benefits of the women participants brought about by the project assistance is presented in Table 18. Women respondents rated the identified social gains, indicators using a scale of 0 to 3 (o being worse and 3 being much better). Actually, this assessment scheme is the same as the instrument used in the pre-assessment study conducted in June 1993. The only difference lies in the comparison between participants and dropouts. It is assumed that drop-outs have also perceived social changes that occured in their lives in the span of 4 year, because some of them have attended training and some were able to avail the first batch of loan.
In general, majority of the participants (61%) and drop-outs (56%) perceived their situation as better now. It was noted that only one participant-respondent had identified a worse off condition in terms of access to credit and family welfare. This is due mainly to failure in IGP and lack of hopefulness. By province, Capiz participants had a higher percentage of women reporting a much better (47%) status as compared with Pangasinan participants (28%). This supports the initial assessment's findings that Capiz women perceived themselves as relatively socially better off than their Pangasinan counterparts.
Access to Credit. The lack of capital has caused a serious constraint in the socio-economic development of the people particularly the women in rural areas. The Project with its credit assistance through the Guarantee or Revolving fund scheme administered by banking institutions equip the women the necessary means on the way to economic development.
A majority (64%) of all the participant-respondents revealed, that they have better access to credit now and about 30% reported a much better access. They had this good rating because before the Project, they only depended on money lenders who normally impose high interest rates. But now, they were able to avail loan at lower interest rate and without collateral requirement. Some of them had established credibility and good track record with the bank, which will ensure them of continuous access to credit.
Between province, Capiz participants who reported a much better access is higher than the Pangasinan participants by 21%. This could be attributed to the fact that there were more participants who were plain housewives in Capiz before the project.
On the otherhand, half of the total drop-out respondents reported no change as to accessibility because they are still at the mercy of private moneylenders and they cannot loan from the bank due to its several requirements. The 41%. drop-outs who rated better access attributed this to the Project as they were able to borrow once before they dropped-out.
The husbands of participants assessed that access to credit is much better now.
Access to social services:
Family Planning Services. About 64% and 30% of the participants rated a better and much better access to family planning services respectively. Similarly, drop-outs had a better access to family services. The linkage with DOH established by the Project improved the FP services. The effort of Project staff, the active FP Volunteers, the continuous services of BHWs and the WGs themselves contributed to the efficient delivery of the FP services. The WGs had close relationship with DOH personnel and continuosly assist them in their activities. The referral system operationalized by the WG and FW caters not only to women members but to other women in the community as well.
As to availability of contraceptives, respondents said that supplies are always available and accessible since FPVs had supplies with them.
Health Services. Both types of respondents reported a better access to health services due to strong linkage with DOH, DOH personnel regularly visit the barangay to deliver health services. The WGs are also actively participating in healthrelated activities, e.g. immunization, operation timbang, supplemental feeding and others. Some of these projects took place in the association's office. With the IEC material inputs, participants were well informed on where to go for health services. The increase in income of the participants also contributed to improved health services.
The midwives interviewed shared that the organization of WGs was a big help to carry their tasks efficiently and WGs contributed to overall improvement of a barangay.
Family Welfare. As partner of man in life, woman have power to be concerned primarily in their family welfare. Majority of the participants reported that they were able to satisfy daily needs, e.g. food, clothing, education and others better after joining the Project. The earnings of the women were commonly used for the family in terms of food, nutrition, and education which all add up to health, welfare and development. The knowledge acquired from Family Welfare training also contributed to this improvement.
Husbands interviewed supported the women's claim that improvement in family welfare is attributed mainly to the effort made by the Project.
Mobilization. More than half of the participants assessed that they have better mobility since joing the Project. In contrast, half of the drop-outs reflected no change in terms of mobility.
Project participants expressed more improvement in terms of mobility because through the Project, they were able to improve themselves and discover some skills, e.g. inter-personal and communication skills, selling skills that lead them to wider market, etc. Before, some women confined themselves in their household, but now they have the chance to visit other places and met other people (co- participants from other barangays, municipalities and province) government officials and other persons attached to the Project).
The existing IGP of some respondents demand them to go to other area to widen market and earn more income.
Husbands of participants were not hampering their wives from going to one place to another. They revealed that despite meetings and other activities of the WG, their wives were able to fulfill household obligations. In some cases, husbands, mobility was also affected positively.
Self-confidence, self-esteem, hopefulness. Most of the participants perceived better positive changes within themselves after attending the extensive training on self-awareness and team building. The Project helped the women participants become aware of themselves, their strengths and weaknesses, and their needs and opportunities.
Self-confidence, self-esteem and hopefulness were remarkably enhanced as confirmed by some barangay officials, DOH personnel and the participants, husbands as well.
These changes are all attributed to training component of the Project and to the dedicated project staff.
Respect to one's family, neighbors and community. As a result of joining the Project particularly in the training and social action projects, the relationship of the women with family, neighbors and community improved. Almost all participants observed either a better or much better relationship with their family. According to husbands interviewed, their wives also influenced them to change their attitudes for the better and similarly, they gained respect as well.
Women participants were able to socialize with their neighbors on a-regular basis unlike before wherein contacts or communications were very limited and conflicts or misunderstanding among neighbors arose.
In the community, the WGs social- action projects, e.g. cleanliness and beautification drive, health-related activities and initiation of some resolutions (e.g. electrification, water system), among others greatly contributed in the improvement of the community as a whole. WGs were able to think and identify community needs and of activities that would enhance community development.
Barangay officials being interviewed revealed that WGs have closely coordinating with them which enhanced better working relationship. WGs were able to mobilize their husbands, neighbors and other non-members to cooperate and participate in their activities and the barangay projects as well. Furthermore, these officials said that the WGs are their partner and important arm toward progress and development of their barangay.
Respect and recognition of women could be best indicated in the recent barangay elections wherein some women members were elected as barangay official and there were some wherein husbands were the ones elected as attributed to support of the wives and respect given to them.
Decision Making on Family Planning. At present, majority of the participants indicated that decision making on family planning is much better than before they joined the Project. With the learnings learned from seminars and information disseminated by project staff and DOH, husbands-and wives jointly came up with a decision whether to adopt family planning or not and what method should be used. Also, some husbands, indifference toward the family were also softened as most of the participants shared what they have learned to their husbands.
<section>6</section>
4. Project implementation and management: an assessment
4.1 Involved organization and institutional arrangements
4.1.1 Involved organizations
4.1.2 Institutional arrangements
4.1.3 Beneficiaries assessment of institutional performance
4.2 Project management aspects
4.2.1 General assessment
4.2.2 Efficiency
4.3 Project implementations limitations and constraints
4. Project implementation and management: an assessment
4.1 Involved organization and institutional arrangements
4.1.1 Involved organizations
Participating Agencies
Pole/Functions
UNFPA
- Source of funds ($507,649)
FAO
- Executing agencies including over all management of project, monitoring operations and technical backstopping
Financial Institutions:
a) GFIs
- Land Bank of the Phils., channel of UNFPA funds for establishment of economic enterprises
b) Private bank
- Allied Bank, channel of UNFPA funds for establishment of economic enterprises
National Government Agencies:
a) DOH
- health, nutrition, MCH and family planning services
b) DA/BFAR
- technical assistance/training on livelihood (economic enterprises, etc.)
c) DSWD
- administration of household care management (i.e., child cares and relief/rehabilitation)
d) DECS
- assistance in the implementation of activities by participating agencies (venue/facilities for training)
e) POPCOM
- family planning and IEC activities
f) CDA
- assist in the institutionalization of women organizations
LGUs
a) Provincial Government
- serve as project action unit in the implementation/operationalization of project activities
b) Municipal Government
- support provincial government
NGOs:
a) FPOP
- family planning activities (provision of supplies/services, training and IEC)
b) CARD
- assist in technology transfer (i.e., experience sharing among field staff and WGs)
c) IMCH
- provide MCH related services
d) ACPC
- technical assistance (training on savings mobilization
Other Agencies/Program:
* USAID/Pangasinan Family Planning program has indirectly supported the project in terms of provision of various supplies, training and IEC.
* UNICEF/Capiz - for IEC on children care and welfare
4.1.2 Institutional arrangements
Project Intervention
Involved Institutions
Direct
Support a) Community/Group Project
Organizing
LGU/BC/DOH
b) Training Assistance
Project
DA-BFAR/DOH/
DTI/CARD/ACPC/
DOST/TLRC/DECS/
LGU/BC/FPOP/GVO
c) Technical Assistance
Project
DA-BFAR
d) Credit/Funding Assistance
UNFPA
LBP/AB/LGU
e) Social Services/
DOH
POPCOM/DSWD/
linkages to Resource
Project
FPOP/IMCH/LGUs/
and services
DA/DECS/CRS/
(FP, MCH, nutrition)
USAID/UNICEF/
WGs/BHW/FPV
f) IEC Material
POPCOM/DOH
LGUs/USAID/
Support
Project
UNICEF
g) Monitoring and
FAO/UNFPA/
LBP/WGs
Evaluation
GOP/Project
4.1.3 Beneficiaries assessment of institutional performance
Table 19 presents the assessment of the efficiency/ effectiveness of implementation of project activities and delivery of project inputs of agencies/ institutions involved.
A majority of all the participants for both provinces had a very good rating for both the FAO and Provincial Governments on the effectiveness and efficiency of implementation of project activities as delivery of inputs were timely. However, banking institutions administering the guarantee funds had been rated as good by 32% of all participants and 23% as fair due to long delay in release of loans.
As to the collaboration of activities with other agencies, most of the respondents said that the linkages/coordination are good.
4.2 Project management aspects
4.2.1 General assessment
1. UNFPA - As funding agency, not only provides funds but also monitor project and gives valuable recommendations esp. in family planning aspects.
2. FAO - As executing agency, has closely supervised and monitored the project through frequent visitation in the provincial offices as well as the WGs in their communities. Regular backstopping is also provided.
Funds management is very satisfactory as total annual expenditure did not exceed alloted budget, as shown in Table 20.
3. Provincial Government
The two implementing agencies have distinct cases in terms of project management. Table 21 presents distinct features of their respective management.
The Provincial Government of Capiz has an ideal feature which can lead to efficient and sustainable implementation of the project. On the other hand, change of management in Pangasinan at a particular time appears to have negatively influenced the staff morale and team spirit. This has been perceptible in discussions with individual members of the project staff and through observations. This can adversely affect the performance of the individual staff member and the project in general.
4. Project Guarantee Funds Management
The two banks administering the project's credit component have differences as shown in Table 22. The guarantee funds amounting to US$99,000 of Pangasinan and US$81,000 of Capiz are deposited in peso time deposit at Land Bank of the Philippines and in dollar current account at Allied Bank respectively.
The total credit allocation in project is US$180,000. The credit component of the project different from other projects because money was not used directly for lending but as credit guarantee. As an advantage, the administering banks use their own money and participate in a more responsible and sustainable way. Moreover, there are more funds available for lending. As a result, about US$400,000 had been disbursed to women participants during the project period. As of August 1994, total outstanding loans amounted to US$103,367 (P2,584,168.85). Assuming that none of this amount will be repaid, there will still be about US$105,478 left as guarantee fund.
As to which bank is more efficient, the team is in no position to assess this, since no actual assessment and interviews were conducted with the two banks. However, most of the project beneficiaries complained the delay or slow release of loans from either banks.
4.2.2 Efficiency
The team finds that the project's limited resources were utilized efficently and that the cost/benefit ratio is very satisfactory. This particularly applies to the , training and credit components of the project.
4.3 Project implementations limitations and constraints
1990-1991 (Initial Stage)
Pangasinan
(Institutional)
1. Inadequate counterpart budget for project staff. PMS took dual assignments, Project field staff was composed of paid provincial and 8 municipal employees wherein the latter were not under the administrative control of the PMS and worked on a part-time basis for the project. This hampered the preorganizational and group formation activities.
2. Most staff were relatively new (neophyte) and had limited or no exposure and experience at CO and training activities.
3. Frequent replacements/turn-over of staff esp. at municipal level which hampered continuity of project interventions (there was a period when there was no field worker assigned in a barangay for 2 months) and gaining experiences.
(Target Beneficiaries)
4. High incidence of drop-outs in initital stage due to:
(a) husbands objections (either jealous or indifferent to project);
(b) neighbors, negative speculations about project and sneering insults,
(c) negative belief on the project due to previous unfavorable experiences,
(d) disappointment and doubts over the delayed release of loans
Both Provinces
1. Some project sites were inaccessible or hard to reach affecting mobility of staff.
2. Delay in the actual lending or guarantee/revolving fund operations due to additional time devoted to preorganizational activities.
3. Some barangay officials refused to cooperate in organizing women due to fear that women would not repay their loans and they would be left accountable.
4. Dole-out mentality of the target participants.
S. Little emphasis on age requirement in selection of participants, thus several members are non-MWRAs which in turn affect the FP component of the project.
1. National and local election in May 1992
2. Subsequent change in provincial administrators which affected the continuity of project activities esp. conduct of training
3. Delayed approval and release of- supplemental funds for training (counterpart fund).
4. Delayed loan disbursements because of the deferment of the completion of required training inputs.
5. Lower repayment of loans due to natural calamities (e.g. typhoon, Mt. Pinatubo eruption)
6. Irregular and inadequate supplies of contraceptives at the village-level. Contraceptives bought at private suppliers are very expensive leading to increased drop-outs among users.
7. Inaccessibility of health services in some project areas.
8. Lack of motivational skills of young. inexperienced and unmarried field workers in FP aspects. (Pangasinan)
9. Delay in the preparation of feasibility study for IGP proposal of women participants as IGP Specialist had other concerns aside from the project (Pangasinan).
10. Difficulty in finding the IGP Local Consultant.
1. Delay in releases of loans as attributed to policies of Bank serving as administrator of technical assistance fund from UNFPA:
(a) LBP imposed/required WG to be converted into a fullpledged cooperative and bank had simultaneous commitments and other project priorities.
(b) Allied Bank has new branch manager who is hesitant to take the risk of releasing new loans unless previous loans were paid.
1. Low repayment as some participants know that project will be terminated by December 1994 (i.e., dole out mentality of participants that needs to be corrected/changed).
2. Project staff of Pangasinan are not certain of being retained beyond project life in view of temporary nature of their appointment. (lack of government commitment in sustaining the project)
3. Devolution of government agencies, e.g. DOH, affect delivery of health and family plannings services. (A woman who decided to be ligated has to pay P500 and provide medical supplies needed).
Staff
Pangasinan
1. Frequent turn-over and replacements of staff. Average year of involvement in the project is 1.8 years.
2. Inadequate funds for field work. Project staff solely depend on supplemental budget from FAO for field work. The provincial government does not provide per diem and travel allowance.
3. Staff hired in the last two years of the project have minimal training on CO and other project components.
4. Most of them are not sold to the idea of cooperativism, thus no effort has been initiated to convert WG into cooperative.
Capiz
1. Except for the delays in submission of reports to national project office (Manila), no other hitches or limitations have been observed.
Women Groups
1. Questionnable uses of loan funds. (e.g. improper utilization of loan proceeds due to other personal needs of the women beneficiaries)
2. Lack of group consultation in other matters (e.g. utilization of the capital build-up funds (CBUs))
3. Minor conflicts brought about by gossips originating from one member about another.
4. Shyness of the members in the first years of the project due to limited education and exposure to other people.
5. Departure of member from the barangay after receiving loan (i.e. the case of ambulant or non-resident members).
6. Lack of participation of some members in group projects/activities (social action projects such as community beautification gardening, health/nutrition related activities, social/cultural activities and others).
7. Poor leadership among some of elected officers of the WGs.
8. Non-payment of CBU by some members due to some failure in their business activities and limited income.
9. Some members have not yet internalized/realized the objectives of the project but just avail of loans.
10. WG members related to each other as co-borrower and not as a member of a united group, as in the case in some WGs in Pangasinan which caused dropping out of 4 WGs included in the 1st batch.
11. Slow repayment of loans as some members incurred lose in their IGP due to natural causes, mismanagement of loans etc. Lack of insurance guarantee fund.
12. Conflicts of women's time and concerns delayed training schedules.
13. Delay in processing IGP proposals among WGs.
14. Some of their husbands are jealous and objected to their wives, attendance of training (initial stage).
15. Some WGs are very dependent on their President. Thus, her absence or resignation has caused the members to discontinue activities and become inactive.
Bank
1. Delay in loan processes and releases due to limited staff (only 1 loan clerk) and loan requirements (registration in DOLE/CDA).
2. MOA of the project is with head office so bank branch manager cannot make major decision on their end.
3. No field staff to collect loan amortization of members (Capiz)
4. Only 1 bank is servicing the WG in Capiz. Accessibility of bank to other WG might be a constraint in delayed payment.
5. Change in bank employee/s assigned to project.
6. Release of loans not on a continuous basis, thus limiting the sustainable growth of the participant's business activities (e.g., a member who is fully-paid of her loan cannot immediately reloan as full payment of other borrowers must be satisfied first).
<section>7</section>
5. Sustainability and durability of project achievements
5.1 Summary of project achievements
5.1.1 Household level
5.1.2 Organizational level
5.2 Sustainability of achievements
5.2.1 Approaches towards sustainability
5.2.2 Assessment of the women groups development level
5.3 Adoption/replication of project achievement
5.3.1 Adoption
5.3.2 Future replications
5. Sustainability and durability of project achievements
5.1 Summary of project achievements
5.1.1 Household level
A. Economic Improvement
1. Engagement of all women participants in IGP. A total of P7,242,245.16 ($272,265) loan was released to about 1612 members from 1991 to 1993.
As of August 1994, total loan amounted to P9,105,913 ( $342,328).
2. Increases in total household income brought about by significant increases in income contributed by women respondents.
3. Increases in women's income led to improved family welfare. Primarily, women used their earnings for the family in terms of nutrition, clothing and education which all add up to health, welfare and development.
4. Some women already engaged in more advanced economic activities (fish processing, mussel culture, meat processing, etc.).
5. Improved women's skills in the management of enterprise led to expansion and diversification of their economic ventures.
6. Acquisition of capital assets (e.g. motor boat, fishing gears, tricycle, etc.) and household-related assets (e.g. appliances, lot, etc.). These can serve as collateral if members decide to continue and expand their credit practices even without the Project's assistance.
7. Women acquired the good habit of savings and credit practices through training.
8. General economic improvement of members influenced nonmembers (neighbors) to engage in similar economic activities (e.g. fish vending, commodity trading, etc.) 'to improve their lives' too. More non-members expressed their desire to be part of the Project.
B. Social-related Improvement -
1. Improved family relations. Knowledge, values and attitudes learned by the women from training were transferred or shared with their husbands, children and other household members.
2. Improved awareness and knowledge of family planning methods. Improved access to family planning services provided by the project and accounting in part for the rise in contraceptive prevalence rate from 20% in 1990 to 65/. as of August 1994.
3. Active participation in MCH and nutrition related programme (immunization, operation timbang, supplemental feeding, etc.) and community-related activities.
5.1.2 Organizational level
A. Women's association and linkages
1. 78 WGs with 1692 members were organized from 1990 to 1993. (Number of drop-outs is excluded).
2. In Capiz, 7 Municipal Federations and Provincial Federation of all WGs were organized. In Pangasinan, only 5 Municipal Federations of 18 WGs were organized.
3. Representation of the Chairman of WG Federation in Municipal Development Council.
4. Legal personality of the WGs (38 WGs in Pangasinan and all WGs in Capiz) as they are registered in DOLE. In Capiz, some WGs are in the process of registering with CDA as full-pledged cooperative.
5. Strong linkage with LGUs, DOH and other agencies and with banking institutions (LBP and Allied Bank).
6. Established Group CBU fund and savings. As of August 31, 1994 , Pangasinan's WGs has a total of P169,549.20 Group CBU fund and P189,501.60 Group Savings. As of July 31, 1994, Capiz, WGs has a total of only P5,7611.50 Group CBU fund and P190,321.34 Group Savings.
Some WGs have already used their Group Funds for relending and marketing activities.
7. Leadership capabilities of women were recognized in the community as indicated by the recent-election wherein come members were either elected as barangay officials or appointed as barangay secretary or treasurer.
B. Barangay Community Activities
1. Social Action Projects of WGs:
a. construction of project office
b. cleanliness and beautification drive
c. tree planting
d. medicinal/herbal garden or vegetable garden
e. construction of waiting shed/area
f. assisted in construction of school building/chapel/mini sports facility/day care center/multipurpose center
g. facilitated electrification of village
h. facilitators on some community activities (e.g. Cooperative Month, Nutrition Week, Brgy. Fiesta, Valentine's Day, etc.)
i. campaign on illegal fishing or illegal gambling
2. Health-related projects
a. immunization
b. supplemental feeding to malnourished children
c. operation timbang
d. sputum sampling
e. herbal medicine preparation
f. construction of sanitary toilets or latrines
g. distribution of first aid kits
h. request for Medical Action Teams for medical checkups of village residents
i. service of some members as Day Care Worker
3. Family Planning Related Projects
a. referral system
b. resupply of contraceptive pills and condom
c. film showing on family planning
d. participation in Population Week Celebration
e. IEC billboards
f. service of some members as BHWs, BSPOs for government and NGO programs
g. service of FPV (Pangasinan has a total of 30 functioning FPVs)
4. Fund Raising Activities (Raffle, benefit dance, Christmas carolling and others) - proceeds are used in financing their projects and as group CPU and savings.
The enumerated activities above are the type. of projects initiated by WGs. One WG has at least 3 social action projects and several health and family planning related activities. Construction of project office is their primary project.
5.2 Sustainability of achievements
5.2.1 Approaches towards sustainability
The sustainability and institutionalization of the Project will mainly depend on the Project's implementing arms namely the Provincial Governments of Pangasinan and Capiz.
Among the measures introduced by the project in order to ensure that its activities can be continued without interruption are as follows:
A. CAPIZ
1. Creation of Group Volunteer Organizers (GVOs). At least one (1) GVO per WG is being trained as leader or another "field worker" who can assume some of the Field Worker's tasks, e.g. organizing women, preparing training design, resource speaker in training courses, conducting survey of members etc. Three (3) training for GVOs with 112 participants had been conducted since 1991.
2. Federation of all 30 WGs at municipal and provincial levels. Chairman of WG Municipal Federation has a representation in Municipal Development Council.
3. Gradual conversion of WGs into a full-pledged cooperative. In August 1994, District 1 had piloted a General Assembly. Processing of CDA registration is underway.
4. Inclusion of project in PPDO's regular budget. 20% of development fund is alloted to project. By 1995, expansion to upland areas is included in their workplan and budget.
5. Strengthening skills and competencies of project staff through regular training/seminar that will enhance project implementation not only from project but also from other institutions.
6. Establishing strong linkage with LGUs, Some municipal LGUs have provided financial assistance (e.g. sponsoring WG federation's general assembly, inter-barangay tour), facilities and encouragement.
7. Representation of PMS (Field Supervisor of District 1) in the session of Municipal Council on a quarterly basis to update officials on the progress and problems of the project. Mayors are furnished with project monitoring reports.
B. PANGASINAN
1. Creation of FP Volunteer. Two (2) training with 41 pax were conducted.
2. Five (5) municipal-based WG federations were established in 1994 .
3. Strengthening of skills and capabilities of project staff through regular training/seminars.
It is noticeable that Capiz, approaches toward sustainability are many compared with Pangasinan. The frequent replacement/turnover of staff, contractual nature of assignment and lack of commitment might be the contributing factors of this result.
5.2.2 Assessment of the women groups development level
On a quarterly basis, project staff assessed the level of development of WGs whether the group is in Level 1 (Group Formation), Level II (Group Development) or Level III (Group Institutionalization). In 1992, only 1 WG achieved Level III, a. shown in Table 23. It is assumed that in 1994, more WGs are in Level III. (Data on recent status of level of WGs development level is not available.)
The goal of the Project is for all WGs to reach the Level III status since it is an indication that the group can continue and sustain their activities even without the project.
5.3 Adoption/replication of project achievement
5.3.1 Adoption
The community-based management and the integrated social and economic approach of the project particularly the training package have already been adopted by the implementing agencies in some cases which are as follows:
A. CAPIZ
1. Other PPDO Special Projects
a. Greening Panay, a project with task force composed of DA, DENR, PPDO, Rotary Club, etc.
b. Coastal Resource Management
2. Municipal LGUs a. Training for Sangguniang Kabataan
B. PANGASINAN
1. Provincial Livelihood Program. The Provincial Government entered into a separate agreement with LBP for implanting a similar model of lending for accredited organized groups and associations (e.g. fishermen, farmers, etc.).
C. Project in other countries
1. CPR/89/P01, a UNFPA project in China which is similar to PHI/89/P16. Sixteen (16) Chinese project implementors had a 2week training program in Capiz in 1992 for them to be exposed to the Philippine experience in WG formation, savings mobilization, micro-enterprise development and integration of social development activities in WG established.
Project- staff were the trainors and WGs had actual interaction with the Chinese.
2. Visit of 3 fellows from Nigerian Agricultural and Cooperative in Capiz on July 1992. This is under the UNDP/IPAF assisted project Artisanal Fisheries Development Project of the Government of Nigeria which has placed special emphasis on women fisherfolk.
5.3.2 Future replications
1. The project is starting to influence a participating commercial bank's (Allied Bank, Capiz) lending policies toward the poor, particularly for women. It has indicated its desire to replicate the Project's credit scheme to other provinces.
2. Municipal Mayors esp. in District 1 of Capiz expressed to replicate the project in other areas of the municipality. Allocation of part of Countryside development fund is planned.
<section>8</section>
6. Conclusion and recommendations
6. Conclusion and recommendations
Survey results revealed positive changes on the socioeconomic status of disadvantaged women, as brought about by the Project interventions in selected coastal communities of Capiz and Pangasinan.
The provision of technical assistance such as training, family planning inputs , skills transfer activities as well as credit guarantee funds have enabled the disadvantaged women to engage in their own or additional economic activities and expand existing ones. By engaging in IGPs. the women were able to increase their contribution to total household income. Through the IGPs, the women have also demonstrated to be good business managers as well as excellent borrowers by virtue of low, if not negligible, loan defaults.
Also, the additional household income contributed by women have not only improved the household's propensity to save but also improve family welfare. It also strengthen women position in household decision-making including those with respect to family size.
With respect to other form of social gains, the Project has contributed to the enhancement of women's social position through building self-confidence and self-esteem, thereby contributed to improved relations in and outside the homes, benefitting their communities as well.
In order to further improve the efficiency of Project implementation and management, the following may be taken into consideration.
1. Extension or expansion of project to cover other areas such as other coastal barangays or upland areas in both provinces as project's impact is very much felt favourable.
2. Management of Guarantee Fund to be given to Provincial Governments after project life as per MOA between GOP and FAO. To sustain economic activities established under the project, the Guarantee Fund should be directly manage by established women group through the existing fund mechanism. Rural banks may be utilized to improve accessibilities.
3. Criteria for the selection of Project participants. The Project should continue to provide organizational and credit/loan assistance as well as family planning services to women who are interested or in need of these services. Through these services, the project is shown to contribute to the economic well-being of families and to the improvement of women's socio-economic status. To better delineate the economic impact of the project from its other social effects on women however, it is important to review the project's monitoring system and develop one that will allow for the easy assessment of project effects.
4. Strengthen commitment of LGUs. Welfare of staff should be given importance as human resources is a major factor toward the success of a project.
Prospects for continuity and sustainability of a project are enhanced when local staff as much as possible is permanently employed by the LGUs. This is to avoid local staff trained by the project be scattered when the project is terminated.
5. Resource management. Some women engaged in fish coral, etc. which can lead to depletion of fishery resources. There should be training on CRM not only for women but more so to their husbands and other fishermen in the area.
6. Continuous technical training to sustain women's economic activities and to give them opportunity for value added source of income.
7. Bank. Agreement with LOP seemed to be more advantageous as funds earned interest which could mean additional loan beneficiaries. Also, LBP provided technical assistance to WGs as their vision is toward countryside development.
8. There should be an annual Performance Assessment Workshop of all the project staff (both provinces) with key representatives from WGs in order to assess the project's efficiency in its implementation and achievement of objectives, the problems encountered and for both provinces to have sharing of experiences and strategies/approaches in project interventions.
9. Annual reports (including the annexes/attachments) should be standardized so that consolidation and comparative/trend analyst will be easily facilitated.
10. Conduct impact assessment or comparative study of all WGs (1st to 3rd batches) to gauge overall impact of the project. According to project staff, Batch 2 WGs are much better as project operations were refined unlike for batch 1 which was the initial stage where lots of problems were encountered.
11. Prepare a case study or a publication containing project approach/strategy achievements and experiences which can serve as reference or guidelines for replications and/or adoptions.
12. On "Consolidated Training Manual", it is recommended that funds be sourced to trim/refine, validate and pilot-test the manual in other areas by other agencies. By this, there will be long term evidence of project achievements and the project can have tangible contribution in CO and women development.
<section>9</section>
7. Tables
7. Tables
Table 1. Distribution of Respondents by Women's Group
Number of Members
Women's Group
Group age (as of 12/31/93)
Beginning
Remaining as of 12/31/93
Drop-out
Participants (PAX)*
Drop-out**
PANGASINAN
1. Rabon, San Fabian
2. Baybay-Lopez, Binmaley
3. Buenlag, Binmaley
4. Dorongan, Lingayen
5. Maniboc, Lingayen
6. Pangapisan Sur, Lingayen
7. Tobuan, Labrador
8. Uyong, Labrador
9. Pangascasan, Sual
10. Baquioen, Sual
11. Boboy, Agno
12. Cabungaoan, Burgos
13. Olanen, Bami
14. Petal, Dasol
15. Gais-Guipe, Dasol
16. Cato, Infanta
17. Batarang, Infanta
18. Vallarta, Infanta
19. Concordia, Bolinao
20. Luciente l, Bolinao
21. Goyoden, Bolinao
22. Binabalian, Bolinao
23. Awag, Anda
24. Mal-ong, Anda
25. Roxas, Anda
CAPIZ
1. Culasi, Roxas City
2. Libas, Roxas City
3. Barra, Roxas City
4. Buntod, Panay
5. Balogo, Pilar
6. Marita, Pres. Roxas
7. Cabugao, Ivisan
8. Lonoy, Sapian
9. Pawa, Panay
10. Agbanog, Pontevedra
Table 2. Profile of Respondents
INDICATOR
PANGASINAN
CAPIZ
ALL RESPONDENTS
PAX (n=65)
DROP-OUT (n=22)
PAX (n=65)
DROP-OUT (n=22)
PAX (N=107)
DROP-OUT (N=34)
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
1. Age
20 & below
51 & above
Total
Average
2. Civil Status
Single
Married
Separated
Widow
Total
3. Religion
Catholic
Non-Catholic
Total
4. Educational Attainment
Primary (Grade I-V)
Intermediate (Grade VI)
I-III Year High School
High School Graduate
College Undergraduate
College Graduate
Vocational
Total
Average
5. House Size
Total
Average
6. Number of children
not applicable
Total
Average
Table 2a. Number of children by age of respondents
Number of children
Total
Age
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
A. PANGASINAN
1. PAX (n=65)
20&below
51&above
Total
2. DROP-OUTS (n=22)
20&below
51&above
Total
B. CAPIZ
1. PAX (n=42)
20&below
51&above
Total
2. DROP-OUTS
(n=12)
20&below
51&above
Total
C. ALL RESPONDENTS
1. ALL PAX (N=107)
20&below
51&above
Total
2. ALL DROP-OUTS (N=34)
20&below
51&above
Total
Table 2b. Number of children by educational attainment of respondent
Educational Attainment
Number of children
Total
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
A. PANGASINAN
1. PAX (n=65)
Primary (Grade I-V)
Intermediate (Grade VI)
I-III Year High School
High School Graduate
College Undergraduate
College Graduate
Vocational
Total
2. Drop-outs (N=22)
Primary (Grade I-V)
Intermediate (Grade VI)
I-III Year High School
High School Graduate
College Undergraduate
College Graduate
Vocational
Total
B. CAPIZ
1. PAX (n=42)
Primary (Grade I-V)
Intermediate (Grade VI)
I-III Year High School
High School Graduate
College Undergraduate
College Graduate
Vocational
Total
2. Drop-outs (n=12)
Primary (Grade I-V)
Intermediate (Grade VI)
I-III Year High School
High School Graduate
College Undergraduate
College Graduate
Vocational
Total
C. ALL RESPONDENTS
1. ALL PAX (N=107
Primary (Grade I-V)
Intermediate (Grade VI)
I-III Year High School
High School Graduate
College Undergraduate
College Graduate
Vocational
Total
C.2 ALL Drop-outs (N=34)
Primary (Grade I-V)
Intermediate (Grade VI)
I-III Year High School
High School Graduate
College Undergraduate
College Graduate
Vocational
Total
Table 3. Economic activities of respondents
INDICATORS
PANGASIAN
CAPIZ
ALL RESPONDENTS
PAX(n=65)
DROP-OUT(n=22)
PAX(n=42)
DROP-OUT(n=12)
PAX(N=107)
DROP-OUT(N=34)
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
A. Number of economic identified
Total
B. Type of economic activities Fisher-based
1. Fish vending/trading
2. Fish processing/marketing
3. Shell craft
4. Salt production
5. Mussel culture
6. Fish culture/fishpond prod.
7. Fish coral
8. Crab fattening
Sub-total
Non-fishery based
1. Hog fattening
2. Commodity trading (retail store, food vending)
3. Handcraft
4. Farming
5. Dressmaking
6. Employee/laborer
Sub-total
Total
Table 3a. Present occupation of respondents' husbands, 1993
OCCUPATION
PANGASINAN
CAPIZ
ALL RESPONDENTS
PAX
(n=65)
DROP-OUT
(n=22)
PAX
(n=42)
DROP-OUT
(n=22)
PAX
(n=65)
DROP-OUT
(n=22)
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Fisherman
Farmer
Fishpond Caretaker
Laborer
Employee
Others*
None (unemployed)
Not applicable
Total
Table 4. Monthly Income of Respondents
Menthly Income (P)
PANGASIAN
CAPIZ
ALL RESPONDENTS
PAX (n=65)
DROP-OUT (n=22)
PAX (n=42)
DROP-OUT (n=12)
PAX (N=107)
DROP-OUT (N=34)
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
0, None
P 1000 & below
5011 & above
Total
Minimum Income
Maximum Income
Average Income
Total Income
Table 5. Profile of household members (other than respondents) who are presently earning
Panasinan
Capiz
ALL
INDICATOR
PAX (n=65)
Drop out (n=22)
PAX (n=42)
Drop out (n=12)
PAX (N=107)
Drop out (N=34)
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
1. No. of household members (other than respondents earning)
Total
2. Household Member
Husband
Daughter
Son
Father/mother
Brother/sister
Son-in-law
None
Total
3. Occupation of Household Member
Fisherman
Fish vendor/trader
Farmer
Fishpond Caretaker
Driver
Laborer
Employee
Barangay Official
Others
Total
4. Monthly Income
P 1000 & below
5001 & above
Total
Minimum Income
Maximum Income
Average Income
Total Income
Table 6. Respondents' other sources of income, 1993
INDICATOR
PANGASINAN
CAPIZ
ALL
PAX(n=65)
DROP-OUT(n=22)
PAX(n=42)
DROP-OUT(n=12)
PAX(N=107)
DROP-OUT(n=34)
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
1. Have other sources of income
Yes
No
Total
2. Other sources of income
1. Hog fattening
2. Farming
3. Fish pond
4. Laundry
5. Pension/allowance from relative
6. OCW child
7. Dressmaking
8. Others*
Total
3. Annual income from other sources
P 2000 & below
12001 & above
Total
Minimum income
Maximum income
Average income
Total income
Table 7. % Contribution and changes in total annual income of households, 1990-1993
Year Household Member
PANGASIAN
CAPIZ
ALL RESPONDENTS
PAX (n=65)
DROP-OUT (n=22)
PAX (n=42)
DROP-OUT (n=12)
PAX (N=107)
DROP-OUT (N=34)
Total (P)
% Contri-bution
Average (P)
% change
Total (P)
% Contri-bution
Average (P)
% change
Total (P)
% Contri-bution
Average (P)
% change
Total (P)
% Contri-bution
Average (P)
% change
Total (P)
% Contri-bution
Average (P)
% change
Total (P)
% Contri-bution
Average (P)
% change
Respondent
Others
Total
Respondent
Others
Total
Respondent
Others
Total
Respondent
Others
Total
Change from 1990 to 1993 Respondent
Others
TOTAL
Table 8. Respondents' Assessment of Factors which Contributed to Increased Incomes, 1990-93
INDICATOR
PANGASINAN
CAPIZ
ALL RESPONDENTS
PAX
DROP-OUT
PAX
DROP-OUT
PAX
DROP-OUT
(n=65)
(n=22)
(n=42)
(n=12)
(N=107)
(N=34)
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
1. Is there an increase in income?
Yes
No
Total
2. Factors which contributed to increased incomes
1 Project loan used as capital for new or expansion of IGP
2 Acquisition of fixed assets (fishing boats, nets, etc.)
3 Improved management skills
4 Both husband & wife are earning
5 Additional income from children/relatives
6 Increase in quantity/quality of catch
7 Selling husband's catch
8 Mobility/wider market
9 Earnings used to expand IGP
10 More time in business (children are grown-up)
11 Hardwork, patience & effort
Total
3. Reason/s why no increase in income
1 Incurred lost in IGP
2 Part of project load used in personal & other household expenses
3 Husband in the sole earner
4 Nocapital for IGP
Total
Table 9. Monthly Household Expenditures of Respondents, 1993
PANGASINAN
CAPIZ
ALL RESPONDENTS
PAX (n=65)
DROP-OUT (n=22)
PAX (n=42)
DROP-OUT (n=12)
PAX (N=107)
DROP-OUT (N=34)
Item of Expenditures
Freq
Average (P)
Total (P)
Freq
Average (P)
Total (P)
Freq
Average (P)
Total (P)
Freq
Average (P)
Total (P)
Freq
Average (P)
Total (P)
Freq
Average (P)
Total (P)
Food
Medicines
Education
Clothing
Transportation
Recreation
Monthly Expenses
Annual Expenses
Annual Income (c.f. Table 7)
Balance*
Note: *Balance in annual income has been used in IGP, house repair, acquisition of appliances and cash savings.
Table 9a: Percent (%) Utilization of Increased Incomes (Monthly) by Significant Items of Expenditures, 1993
PANGASINAN
CAPIZ
ALL RESPONDENTS
PAX (n=65)
DROP-OUT (n=22)
PAX (n=42)
DROP-OUT (n=12)
PAX (N=107)
DROP-OUT (N=34)
Item of Expenditures
Freq
Average (P)
Total (P)
Freq
Average (P)
Total (P)
Freq
Average (P)
Total (P)
Freq
Average (P)
Total (P)
Freq
Average (P)
Total (P)
Freq
Average (P)
Total (P)
Food
Medicines
Education
Clothing
Transportation
Recreation
Total %
Table 10. Credit practices of respondents, 1993
INDICATORS
PANGASINAN
CAPIZ
ALL RESPONDENTS
PAX(n=65)
DROP-OUT(n=22)
PAX(n=65)
DROP-OUT(n=22)
PAX(n=65)
DROP-OUT(n=22)
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
1. Number of times that avail loan from the project
Total
2. Purpose/Utilization of loan Fisher-based
1. Fish vending/trading
2. Fish processing/marketing
3. Acquisition of fixed assets
(boat, fishing gear, etc. )
4. Shell craft
5. Salt production
6. Fish production/culture
7. Mussel culture
8. Crab fattening
Sub-total
Non-fishery based
1. Commodity trading (retail store, food vending, etc.)
2. Rice farming
3. Hog fattening
4. Household expenses
(medical, educ., etc)
Sub-total
Total
3. Total amount borrowed from the project (P)
4000 & below
20001 & above
Total
Minimum
Maximum
Average
Total
4. Average amount of loan per borrowing
2000 & below
10001 & above
Total
Minimum
Maximum
Average
Total
5. Have other sources of loan?
Yes
No
Total
5.1 If yes, source of loan
Cooperative
Gov't agency(DSWD, BFAR)
Bank(PNB, LBP)
Relative/neighbor
Moneylender(Bombay)
Barangay Captain
NGOs, other
Total
5.2 Purpose of loan
Additional Capital
Purchase of fishing gear/boat
Hot fattening
Farming
Personal Expenses
Total
5.3 Amount of loan
2000 & below
10001 & above
Total
Minimum
Maximum
Average
Total
Table 11. Savings Practice of Respondents, 1990 and 1993
Indicator
PANGASIAN
CAPIZ
PAX (n=65)
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
1. Able to save
Yes
No
Total
Amount of Savings/month
500 & below
3001 & above
Total
Minimum
Maximum
Average
Total
3. Where savings are placed?
House
Bank
Association
House & Association
Total
4. Reasons why there's no savings
1. income is just enough
2. use for education of children
3. members of family got sick
4. reinvested to new IGP
5. paid loan
6. inadequate income
7. incurred business loss
8. prices of commodities increased
Total
Indicator
All respondents
Pax (N=107)
DROP-OUT (N=34)
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Freq
Freq
Freq
Freq
1. Able to save
Yes
No
Total
2. Amount of Savings/month
500 & below
3001 & above
Total
Minimum
Maximum
Average
Total
3. Where savings are placed?
House
Bank
Association
House & Association
Total
4. Reasons why there's no savings
1. income is just enough
2. use for education of children
3. members of family got sick
4. reinvested to new IGP
5. paid loan
6. inadequate income
7. incurred business loss
8. prices of commodities increased
Total
Tabel 12. Respondents' Selected Level of Living Indicators
INDICATORS
PANGASINAN
CAPIZ
PAX (N-65)
DROP-OUT (n=22)
PAX (N-65)
DROP-OUT (n=22)
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Frequency
Frequency
change
Frequency
Frequency
change
Frequency
Frequency
change
Frequency
Frequency
change
A. Ownership of Land
1. Residential Lot
* owned
* rented
* squatter
* owned by parents
Total
2. Farm
* owned
* leased
* tenanted
* none
Total
B. Residential House
* owned
* rented
* owned by parents
* living with parents
Total
Materials
* concrete
* semi-concrete
* light materials
Total
C. Household facilities
1. Lighting facilities
* electric lights
* kerosene lamp
* LGP lamp
* petromax
Total
2. Water supply
* public artesian well
* deep well
* piped water
* jetmatic
* dug well
* rain water in tank
Total
3. Cooking facilities
* earthen stove
* LPG stove
* electric stove
* gas stove
Total
4. Toilet facilities
* flush/water sealed
* pit pivy
* public toilet
* none
Total
5. Appliances
5.1 Number of appliances
9 & above
Total
5.2 Type of Appliances
* radio
* tape recorder
* electric fan
* sewing machine
* bed
* TV set
* stereo set
* sala set
* dining set
* refrigerator
* karaoke
* dresser
* wall clock
* betamax
* washing machine
* freezer
Total
D. Transportation facilities
D.1 Number of facilities
Total
D.2 Type of facilities
* motorboat
* fishing boat/banca
* bicycle
* pedicab
* motorecycle
* tricycle
* jeep
Total
Table 12. Cont'd
INDICATORS
PAX (N-65)
DROP-OUT (n=22)
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Frequency
Frequency
change
Frequency
Frequency
change
A. Ownership of Land
1. Residential Lot
* owned
* rented
* squatter
* owned by parents
Total
2. Farm
* owned
* leased
* tenanted
* none
Total
B. Residential House
* owned
* rented
* owned by parents
* living with parents
Total
Materials
* concrete
* semi-concrete
* light materials
Total
C. Household facilities
1. Lighting facilities
* electric lights
* kerosene lamp
* LGP lamp
* petromax
Total
2. Water supply
* public artesian well
* deep well
* piped water
* jetmatic
* dug well
* rain water in tank
Total
3. Cooking facilities
* earthen stove
* LPG stove
* electric stove
* gas stove
Total
4. Toilet facilities
* flush/water sealed
* pit pivy
* public toilet
* none
Total
5. Appliances
5.1 Number of appliances
9 & above
Total
5.2 Type of Appliances
* radio
* tape recorder
* electric fan
* sewing machine
* bed
* TV set
* stereo set
* sala set
* dining set
* refrigerator
* karaoke
* dresser
* wall clock
* betamax
* washing machine
* freezer
Total
D. Transportation facilities
D.1 Number of facilities
Total
D.2 Type of facilities
* motorboat
* fishing boat/banca
* bicycle
* pedicab
* motorecycle
* tricycle
* jeep
Total
Table 13. Knoledge of Family Planing Methods of Respondents
PANGASINAN
CAPIZ
PAX (n=65)
Drop-out (n=22)
PAX (n=42)
Drop-out (n=12)
INDICATORS
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
1. Number of FPM known
Total
2. FPM known
1. Vasectomy
2. Ligation
3. IUD
4. Pills
5. Natural
6. Condom
Total
3. Source of information
1. POPCOM/PPO/MPO
2. Project (staff, training)
3. RHU (midwife, nurse, doctor)
4. School
5. Neighbor
6. Pre-marriage Counselor
7. Respondent is BHW
8. FP Volunteer
9. Others (radio/media, hospital, INK, DSWD)
Total
Table 13. Cont'n
ALL RESPONDENTS
PAX (n=107)
Drop-out (n=34)
INDICATORS
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
1. Number of FPM known
Total
2. FPM known
1. Vasectomy
2. Ligation
3. IUD
4. Pills
5. Natural
6. Condom
Total
3. Source of information
1. POPCOM/PPO/MPO
2. Project (staff, training)
3. RHU (midwife, nurse, doctor)
4. School
5. Neighbor
6. Pre-marriage Counselor
7. Respondent is BHW
8. FP Volunteer
9. Others (radio/media, hospital, INK, DSWD)
Total
Table 14. Adoption of Family Planning Methods of Respondents
Indicators
Panganisan
Capiz
PAX (n=65)
Drop-out (n=22)
PAX (n=42)
Drop-out (n=12)
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
1. Able to adopt at least 1 FPM?
Yes
No
Total
2. FP Method Adopted
1 Vasectomy
2 Ligation
3 IUD
4 Pills
5 Natural
6 Condom
Total
3. Year 1st adopted
On or before 1980
Total
4. Length of adoption (in years)
less than 1 year
more than 10
Total
5. Reasons for non-adoption of any FPM
1 afraid to use
2 husband dislikes it
3 old age (menopausal stage/non-MCRA)
4 health problem
5 wants another baby
6 pregnant/gave birth
7 newly married
8 lack of information
9 not applicable due to civil status
Total
Table 14. Cont'n.
Indicators
All Respondents
PAX (N=107)
Drop-out (N=34)
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Freq-quency
Now
Freq-quency
Now
Freq-quency
Now
Freq-quency
Now
1. Able to adopt at least 1 FPM?
Yes
No
Total
2. FP Method Adopted
1 Vasectomy
2 Ligation
3 IUD
4 Pills
5 Natural
6 Condom
Total
3. Year 1st adopted
On or before 1980
Total
4. Length of adoption (in years)
less than 1 year
more than 10
Total
5. Reasons for non-adoption of any FPM
1 afraid to use
2 husband dislikes it
3 old age (menopausal stage/non-MCRA)
4 health problem
5 wants another baby
6 pregnant/gave birth
7 newly married
8 lack of information
9 not applicable due to civil status
Total
Table 15. Practice of Family Planning Methods of Respondents
Indicators
Panganisan
Capiz
PAX (n=65)
Drop-out (n=22)
PAX (n=42)
Drop-out (n=12)
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
1. Still using FPM?
Yes
No
Total
2. FPM still using/practicing
1 Vasectomy
2 Ligation
3 IUD
4 Pills
5 Natural
6 Condom
Total
3. Reason for using/practicing any of the FPM
1 to avoid pregnancy (too many children)
2 effective/got used to it
3 to have more time in IGP
4 birth spacing
5 for a better future
6 good for health
7 wish of both husband & wife
8 permanent FPM
Total
4. Reasons why stop practicing/using FPM
1 side effect
2 husband dislikes it
3 old age (menopausal stage/non-MCRA)
4 health problem
5 wants another baby
6 pregnant/just gave birth
7 newly married
8 lack of information
9 not applicable due to civil status
Total
Table 15. Cont'n.
Indicators
All Respondents
PAX (N=107)
Drop-out (N=34)
Baseline
Now
Baseline
Now
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
1. Still using FPM?
Yes
No
Total
2. FPM still using/practicing
1 Vasectomy
2 Ligation
3 IUD
4 Pills
5 Natural
6 Condom
Total
3. Reason for using/practicing any of the FPM
1 to avoid pregnancy (too many children)
2 effective/got used to it
3 to have more time in IGP
4 birth spacing
5 for a better future
6 good for health
7 wish of both husband & wife
8 permanent FPM
Total
4. Reasons why stop practicing/using FPM
1 side effect
2 husband dislikes it
3 old age (menopausal stage/non-MCRA)
4 health problem
5 wants another baby
6 pregnant/just gave birth
7 newly married
8 lack of information
9 not applicable due to civil status
Total
Table 16. Pregnancy occurrence within project period, 1993
Indicators
Pangasinan
Capiz
All
PAX
(n=65)
Drop-out
(n=22)
PAX
(n=42)
Drop-out
(n=12)
PAX
(N=107)
Drop-out
(n=34)
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
Fre-quency
D. Pregnancy
1. Became pregnant within project duration?
Yes
No
Total
2. Reason, if yes
1 planned by husband & wife
2 wish of husband only
3 wish of wife only
4 use of FPM
5 unexpected
6 did not care
Total
3. Reason, if not*
1 stop use of FP method
2 wish of husband only
3 wish of wife only
4 planned by husband & wife
5 old age (menopausal stage/non-MCRA)
6 busy with IGP
7 newly married
8 health problem
9 not prolific
10 not applicable due to civil status
Total
Table 18. Social Gains achieved by respondents as a result of Project assistance
a)
SOCIAL GAINS
Pangasinan PAX (n=65)
Pangasinan DROP-OUT (n=22)
(Worse)
(no change)
(better)
(much better)
(Worse)
(no change)
(better)
(much better)
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
1 Access to credit
2. Access to family planning services
3. Access to health services
4. Security of food supply
5. Family welfare
a. consumer goods
b. clothing
c. housing
d. school fees
e. health
6. Capacity to work outside the village
7. Self-confidence, self-esteem, hopefulness
8. Respect to one's family
9. Respect to one's neighbors
10. Respect to one's community
11. Decision-making on family planning
TOTAL (N)
AVERAGE (N/11)
(N/11)/65
b)
SOCIAL GAINS
Capiz PAX (n=42)
Capiz DROP-OUT (n=12)
(Worse)
(no change)
(better)
(much better)
(Worse)
(no change)
(better)
(much better)
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
1 Access to credit
2. Access to family planning services
3. Access to health services
4. Security of food supply
5. Family welfare
a. consumer goods
b. clothing
c. housing
d. school fees
e. health
6. Capacity to work outside the village
7. Self-confidence, self-esteem, hopefulness
8. Respect to one's family
9. Respect to one's neighbors
10. Respect to one's community
11. Decision-making on family planning
TOTAL (N)
AVERAGE (N/11)
(N/11)/65
c)
SOCIAL GAINS
ALL PAX (N=107)
ALL DROP-OUT (N=34)
(Worse)
(no change)
(better)
(much better)
(Worse)
(no change)
(better)
(much better)
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
1 Access to credit
2. Access to family planning services
3. Access to health services
4. Security of food supply
5. Family welfare
a. consumer goods
b. clothing
c. housing
d. school fees
e. health
6. Capacity to work outside the village
7. Self-confidence, self-esteem, hopefulness
8. Respect to one's family
9. Respect to one's neighbors
10. Respect to one's community
11. Decision-making on family planning
TOTAL (N)
AVERAGE (N/11)
(N/11)/65
Table 19. Beneficiaries (PAX) assessment of institutional performance
A. Assessment of the Effectiveness/efficiency of implementation of project activities
Institution/Agency
Pangasinan PAX (n=65)
Capiz PAX (n=42)
ALL PAX (N=107)
Poor
Fair
Good
Very Good
Poor
Fair
Good
Very Good
Poor
Fair
Good
Very Good
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
1. FAO
2. Provincial Government
3. Banks
B. Assessment of the delivery of project inputs
Institution/Agency
Pangasinan PAX (n=65)
Capiz PAX (n=42)
ALL PAX (N=107)
Long delay
Timely
Satisfactory
Long delay
Timely
Satisfactory
Long delay
Timely
Satisfactory
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
1. FAO
2. UNFPA
3. Provincial Government
4. Banks
C. Collaboration/coordination of activities with other agencies
Institution/Agency
Pangasinan PAX (n=65)
Capiz PAX (n=42)
ALL PAX (N=107)
Poor
Fair
Good
Very Good
Poor
Fair
Good
Very Good
Poor
Fair
Good
Very Good
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
Freq.
1. DOH
2. USAID
Not Applicable
3. DA/BFAR
4. UNICEF
Not Applicable
5. NGOs
Notes: Not applicable means no collaboration/coordination undertaken.
Capiz respondents who evaluated the performance of agencies include not all PAX but also some key informants (brgy. Officials, WG Presidents, midwives)
Table 20. Financial/Funds Management of FAO
Total
A. Total Budget ($), 4-year
GOP
UNFPA
Total
B. Approved Budget*
C. Total Expenditure*
Balance (B-C)
Notes:
* Includes project personnel, sub-contract, training, equipment and miscellaneous components
** Large balance since alloment for sub-contract was not utilized
*** As of August 31, 1994.
Table 21. Project Management Aspect, Provincial Governments
Areas of Assessment
Pangasinan
Capiz
A. Project Team
1. Staff
Skills/competencies (initial stage of project)
new and limited CO & training experiences
well-trained and experienced in field works, GO, FP, etc.
Job tenure/status
Contractual
Permanent
Fulltime
Fulltime
Turn-over/ replacement
Frequent
Negligible
Change in area of assignment
frequent
none
No. of staff involved in the project since 1990
Average involvement
1.8 years
3.2 years
2. Change in Gov't Project Director
once
once
3. Change in Project Manager
thrice
none
B. Politics (staff recruitment)
high
negligible
C. Operational strategy
Organized 29 WGs in 1 year with limited staff (3:1 ratio, 3 WGs for every 1 staff)
Concentrate in 10 WGs to enable the team to gain experience and fine tune operations before expansion (1:1 WG & staff ratio)
D. Travel allowance
only travel supplement from project
Per diem, TEB and travel supplement from project
E. Linkages with other agencies/NGOs
satisfactory
good
Table 22. Guarantee Funds Management by Banking Institutions
Pangasinan
Capiz
1. Establishment of fund
Guarantee fund
As collateral
2. Channel of Fund
Land Bank (Gov't Bank )
Allied Bank (Private Bank)
3. Amount
4. Type of deposit
Time deposit in Peso with interest
Current account in Dollars ($)
5. Interest rate (loan)
14% for short and medium term
14% for short and medium term
6. No . of banks branches servicing the project
7. Have field staff to monitor/collect loan
Yes
No
8. Type of loan
Group loan
Individual loan
9. Total loan administered (1991-1994)
P5,019,757*
P4,086,256**
10. % utilization of guarantee fund
11. loan default
with legal
no legal
notice
notice
Notes:
*As of August 1994
**As of July 1994
Table 23. Summary of WGs Development Level (Based on the assessment by project staff
Developmental Level*
Province
Level I
Level II
Level III
Total
Capiz
Pangasinan
Total
As of August 1994
Capiz
Pangasinan
not available
Total
Notes:
Level l. (Group Formation) - Seed project period. WGs still building up leadership. Full complement of FW pair/team needed. Indicators include written CBL, functional set of officers, at least 80% of members participating in group meetings and activities, conduct regular/special group meetings, written short-term action plan, existence of committees, at least 80% of members participating in group decision making, at least one. social project implemented, 100% members trained in team building.
Level II (Group Development) - WG and FW pair/team have assumed, shared, agreed upon functions. Equipping is critical. Indicators include written long-term action plan, set priorities arid alternatives, on-going social/ community projects, able to prepare minutes of meeting and resolutions; able to identify feasible income generating projects, able to solicit feedbacks relative to on-going activities, able to apply clientbased monitoring tools, 100% members trained in basic organizational skills. 100% members trained in bookkeeping and project management, participation in government initiated projects, implementing on-going written short-term action plan.
Level III (Group Institutionalization) WGs equipped to assure full management functions and facilitation of development process within the year. Coaching support is needed but FW could phase-out anytime or within a year. Indicators include established linkages with GO's. NGOs and other agencies, increased mem-bership with legal personality, trained and functional second line leaders, implementing on-going written long-term action plan.
<title>An evaluation of project PHI/89/P16 - Improving the status of disavantaged women in small-scale fishing communities of Capiz and Pangasinan, Philippines. Improving the Status of Disadvantaged Women in Small-Scale Fishing Communities </title>
8. Annexes
Annex 1. Evaluation of project PHI/09/P16
Annex 2. Women groups organized from 1990-1994
Annex 3. Summary of training conducted by project to WGs, 1990-1994
Annex 4. Summary of credit assistance to women beneficiaries, 1991-1994
Annex 5. Summary of contraceptive prevalence rate, 1990-1994
8. Annexes
Annex 1. Evaluation of project PHI/09/P16
Terms of Reference of Evaluation/Impact Assesment
Evaluation study and evaluation report are to assess three distinctly different areas of project impact and project implementation viz.
a. Assessment of the impact of the project on the social and economic status of women in rural fishing communities in Capiz and Pangasinan in a statistically and empirically objective manner. The impact assessment should also identify and document project achievements as well as the constraints and shortcomings encountered by the project. The impact assessment will form Part I of the evaluation report to be submitted by the consultant. It is to be written in such a way that it can stand on its own and can be published later on as a separate publication.
b. Assessment of the efficiency of project implementation and management by FAO, UNFPA, Provincial and Municipal Governments, participating banks and participating Central Government agencies in the field of fisheries, health, nutrition, mother and child care etc.. Identification and documentation of shortcomings constraints and achievements including the strengthening of the national institutions involved in the project through exposing them to new tasks, widening their expertise. expanding their field of operation etc.. The assessment of the efficiency of project implementation and management will form Part II of the evaluation report to be submitted by the consultant.
c. Assessment of the sustainability and durability of project achievements and activities and recommendation of suitable measures for enhancing these. Identification and documentation of adoption and replication of project achievements by participation national institutions and FAO in others development programmes such as provincial livelihood programmes. FAO projects in other countries etc.. The assessment of the sustainability and related recommendations are to be presented as Part III of the final report. Additional information to be gathered include:
- Assessment of project's effectivity or evaluation of appropriateness of used Means compared with the Realized Unexpected contributions in and outside the fishery sector;
- Impact of credit schemes, investments in fishing gears and related fishing effort on the already over-fished coastal resources with regards to biological Key Indicators which were not considered in the project design (environmental impact);
- Assess factors which changed the status of Key Indicators of those women; and
- Whether or not those women who participated in the project who received cheap credit invested also outside the fishery sector (where and who?).
Regarding Part I of the evaluation report and the design and conduct of the impact assessment, the following guidelines are to be observed. The impact assessment is to be done by comparing a statistically representative sample of women who benefitted from the project through obtaining a loan. receiving training and encouragement etc. with a representative sample of women from the same villages who did not participate in the project.
In order to have socio-economic baseline data on the women prior to the beginning of the project, the sample of women which did not participate in the project its to be chosen from those women who initially joined the first and succeeding batches of women groups which were formed but then dropped out and did not remain members. Identification of unintended effects of the project in the course of implementation should likewise be looked at.
The sample to be studied should include 20% of all women who coined and remained members of all batches of groups which were formed in Capiz nod Pangasinan. This sample should be compared with another sample consisting, of 20% of the women who initially coined the groups but then dropped out and those who did not join at all.
All municipalities where the women groups were established should be represented in tile sample, proportionally to the number of women who became members in a particular municipality.
The women included in the sample are to be interviewed individually with tile help of a questionnaire containing open and closed questions. The husbands/partners of the women are also to be interviewed with the help of another, shorter questionnaire. The information gathered in individual interviews is to be supplemented through case studies of selected women? group discussions with members of women groups, interviews with key informants in each of the villages to be included in the survey i.e. barangay captains, medical doctors, midwifes, school teachers and presidents of women's groups and through observations.
The comparison between women who participated in the project and women who dropped out and subsequently did not participate in the project, and the assessment to what extent and how the project was instrumental in bringing about the changes in the lives of the project participants their families and communities, should include the following:
- Social and economic status of women at the beginning of the project. Information to be analyzed from baseline study carried out in 1990 and from questionnaires completed by women when coining the groups from all batches of women organized.
- Social and economic statue of women at time of impact study and their perception of the projects contribution to changes which have taken place, with regard to:
* new or expanded economic activities taken up, skills acquired, income derived from activities, use of income personal and group savings;
* change of women's social and economic role in family and village/community in terms of decision making (including family planning), relationship with family members/neighbors social and physical mobility, self-esteem and confidence, household food security, nutritional and health status, access to institutional credit, facilities/health and family planning services etc.;
* health and nutritional status of children;
* educational statue and achievements of children:
* household assets, housing ;
* fertility, behavior, family planning practices, related attitudes and perceptions.
* assess those factors which changed the status of those women who did not participate at all in the project to compare the "with and without project situation".
During the interviews with key informants, particular attention should be paid to investigating changes in fertility behavior and family planning practices which occurred in the project villages and whether they can be attributed to the project, what those changes consist of and how they were brought about.
The availability of family planning services and supplies in the municipalities from which the sample has been chosen over the last three years needs to be asserted and the change of women social and economic roles and activities as a result; of the project needs to be described as perceived by the key informants and by the husbands/partners of the women and to be compared with the women's own views.
Through the key informants and statistical material. information needs, to be collected and presented on the demographic and occupational characteristics of the villages and on the availability of infrastructure, public services etc.
Regarding the time frame, the field study needs to be carried out in July 1994 and the final report is to be submitted before the end of September 1994. Two months consultancy of two national consultants are proposed.
Annex 2. Women groups organized from 1990-1994
Membership
Pangasinan
Capiz
Total
1. Total WGs
2. Total Members
1994 (As of 8/94)
3. Average # of member/WG
Annex 3. Summary of training conducted by project to WGs, 1990-1994
TRAINING
PANGASINAN
CAPIZ
BOTH PROVINCES
Number of
Number of
Number of
training
WG
Pax
training
WG
Pax
training
WG
Pax
1. Team building
Sub Total
2. Organizational Skills
(Incorporated in
Team Building)
Sub Total
3. Micro Entreprise Dev't
Sub Total
4. Family Welfare
Sub Total
5. Refresher
Sub Total
6. Leadership Training
GOVs (1991)
Adv. Leadership, 1993
GOVs (1993)
FP Volunteer (1993)
Sub Total
7. Others
Bkkpg & Record Mgf
Fish procesing
GRAND TOTAL
B. Interprovince Study Tour
Note: *Number of participants is estimated due to absence of data.
1994 training conducted by Capiz is not available.
Annex 4. Summary of credit assistance to women beneficiaries, 1991-1994
Year
PANGASINAN
CAPIZ
BOTH PROVINCES
No of members
Total Loan, in PHP (US$)
% Repayment
No of members
Total Loan, in PHP (US$)
% Repayment
No of members
Total Loan, in PHP (US$)
% Repayment
A. Loan
1,387,769 (US$ 52,172)
688,510 (US$25,884)
2,076,279 (US$ 78,056)
341,442 (US$ 12,836)
930,041 (US$34,964)
1,271,483 (US$ 47,800)
1,787,078 (US$ 67,183)
2,107,405 (US$ 79,226)
3,894,483 (US$ 146,409)
1,503,468* (US$ 56,521)
360,200** (US$13,541)
1,863,668 (US$ 70,063)
TOTAL
5,019,757 (US$ 188,713)
4,086,156 (US$ 153,615)
9,105,913 (US$ 342,328)
B. Guarantee Fund
LBP
Allied Bank
Total Guarantee Fund
2,633,400 (US$ 99,000)
2,154,600 (US$ 81,000)
4,788,000 (US$ 180,000)
C. % Utitlization of Fund
Exchange rate: US$ 1.00 = PHP 26.60
* as of August 1994
** as of July 1994
*** Time deposit interest is not included in the total guarantee fund reflected.
? Number of members who received loan for 1994 is not available
Annex 5. Summary of contraceptive prevalence rate, 1990-1994
Province/Year
Total MWRA*
No of FP User
Prevalence rate**
A. PANGASINAN
not available
As of 8/94
B. CAPIZ
As of 8/94
C. BOTH PROVINCES
As of 8/94
Notes:
* Married Women with Reproductive Age
** MWRA/ Total Number of FP User
<title>An evaluation of project PHI/89/P16 - Improving the status of disavantaged women in small-scale fishing communities of Capiz and Pangasinan, Philippines. Improving the Status of Disadvantaged Women in Small-Scale Fishing Communities </title>
<section>1</section>
9. References
9. References
Food and Agriculture Organization. "Benchmark Survey of Women in Selected Coastal Communities in Capiz and Pangasinan." Prepared by Pacific Rim Innovation and Management Exponents Inc. 1990.
FAO/UNFPA. Annual Project Reports of PHI/89/P16, "Improving the Status of -Disadvantaged Women in Selected Fishing Communities in Capiz and Pangasinan, Philippines." 1990 to 1994.
FAO/UNFPA. Process Documentation of PHI/89/P16, "Improving the Status of Disadvantaged Women in Selected Fishing Communities in Capiz and Pangasinan, Philippines." Prepared by Elsa Santos, 1991.
FAO/UNFPA. Project Document of PHI/S9/P16, "Improving the Status of Disadvantaged Women in Selected Fishing Communities in Capiz and Pangasinan, Philippines." 1989.
National Statistical Coordination Board. 1993 Philippine Statistical Yearbook.
Villareal, L.V. "An Initial Assessment of Project Impact on Selected PHI/89/P16 Women Focusing on Specific Economic and Social Gains." FAO-UNFPA Improving the Status of Disadvantaged Women in Small-Scale Fishing Communities of Capiz and Pangasinan, Quezon City, Metro Manila, Philippines, 1993.
