<title>Vanuatu - Technical Report: An assessment of the role of women in fisheries in Vanuatu</title>
<section>1</section>
1. Summary
1. Summary
Vanuatu women provide for their families from dawn to dusk, in all weathers. Rural women engage in agriculture and sometimes fishing, household and community activities and rear children; their working hours far exceed those of men. Most of production from their hard work is used to feed the family and maintain it; so where markets are available surplus is sold. This enterprise also contributes to the economic activities of the country. Women produce much of the food and they are the major resource base in agricultural production.
Fisheries has a low accent in Vanuatu, but it is receiving more attention as the population grows and the economy attempts to keep up with the population's demands. Women and men who rarely go to the sea to harvest for subsistence may simply lack knowledge of the value of fish protein to their family's nutrition. As knowledge expands and education increases people's expectations however, there will be increasing pressure on inshore resources coupled with an increase in opportunities for women to sell their harvest. While the government, NGOs and other organisations should support those women who want to sell fish, the Fisheries Department will have to establish and maintain a fine balance between encouraging fisheries exploitation and discouraging over-exploitation. This it can do by establishing and supervising the ground rules for sustainable fishing practices and developing, promoting and supporting new and improved ways of handling the harvest. Women having little time
to go fishing will be tempted to engage in unsustainable fishing practices to harvest rapidly; and. unless firm measures are maintained, inshore fish resources will be severely impacted as the national population increases.
Across the board, women are increasing their involvement in business, per se. Of those who already engage in economic activities to support their families most of those interviewed admitted that they could spend more time on those activities. As their children grow up and the raising of school fees becomes important' they will almost certainly do so.
Support for women's increasing involvement in fishing activities should come firstly from offering relevant training. The nation cannot develop to its potential if it continues to only offer women training in domestic activities; and if it continues in that way, it does a disservice to women's capabilities. Other important government and non-government assistance can come from access to appropriate credit lines and credit levels. making available information on new fishing techniques and resources. improving domestic marketing systems and facilities, supporting the development of more cooperative activity within communities and between organisations, and by developing a national appreciation of women s fishing' as being worthwhile and distinct.
Where yield from offshore fishing appears unable to meet expectations the government is looking at inshore fisheries resources to contribute to sustaining the national economy. Inshore areas are the domain of the women fishers. Women should always be consulted in the preparation of plans for inshore fisheries. Through being consulted people offer support, and their knowledge contributes to wise utilisation and management.
The recommendations in this report are made to increase awareness of the contribution that women's fishing activities make to the national economy and the nation's well-being, to promote the increased involvement of Vanuatu women in national fisheries development activities, and to enhance income-earning opportunities for women based on and around fisheries.
Practical suggestions offered in this report are not in themselves new; yet their application in Vanuatu and the necessarily different approach to national fisheries development required appear not to have been considered before. Undertakings such as grow-out fish farming, value-adding, maintenance of quality, wise resource management and marketing can utilise the skills and situation of women as part of communities.
<section>2</section>
2. Introduction
2.1 General
2.2 Status of women
2.3 Legal status of women
2.4 Population
2.5 Government services
2.6 Health
2.7 Schooling
2.8 Fishing
2. Introduction
2.1 General
This report is about fishing and Ni-Vanuatu women as part of communities. Whereas several reports have been written about Ni-Vanuatu women (the most, recent being Charlotte Bowie's 1995^1 assessment of needs of Vanuatu's rural women: Voice blong of woman) there is little information about women in relation to fishing.
In the two months allowed, the consultant attempted to investigate the national role and needs of women in fisheries matter and to gather as much information as possible from and about women fishers in the six Vanuatu provinces. The information contained in report, although it is of necessity limited, will assist decision makers within the national government, non-government organisations and other aid organisations, to accommodate the needs of communities in fisheries development plans and policies in the country.
Whilst attempting to avoid making this report another in the series about women, it is important that an outline is given of women's position in Vanuatu society - as witnessed, verbalised by nationals and written about. This outline will provide background to the fisheries issues central to this report.
2.2 Status of women
Gender bias favouring men is widespread in Vanuatu^1 as illustrated by the higher number of boys in school, less females in training initiatives, less employment opportunities for girls, the lack of female participation in local and national government and lower participation in high level policy decisions and planning^2. However, because of the sexual division of labour, there is little or no time left for women to participate in community and government decision making, nor attend training and development sessions is widespread in Vanuatu.^1,2
Vanuatu women are the bearers of children, are responsible for all aspects of childcare, agriculture, food preparation, firewood and water collection, household duties, and are expected to contribute to household income-generating projects and church activities. Reports stress over and over that, outside of caring for children, preparing meals, carrying firewood and water (all of which add up to a considerable time and work load), the woman's role is to spend most of her day working in the garden. Walking to and from the garden may take several hours. Often the gardens are a long way from their home, sometimes more than two hours' walk, one way.
These basic societal tasks are not valued in monetary terms. Bowie (1995^1 : 59) considered that in Vanuatu, women's family labour is discounted and often viewed as the obligation of the female, i.e. her social role rather than real 'work'. 'When men do the same tasks, it is labelled as economic activity.'
According to Mackenzie-Reur (1995^2 : 20), 'More women are involved in agriculture and other primary activities (82%) in comparison to their male counterparts (63%), yet their contribution towards the economic and social development of the country is not recorded and inadequately recognised....' A 1985 survey on Tanna showed that 85% of adult women did moderate to heavy work, while the proportion of men doing the same was much lower^3.
Speaking about Pacific nations, Liloqula (1989^4 :182) said 'women are really the significant force in the economic development of our nations and an effective programme to support and promote their production and participation needs to be looked into.' However, gender blindness prevents statisticians and economists from seeing how and how much women contribute to the economy. Their invisibility in databases is then reflected in economic policies and therefore in the distribution of benefits (Stephens, cited in Bowie, 1995^1). The present report is intended to provide the basis of an effective programme to support women who fish in Vanuatu.
2.3 Legal status of women
The Vanuatu Constitution states that women and men have equal rights. Even then, Ni-Vanuatu women have to be educated on what their rights are.
When Parliament passed the Divorce Bill in 1986 its action was seen as amajor breakthrough. The Family Law Act was presented to Government in 1985 yet by 1995 it had not been actioned. Similarly, the Convention for Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women has not been signed and ratified. Hence it cannot be used as a guideline for formulating national legislation affecting women. However, Vanuatu has signed the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection, and Development of Children^3 and this could form the basis for a national policy on family welfare.
2.4 Population
The relatively low human population has also produced a lower fishing intensity - but this is set to change. The human population has been steadily climbing back from the decimal on of labour recruiters ('blackbirding') and white-man's diseases of the later 1800-early 1900s. In 1967 the national population stood at 77,988; increasing to 111,251 in 1979 and 142,944 in 1989. Although most of the population Iives in rural Vanuatu, the 'drift to the towns' is illustrated by the comparative figures of 90% of the population being rural dwellers in 1967, falling to 81.6% in 1989^2. Rapid urbanisation is one of the more outstanding features of Vanuatu's demographic history, such that between 1967 and 1989, the urban population (Luganville and Port Vila) increased annually by 5.4%. Between 1979 and 1989 it increased by 7.5%^2. In 1994 the national population was estimated at 160,700 of which 126,200 was in rural areas, and the 1996 population at 168,400 of which 128,800 lives in
rural areas (source: Statistics Office). Recent information from the Statistics Office is that the national population is increasing at slightly more than 2.8%.
In 1991, just under half (44%) of Vanuatu's population was under 15 years of age and present information suggests that the proportion under 20 years of age is about half of the population. The large number of children brings an immense burden on women who are largely responsible for their care. Life for many Ni-Vanuatu families is becoming more difficult^3 and there is considerable pressure on women as providers for the family, particularly as their subsistence role is becoming linked, with the needs of a cash economy.
Overall population density is 11.7 persons/sq. km, and it is highest in the Shepherd Islands, Paama Island and Efate Island. Relatively high population density also exists in Mere Lava (Banks Islands), Tanna (Tafea Province) and north Pentecost (Penama Province); and many smaller islands lying offshore of larger ones are densely populated. The highest densities recorded^2 are in Avokh (southern Malakula Island), Ifira Island near Port Vila and Atchin Island (northern Malekula Island) where there are more than 1,000 persons/sq. km. Emigration takes place from areas of high population density; for example, north Pentecost people move to Maewo, Ambae and Port Vila; Banks people move to Luganville.
2.5 Government services
Economic problems have meant that the national government has cut expenditure on government services. This cost-cutting has also meant the lack of money in rural areas has affected disposable income which in turn negatively affects the standard of living^3.
In recent years, the proportion of the national budget allocated to social services has decreased. e.g. Health and Education received 38% of recurrent expenditure in 1986 but this was reduced to 31% in 1989^2. Information provided by the Statistics Office (1996) is that whereas the population is increasing, the numbers of dispensaries and doctors has dropped slightly over the past three years, and the number of registered nurses has dropped substantially (342 in 1993, 220 in 1995). In this country where there is social inequity, these cut-backs find most expression in the comparative lack of programs addressing women's health and nutrition, women's education, access to clean water and Sanitary facilities. Lack of atention to such matters is a waste of human resources.
Vanuatu is the second most expensive place in the Pacific to live, according to the report. The average income in Vanuatu is 37,000 vt/head/year (1989 census). Urban income is 8.5% times than the higher than per capita rural income^2 - reflecting the presence of high-income earning expatriates in the towns. Many Ni-Vanuatu have moved back to the rural areas because of the expense of living in the towns (despite urban population numbers) and the public servants' strike of late 1993 was partly a reflection of the difficulty of 'making ends meet' by salaried Ni-Vanuatu working in Vila or Santo. The minimum government wage is 16,000 vt/month; and many Ni-Vanuatu urban families are extremely poor, their incomes as low as 7,000-10,000 vt/month if rent has to be taken out) (pers. comm., DWA). The DWA estimated that a family would have less than 400 vt/month to spend on fish Nearly 40% of the entire Port Vila population lives in squatter settlements with poor sanitation,
over-crowding, poor water supply and disease (National Planning Office report). Poor urban dwellers are also much more affected by the lack of income than are rural dwellers, as they have little or no land nor access to the sea.
2.6 Health
The infant mortality rate is 50/1,000 live births (1989 census), a high figure compared to other countries in the Pacific region^2. This could be one indication of the social and health status of women in the community; viz. the higher the infant mortality rate the lower the social and health status of women, and vice versa. The total average fertility rate for Ni-Vanuatu women was 5.1 in 1989 (census) and women in rural areas have more children than do women in urban areas. The WBU (1995)^5 recorded a national average family size of six.
A major factor which impacts on the health of women is the number of children they have and their age, and the spacing of children. Twenty-one percent of women aged
15-19 years had already had one child (1989 census) and 8-9% of these had had two children. The spread of children is greater in the rural areas, with 25% of rural mothers older than 35 years^2. Use of contraceptives is very low in Vanuatu (compared to the situation in other developing countries), being used by only 15% of child-bearing age women. Many rural men do not agree to their wives using contraceptives.
Nutritional anaemia is one of the major health problems of Ni-Vanuatu women, being particularly high in pregnant and lactating women, and in women and children eating only small amounts of protein foods^2.
2.7 Schooling
Vanuatu education system provides for six years of primary, four years of junior secondary and 2-3 years of senior secondary. In 1989, about 78% of the female population and 83% of the male population were attending school^2. Although it is difficult to estimate the literacy rate, it would be less in older age groups. At ages 1015, 25.7% of males were in school, but only 17.9% of females were (1989). Two main issues which impact on secondary school attendance for primary school leavers are the reduced number of spaces in secondary school (in 1989, only between 20% and 25% of Grade 6 children were selected to attend junior secondary schools) and the requirement to pay school fees (c. 10,000 vt/term/child). In rural areas, it is likely that girl students are negatively affected by the school fees issue. In 1989, 26 Ni-Vanuatu females had obtained a degree, compared with 106 males.
2.8 Fishing
A feature of traditional inshore fishing activity in Vanuatu is that there appears to be so little of it. By comparison with the inshore fishing performed in some other countries in the western Pacific region, Vanuatu is a minor player. Fishing is not an important traditional economic strategy among Melanesian coastal dwellers^6 and the populations of Papua New Guinea (PNG), Solomon Islands and Vanuatu are generally more orientated to cultivation of root crops and pig husbandry. Including poultry and beef raising to the community's larder appears to be more comfortable than taking to the water for many Ni-Vanuatu - even coastal dwellers. The situation in Vanuatu is probably like that in PNG, where only half of the coastal population regard fishing as an important activity: those communities are where there is little land for agriculture riverine and swampy areas and small, infertile islands^6. However, over the past 100 years, during which up to 70% of Vanuatu's population
has moved to the coast^7 nearshore coastal waters have played a more important part in rural people's lives.
In Vanuatu land is available to many communities although there is high human population density on some islands or areas thereof (e.g. north Pentecost, Atchin Island, Tanna, Ra Island). Land-based protein (cattle, pigs, poultry, nuts) is relatively cheap - especially beef- and in many areas these items are consumed as protein sources, or protein is infrequently consumed. Access to inland communities whereby fish could be brought to for sale - is inhibited in the large islands. Moreover, the volcanic origin of most islands often restricts general access to the sea. There are few atolls or extensive reefs in Vanuatu. The inner reef areas of Vanuatu (c. 478 sq. km.) are limited to a narrow fringing reef or reef platform surrounding the islands and few lagoons and barrier reefs and the mangrove and estuarine areas (c. 25 sq. km) are also limited^7. Almost all of the subsistence and artisanal catch of fish and shellfish is taken from these inshore areas.
Added to that is the earnings from agricultural commodities. When copra, beef and Lava prices are improving, there is little incentive for people who are not traditionally fishers, to go fishing.
Another factor affecting fishing activity is the retention of strong customary tenure over land and inshore areas: even if an inshore area is unworked by its traditional owners they may not allow outsiders to fish there.
Nevertheless, it would be wrong to sweep all of Vanuatu under the one blanket. Commentators have reported often that it is a diverse country: the potential to earn income is different between islands and areas, and application of a single 'remedy' or plan to the whole nation would result in general failure. This study on community (women's) fishing in Vanuatu supports those views.
Information gathered in the 1992 and 1993 agricultural censuses show that fishing activities are most important in Banks/Torres (Torba Province) followed by Efate and the Shepherds (Shefa Province), although on average only 35% of rural households reported fishing in the seven days prior to the survey. Of those not fishing, 60% (1992) and 38% (1993) said that was the result of work in the garden. Preston (1996)^8 estimated an average subsistence harvesting rate of 42 kg/hectare in inshore Vanuatu waters, which is moderately high. Because the rate would vary throughout the country, he suggested that over-exploitation must be taking place in some areas.
In 1993, 70% of rural households reported eating fish at some time during the previous 12 months^7. Compared to others Pacific Island nations, this consumption rate is very low. The actual fishing rate over the 12 months is relatively much lower, with 53% of the fish consumers having purchased the fish (61% of them from fishers within the village or from other villages (51%).
It is noteworthy that 40% of fishing households reported selling fish in the seven days prior to census-recording. In other words, 'The ongoing introduction of a cash economy to many rural households has also led to the much greater fishing effort as an alternative income generating activity.' (Statistics Office, 1994 : 11.2^7) It is almost certain that Vanuatu's inshore waters will be subject to greater fishing pressure taking into consideration the increasing population size and its attendant issues.
Self-sufficiency and balanced development depend on the contribution of both women and men to the collection of fish resources in the Pacific islands^9. In some areas of Vanuatu, where the sea is often rough or where social tabus prohibit women fishing from boats, men's fishing provides the fish protein for families; and export fisheries do bring revenue to nations. This report is about the contribution of women's fishing to Vanuatu's national security however. The pattern se. down in other western Pacific nations^10 is to investigate the importance of women's contribution to subsistence and artisanal fishing, the nutritional contribution of women's fishing, the effects of environmental impacts on women's fishing; and the increasing activity in fish processing and marketing often or mainly involving women.
^1 Bowie C. (1995) Voice blong of woman. "The women's voice". Report of the rural women's needs assessment. Vanuatu National Council of women. 183 pp.
^2 Mackenzie-Reur V.L. (1995). Statistical profile on the situation of women in Vanuatu. ESCAP, Vila. 67 pp.
^3 UNICEF (1991). A situation analysis of children and women in Vanuatu. Vanuatu Government. 97 pp
^4 Liloqula, R. (1989). Paper (untitled), pp. 179-182, Workshop on Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. Fourth regional conference of Pacific women. Suva. Fiji, 17 -23 September, 1988. South Pacific Commission, Noumea. New Caledonia.
^5 Women's Business Unit (1995).A study of women in micro business. their resources and their needs. A study done by the Women s Business Unit of the Department of Cooperative & Rural Business Development in cooperation with Statistics Office. Republic of Vanuatu. 46 pp plus.
^6 Schoeffel, P and S Talagi (1989). The role of women in small-scare fisheries in the South Pacific. Report of case studies in Cook Islands, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu and Western Samoa. London Commonwealth Secretariat, Food Production and Rural Development Division 60 pp.
^7 Statistics Office (1994). Vanuatu national agriculture census 1994 [sic]: main report. Statistics Office. Office of the Prime Minister. Port Vila. Vanuatu
^8 Preston. G.L. (1996). Masterplan for the sustainable management and development of Vanuatu's inshore fisheries resources. Food and Agricullural Organisation of the United Nations, Technical Cooperation Programme. TCP/VAN/4552. technical report no. 2. pag. var.
^9 Matthews, E. (1993). Women and fishing in traditional Pacific Island cultures. pp. 29-33, in Workshop: People. society, and Pacific Islands fisheries development and management. SPC, technical document 5.
^10 Naqasima, M. (1994). Women and Fisheries Network. SPC Traditional marine resource management and knowledge information bulletin, no. 4: 24-25.
<section>3</section>
3. Women's social and economic role in the fisheries sector
3.1 Pacific overview
3.2 Ni-Vanuatu women and fishing
3.3 How much
3.4 Social role
3.5 Economic role
3. Women's social and economic role in the fisheries sector
"Women don 't fish; they just gather shells"
3.1 Pacific overview
Women engage in many types of fishing in the various Pacific Islands cultures, from deep-sea fishing alongside men and community fishing to reef gleaning and freshwater trapping activities. Traditionally however, women are much more involved in fishing activities in shallow near-shore waters^1 while men's fishing activities are focused on deep-sea areas.
In the western Pacific, women contribute to fisheries in many ways:
o they collect fish and other marine resources on a daily basis^1;
o their fishing produces a high proportion of the daily protein intake of families;
o their fisheries often provide family income;
o they are often involved in marketing and processing fish catches;
o they engage in gear mending and manufacture; and
o they are crew or observers on fishing boats^2.
Women are also employed in fisheries organisations, and are involved in fisheries research, education and training.
Unfortunately, most of these kinds of contributions have often been underestimated. Fisheries studies have focused often on men's fishing activities, and Pacific men have tended to ignore their womenfolk's work. Men's fishing is given higher social status and official support, fisheries divisions usually concentrate on training and projects for men, and emphasis on high technology and deep-sea fisheries excludes proper attention to inshore and subsistence fishing (where women are involved)^1.
3.2 Ni-Vanuatu women and fishing
When the consultant asked Ni-Vanuatu about women's fishing, the response varied from curiosity (at the question) and 'mild disinterest' to enthusiasm. There appeared to be a general view that women don't (want to) fish, or that they do so only occasionally, or very often, or that it was a normal part of the woman's role as a provider so why should it be remarked upon. The women who gather fish and shellfish for home consumption did not clearly identify this activity as 'fishing': 'fishing' was done usually when selling was involved, and women selling fish is not so common in Vanuatu. Yet throughout Vanuatu women engage in many kinds of fishing, including 'men's fishing': Atchin, north Pentecost and north Efate women go in canoes to dropline or troll; Litslits women are good divers; Mere Lava women fish almost every day from their canoes. Probably as many women seldom fish.
The understanding of the word 'fishing' on a commercial or men-only basis is unfortunate, as it negates the role of subsistence fishing performed largely by women on the one hand and supports the concept of exploitation performed largely by men on the other. Indeed, as in other western Pacific nations, Ni-Vanuatu women are engaged in the three recognised forms (end-products) of fishing: subsistence, artisanal (or smallscale) and commercial. The preservation, marketing and distribution of fish catches also remains the responsibility of women.
In coastal areas of Vanuatu, women's main fishing activity is reef or mud-flat gleaning and collecting. This practice is mainly for subsistence, and the provision of fish food to households is largely (but not always) the preserve of women. Women also fish for reef fish with handlines (from shore or canoe) or with fishing rods of bamboo (where sloping foreshores or reefs do not exist). In some areas women and men use nets to catch shoals of small fish including 'mangrou' (Decapterus, Selar), 'picot' (Siganus), sardines and herrings (Clupeidae). Fishing is also carried out in freshwaters by damming or handlining.
Artisanal fishing is becoming more important in areas within travelling distance to large markets: often on Efate, women, girls and boys use handlines to catch small reef fish which are then fried and sold with laplap. On Efate octopus (nawita) is also targeted for sale with laplap, and very occasionally baskets of shellfish (kai - Anadara, chitons, turban shells; not giant clams, Tridacna) are sold. Aquatic resources from Malo Island are targeted for similar sale in Luganville (Santo). At both urban areas reef fish are also sold direct to stores (e.g. Natai, Au Bon Marche, Chinese stores). When men catch reef fish for market sale, women are almost always the sellers.
Fishing for commerce is engaged in at various levels. Whole communities often harvest sea cucumber, trochus, lobsters, mud crabs ('Caledonie crabs', Scylla), mangrove oysters, freshwater prawns, coconut crabs and mangrou (eastern Santo). Sometimes the harvest of lobsters, greensnail, trochus and sea cucumbers is restricted to men, and it is uncommon for women to engage in fishing beyond outer reefs (e.g. for drop-line fish ('poulet', Pristipomoides; 'loche', Epinephetus). Women may engage in processing sea cucumbers. In Vanuatu there is no fish processing facility, and the processing of drop-lined fish is the task of the fisher.
3.3 How much
Despite women's contribution, there is no quantitative information on the amount of fish (for food security; family nutrition) provided by Ni-Vanuatu women to their own households, nor is there any information on the amount of fish sold at urban and rural markets. Information on fish harvesting in Vanuatu is limited to a few of the commercial fisheries. Women's participation in the fisheries sector is little acknowledged 'officially'. The priority of the planners is to see how much fish is exported or traded to restaurants, hotels and shops: it is not to see how much the fishing by women (or communities) contributed to the nation's economy through providing 'free' fish protein to families and thereby facilitating a healthier population.
The subsistence catch in Vanuatu in 1990 was estimated at more than 2,000 tonnes or more than four times the commercial catch, a comparative factor common to all nations in the western Pacific^3. The few studies performed on women's fishing input in the western Pacific (such as in Fiji^4, Western Samoa and Kiribati^1) generally support claims to their high contribution to family nutrition. Tuara^5 quotes Ram-Bidesi (1994) who estimated that subsistence fishing supports two-thirds of the western Pacific's population.
3.4 Social role
Harvesting and preparation of food for home consumption are the main activities performed by women in Vanuatu, and rural areas relies primarily on their subsistence sector to provide the daily food requirements. Social activities involving women in fishing range from two women fishing from a canoes, groups of women gathering shellfish and other invertebrates, and women participating in community fishing activities (e.g. coconut leaf sweep net).
3.5 Economic role
In many Pacific Island nations the sale of surplus seafood is an established activity and the money earned is used to supplement the family income. This situation is also beginning to occur in Vanuatu, although many women still often harvest inshore fish solely for subsistence. Mangrou is a resource which is being increasingly targeted for sale as well as consumption - assisted by the ready availability of gillnets. The yield is eaten by the family and sold or given away within the community; or it is targeted by small-scale fishers and transported to urban centres with a small portion of the yield left for family consumption (this situation is more like that of commercial fishing).
In Vanuatu women are directly involved in commercial fishing activities by:
o diving for trochus(some islands)
o reef and mudflat gleaning and gathering trochus, sea cucumbers, mudcrabs and mangrove oysters
o gathering land crabs
o participating with husbands on commercial fishing trips (for 'poulet')
o selling fish or fish products in markets
o catching octopus to sell on laplap
o netting mangrou fish and selling
o ·?catching freshwater natura for sale
o working in the shell factories
o processing (and buying) bêche-de-mer
o selling seashells
o selling shellfish
o catching coconut crabs and selling
o repairing fishing gear
o working at fish processing establishments (Santo & Vila Natai, supermarkets)
o trapping lobsters for sale
o working in shops that sell fishing gear
^1 Matthews, E. (1993). Women and fishing in traditional Pacific Island cultures. pp. 29-33, in Workshop: People. society, and Pacific Islands fisheries development and management. SPC, technical document 5.
^2 Tuara. P. N. (1995). The participation of women in fishertes in the.South Pacific. 4 pp. Paper presented at the SPC regional workshop on the role of women in fisheries development. Iloilo City Philippines, 17-21 July 1995.
^3 Dalzell, P., T. Adams and N. Polunin (1995). Coastal fisheries of the South Pacific. Paper presented at the joint FFA/SPA Workshop on the Management of South Pacific Inshore Fisheries, SPC, Noumea, New Caledonia, 26 June-7 July 1995.
^4 Matthews, E. (1995) (ed.). Fishing for answers. Women and fisheries in the Pacific Islands. Suva, Fiji: Women and Fisheries Network. 177 pp
^5 Tuara, P. N. (1996). Women's fisheries development section: supporting women in fisheries. Paper presented at the South Pacific Commission Twenty-sixth Regional Technical Meeting on Fisheries. Noumea, New Caledonia. 5-9 August 1996. SPC/ Fisheries Information Paper 11. 5 pp.
<section>4</section>
4. Changes in women's role in the fisheries sector, and their impact
4.1 Providing through fishing
4.2 The 'down-side' of selling
4.3 Change in fishing
4.4 Women in business
4. Changes in women's role in the fisheries sector, and their impact
"We sell our fresh fish to buy tinned fish"
4.1 Providing through fishing
What needs do worn en have for fish? Why would they want to go fishing more, or be more involved in fishing? - to sell for money?; to provide better nutrition for :heir families? The short answer is that women have to provide...
Charlotte Bowie's (1995)^1 survey to assess the needs of Ni-Vanuatu women found that in 48 of the 77 sites where she conducted interviews, the women identified income as their greatest need.
As Bowie^1 pointed out, providing more in a society having expectations of listening to a radio (batteries), telephone calls, having a gas stove, having ice or a refrigerator, motorised transport, and so on, requires money. No longer can goods (as produced in a village garden) be used as trade. Families cannot function without an income using imported goods requires cash. The need to provide brings pressure on women to produce more - not only for direct consumption but also to be sold for cash. As families rely more on manufactured tools, equipment, housing materials and food, the need for a reliable and adequate income increases. Women in Efate, Ambae and Santo villages told the consultant that they sometimes sell their garden produce or even their fresh fish - and use the money to purchase rice and tinned fish, a phenomenon mirrored in other western Pacific nations^2.
Many women told the consultant that when they need money they usually sell vegetables, shells, woven goods, kava or water taro in preference to selling fish. Why is this? Except for some garden produce these items are not perishable, and women are comfortable (i.e. used to) in selling them. Water taro and kava also can be shipped to urban centres where they receive better prices than if they are sold locally. Albeit postharvest and transport problems attendant on harvesting fish for sale however, Ni-Vanuatu families are developing an awareness of fish as a saleable resource (pers. comm., Department of Industry, Trade & Commerce).
In the rural areas Ni-Vanuatu women are actively involved in earning money to support their families. Goods in stores in rural areas are expensive. The national government's high import duty on many consumer goods (including foods) is exacerbated in rural areas by freight charges, and locally-manufactured foods are also expensive because of high production costs. Local businesses also are taxed 10% 'turnover charges' and these are passed onto consumers. School fees are (probably) the same throughout the country. There is little money nor economic activity in rural communities, and prices from the sale of goods in markets are low, so new ways have to be found to raise money for school fees and to buy household items, clothes and food. Women 'and men) are increasingly turning to the sale of fish to raise money, and more money is obtained by sending the goods (fish) to towns where selling prices are higher (e.g. the kava water taro). Examples of the relative amount of money
around (also the cost of living) is the price for nawita laplap. In Vila market each piece sells for 150 vt, but in Norsup (or local Wala market), each piece sells for only 20 vt/piece. The market fees are 400 vt in Vila of 50 vt in Lamap.
A reason for certain rural women becoming increasingly involved in fishing (for food, for cash) is that they may be the heads of households. More males than females reside in the two urban areas (from in-migration; higher education possibilities), and women in the 20-44 year age group are live more in rural areas than in town^3. This imbalance affects rural women for whom wherewithal and ability to keep the household going is more difficult. They need money and their husband in town many not send it back (indeed, he often forms a new relationship there). The WBU report (1995)^4 recorded that female-headed households were more common in Santo and Malekula (ahead of Tanna, Efate and Ambae).
Once the problems of post-harvest care and transport of fish are addressed, exploitation of fish for sale in Vanuatu will develop rapidly. This statement is made in defiance of the current situation, and the consultant perceives that motivation will come from the need of families to provide in a country where education, increasing population size and consumerism is effecting change.
4.2 The 'down-side' of selling
The growth of urban areas has created a market for fish and fisheries products. The urban market is there for artisanal fishers because full-time salaried workers do not have the time to catch their own fish (or urban dwellers have no access to fish resources). Urban women employed long hours in shops do not have time to fish but have money to buy fish (or they may not).
Whereas many communities still only fish for food to eat and where once surplus was distributed in the village, there is now the opportunity to fish for sale. Sending fish and other goods to urban markets causes a shortfall in the rural areas. Nevertheless, men and women harvesters of freshwater naura in southern Santo and of nawita in northern Efate, fishers for mangrou in eastern Santo, harvesters of saltwater naura at Futuna, catchers of coconut crabs in Torres and of Caledonie crabs in South West Bay are doing it specifically for urban markets. Women from Saarma village (North Efate) said that their menfolk fish with cast nets and gillnets to sell the fish they harvest. "Less is being shared out nowadays."
Availability of a market intensifies fishing in at least two ways: more time is spent on fishing, and there is a higher demand for more efficient fishing gears. Women who wish to sell fish must therefore find more time (or organise it better) or fish more efficiently - i.e. with nets or native poisons. The women who cannot afford to buy nets will fish with poisons (see also chapter 7). Note that while people fish to sell, they and others are still fishing to eat. Overfishing results from both and more tabus are being placed.
It may be that planers are not informed about the state of resources, and assume there are plenty of fish (e. g. Bowie1 remarked that the people in Torba Province a e nutritionally well-off for protein because they have plenty of coconut crabs). Yet the need for school fees, access to the tourist market and over-harvesting and wastage of crabs (freight space on planes) impact on the resource availability.
Bowie^1 provides anecdotal information that the women of Erromango and Tanna and Tongoa say that fish are no longer easily available. Women from west Ambae and Lamen Bay (Epi Island) told the consultant that they rely on buying fish from-shops (although this may be as much a symptom of time management as of resource loss). Freshwater naura in southern Santo streams are becoming scarce because there is a good market for them; Port Olry artisanal mangrou fishers are impacted by other harvesters along adjacent coasts; and the numbers of mangrove oysters at Uribiv Island (Malekula) have been significantly reduced through selling: where previously 8-4 rice bags of oysters could be gathered in one low tide, now only one rice bag can be filled in a low tide. [see also chapter 7]
4.3 Change in fishing
Women are obtaining more fish by using old (e.g. native poisons) and new (e.g. synthetic handlines) fishing gear. There has also been a change in social acceptability of women fishing in new ways. In Paarma and Mota Lava, women use bamboo fishing rods where traditionally only men did. Women (and men) divers and fishers on many islands use diving masks whereas before they would see below the water surface through a film of coconut oil. The gillnet has supplanted the coconut leaf sweep in men's and women's artisanal fishing.
Even with gear and time, women still need to have the skills for fishing (netting, handlining). This is one matter that the Fisheries Department attempted to address (chapter 6).
4.4 Women in business
Ni-Vanuatu women display great resourcefullness in the way in which they generate income from a range of activities other than by paid employment4. Of rural women involved in market activities 45% are working 1.5-4 days each week, and 20% are working 5.5-7 days - this is in addition to other household responsibilities they have. Sixty-five percent of women practicing multiple economic activities are active in 2-4 activities at the same time. 'When asked if they could spend more time on these activities, women responded positively: 71% overall, with particularly high percentages in Tanna, 87% and Efate, 89%.' (WBU^4: 34).
Most of the income raised goes towards supporting the family. Relative expenditure by women ranged from household goods (89%) and school fees (37%) through to medical bills (2%)^4. Women at Port Olry told the consultant that they keep all the money they make for the household, whereas their husbands give them some money from the sale of items (see also chapter 7 on spending patterns).
Up until now, discussion has been on rural, village women selling fish in small ways as additions to the family budget. There are other Ni-Vanuatu women however, who are working at more commercial level in the fisheries sector. According to MackenzieReur^3, better education has motivated women to look for business opportunities in domains which traditionally were reserved for men. The consultant heard of or met just some: the Port Olry lady who has a gillnet and esky and sells mangrou along with the men fishers; a lady in Emae Island who trades in bêche-de-mer; one of the managers of the Natai Fish Market in Vila and a former manager of the Santo Fish Market; and there are women who fish with their husbands for poulet; - and the Atchin Island husbands who leave the fishing to their wives and go to the gardens in their stead! Salaried and urban women are also more likely to have access to money to purchase fishing gear and set up businesses.
The participation of women in business is increasing. Figures from the Development Bank of Vanuatu show that in the 10 years to 1995, the proportion of total loans to women increased from S.8% in 1986 to 22.8% in 1995. In 1996, the Development Bank had 63 current loans in the fisheries sector, of which three were to women (one of these is a husband-and-wife team), all in Efate. The amounts of these loans are: 739,771 vt, 326,680 vt and 217,280 vt. Another fishing-related loan to a woman is an aluminium boat building operation in Efate.
Women have gained self-confidence in their own right^3 and together with their male counterparts are contributing to the development of the country. It is important to appreciate that the,Ni-Vanuatu women who are making such steps are being supported by their husbands (and families).
^1 Bowie, C (1995). Voice blong of woman. "The women's voice". Report of the rural women's needs assessment. Vanuatu National Council of Women. 183 pp.
^2 Vunisea A. (1996). Up against several barriers - Pacific invisibility. Samudra (International collective in support of fish workers) no. 15: 26-33.
^3 Mackenzie-Reur, V.L. (1995). Statistical profile on the situation of women in Vanuatu. ESCAP, Vila. 67 pp.
^4 Women's Business Unit (1995). A study of women in micro business: their resources and their needs. A study done by the Women's Business Unit of the Department of Cooperative & Rural Business Development in cooperation with Statistics Office. Republic of Vanuatu. 46 pp plus.
^5 Statistics Office (1993). Report on the smallholder agricultural survey 1992. Department of Agriculture & Horticulture. Statistics Office, Office of the Prime Minister, Port Vila, Vanuatu.
<section>5</section>
5 Regional information on women's fishing activities
5.1 Regional differences in women's fishing activities
5.2 Differences by region
5.2.1 Torba
5.2.2 Sanma
5.2.3 Penama
5.2.4 Malampa
5.2.5 Shefa
5.2.6 Tafea
5 Regional information on women's fishing activities
5.1 Regional differences in women's fishing activities
It is unwise to 'put on labels' and categorise local interest in fishing after a brief study; however there does appear to be a pattern. The recommendation that the consultant assess regional differences in Vanuatu as an aid to determing relevant assistance measures has been vindicated - even though time permitted assessment of only a small number of communities. The study revealed certain characteristics of communities, and using these as a guide, wise allocation of resources to aid women and inshore community fishing activities in Vanuatu can be made.
* people who have always lived on the coast of small islands are fishers
* people who live on the coast of islands which are large and/or have large areas of available fertile land are less devoted fishers
* people who have moved to the coast from inland are less often fishers
* people who have other means of food (?protein: beef, chickens) supply are less often fishers
* people who derive sufficient income from other sources (e.g. copra, beef, salaried family members) are less interested in earning income from fishing
* people who traditionally are not fishers are less interested in earning income from fishing
* in communities where certain tradition (custom) ways are strong - as expressed by women spending most of their time in tasks including gardening, carrying water and firewood, cooking and raising children - there is little involvement of women in fishing
* women who have many young children have little time for fishing
* a higher level of education of women in communities should not be taken as a basis for offering support in fishing ventures
* even where the optimum 'mix' of characteristics exists, there is no guarantee that communities will fish. Motivation is the over-riding factor to community involvement in fishing in Vanuatu. It often depends on short-term needs for cash
5.2 Differences by region
This section is compiled based on the information in Appendix Five, discussions in Vila, and readings. The quality of information obtained from communities varied with time of day in village, whether men were present at the interview, and the enthusiasm of the respondents. There are also large gaps in the area covered - for example, some larger islands such as Pentecost, Ambrym and Ameityum were not visited, and neither were the Shepherd Islands.
Policy implications of regional differences are noted in chapters 8 and 9. Additional information may be given here.
5.2.1 Torba
General
Banks people (Mote Las a, Mere Lava - at least) are good fishers and probably consume fish every or every second day. Everyone goes fishing. The islands are small. On Mota Lava there are no cliffs. Some other islands have cliffs which. inhibit sea access, and some have no airstrip. There are few plane services: Tuesday (to part), Thursday and Saturday are the main scheduled flights from Santo. Torres is serviced on a Saturday only. If there are no passengers or notified freight to collect, some scheduled arrivals/departures are cancelled. Freight rates are high: 140 vt/kg to Vila Shipping service appears irregular, with long delays between arrivals. Mota Lava has three motor vehicles.
Mota Lava has a very high population. Many Banks people have moved to live in Santo and Maewo. Recently a short tabu was placed on a stretch of reef.
The ground water on Mota Lava is brackish; collected from wells.
There are freshwater prawns on some islands. Seafood export are lobsters, freshwater prawns, coconut crabs to Santo (mainly). Problems with coconut crab conservation and freighting exist in Torres (destroyed if no room on plane).
There are no fish markets in Banks. There is no refrigeration and ice, irregular generator-supplied electricity.
Observations
There may be interest in preserving fish in some islands. People say that when cyclones hit, the fish disappear - but the consultant heard of previous failed ventures in drying fish in the province (reasons for failure not known).
Drying of trochus meat could be investigated.
Grow-out freshwater prawn farming could be extended.
Distance (therefore cost of training) is an impediment to developing ventures that require much fisheries supervision in early stages. The lack of facilities prohibits projects dependent on coolrooms, rapid freight and communication.
Investigation of domestic marketing activities would advantage Torba exporters. Some of the Banks islands (at least) are very attractive and there could be scope for tourism (Gaua certainly) which could be promoted to ecotourists. In any case, the Fisheries Department should not overlook the importance of supporting environmental awareness programs in the province
Support for better shell and coconut crab production should (continue to) be directed here. Improved handling practices for coconut crabs and lobsters would provide a basis for better prices (and therefore conservation of resources).
Beche-de-mer harvesting, and processing is a fishery which could be re-started once stocks are stabilised. It would need supervision by a trained 'quality manager' on each island participating, and good awareness of prices, collecting practices and processing techniques.
Training in business skills would be an advantage. The many islands invite an enquiry into the interest in setting up a cooperative marketing system. Access to raising credit would probably be difficult here.
5.2.2 Sanma
General
Reef areas are limited with deep water close to shore in many areas. The west coast waters are said to be very rough, and there are large rivers in south Santo. The main island has roads along the eastern half but the western half is unserviced (mountainous; and ha' a low and scattered human population). The south-east of the main island is service i well with planes, with freight rates from Torres to Santo and Santo to Vila both being 100 vt/kg. Shipping services are probably more regulregalar than to many other places. There is hydro-electricity in the south-east but only generator-supply elsewhere. The FTC currently is the only supplier of ice to fishermen.
There was no information on fishing activities on the west coast. People living on Malo and Aore islands may fish relatively often. In many communities outside of Luganville, Santo women are confined largely to their traditional roles and do not have much time for fishing. There are probably sufficient amounts of money coming in to communities from copra and beef to meet most needs in the short-term.
Luganville being on this island attracts a fair amount of industry and it has a very high human population. It acts as a service centre for northern Vanuatu. There are very poor people in Luganville and in some western and southern con munities. Luganville cannot get enough fish - much of the better quality product bypasses it for Vila where prices achieved are higher. The current failure of the fish market is a problem. There are reports of over-harvesting and some water pollution along the south-east.
The size of the island suggests that people are generally more comfortable with agricultural pursuits than with fishing. Some of the coastal communities are relatively recently established (inlanders).
Observations
There is need for awareness of sustainable fishing practices along the east and south coats - particularly with mangrou. Attention should be given to this resource - proper handling (including value-adding - drying) would improve remuneration from its limited season.
Picot and mangrou drying could be trialed with people in the south coast villages.
There is a convenient potential local market in Luganville. Rock salt is available.
Freshwater fisheries could benefit here: freshwater naura stocks should be conserved and ways of farming and handling prawns (e.g. in water taro paddies) should be investigated as a means of bringing more income (and nutrition) to bush people. The same can be said about the reported mullet, 'black loche' and tilapia - what is there?; what can be done with it? Reports that Ni-Vanuatu do not like the taste of freshwater fish may be just that. Is there a possibility that namarai grow-out farming can be trialled? Having access to the FTC is an advantage for running pilot studies of value adding techniques.
There is considerable need for better business skills among women: marketing, negotiating, credit and debit, profit and loss. There was particular interest in two villages for training.
As with the other provinces, a study to follow the domestic marketing chain of fish could result in better returns to harvesting communities.
The reported mudcrabs in the south Santo rivers could yield a steady, good income to communities there with proper resource management and post-harvest handling practices (see also Malampa province).
Net-mending businesses could be pursued but it appears that this market is already satiated.
5.2.3 Penama
General
Ambae and Maewo are very wet islands; maybe some of Pentecost is as well. Maewo and Pentecost and the centre of Ambae are mountainous. Roads are limited (and are hard to maintain in the climate) yet the three islands are in speedboating distance of each other. It is said that the waterway between Ambae and Maewo is rough in the dry season (?and Pentecost). Much of the coastlines is rough and not inhabited, and there are abundant rivers and streams (except in some rain-shadow areas).
Generators supply electricity to northern Ambae towns. The ice machine at Lolowei is not functioning. Airlines service Pentecost and Maewo several days each week and there are daily (not Sunday) flights from Longana on Ambae (freight 100 vt/kg to Vila).
There are very strong community cooperatives in Penama province.
Reports suggest that people on Pentecost seem to do more fishing than do other islanders, although the ex-Mere Lava residents of northern Maewo and Ambae may make a difference. There was not much fishing activity witnessed at Ambae.
Income comes from copra and beef on Ambae and appears to satisfy. The population on Maewo (particularly) is low; yet in north Pentecost it is high and there is emigration. It is mderately high on western and northern Ambae.
It is said that there are namarai and naura in abundance on Maewo, and that there are skipjack and other small tunas on the east of Ambae.
Observations
Inshore pelagic fish could be accessed on Ambae (?sell as tuna jerkey outside of the season, sell fresh in the season: would require marketing). Interest was also expressed in the bottling-fish preserving method. Pentecost has a tradition of drying fish.
A pilot grow-out freshwater prawn farming and eel-farming project should be carried out in northern Ambae, with stock supplied from Maewo. This location has several advantages, including the regularity of air services, flat land, access to stock and guidance (FTC a short flight away) and a strong cooperative spirit already existing in the communities
Another activity worth trialing (later) is doing 'something' with the frogs around the crater lake on Ambae: smoked frogslegs? Land crabs are also said to be plentiful most of the year, and their marketing can be enhanced by good post-harvest care.
There are one or two fishing ventures already operating in Pentecost and Maewo (this one is the grow-out prawn farm). Establishing and servicing a fish market on Pentecost has been identified as desirable
5.2.4 Malampa
General
Malekula is heavily wooded and receives high rainfall in the southern half (at least) but the north-east is dry in the dry season. Just-passable roads connect, communities on the east coast and there is a road going part-way along the north coast and one crossing the island to link up some west coast villages. The centre of the island is very rugged and little inhabited. There are numerous streams and rivers in the south. The north eastern islands are densely populated. Air services link Norsup to Santo about every day and there are less frequent flights to Lamap in the south and South-west Bay.
South-west Bay is fairly isolated. Air freight rates: South-west Bay to Santo is 100 vt/kg and Lamap to Vila is 80 vt/kg. There is an inter-island ferry to Vila.
Electricity (if it is available) is generator-supplied and not constant. Ice is available at
Lakatoro but the ice plant at Lamap is inoperable.
There are seasonal runs of mangrou and picot (south-east). The east coast has extensive rock/reef platforms and beche-de-mer and trochus have been periodically harvested. Eastern and southern Malekula is about the only supplier of mangrove oysters in Vanuatu.
While some west coast and inland Malekula, also Ambrym and Parma people are not noted for their interest in the sea (the coast is rugged?) the residents of Atchin, Wala and so on are good fishers. Many people traditional.
The Australian High Commission is supporting the development of a fisheries project on the Maskelyne Islands which will involve women (if it goes ahead).
Paarma is a densely populated island with emigration. I have information on Ambrym.
Observations
There was great interest for making dried and salted fish from mangrou and picot by almost all communities visited on east coast.
Freshwater prawn grow-out ponds should be trialed at Aulua village (river; large community; access to air service).
There is good potential for a crab meat market and stonefish fillet market from Lamap area once the freezer becomes operational.
Resource management practices should be encouraged with regard to mangrove oyster harvesting, beche-de-mer and trochus stocks.
The reef platforms and proximity to the Lakatoro ice could stimulate the development of niche fisheries - e.g. for smoked nawita, smoked namarai, seaweedSmoking of mullet was carried out in south-east Malakula up to about 10 years ago and the core of knowledge that may exist there could be useful.
Training in fish quality and product handling is needed.
Great need for training in business management, book-keeping, negotiation skills, group work, marketing and communication skills. As for all other provinces, checking out and stabilising the domestic marketing of fisheries products would probably act in the good interest of dispensing communities.
5.2.5 Shefa
General
This is probably the busiest province in Vanuatu. Efate is the home of the capital, and there are almost daily air services to Epi and Emae/Tongoa islands.
Efate at least is a relatively dry island and there are water shortages on the dry season on the offshore islands in the north. Some of the Shepherd I: lands may be similarly affected. Efate has no rugged coasts and few mountains. There is a complete road link.
Epi at least appears to be well-equipped with roads. Inter-island ferry services exist.
The heavy inward migration to Vila has brought pressure on the islands resources, especially around Vila. Vila has a very high population density and the cost of living there is very high. However, it is the centre of the government and as such provides a measure of sophistication and regular salaries to those lucky enough to be employed.
Urbanisation has influenced the outlook of some Ni-Vanuatu to rural dwellers and also the life styles of Efate communities. Whereas some goods are cheaper (e.g. eskies) than elsewhere, services (e.g. transport, market fees) are more expensive.
Electricity is available 24 hours a day in the capital and nearby villages, but electricity in some communities on north and east Efate runs on generators.
Many people go fishing in Efate and even more do in the Shepherd Islands.
Fish are marketed at Natal and in some supermarkets. There are no sales of dried fish.
There is a high tourist demand for fish products in Vila; and product is also exported from here. Probably a high amount of harvesting (over-exploitation?) takes place in northern and western Efate.
In Epi and Tongoa the sea is rough in some parts or seasons and this restricts fishing.
At Emae there is a sound fisheries co-management system operating.
Supply of foodstuffs is not a problem to people who have the money in Efate - and money gets to the communities via sale of product and remittances from salaried family members.
Observations
There is little interest from Efate village women in undertaking post-harvest activities on fish (many women don't have the time to go fishing). Also the price of tinned fish is probably cheaper than in outer islands. However, there is a need to encourage better fish handling practices, especially of shellfish
Environmental awareness and management programs should be commenced around Efate, at least.
Training in marketing, simple economics (supply and demand) and business management, book keeping and negotiation skills is needed. Efate is one island where trainers can go TO the people without much effort.
Marketing again is an important issue that should be investigated.
Efate (and Shepherds?) women may be more interested than some others in improving the shell products they sell to tourists.
5.2.6 Tafea
General
Five scattered islands comprise this province. Tanna is densely populated, and is the second most popular tourist destination after Efate. A new airport is being constructed at Tanna. There usually are two flights per day to Tanna from, Vila but other islands in the group are disadvantaged in air services. Shipping is also inadequate. While the air freight charge from Tanna to Vila is 80 vt/kg, so are those from the other islands to Tanna itself.
Many of the people on Tanna retain their traditional ways and education levels and business skills are lower than those in many other parts of Vanuatu.
Futuna has one small beach from which to launch boats, and seas on the eastern side are often rough. Erromango is a large,sparsely populated forested island, mountainous in its interior. Rocky reef platforms surround some of the islands, but on Aniwa and Aneityum (?) there are extensive reef areas.
There is a lack of water in the dry season at Tanna (and maybe Aniwa). There is clean, piped water in Futuna and clean water in Erromango. Aneityum suffers from some erosion and reports say the southern reefs (near Anelgowhat) are becoming over fished. There are small fishing ventures on Erromango and (several boats) Tanna.
Many Erromango communities get money from timber plantations, but some are poor. Tafea women - those on Aniwa, Futuna, Aneityum, at least - are said to be very active fishers. There are various tabus associated with women's fishing in each of the islands. Erromango, Aneityum and Futuna send lobsters to Vila and Tanna.
Beche-de-mer stocks are variable, although they appear not to have been tapped.
Observations
The handling of lobsters (and other invertebrates) should be improved. As elsewhere, an investigation of the domestic marketing arangements should be made.
Beche-de-mer harvesting and processing could be undertaken at Futuna and supposedly the other islands under guidance of a village 'quality manager'. Sustainable harvesting of sea cucumbers, trochus and greensnail (where applicable) would benefit from utilisation of the customary marine tenure tradition coupled with environmental awareness education. This is particularly so on Aneityum.
Ecotourism could be encouraged - probably on Aneityum, Aniwa.
Freshwater prawn farming (grow-out) may be possible on Aneityum
With the installation of a generator at Futuna and the construction of an ice-plant and fish market at Tanna, a regular supply of fish (protein) to Tanna could commence.
Regional freight rates are lower (than rates to Vila) and prices received in Tanna - because of the tourism industry there - would be less by a small amount then those on the Vila market.
Fish quality and value-adding training should be offered to community fishers on all islands. Business management skills are needed - especially on Tanna.
It may be that some islands could indulge in the production of niche products - e.g. dried trochus meat.
Rock salt from Aniwa and Futuna could be sold within the province.
<section>6</section>
6. The role of organisations in women's fishing
6.1 Government departments
6.2 Non-government organisations,
6.3 Churches
6.4 Overseas missions
6.5 Regional organisations,
6. The role of organisations in women's fishing
What role should organisations play in promoting women's fishing? Before answering that, one has to decide what activities are needed. This matter is generally addressed in chapter 7 (constraints) and chapter 8 (recomendations): activities include access to fisheries resources, markets, relevant information and acquisition of skills. Indirect support helps women to go fishing too: for example, by encouraging good family nutrition.
Answering the question 'what are you doing to aid women in fishing?' was not easy for most organisations until the consultant explained the type of issues involved. It transpired that about half of the organisations are directly assisting women or communities in Vanuatu to improve their capacity to utilise the fish stocks. The consultant's selection of organisations to visit may have biased the record of the second half. Unfortunately, shortage of time prevented the consultant from meeting representatives of some organisations.
Apart from direct assistance, provision of skills or training are common forms of assistance.
The consultant identified two remarkable facts. Firstly, a lot of organisations or institutions with similar interests are working in Vanuatu, and secondly, that almost all of them are working in isolation. "If Only" they would adopt the skills they themselves often teach (e.g. communication, negotiation, problem solving) to better utilise their resources - in any of their activities. 'There is potential for the existing women's organisations to promote the enhancement of women's status. However, these organisations will have to clearly define their roles and overcome problems of lack of finance and human resources, skills training, etc.' (Mackenzie-Reur, 1995^1: 48).
6.1 Government departments
The Women's Business Unit, Department of Rural Business & Cooperatives
This unit was created by the Government in response to the need to develop income-generating possibilities suitable to women. It was opened in 1993. 'Its primary purpose is to identify the full range of businesses that could involve women and to explore income-generating activities that could be developed into businesses.'
The WBU receives funding through the British Government (Overseas Development Agency). The Unit gives advice and offers courses; does research on what women do and, as a result of that, may suggest new activities. The unit's main activities are in promoting business awareness, costing, marketing and use of credit.
The consultant heard about the work of the WBU from the British High Commission, the unit itself and - more significantly - from women in villages in most places she visited. The consul, ant commends the members of the WBU for their approach to helping women, especially to their traveling to the communities.
Department of Women's Affairs
First established within the Department of Social Welfare and Community Development under the Ministry of Education; then part of the Prime Minister's Office. In October 1992, the Office of Womens' Affairs became a small department under the Ministry of Justice, Culture and Women's Affairs.
The two main functions of the DWA are to coordinate the implementation of Government policies, plans, projects and programs for the development of women in Vanuatu and to advise the government on the needs, plans and requirements of women's groups, including the VNCW and church women's associations. The DWA has four field officers (northern (three provinces), Malampa, Shefa, Tafea provinces) who visit communities to provide training in nutrition, sewing, cooking, soap making, water tank construction, processing of vegetable crops, confidence building(?). The DWA does appear to be assisting women, but it is still tied to the conventional items.
The DWA dispenses grant-in-aid money for women received by the NPSO to church groups, women's groups and cultural groups (all under the umbrella of the Ministry of Justice, Culture and Women's Affairs).
There appears to be conflict and overlap of service with some of the NGOs.
Department of Environment
The main emphasis by this department is in gathering information on environmental impact and conservation matters (e.g. overfishing reports). The department also runs awareness programs in Torres and Banks on the conservation of coconut crabs. No surveys of Vanuatu's freshwaters have been undertaken (say they are waiting for the Fisheries Department).
Fisheries Department
The department is small and has a small budget. With these limitations it does its best to perform its functions. However, it is a slow starter with regard to women's and community involvement in fisheries. For example, it has not carried out surveys of Vanuatu's freshwaters and archipelagic waters, but has limited information on inshore waters of some islands (work by A.I.M. S., ORSTOM). The department has no or few statistics on inshore fish landings and cannot estimate stock size of most fish resources, and for some it has little information on species distribution and identity. The emphasis by the department has been, and is, largely on export and high-value domestic fisheries.
The department has some information on fishing methods (including custom) used around the country - compiled a few years ago by agencies of the FTC.
The department has no or little information about fisheries businesses or enterprises underway in areas other than the export and high-value domestic fisheries. Its extensior, staff's attention is given largely to these areas, and there is inadequate funding of the law enforcement officer and extension work for communities.
The department has little liaison with other government departments, NGOs and churches on fisheries development or community fishing matters. Its competency in giving advice in these arenas is questionable, an observation also supported by very few of the NGOs having approached or discussed their community fisheries initiatives with the department. One fisheries officer works with the Department of Environment on conservation/awareness matters; and other informal networks may be operating. The department's main liaison is with regional bodies and overseas missions.
In a positive move however, the Fisheries Department ran a fisheries training course (in two, one-month sessions) for rural women from the no them provinces at its training centre in 1996. Another course is supposed to be un in 1997 for rural women from the southern provinces, as well as a course on fish quality for women (pers. comm., J. Stewart, New Zealand).
The first Rural Women's Fisheries Training Course was funded at nearly 3.1 million vatu by the New Zealand High Commission from its in-country training allocation. The aim of the course was to teach gillnet construction, repair and maintenance, demonstrate how to use gillnets, teach fish smoking and making a smoke house, teach simple money management and demonstrate different ways of cooking, and the objective was to teach women to develop fishing skills and so give them the potential to enter the industry so that they may increase their standard of living, increase their income, increase the amount of fish protein in their diet, and integrate fishing with farming and agriculture.
The course and time allocation consisted of:
Fish quality: 0.5 day
Gillnet construction and use, knotting and splicing, net braiding and mending, making of mats, machrame hangers, hammocks: 12 days
Drop-line fishing trip: 2 days
Smoking, drying, bottling and salting fish: 3 days
Fish in food and nutrition, fish poisoning, recipes, home gardens: 6 days
Money management and book-keeping: 1 day (reading only)
Women's self-esteem (including child discipline with biblical quotations, human diseases, breast feeding, hygiene, nutrition, child care and family planning): 1 day
Communication skills: 0.5 day
Marine (environmental) awareness: 1 day
Fisheries laws: 0.5 day
Fisheries in the Pacific: 0.5 day
The women could choose the mesh size of the gillnets they constructed (choice of about 1.5 inch to 3 inch, stretched mesh) and they were given the nets they made. A stated reason for the heavy emphasis on gillnets was to introduce an alternative means of harvesting so that the women would not over-exploit the reefs which they traditionally target. The Fisheries Department's initiative to run the course was stated as being its 'support for sustainable development and management of inshore waters' as well a, its desire to invoIve women in fishing opportunistics. The premise of the course (to help women enter the industry) was misplaced: it assumes women don't fish already. The course content was circulated to the VNCW and the DWA before approval.
It is a reflection of the skills of the FTC officers and the department's current approach to fisheries that the course had such emphasis on commercial fishing techniques. The course was imbalanced with regard to 'sustainable development and management' and indeed, the department encouraged over-exploitation by issuing gillnets of indiscriminate mesh size. However, such nets are already available in Vanuatu without restriction, so a gift of a net at least overcomes the financial constraint on would-be women netters. Much more emphasis could have been given to sustainable fishing practices by women, habitat conservation and post-harvest handling.
It is unfortunate that bias crept into the selection of candidates and there was underrepresentation of some islands (e.g. no-one from Torba Province came). The FTC officers are expected to follow-up on the attendees in the coming months. The consultant met some of the course women in Malekula and Santo.
Education Department
Marine studies ("The Sea") is taught in grades 5 and 6 in all primary schools in Vanuatu, and is not repeated in the secondary school curriculum. In years 7-10 (juniopr secondary), food and nutrition, home economics and food preservation are taught (?to girls only). The New Zealand Government has funded a workshop on 'women in technology' (emphasis on industrial arts and home economics) for junior(?) secondary school students. Students going on to the two years of senior secondary school choose their subjects, and this depends on what courses are offered at the senior level. Many go into computing; some do science. There was not easily available information on how many girls and boys took up studies relevant to business, fisheries and the environment.
University of the South Pacific
The USP in Vanuatu does not offer courses in fisheries (or science), which are available at the Suva (Fiji) campus.
The USP sub-centre at Santo's Continuing Education courses are of interest. Ten week, two hours/week courses are run in business management, basic mechanics, English for beginners, French for beginners, computer awareness and typing courses several times a year. There are no required entrance qualifications and the course fee is 6,500 vt each (8,000 vt for computing).
Department of Health
The department's involvement in improving the nutrition of the Ni-Vanuatu population extends to village visits and workshops and surveys. Some of its nutrition funding comes from the Save the Children Fund. With the assistance of the Statistics Office it recently carried out a 24-hour diet recall survey of 3,000 people. With the Department of Education it has developed a health-nutrition-agriculture syllabus for primary schools, but its teaching is optional. The department promotes good nutrition also through the National Food and Nutrition Committee.
Department of Industry. Commerce & Trade
The department supports small business development projects in rural areas. It also organises some workshops in low skills levels (e.g. in Santo).
Department of Youth. Sport & Community Development
The department encourages the provision of basic fisheries training in the villages. The Santo office administers the Ausaid-funded Land Use Planning Project, whose objective is the sustainable development of natural resources.
National Planning and Statistics Office
The National Planning office 'watches over' and directs national development. This includes attention to the direction of the Fisheries Department. It commissions studies in the national interest.
The Statistics Office conducts and publishes the results of the national agricultural census and the national census. It also publishes and offers for sale reports of studies of national interest, and facilitates statistical surveys and analyses by departments, organisations, and individuals
6.2 Non-government organisations,
Vanuatu National Council of Women
Set up as an umbrella organization of all women's groups and clubs in Vanuatu in May 1980, the VNCW receives most of its funding from the ICCO, a Netherlands-based group of churches. Funding has also come from New Zealand, Australia, Britain, CUSO, Save the Children Fund and World Vision Vanuatu.
The goals of the VNCW are to act as an umbrella organization; to ensure its development programs 'contribute to the realisation of the potential of women as partners and beneficiaries of the development process' and to ensure that development assistance is responsive to the priorities and requests of all women in Vanuatu (Bowie, 1995^2: 137). The goals include assisting women in upgrading their skills 'to deal with women's problems and needs' and developing national programs on issues and problems facing women. (Bowie2. 139).
Bowie^2 is critical of the VNCW's administration and its underlying motives. She says 'The activities of the VNCW at the village level follow the traditional activities introduced by missionaries when they set up church women's clubs.'(p. 112). Indeed, it is difficult for the consultant to shake that view. Most of the training offered to rural women by the VNCW are activities that enhance the domestic realm of women: cooking, sewing, sewing machine repair, health, nutrition, culture and the environment, crocheting, weaving, soap making, silk-screen printing, rural water tank construction and(?) smokeless stove manufacture. Infrequently the VNCW offers skills that take the women outside of the 'woman-wife-mother' role - for example, they supported a training course in fish processing at a vocational school (pers. comm., Alice Athy). Women's self esteem courses are run at the women's crisis centre in Vila (only), and VNCW head office staff have attended management and personal
c development courses.
The consultant heard complaints about the VNCW or its regional councillors in many villages she visited. Particularly striking were complaints from rural Efate women that they could only improve their skills if they travelled intoVila to attend courses; with the result that Efate women don't attend because of the money they would need for transport (alone). On three occasions the consultant visited the VNCW head office,where the staff were unable to locate copies of their 1996-98 work program, their current list of 23 island councillors, nor advise on the status of funding schemes. Comments heard by other women's workers in rural Vanuatu endorse the impression received and statements read in published reports^1,2,3 that the VNCW is out of touch with the needs and views of rural Ni-Vanuatu women, that some of its staff are not competetent, and that the head office's unprofessional attitude does a dis-service to the women of Vanuatu. The VNCW may well service the needs of
urban women however. While the VNCW's officer in Banks gave a good impression, other rural representatives (in two Santo places, Efate) were unavailable.
The 13 regional councils of the VNCW each receives a subscription of 10,000 vt/year raised from communities. The VNCW does not appear to collaborate in its activities with those of the DWA or other NGOs.
Save the Children Fund
The fund has operated in Vanuatu since 1984. It works mainly in the health arena. It supports the nutrition program run by the Department of Health, the rural water tanks program and (?) the rural sanitation program.
The SCF has carried out a number of projects in Vanuatu, all aimed a. improving the quality of life in communities. There was its national nutrition survey in 1983, a kitchen improvement project at Ambae in 1993; and recently (1996) a study into the needs of communities in south Santo ('South Santo Bush Community Resource Management Project'). The SCF is looking for ways of creating income generation in communities.
World Vision Vanuatu
World Vision Vanuatu used to substantially fund DWA and VNCW for projects such as home economics, rural water tanks and smokeless stoves. Its new direction is to encourage the status of women in rural Vanuatu by developing skills for income generation. Through its participatory rural appraisal (PRA) schemes it is offering training in basic management skills, leadership (engenders confidence) and communication (gives responsibility). It has a primary health care clinic in Torres, runs adult literacy courses in eight islands, runs a vocational training centre (with the Presbyterian Church) in north Efate and delivers human resource development courses for the national government in rural areas.
CUSO (Canadian University Students Overseas)
CUSO was previously involved in the Village Fisheries Development Programme (VFDP). Now it undertakes and encourages customary marine tenure and comanagement initiatives (e.g. is funding a Cultural Centre survey of the Maskelyne Islands) which includes recording custom fishing methods.
CUSO provides funds to build women's centres and is also involved in developing equal gender participation in rural areas (runs workshops).
Foundation for the Peoples of the South Pacific
The consultant had limited success in finding out a lot about the FSP's work in Vanuatu (not a constraint from FSP).
FSP has recently run environmental awareness and education courses in Vanuatu. These were funded by Ausaid and managed by SPREP, and comprised a 'train the trainer' approach: schools, media, other NGOs and schools participated
In 1993-94 at Hog Harbour (Santo) FSP engaged in a big community-based resource management project with some funding coming from USAld. The involvement of women was mainly on the environmental management aspect. At the time, a survey was carried out on the role of women in fishing at Hog Harbour - but the results were either not completely analysed or are still in draft form (i.e. unavailable).
The FSP has changed its approach to assistance in Vanuatu and is now orientating its programs to 'bottom-up needs' (pers. comm., Toulel Sope). Previous courses run have been on conventional 'women's needs' (e.g. soap making); now FSP's program involves self-awareness and 'out-going' skills. The FSP officer in Tafea travels to the villages (as may other FSP officers).
Vanuatu Rural Development Training Centres Association
The RDTCA runs programs on several Vanuatu islands (including Epi Island and north Pentecost). Its manner of approach is through participatory rural appraisal (PRA). Skills aimed at encouraging individual and community income generation are taught, including literacy, numeracy, business management (e.g. book-keeping). The north Pentecost program involves a fishing operation. Some funding for the RDTCs comes from the New Zealand government.
For various reasons, the consultant was unable to obtain much information about this NGO. It receives good acknowledgement from the WBU and the Fist cries Department.
Peace Corps
The Peace Corps has a fishing project in Paarma. Its main emphasis is in providing volunteers to teach in secondary schools (southern Malekula, Tanna, Erromango) and at Rural Training Centres (Maskelyne Islands, Banks, Erromango, Aneityum). Subjects taught by its volunteers include accountancy, book-keeping, carpentry and home skills.
Vanuatu Association of Non-Governmental Organizations (VANGO)
Vango's goal is to build a 'vital NGO sector which accurately represents the interest of the indigenous people and promotes locally important development issues'. Its brochure says that it provides networking, arranges meetings, public talks and training workshops, has a resource centre, supports community groups. Among its objectives is that of providing 'a communcations network to encourage exchange between NGOs at a national, regional and international level.'
Although '50' organisations, participate in VANGO's work, its 1994-95 financial and associate membership numbered only 17. This points to the failure of VANGO: despite its competent and enthusiastic small staff, it has to struggle for funding and many NGOs bypass its services. This is a pity as it results in duplication of effort and hence resource waste.
National Community Development Trust
This NGO undertakes environmental awareness education, provides education on health matters, teaches 'empowering' information and has literacy programs. It conducts community workshops, and tries to encourage and support primary school leavers returning to their villages. Funds for its work come from Community Aid Abroad and Oxfam New Zealand.
Rural Skills Training Program
The consultant was again unable to obtain much information about this NGO. It appears to carry out programs similar to those of the National Community Development Trust and the Vanuatu Rural Development Training Centres Association.
6.3 Churches
Church women's clubs in Vanuatu were originally set up by the white missionaries' wives. Ni-Vanuatu women were taught how to weave and sew (to clothe themselves). To some extent, little has changed as women's clubs mainly support the influence of the church in the community: women work for the church. It is unusual for the church to develop, programs aimed at enlightening or emancipating women or which may lead women away from the traditional wife-and-mother role of supporting their menfolk and family (various sources). Churches fit in well with the Vanuatu culture as decided by the Council of Chiefs. They do not teach environmental education (pers. comm., Department of Environment).
The contribution of churches to communities depends on one's outlook. Several interviewees said that 'the church and politics' have caused a lot of division in Vanuatu communities.
There are at least 12 religious denominations in Vanuatu: Anglican, Apostolic Church, Assemblies of God, Baha'i Faith, Catholic, Christian Orthodox Centre, Church of Christ, Holiness Fellowship, Presbyterian, Renewal, Seventh Day Adventist and the Vanuatu Christian Council. The consultant managed to interview four:
Anglican Has very strong community groups. Anglican church is dominant in the north of the country. Women work hard for the church. The church at Santo has built a fishing boat with 10mt fish-hold capacity.
Church of Christ Funds for the main program come through New Zealand and Australia, yet individual programs have to raise their own money. The womens/community group has two-year programs. Up until now they have concentrated on sewing, weaving, cooking, crocheting and so on; however the intent for the next two years (Santo office) is to offer training in organisational skills, bookkeeping, accounting/profit-and-loss and business management. The Santo women's representative works with the DWA officer to pool resources. The initiative is looking for funding.
Presbyterian The Presbyterian Women Member's Union said that women sell a lot of things in support of church projects. The union members interviewed didn't seem to think that women should be engaged in commercial fishing other than selling shells. However, they indicated that their practice is to inform a community, which then decides if it wants to know - and if extra support is needed to help women in fishing activities, then the union will try to provide it.
Seventh Day Adventist The women's group (Dorcas society) of the church concentrates on raising funds for the church through traditional women's activities (sewing, cooking, crafts...) and a once-a-year fair. The money from the activities is despatched to needy people as well as being recirculated. The church considers that through teaching understanding and supporting families, it contributes to the capacity of women to enter and continue in commercial activities and interests outside of the home.
6.4 Overseas missions
ORSTOM
In earlier years, ORSTOM did a lot of work on Vanuatu's fisheries. It investigated the drop-line snapper resource, for example, and has performed village and inshore fisheries surveys (see David (1990) for literature). Its current projects are the preparation of an atlas of Vanuatu fish resources (in French and English) and a study of food consumption patterns through time in west and east Santo and Malo.
ORSTOM also directly contributed to the Fisheries Department's work by training and funding some staff positions. An ORSTOM-trained man the consultant met at Wala is supporting his community by transplanting trochus to the community's reef area.
Australian High Commission
The commission aims for gender equity in the allocation of funding. It provides funding to the DWA, and is investigating a proposal to fund a fishing project in the Maskelyne Islands which 'may' involve women.
Ausaid funding supports the Land Use Planning Project and contributed to a FSP-managed environmental awareness program in Santo.
British High Commission
The commission supports training for rural women in small business and project management. Decision making, book-keeping and credit management are some of its training areas. Funding comes through its Overseas Development Agency which supports the WBU and the current Department of Fisheries - Marine Resources Assessment Group's co-management project.
European Union
The European Union funded the Fishing Training Centre in Santo and has spent considerable monies on placement of ice plants and related facilities around the country under the village Fisheries Development Programme. Now it funds in five-year cycles based or a 'National Indicative Program'. The obligation of the union is based in the Lome Convention.
The European Union commits a lot of funding to natural resources, including fisheries It puts priority on funding equally by gender. If fewer projects [in fisheries] involving women than for men are identified, then the union may not be interested in providing funds for fisheries programs. It has funds available for training courses in reef management.
New Zealand High Commission
The commission funded the rural women's training workshops in Santo as well as an earlier workshop on fish quality which included women (?with/in he South Pacific Development Assistance Facility).
New Zealand is keen to aid women's small business initiatives which it does through allocations for small business development and women in development. The commission also provides assistance to income generating projects in rural areas. The commission's programs are aimed at gender equity. If women are specifically denied access to a project aid for it would be refused. However, good projects are still favourably considered, even if women are not included (concept: all the community benefits from the project). New Zealand funding has assisted in school, VNCW and VRDTCA programs.
6.5 Regional organisations,
Forum Fisheries Agency
Apart from its regional tuna program the agency provides assistance to member countries in its extension officers' training programs.
Recently (1994) the agency published the Republic of Vanuatu Fisheries Resources Profiles which contains in one volume all the information known on Vanuatu's fisheries resources.
South Pacific Commission
The SPC has an active women's fisheries development section which provides networking and offers assistance to women fishers in member countries (probably at government request). The commission also has a resourceful post-harvest section which can give advice also.
The SPC provided foundation money in the early 1990s for a small loans scheme for women in each member country.
South Pacific Regional Environment Program (SPREP)
This program supports the turtle conservation project in Vanuatu (and also in the Pacific). It managed a FSP environmental awareness program at Hog Harbour for the FSP, and it may be involved in other environmental management programs in Vanuatu (e.g. coconut crab conservation).
Economic and Social Commission for the South Pacific (U.N.) (ESCAP)
The ESCAP supported the study by Mackenzie-Reur (1995) on the situation of women and children in Vanuatu. It has a women's affairs officer who identifies programs for women and facilitates funding arrangements for them from the (?)United Nations Development Programme.
^1 Mackenzie-Reur, V L. (1995). Statistical profile on the situation of women in Vanuatu. ESCAP, Vila. 67 pp.
^2 Bowie, C. (1995). Voice blong ol woman. "The women's voice ". Report of the rural women's needs assessment. Vanuatu National Council of Women. 183 pp.
^3 UNICEF (1991). A situation analysts of children and women in Vanuatu. Vanuatu Government. 97 pp.
<section>7</section>
7. Constraints to women's involvement in fisheries
7.1 Social issues as constraints
7.2 Access to resources as a constraint
7.3 Access to opportunities as a constraint
7. Constraints to women's involvement in fisheries
A snippet of information from the WBU^1 report on women participants in the rural market economy serves as an introduction to this chapter.
Women were asked if they had wanted to receive relevant skills training in the last 12 months, but had been unable to do so. The reasons given for non-participation in training were: not enough money to pay course fees (48%), too much family responsibility (39%), not enough time (34%), not enough places on the course (7%), and 'other reasons' (including not hearing the radio message advertising the course, and the husband not agreeing to her participation) (51%).
7.1 Social issues as constraints
The work load of women
Time to go fishing:
Many reports (e.g. Bowie^2) say that there is little time left for Ni-Vanuatu women to go fishing to feed their families or to sell fish. This is a sweeping statement and is not applicable to all of Vanuatu. It also overlooks the contribution of men to subsistence and artisanal fishing. The consultant found that women from small islands almost always found time: Atchin, Mere Lava, Wala, Mota Lava, north Efate islands women, Aneityum women, Makira (reported). Women do not fish from boats/canoes when the sea is rough or current strong (e.g. Tongoa, Eton village in Efate); women fishing with bamboo rods (e.g. Futuna, west Tanna) fished irrespective of weather conditions; while some women reported that they occasionally fished when the tide was low and the sea calm (e.g. handlining and reef gleaning activities).
Fish as an animal protein source is more likely to contribute to the everyday subsistence diet in coastal rural areas than do beef and pig^2, as usually it can be harvested in small amounts. Nevertheless, surveys (e.g. UNICEF^3) show that nutrition is poor generally in Vanuatu. This information as much supports the observations that rural women rarely have time to go fishing as suggests that rural men do not go fishing (for subsistence). In Ambae the men and the women rarely fish in the sea. But again there are exceptions: for example at Futuna the men go trolling for karong and flyingfish fishing for subsistence, men in the off-shore Efate islands frequently provide for the families, as do Post Olry men).
However, time is certainly a general constraint on women in many rural areas. There are not enough hours in the day for them to participate in fishing on a regular basis (as would be required for fully commercial activity) in addition to their socially prioritised chores. The greatest amount of time in the daily lives of women - often many hours - is spent in the garden or walking to/from the garden. Access to labour saving devices in the village household is limited, and asking women to do more leads to serious time-management problems.
If women generally are to participate more in regular fishing activity, their practical work load in others areas must be decreased and the men in society have to take on more responsibility in providing.
Women's childcaring and household duties mean they remain nearer in the village; and it is possible that only women whose children are at school or are beyond childbearing age are more active in fishing - that is, they can stay away from home longer or have less other work (a survey of this should give interesting results). Being absent from the community for long hours while fishing alone or with one other - such as in drop-line fishing - can also be a social disadvantage. This is in contrast to reef gleaning and gathering, and other activities such as gardening, weaving and sewing.
Managing time:
Some women are time managers. For example:
a) Sometimes women ask young family members to go fishing for small reef fish for laplap while they themselves prepare the laplap material - as they do not have time themselves. The women may remunerate the children in vatu.
b) Some women engage others to garden for them or care for their children while they undertake other tasks.
c) Two-thirds of women consulted^1 engage in 3-4 economic activities simultaneously, and 45% of women consulted spend 1.5-4 days a week on these activities - in addition to their usual household responsibilities.
Men make decisions in the household
Most of the decisions in the Vanuatu household are made by the man. He decides on the use of resources such as land, money and dictates the number of children^4. One major reason for this is the attitude that because the women are paid for (bride price) they are the man's property and must do as they are told. In modem day Vanuatu, the dowry system continues even though many women have better access to education and employment and have become very independent. In families where the husband is the head of the household^1, the family size is larger (up to 8 children). In the rural areas, women are largely dependent on their menfolk, and this is one reason why they continue to be secondary to them. Land inherited by women becomes the property of the husband on marriage, and the women cannot own or have legal control over resources in their new home area: so women (as individuals) effectively lose resource rights.
On income and how it is spent.
The consultant found that almost invariably, the husband decided the sale pace of goods (vegetables, laplap, fish) for the market - although he did not do the marketing. This function is performed by women only except in Vila and Santo where some husbands attend with their wives.
Although 34% of females have paid employment^4 this does not mean that they have access to their earnings and control how it is spent; although the situation is more equitable amongst educated couples. In more educated families, couples worked together to save for important items (e.g. school fees)^2.
On earning more:
In some rural areas, there is a social constraint to women earning more income^2. Some rural men reported to resent their wives carrying out income-generating projects in a group of women - separate from the family. However, there is no resentment felt by husbands towards women's income generating activities intended to assist the individual household. Women's activities to help the community or the church would be permitted.
Men make decisions in the community
Women's fishing preserves and their access to resource harvesting can be negatively affected by decisions made by men. Although reefs and lagoons remain predominantly community property, overall control of and decisions on access to them is usually the responsibility of the village council, comprising village chiefs and elders (no women). Whereas the whole community is consulted on community matters, the village elders and chiefs make the final decisions. The village council would decide on any major commercial development that may be envisaged, as well as when to impose and lift, fishing bans (tabus).
Nowadays, where production and harvesting of trochus, greensnail and sea cucumbers (for bêche-de-mer production) are highlighted, customary tenure rights have been implemented to set aside whole reef areas from harvesting. Tabus have also been placed where general fish harvesting is perceived to be diminishing stocks - as in Mota Lava, some near-Vile reefs, north Efate and on Malekula. The level of closure may encompass only the targeted item, all sessile - generally invertebrate - organisms, or all fish; the period of closure varies from one to four (Emae Island) years; and one or all reef complexes may be involved. A total harvesting ban effectively prevents the consumption of vertebrate and invertebrate reef fish in the associated villages - unless the fish is procurred through barter or exchange with unaffected villages, given, or bought. At Dravail near Lamap, the women told the consultant that they 'don't eat fish' because half of their nearshore reef is under tabu and
that tinned fish was too expensive at 180 vt/large tin. [It was not explained why the women don't barter for fish from nearby areas.]. Closure of reefs does not prevent fishers from fishing beyond the reefs or reef platform (e.g. for tunas and larger pelagic fishes, drop-line fish) but this fishing is predominantly performed by men.
Women are the ones mainly affected by reef closures therefore and as such the practice impinges on (a) the provision of fish in the subsistence diet in rural areas and (b) the ability of women to earn income from fish they harvest. Urban dwellers are not affected by reef closures implemented in outer islands as some of the fish harvested by the men fishers often are intended for their consumption: however, they would be affected by reef closures on Efate and within commuting distance on Santo.
Attitude of some men some women. some church groups and government departments
Planners:
With the goal of encouraging economic development and having limited finances to support initiatives, national fisheries planners often focus on supporting commercial and export-orientated fisheries which tend to be the domain of men. Credit, equipment, training, research and other services are provided to commercial fishermen to support their activities in the hope that income will flow into the country^5,6. The subsistence fisheries usually receive little attention - and women contribute greatest at the subsistence level. Ipso facto, their contribution in fishing and selling fish on local markets tends to be under-estimated^2. Whereas statistics on commercial fisheries (e.g. export values) are kept to 'justify' the expenditure on them there are rarely data on the value of women's fishing activities to the national economy. Moreover, because of its generally subsistence and small-scale nature, the benefits of women's fishing are not as 'easy' to quantify - for example,
healthier population from daily consumption of fish, labour in processing, time spent in marketing. The consultant prepared a questionnaire aimed at getting some idea of the value of women's fishing (Appendix 3).
Frequently in developing nations, training and development is centred on men, as 'planners repeatedly assume that men can use women as unpaid family labour' (Whitehead and Bloom, quoted in Bowie^2 :30). Fisheries development projects are no exception and contain implicit assumptions such as:
a) most participants in fishing activities are men, so assistance should be directed at them;
b) all women involved in fishing-related activities in the community have menfolk who are similarly involved;
c) that benefits of training, new gear, boats and engines, refrigeration and new processing techniques directed at men will 'trickle-down' and indirectly affect women;*
d) that women will participate in programs 'if they want to';
e) that women who have been displaced by the fishing sector would prefer to (or logically should) find employment in occupations outside the sector.
* For example, Gina-Whewell (1992:13): (on Roviana - Solomons- women) 'With the recent development of clam and seaweed farms in some parts of Roviana, women, who are the traditional exploiters of these resources, are not involved. It involves only the men. So it appears that the women's knowledge of this resource has not been given any recognition.'
Through education barriers such as that are usually removed. Yet in Vanuatu, attitudes to educated women may still take a long time to change: the consultant was struck by the attitude of a young male Ni-Vanuatu senior bank loans officer who stated that the reason many women are employed in the business sector in Vanuatu is because 'they are more obedient'.
Speaking down:
According to some writers and spokespersons on women's issues women are not comfortable in receiving guidance from men, that the men 'speak down' to women and are inclined to instruct male villagers rather than the women. Indeed, it was urged that there be female extension officers for both agriculture and fisheries. There are no female extension officers in Vanuatu's Agriculture and Livestock, and Fisheries departments. However, the consultant was informed that the agriculture extension officers are impartial in their training and are aware of gender issues in communities, although 'more than 60%' of the attendance at community training sessions are men. Probably the level of female participation varies throughout the country, and the consultant agrees somewhat with the agriculture officers' view that their attendance depends on whether they are interested, as the consultant perceived the same situation in villages she visited to speak with women.
Class system:
Some government department officers build an air of superiority about themselves and are lacking in effective communication skills when talking with rural people. They 'dictate from Vila' (M. Amos, pers. comm.) and create a barrier between themselves and the people they are meant to serve. Such an attitude creates a class system. Two examples of the creation of a class structure - by women - were observed by the consultant.
1. courses offered by the VNCW in Efate are run in Vila only, making it necessary for the would-be participants to travel and spend at least one day in Vila. Transport costs in Efate are high, as much as 10,000 vt return trip from Takara, Saama and Epao villages in the north-east. Add to that the cost of lunch while attending the course; and of accommodation if the course runs for more than one day. Back in the village meanwhile, who is minding the children or preparing meals for the husband and family? In constrast, the women in Vila or nearby locations (e.g. Mele, Erakor) can attend the course at comparatively very small cost. When asked, the VNCW could not explain why their officers could not go to the villages (for the cost of one person) where a large audience would be available. They also commented that 'if people valued training they would be willing to pay for it'. Did they?
2. while urban employees of the VNCW, some NGOs and government departments are offered and attend courses in communication skills, team-building skills and the like, courses taken or offered to the rural areas are very frequently 'home skills' courses only. Courses in sewing, soap making, screen printing, nutrition, cooking, weaving, smokeless stove manufacture, rural water tank construction and sewing machine repair appear to be the only courses run in rural areas. It seemed as if a conscious decision had been made that 'educated/urban women can learn these things, but under-educated/rural women are incapable of such learning'. By relegating traditional women's tasks to rural women's learning courses, planners are creating a haves/have-nots structure in society and, worse still, are reinforcing the traditional concept that women are second class citizens. Some NGOs argued that they 'asked rural women what they want to learn and that's what they said' but that argument
is flawed: no person can make a complete choice if they are unfamiliar with or unaware of the concepts and options and endpoints of learning.
The consultant also found a self-made 'second-class citizen' attitude held by some women of good education level and jobs - for example, these women did not demur at reported statements by Ni-Vanuatu men that women are employed by firms [only because] they are obedient.
Motivation
The export and domestic markets in Vanuatu maintain a demand for fish which has never been satisfied despite the good results of the VFDP in the 1980s. There is always a high fish demand in Vila and Santo from expatriates, tourists and high populations.
The constraint is in why it is not being accessed. Some of this is from lack of motivation resulting in irregular fishing (pers. comm., Development Bank) but just as likely it is from inter-island marketing problems (see below).
This motivation phenomenon is not a 'women-only' matter and it is common in the country and throughout the Pacific island nations. Working for the purpose of accruing income is, for many non-salaried workers, a part-time activity: women and men involve themselves in income generation when they need cash. According to the Department of Industry, Trade & Commerce, Ni-Vanuatu men have too casual an attitude to work, especially in the rural areas, and people generally have yet to develop a daily 'going to work' ethic. Women are not as casual, but even then, most (71%) of rural women engaged in the market economy consider that they could spend more time on income generating activities^1.
7.2 Access to resources as a constraint
Fish
There are no social contraints to women fishing per se. Some communities or island groups place restrictions on the mode of fishing however (such as use of bows and arrows, spears, underwater spearguns).
Access to gear and equipment:
Women are the biggest users of light handlines. Often they do not have the money to buy more expensive fishing gear, yet in some areas (notably Efate, south-eastern Santo) women do use fishing nets and occasionally boats with outboard motors, and canoes. The gear either belongs to their husbands, themselves, or a relative. Women in these areas however, are more likely to have income from sale of market produce, salaried employment, and be more educated. So may their husbands and relatives.
The price of fishing equipment is prohibitive to lower income earners (here, women). The price of a gillnet from a Chinese store in Santo starts at 12,000 vt but usually from 16,000 vt. Cast nets cost more, 18,000 vt. The price of an esky in Santo is 20,000 vt (small), 40,000 (medium), 50,000 (big); in Tanna the price is 45,000 vt (small), 50,000 vt (medium). All gear is imported and so incurs a 16-17% tax. Women do not have the money for an esky, therefore they transport fish (e.g. mangrou) to market in a rice bag with resultant poor quality. Ice (in Tanna) is 600 vt/block; at Litslits it is 400 vt/block; at the FTC in Santo it is 375 vt/block and 500 vt/1.5 blocks, crushed.
In the absence of appropriate gear or where tabus restrict access to inshore waters, women may use natural poisons (such as narvel) more frequently because of women's need to provide for the nutritional and economic well-being of their families. Women in most villages the consultant that they use natural ichthyocides for fish harvesting perhaps the only 'custom' fishing method still used, and frequently. Where women have access to the reefs and narvel they will continue to exploit the fish resource. With increasing human population, the environmental impact of fishing with poisons is likely to become significant near high population areas and adjacent to closed inshore waters.
Lack of ice plants and generators (electricity) is an impediment to fisheries business. It impacts on men as well as women; and affects the possibility of Lamap women (e.g.) earning a better income from fishing and of Futuna residents selling fish.
Loss of fish resources:
Reduction in fish stocks impacts on inshore fishers' success in harvesting and therefore earning money. Over-harvesting of freshwater naura, mangrou and mangrove oysters for sale were mentioned in chapter 4. Other common causes of reduced fish inshore resources include:
pollution from logging (e.g. north-west Aneityum; Ambai, off south-east Santo) and hydro-scheme(?) (namarai becoming scarce in Sarakata River);
urbanisation (rubbish dumps),
increasing human population (the women in south Aneityum having to fish for longer on the reefs; tabus are being placed throughout the islands not just to protect trochus and greensnail stocks but because all resources appear to be in decline. Especially evident near Vila (Ifira Island), Banks (Mote Lava), north Efate). Even then, customary marine tenure 'doesn't work at night'; and
gear efficiency (almost everywhere, people said there are too many gillnets and/or that they kill everything - e.g. the Banks people at Houchard Plantation, the women at Uripiv, women at Nakere village (south Santo))
Transport to markets and marketing
Transport to markets is an issue that affects men as well as women. UNICEF^3 and Bowie^2 state that there is no transport infrastructure to bring produce from producing areas to local or regional markets. Non-produce areas experience a shortage of produce and producing areas experience a shortage of cash. This is one reason for the high Vanuatu consumption of imported foods^3: the absence of a local food distribution and marketing system. Imported foods get good distribution and marketing and local food prices remain high.
The lack of formal infrastructure to get goods from the airport/wharf to the marketplace has another 'down-side' in that urban family members provide that service - but because proper accounts are not kept, what is perceived as insufficient payment is returned to the rural genesis. People reported that sometimes an order is sent to the village with promise of high returns. After paying the airfreight, the fisher/seller actually gets less than he was told he would - so he loses interest. The problem may be with his urban family link. Middlemen fees are also high: Litslits people receive 200vt/one dozen live oysters, but the middleman charges the buyer 800 vt/one dozen.
The consultant enquired about freight rates from Vanair. Apart from the high freight charges from the more distant islands, concessional rates are only granted after 12 months' of continuous business. Even then, the discounts (10% if above 45 kg but less than 100 kg per week; 15% if more than 100 kg per week - and this quantity has to be guaranteed) are very negative. It appears that Vanair is unwilling to assist small producers of any consumable item in the country. The Vanair pilots often help - not only in acting as courier but also in turning a blind eye to the 'unacceptable' plan packaging of coconut baskets.
Land and water transport cost are also prohibitive. The speedboat from north Efate islands to the mainland costs 5,000 vt one way, and the road cost is 4-5,000 vt from there into Vila. In Santo transport from (e.g. Port Olry) is 2,000 vt. Time to market is another constraint, particularly so when post-harvest handling is poor.
Marketing of fish can be done more easily in south-east Santo and Efate (roads, urban demand), than it can from or in the other islands. Although there appears to be a demand for fish in inland areas which may be partly met by people selling from small trucks and eskies the limited cash in urban areas makes such marketing irregular because the fishers can get more money by sending to the towns.
Finances
Subsidies:
It is noteworthy that whereas the government offers fuel and ice subsidies for commercial fishing, there are no support services for subsistence and artisanal fishing performed in the absence of motorised gear. Charges for ice are made when fishers sell their catches at recognised markets (e.g. Natai) or middlemen and receive proof of the sale: but for sales in rural markets or communities - proof is not so easy to reveal.
Money and credit (financial):
Women are not prevented from owning, leasing or trading property, and they are not restricted in access to credit. However,- the level of equity required often constrains women's business enterprise; and their relative lack of experience as borrowers, their lack of security (e.g. possessions) and the novelty of women running a business often work against them with credit providers such as banks (pers. comm., Department of Industry, Trade & Commerce).
It is not very easy to get large financial assistance in the village in lieu of a bank loan. Women usually either raise capital from selling extra food at the market or borrow money from their families (up to 2,000 vt) to start small businesses. Only 12% of women in business have borrowed from either a commercial bank or a credit union, and only 4% from the Development Bank^1; and 83% of women borrowed less than 10,000 vt [this would exclude them from most bank lending - see below]. Women with lower incomes borrow more frequently than do those with higher incomes, and 29% of borrowers earned less than 500 vt per week^1. When women pay back the family, they usually deposit money earned from the business into a village credit scheme and this (according to the Women's Business Unit) is where their business fails: the problem of relationships and credit. The WBU says that poorly educated women do not know the advantage of depositing in a bank account.
Women-run businesses are rare in rural areas - especially those distant areas infrequently serviced. In a recent 6-week period at the Santo branch of the ANZ Bank there were no enquiries nor applications for loans by women unaccompanied by their husbands, and very rarely by wife-and-husband teams. At the Vila branch of the bank however, there are on average 2-3 applications for personal loans from women per week and occasional ones for business (e.g. a kava business). This phenomenon is less one of distance and ability, but of the level of equity required by commercial banks and the Development Bank. More urban women may be better educated than rural women and hence have better employment, thus they are more likely to be able to meet the loan requirements.
The Development Bank identified the failure of fishing loans on the following courses: having the loan project as the only income source, bad management (a major cause) and the irregularity of fishing.
ANZ Bank. The minimum equity and level of loan preferred is 30,000 vt each. The interest rate usually ranges over 15-16% and the term varies from 12 months to three years. However, there is no requirement for the borrower to have an account with the ANZ. The bank has guidance officers for Ni-Vanuatu loans and also uses the Department of Rural Business & Cooperatives officers as an advisory service on any loans.
National Bank Vanuatu. The minimum equity and level of loans is 50,000 vt each. The interest rate is 17%, and the term is two years. Not surprisingly, the NBV had no loans to women only. The borrower must also hold an account with the bank and have a good account record.
Development Bank. The minimum equity is 25% of the total project cost (which can be in kind), the loan is guaranteed and credit lines are available. The average interest rate is 16% and the term vanes from short-term 12 month loans to 15 years. The Bank stated that its high interest rate is a consequence of the high interest charged by its lending organisations, (mainly the Asian Development Bank and the National Provident Fund). Because of the high cost of supervising loans in the islands which are often for smaller amounts, the Bank is forced to concentrate on large loans (on main islands) to meet its borrowings.
Vanuatu Credit Union League. The credit union operates mainly in rural areas and is open to anyone who is willing to pay the annual fee amounting to 6.500 vt/month. Borrowers must be members of the credit union. Loans vary in size and match the level of equity 'dollar for dollar'. The credit union has officers in al; of the islands who assess and visit ventures. Some women have loans with the credit union, mainly for tourism, retail stores, sewing machine repair, peanut planting, school fees and labour costs.
Small loans schemes:
Women benefit most from having access to micro-credit or small loans schemes. Unfortunately, there are no such schemes operating in Vanuatu - apart from the Vanuatu Credit Union League. Loans schemes operated specifically for women are no longer available. The consultant heard of two:
South Pacific Commission. Sometime in the early 1990s the South Pacific Commission despatched a parcel of money to each member country to be divided up and used as principal for loans to women. An amount of c. 300,000 vt was allocated for Vanuatu and was sent to the VNCW headquarters. In 1994 the VNCW sent 75,000 vt of the grant to the Vila Town Council of Women to be divided into small loan lots of 10,000-15,000 vt; and in 1995 they VNCW sent another 50,000 vt to the Vila Town Council of Women. According to the Vila Town Council, loans were dispensed but very few were successful and the Council is having trouble in recovering money. The consultant was told that no money was sent to the island councils for disbursement. The women's affairs officer at ESCAP informed the consultant that the remaining money is in an interest-bearing account in Vila.
Match program. This program was initiated by the Canadian Government and operated in the late 1980s-early 1990s. The capital for the program came from the Canada Fund and it was administered by the VNCW(?) The program worked on the simple system of matching the equity put up by the applicant. One report from the VNCW said that the program was successful while another report stated that the program was suspended because of misappropriation. The consultant met one person who had had a loan with the program.
7.3 Access to opportunities as a constraint
To information
Having information about something, or knowing where to find the information, are very important assets to increased participation in any activity.
By communicating:
Some NGOs and government departments have(?) produced information for women in written (brochures) and verbal (radio) form. If the women cannot read however, there is no use in producing brochures in Bislama, and (as with many western Pacific nations) because the culture is an oral one the concept of reading is unsuitable. Radio programs are limited in use if women are not at home (e.g. they are in the gardens) and/or do not have radios, or the radio has run out of batteries. Bowie^2 cited the government charging a fee for radio programs as another example of information flow being impeded as less programs are broadcasts
On fisheries resources:
There is little information on Vanuatu fisheries resources that women and communities can use in most inshore fisheries. A report on a biological survey by Done and Navin^7 was published by A.I.M.S. in 1990 and their work encompased selected nearshore habitats in several, widely separated islands. Profiles of Vanuatu's fisheries resources were prepared by Bell and Amos^8 and published in 1994 by FFA. For many inshore resources (e.g. lobsters, freshwater prawns, land crabs, oysters. ornamental and edible shells, octopus, baitfish (including mangrou)) there is sparse information on species, their distribution, production and stock status. The Fisheries Department is limited in its ability to provide information on the level of the subsistence fishery, nor offer suggestions on where fishing could take place and for what.
Lack of information on the prevalence of fish poisoning (ciguatera) in Vanuatu impacts directly on women's commercial fishing opportunities (for handline caught fish) and brings increased pressure on other fish stocks (e.g. drop-lined fish). There is a common belief amongst purchasers and consumers of fish in Vanuatu that 'all reef fish have ciguatera'. This is not the case. Akimichi^9, for example, remarked that few reef fish a. e marketed because of the ciguatoxin.
There is very insufficient extension work from the Fisheries Department to advise communities on sustainable fishing practices for inshore stocks nor offer information on reef and inshore management. What there has been has been targeted at men. In an article describing traditional marine based management of trochus and greensnail stocks in Vanuatu, Amos^10 (p. 16) writes: 'Research Officers arrange for further informal discussions with resource owners and fishermen, about the importance of harvesting only legal sized shells. (These discussions are usually held around bowls of kava.)' and 'As part of the education program, a National Trochus Workshop was organised by the Research Section... for chiefs and resource owners, fishermen and Provincial Government Representatives...[to]...increase the participants' awareness, knowledge and understanding of the marine resources'. Most Ni-Vanuatu women cannot own resources, none are chiefs, fishermen nor(?) provincial
representatives, and they very rarely join men in drinking bowls of kava Yet in many islands of Vanuatu the women gather trochus (sometimes also greensnail) alongside the men, their fishing practices are more likely than men's to impact on trochus and greensnail stocks, and their familiarity with the inshore environment surely indicates that they would be eager and informed participants of management awareness programs.
The recent rural women's fisheries course run at the FTC was the first course offered by the Fisheries Department specifically for women. Unfortunately, its course content was almost entirely on the traditional 'men's fishing' methods and few areas and had little relevance to women's capacity building in fishing.
Women do not receive appropriate instruction on fish quality (especially of invertebrates) and advice on new ways to utilise fish. Skills in both of these areas help to sustain resources by increasing earnings from the harvest. Fish quality training courses have been run in the past (New Zealand funding) which women could have attended but they were aimed at boat owners and high value fish marketing. Bêche-demer processing was taught only to men (pers. comm., VANGO).
To skills
" We know how to fish, but we don't know what to do then "
Literacy and numeracy:
Lack of language and numeracy skills impedes womens' abilities in participating in more economic activities. Not having these skills limits women to sell only items such as handicrafts and garden produce - even locally, because the women may speak only tok-ples (10% of the population speak only their local language^4: 1989 census). Ability to communicate at least in the lingua franca, Bislama, is important.
Understanding of credit, profit-and-loss and business:
The consultant heard explanations from many women of their marketing strategies. Understanding of profit and loss varied. Many women completely negated their transport costs to and from market, their purchases of drink or food to eat and their ablutions fee (i e. they made losses). Taking a lot of produce to the market spread the transport fee although it meant the women had to stay longer at the market. The market fee was identified and 'counteracted' by the women staying at the market through the night and by having a lot of produce to sell; yet at midday on Saturdays much produce is re-loaded onto vehicles for return to the villages. The long hours at the market particularly disadvantages older or pregnant women and mothers of young children. The women from Erakor, Mele and other near-Vile communities harvest ark shells, price them at 400 vt per basket and take the unsold baskets home daily until they are unsaleable arid have to be thrown away. While the women recognise
the waste of the resource, they rarely break the lot into smaller baskets and sell for smaller price. Some women will only harvest 'on order'. Because demand is inelastic in the market the price charged for items is fairly consistent and 'value for money' is difficult to achieve. However, some women are compensating for the time spent in making laplap by selling it with chicken wings (imported frozen in bags): the women cannot get a fair price from the market for the extra work of catching and frying fish or octopus to accompany the laplap. The lady in north Efate who prepares nine pieces of laplap made from one nawita (i.e. eight legs and the head) and sells each piece for 150 vt was not so unusual: women in Wala area (Malekula) do the same yet only charge 20 vt/piece. Women at Santo market offer coconut crabs for sale at comparatively low prices but often too high for Ni-Vanuatu consumers while men get more money by selling coconut crabs direct to hotels and restaurants.
Many women consider that selling vegetables, weaving or shells is more profitable than selling fish. For coastal women this concept is misplaced and it may be the result of societal expectations (e.g. gardening is traditional, fishing is men's work). To be sure, marketing is socially enjoyable and a change from daily village life. Of women engaged in selling, 81% fresh vegetables and fruit, 63% raised beef, pigs and fowl for sale, 60% sold cooked food, 36% sold mats and baskets and 27% sold shells (this activity was mainly in Efate and Malekula)^1.
As discussed in chapter 4, there is an increasing need for women in the Vanuatu society to understand the importance of earning and making money. Store-bought items, school fees and transport costs affect the woman's area of responsibility - that of provider. Where many households do not have an annual plan for consumption, saving and expenditure of their cash^2 the need for them to operate under one is now there, especially where there is limited cash in circulation (e.g. in areas away from tourists). The concepts of profit, credit and fair profit margins is not readily understood by many women^2.
Women involved in market activities interviewed by the WBU^1 felt they had some problems with record keeping, marketing, stocktaking, costing/pricing, advertising and raw material purchase; and there were distinct variations between islands. Overall, Efate women felt they had no problems with any of these skills, while most Tanna women rated every one as 'difficult'. The consultant suggests this reflects the relative urbanisation (familiarity with western-kind of selling) of the two islands.
Irrelevant training. Bowie^2 noted that many women were keen to develop incomegenerating activities but most bad no idea of how to proceed. Those women who did have an idea of their inadequacy identified business and literacy training, start-up materials, a marketplace and better transport as impediments Women who discussed with the consultant the possibility of earning more income from the sale of fish products invariably also identified ignorance of business skills as the greatest impediment to their undertaking being worthwhile.
Only 9% of respondents to the WBU^1 survey of women involved in marketing had received some kind of training. The training had been delivered mainly by the VNCW, churches, DWA and WBU, all other NGOs accounting for 19%. Training included leadership (3%), business awareness (2%), other business training (3%), water tank construction (3%) and sewing (7%). The training from churches included prayer/bible study.'This may be more indicative of what is to offer than what women are interested in.' (WBU^1: 37). If 91% of training given Hence in rural areas, the opportunities for women to move outside their traditional roles into paid employment are few^2.
Self-esteem:
Women's subordinate role in Vanuatu society ill equips them for the hard world of commerce in which men predomate. Their societal position, if accompanying them into business, acts as a direct constraint to success. Having self-esteem, inner strength and courage are personal skills which support women and men in all aspects of their life. Lack of confidence, hesitancy, shyness and little familiarity with the 'new world' of business were identified by bank officers and the Department of Industry as constraints to women's taking a more active part in business.
Functional:
More Vila Ni-Vanuatu female residents have car or motor-bike driving licences than have their counterparts in Santo and the rest of Efate. The consultant estimates that, even while all of these women would far outnumber all other licensed women in the remainder of Vanuatu their total number would not be more than 10% of all motor vehicle licence holders in the country. A similar comparison could be made for drivers of outboard motors. This discrepancy cannot be dismissed simply by observing that there are few roads or that women do not have money to buy their own vehicles or boats with outboard motors, as some women are permitted to use their husband's or relatives' nets and other valuable equipment, and there is the example of the c. 10% of licensed women.
Being self-mobile is a great advantage to people in business. Being unable to drive a motor vehicle or an outboard motor impedes women's independent participation in the business of catching and marketing fish, as it means they have to rely on others (usually men). Women's lack of confidence, access to training and, possibly, social displeasure (rural areas) are important factors determining women's independent vehicular mobility.
A women's group a Uripiv Island has a boat donated by a church which the women use as an inter-island ferry to take produce to market in Norsup. There are several male sellers of fish to inland areas (Pentecost, north-east Santo, south-east Malekula)- they buy ice (sometimes) and drive to the end of the roads, selling the fish to churches, schools and government centres (blow a conch shell or toot the car horn). If women had driving licences they could do that too.
To support
Women lacking the support of families and particularly husbands when attempting to move into business often fail (pers. comm., various sources).
In spite of existing policy guidelines, women's issues and the development of support networks do not receive a high priority from the national government. What support there is is largely influenced by the policies of external forces - i.e. other national governments and aid organisations, Support networks for women were not well developed in 1991^3 and the situation may be little improved. This is despite the Third National Development Plan (1992-96), section 2. 18. statement that: 'The overall goal for the development of women in Vanuatu is to realize the potential of women as partners and beneficiaries of the development process, and to promote their full and equal participation in local, national and international affairs.'
Poor development of support networks is largely due to a lack of resources (particularly financial) being apportioned to women's issues, and a lack of coordination of activity. It may also be that planners, senior officials and community leaders are unaware of women's and children's issues as distinct from those of the (male-psyche) community. According to UNICEF3 (p.20) the 'distinct gap between policy and legislation on the one hand, and what is actually carried out on the other' is complicated by this issue.
The DWA, VNCW, church groups, other NGOs and some government departments organise programs and activities in support of women (or communities) in Vanuatu (chapter 6). Most of these groups work in isolation and their efforts are disparate hence they are weakened and unfocused. The women's groups also largely fail to utilise the services of the VANGO which are structured so as to encourage a cohesive, combined approach to issues. One demonstration of uncoordinated activity and poor financial resources management is the duplication of DWA and VNCW work in the islands - or rather, what seems to be the work of the DWA and the role-playing of the VNCW. The VNCW's head office in Vila gives scant financial support to its island councils of women which then call upon the DWA officers to perform their work.
Bowie's^2 report on the needs of rural women contains a number of suggestions on how to improve the VNCW's and other NGO's service to communities.
Financial cut-backs have impacted on all of the national government's departments including those that service women (e.g. DWA, Department of Health) and are relevant to their needs (e.g. Cooperatives and Rural Business). For example, until 1989 there were eight DWA officers servicing the rural community outs: de of Vila but this was cut back to four (one each for Torba+Penama+Sanma. Shefa. Melampa and Tafea provinces) with re-arrangement of portfolios and provinces. More recently, the government has not agreed to a request from the DWA and the Development Bank for the appointment of a women's finance manager to develop a micro-credit scheme for women.
The national government may also view women's development and related programmes as different to national/ community issues and not deserving of attention - i.e. a side issue.
^1 Women's Business Unit (1995). A study of women in micro business: their resources and their needs. A study done by the Women's Business Unit of the Department of Cooperative & Rural Business Development in cooperation with Statistics Office. Republic of Vanuatu. 46 pp plus.
^2 Bowie, C. (1995). Voice blong ol woman. "The women s voice ". Report of the rural women's needs assessment. Vanuatu National Council of Women. 183 pp.
^3 UNICEF (1991). A situation analysis of children and women in Vanuatu. Vanuatu Government. 97 pp.
^4 Mackenzie-Reur, V.L. (1995). Statistical profile on the situation of women in Vanuatu. ESCAP, Vila. 67 pp.
^5 Tuara, P. N.(1995). The participation of women in fisheries in the South Pacific. 4 pp. Paper presented at the SPC regional workshop on the role of women in fisheries development, Iloilo City, Philippines. 17-21 July 1995
^6 Tuara, P. N.(1996). Women's fisheries development section: supporting women in fisheries. Paper presented at the South Pacific Commission Twenty-sixth Regional Technical Meeting on Fisheries, Noumea, New Caledonia, 5-9 August 1996.SPC/ Fisheries Information Paper 11. 5 pp.
^7 Done, T.J. and K.F. Navin (1990). Vanuatu marine resources: report of a biological survey. A project of the Australian International Development and Assistance Bureau. A.I.M.S., Townsville. 272 pp.
^8 Bell, L. A. J. and M. I. Amos (1994). Republic of Vanuatu fisheries resources profiles. FFA Report 93/49. Honiara, Solomon Islands: Forum Fisheries Agency.
^9 Akimichi, T. (1990). Inshore fisheries and marine resource management in Vanuatu: an anthropological study. pp. 195-140, in Report on a technical and socio-economic baseline studyfor fisheries development in Oceania, with special reference to reef and lagoon resources and aquaculture. Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA).
^10 Amos. M. (1993). Traditionally based marine management systems in Vanuatu. SPC Traditional Marine Resources Management and Knowledge Information Bulletin, no 2: 14-17.
<section>8</section>
8. Enhancing women's role in fisheries
8.1 General
8.2 Specific recommendations
8.2.1 Projects
8.2.2 Information and training
8.3 Summary, or "How can women be more involved in 'men's' fishing?"
8. Enhancing women's role in fisheries
8.1 General
A broad range of circumstances and factors affect women and policy initiatives and plans to deal with these must be broad, integrated and directed at issues rather than at sectors^1,2. The importance of women to family welfare and national development must be recognised by relevant government agencies, which in turn must ensure adequate and appropriate resource allocation.
Previous fisheries policies
'Many times, development plans are geared towards the national interest and often the needs of the national government may not be the same as those of the rural dweller. Also, most of the revenue generated from the rural areas goes to cater for the growing needs of an urban based community, making the gap widen each year.... It is important that primary resource developments be planned side by side with an understanding of how the society works, and what forestry, fisheries and agriculture mean to the majority of rural dwellers. The rural dwellers, especially women, should take part in all stages...' (Liloqula^3: 182)
The absence of even an acknowledgement of the value of subsistence harvesting is only partly surprising however, as it is performed by women. The position of women in Vanuatu society has been discussed elsewhere. The social concept in agriculture programs noted by Mackenzie-Reur^5 that 'Men look after cattle and fishing projects while women look after garden produce and weaving' is in play. Even in western societies men in many households are oblivious of how their food gets on the table (as long as it gets there), their clothes are washed and the house is cleaned.
Men need to be involved in activities related to the improvement of women's economic and social status in Vanuatu. Their involvement would assist in a better understanding of why women's views should be considered and incorporated before programs and policies are implemented^5. Without men's involvement in the decision-making, improvements will be difficult to make. Hence, my emphasis is the development of community fishing opportunities.
Many government-supported fisheries ventures have failed and the hoped for injection of revenue from them has not eventuated. There are many reasons for this, including the part-time participation of fishers, men's spending patterns, government concessions, over-capitalisation?, inadequate fish stocks, and indiscriminate harvesting. By focussing on and promoting community-based fishing operations and businesses and women's fishing activities however, the Vanuatu Government is assured of success in encouraging private enterprise, injecting money into rural communities, achieving a wider spread of resource harvesting, and ensuring resource sustainability.
Women in fisheries
Women's fishing activities are in many places already vital to a communities' wellbeing Yet governments, aid organisations and churches tend to overlook. 'Women's development programmes are becoming increasingly unbalanced - it [always on] health, nutrition, sanitation, etc. - and these need to be reviewed for effectiveness.... Where [are] the services to the household production budget.' (Liloqula^3, p. 182) - i.e developing the skills in fishing that women already have as household providers.
There are some things that only women do (for example, only women are reef gleaners and this can be done all year in most weather conditions) and there are some things that only men do (and these may be limited by seasonal conditions). Women's fishing activities take place within the community. Hence, while a few recommendations (such as the provision of better market facilities) will directly affect only women, most recommendations are given to benefit the communities of which women are a part.
Most rural women in Vanuatu are largely bound to their family and community by social conditioning and duties, child-rearing, education and economics and these women infrequently spend all day periods away from home. Women then, are the preferred group to undertake or engage in certain types of inshore fishing ventures.
Opportunities for increased female involvement in fisheries activities
Constraints to women's participation in currently recognised forms of commercial fishing in Vanuatu are discussed in chapter 7. An alternative is to encourage other ways of fishing. Grow-out fish farming can be done by communities; women can harvest high value (mudcrabs, bysters and stonefish) and niche (seaweed) inshore resources and prepare secondary fish products (dried, salted, bottled, smoked); women can participate in environment and resource management. Better fish marketing and prices can be achieved through acquisition of business and marketing skills, improved transport and facilities and post-harvest handling practices. Women can conduct business from the home through cooperative thinking and networking, and opportunities also exist for women as managers of fisheries businesses in urban and rural areas. Already in Vanuatu some women are buyers (middlemen) of product.
Fisheries management
Management of inshore fish resources is in its infancy in Vanuatu. It is expressed almost entirely in the form of tabus initiated by the research section of the Fisheries Department to conserve exploitable trochus and greensnail stocks, and enthusiastically followed by many coastal village councils and chiefs. In the consultant's view, inshore fisheries management will (and should) become the most important item on the Fisheries Department's agenda, and not simply for safeguarding export commodities. This is because of the combination of the following factors: accessible subsistence and artisanal resources, an immense increase in the national population (currently about 2.9% annual growth rate, and at least half the population less than 15 years of age: chapter 2), the desire for education for one's children, and improved understanding about family nutrition. Whereas now women in some coastal communities rarely fish for subsistence, the consultant considers that they or
their families will in the near future because of the need to provide - directly or through sale of product.
The contribution of women in the fisheries sector and their impact on resources will become increasingly important. Women's fishing activities directly affect inshore resource loss (presently it is minimal except for possibly near the urban centres). The Fisheries Department should prepare for and encourage the involvement of women by directing it along pathways that are environmentally sound (e.g. prohibition of traditional poisons), are diverse (e.g. selected harvest of reef fish, grow-out fish farming), ensure resource sustainability (e.g. improvements in post-harvest-handling and product diversification) and which encourage a high(er) financial return per unit of effort (e.g. salted trochus and greensnail, Bonefish marketing).
Over all of this, it is important to remember the two principles that form the basis for much commercial activity in Pacific Island nations: having the time and having the need for money (motivation). Income generation however, can come from frequency of performance and amount earned, and in this case, irregularity of fishing because of other demands on a woman's time can be offset by increasing the value of the product she sells through good handling and marketing.
8.2 Specific recommendations
8.2.1 Projects
A. Freshwater prawn and eel grow-out farming.
Freshwater prawns (naura) inhabit most streams and rivers and occasionally water taro swamps. They are said to be plentiful on Gaua, Maewo, Santo, Malekula, Epi and Aneityum, but are absent from northern Ambae streams (for example). The prawns are eaten for subsistence and for sale. Traditional methods of capture include darning sections of a stream and then draining it, putting a woven net across a stream and then muddying the water upstream to make the prawns move down into the net, trapping with a length of green bamboo or a woven, double trap, handlining, and spearing with bow and arrow, or with a wimera-type spear. Prawns are often seasonal in abundance.
The prawns are becoming increasingly popular as a saleable commodity. Villagers in inland southern Santo catch prawns for sale to Santo restaurants and in the market; prawns are sold occasionally through the Natal Fish Market in Vila, and many individuals and Chinese-owned stores purchase prawns. Annual yield of fresh-water prawns may be about 56 tonnes^6. The price paid for prawns varies from 400-450 vt/kg (market, Santo), 600-650 vt/kg (hotel, Santo) to 900-1,100 vtlkg (Vile hotels, stores). Lower prices are paid for speared or damaged prawns. The prawns are always sold head-on. The increasing value of the prawns (and over-harvesting effects) is evidenced by:
o some south Santo vendors purchasing ice, driving to the end of the inland road, and buying prawns off villagers who have walked down with prawns bundled in laplap leaves; and
o the existence of two prawn farms (Gaua, north Maewo) where systems of raceways are used.
Farming of freshwater prawns could be taken up by more communities. it is suggested that the farming venture consist of:
1. collection of small prawns in traps or dammed streams,
2. stocking of the small prawns in ponds. Freshwater prawns have a habit of climbing out of ponds and escaping, so the sides of the pond (at least) should be sheer (e.g. covered with cement or? bamboo). The ponds may need to be covered with chicken wire or open thatch to prevent predation by birds,
3. feeding the prawns with vegetable (?only) scraps,
4. netting-out prawns of suitable size for regular sale, or draining the pond to harvest all prawns,
5. either de-heading the prawns, salting lightly and packing in plastic bags for same day air transport to buyers, or chilling or freezing whole prawns for sale over several days.
The price paid for quality de-headed prawns should be sufficiently high to offset airfreight costs. Light salting has been advised as a method of keeping the prawns in good condition for at least a day - this practice would make prawn farming feasilble where ice is unavailable. However, freshwater prawns do not keep as well as marine prawns, so good post-harvest handling practices would be required.
The consultant identified one place - northern Ambae - where community prawn farming could be trialed: small prawns could be purchased from Maewo villagers and trans-shipped to ponds not far distant from the Longana airstrip, which receives a six days/week plane service. Other places (where air service is less frequent) are Aneityum^6 and Gaua. There are probably others. Another probably suitable farming area is Aulua in eastern Malekula, although it has a one-hour road link to either Norsup or Lamap airstrip.
Small prawns could also be stocked in water taro swamps an farmed in a much less intensive way.
The advantages of freshwater prawn farming are:
1. it utilises a resource that is widespread and perhaps not abundant and concentrates it so hat it can be harvested effectively;
2. it is low cost and low maintenance after set-up;
3. it does not require special skills and is not time-consuming;
4. it involves the whole community as can be done within the village area;
5. harvesting can be done whenever income is required;
6. the farmed product has a high value; and
7. income goes almost directly to the community.
Eel farming could be conducted in a similar fashion to naura. The consultant heard reports that eels (Anguilla species) inhabit many freshwater systems in Vanuatu but that they are not a preferred food for many Ni-Vanuatu. However, value-adding (such as smoking) and/or effective marketing would increase their popularity. Smoked eel is in fair demand on some overseas markets, and some trial shipments to the Brisbane market a few years ago were favourably received (F. N'gyuen, pers. comm.).
The eels are collected as juveniles (elvers or glass-eels) when they ascend the rivers each year, then stocked into ponds and fed with garden and vegetable scraps (and other items?). The eels are harvested at the size required by the market. Postharvest handling and smoking could be done in communities - as long as quality standards were maintained.
Mullet could be farmed under grow-out conditions as well. However there are known problems to mullet farming (such as slow growth rate). There appears to be a lack of knowledge of mullet abundance, distribution, seasonality and fishery in Vanuatu (the consultant was told mullet are very abundant in southern Santo).
B. Diversification of fisheries products.
Ni-Vanuatu harvest a limited number of inshore marine resources compared to many other western Pacific peoples. For example, seaweeds, sea urchins, sea cucumbers, jellyfish and sea-anemones are eaten in Fiji and Tonga but are not eaten in Vanuatu [Mote Lava people eat some sea cucumbers]; so also are more species of sedentary molluscs. In Fiji seaweed consumption levels are so high that the sustainability of the resource is in question^7 and there is overharvesting of bivalves in northern Tongatapu (Tonga).
With appropriate guidance and post-harvest handling techniques opportunities exist for Vanuatu to export some popular seafood items (exclude the sea cucumbers) to their western Pacific neighbours. For example, seaweeds can be kept fresh for several days with careful handling and storage. Whereas airfreight rates have impeded some attempts at intra-regional trade of seafood products in the past, it should not be a deterrent once stocks of the preferred items are reduced in countries where there is demand.
All of these items inhabit the domain of the reef gleaners, the women. It is recommended that the Fisheries Training Centre employ a specialist in fish quality to research appropriate harvesting and handling techniques for seafood products destined for regional markets and to introduce the techniques to interested groups of women from islands where resources and transport facilities exist. The fish quality studies should be conducted in conjunction with a marketing survey of the western Pacific and surveys by the Fisheries Department research and extension sections of local resources.
New consumer products for Vanuatu and the western Pacific also can be developed at the Fisheries Training Centre - for example, smoked nawita (octopus)and smoked namarai (eel).
C. Seaweeds are an item that could bring considerable benefit to Ni-Vanuatu consumers as it is said to be a good source of iron,^8 an element important in the production of red blood cells. Nutritional anaemia is a major nutritional problem for women and children in Vanuatu (chapter 4), and hookworm, malaria insufficient dietary protein and frequent pregnancies are implicated^5. Anaemia among women affects their health status and reduces their social and economic productivity. It is possible that the consumption of seaweeds wilt alleviate anaemic symptoms in these women, so the Fisheries Department should collaborate with the Department of Health to investigate the utility of introducing seaweeds to local diets. This would be a clear example of women's fishing activities directly enhancing the health status of the nation.
Harvesting of seaweeds for sale is already being considered in the Maskelyne Islands.
D. Develop drying, salting, bottling and smoking of fish.
Preserving fish is useful when excess fish is harvested, when inclement weather or other activity prevents regular harvesting. It is also a time-saver (for later).
The usual ways of preserving fish in Vanuatu are by chilling or freezing it (where there is ice or electricity), by cooking or smoking it in breadfruit leaves or bamboo, and by frying it.
In most of Vanuatu there is no ice, yet often there is a lot of fish seasonally: mangrou and sardines, also flying fish and mullet, skipjack tuna. Presently, subsistence fish is eaten the day it is caught, cooked for eating the next day (or baked in breadfruit leaves), given away or sold in the community and then thrown away. Nowadays the abundance of mangrou fluctuates more than just with the season, as they are harvested with gillnets. This results in excess fish for some but insufficient fish for others. Commercial gillnetters sell mangrou in towns and large communities.
Apart from the desire to manage fish resources better, there are good reasons for promoting low technology fish preserving in the islands:
1. It can make use of a resource that is seasonally abundant so that fish is not wasted.
2. It enables fish to be sold in more distant areas or in areas where there is a shortage of (fish) protein (e.g. inland; urban areas).
3. It can provide a product ranging from being very low cost for low income families (such as in parts of Vila) to high cost, depending on the preserving method employed and the product preserved.
4. Having it available means that time is saved for women who have large families and protein can be included in most meals.
5. Having low cost fish protein available will enhance the well-being of low income families.
6. It doesn't require expensive equipment and is unaffected by equipment breakdown.
7. Freight rates are small because all product can be sent by inter-island vessels (i.e. doesn't require air-freight, but if it does - such as for smoked fish - the price of the product will offset the freight rates).
8. It is an ideal industry for women or communities as it can be done individually or by a group. Women in most rural areas could have the time to prepare it if they organised as a group.
9. Women and lower income people are more willing to perform the initial labourintensive task of cleaning and salting the fish - especially women who are more willing to spend their available time on small income generating activities (chapter 4). A prospective Vanuatu buyer of dried, salted sardines told the consultant that he had approached men at Malekula to supply him with product but that they'd refused, saying it was 'too much work'. Processing the fish can also be a social activity.
The sale of smoked fish was trialed in Vanuatu at least once in the recent past but the venture failed - lack of consumer acceptance (price too high for Ni-Vanuatu). However, it is the consultant's view that using or adapting a traditional method of preserving will meet with more producer and consumer acceptance. Whereas many people asked stated that Ni-Vanuatu did not dry or smoke fish, the following information came to light:
Baked fish in breadfruit leaves or bamboo. Preserving fish in breadfruit leaves is a traditional method used (or was used) in most areas visited by the consultant. The women placed fresh fish in breadfruit leaves (or bamboo plugged with breadfruit leaves) and baked it in the ground oven or on charcoals. Baked fish remained edible for 2-3 days, whence it was re-baked to keep it. By changing the leaves or the bamboo the fish could be kept for up to two weeks. Sometimes the fish bundle was stored in the ground.
Smoked fish in breadfruit leaves or bamboo. In some areas the fish is smoked above a fire. It is said to last longer than baked fish and does not need re-baking. Pentecost people interviewed reported that they used to smoke fish, and people on Laika(?) Island south-east of Epi smoke wading birds which they sell in pairs at local markets. David^9 reported that Malekula people also used to smoke fish and the consultant met lady at Serser village (Wale Island) who recalled that it used to be done.
Drying fish with salt, or just salting fish. In north Pentecost and Longana (Ambae) fish used to be salted when fresh and then dried. In south Santo and west Santo fish used to be boiled dry, then salted and stored. The west Santo people stored the salted fish in large clay pots and covered the fish with dry leaves. The fish lasted up to two years. People in Epi (?Nalema village) dry fish from a freshwater lake (maybe these are tilapia). In Uripiv Island, mangrou is sometimes stored with salt in a bucket for 2-3 days before being cooked and eaten.
When informed, some island women were extremely interested in the prospect of drying and salting fish - women in north-eastern and south-eastern Malekula and south Santo. In areas where mangrou and sardines arc seasonally abundant, where the women have large families and where women perceive that they are in need of additional income, the consultant promoted it as a means of earning small but regular income (e.g. selling to Vila), saving time in meal preparation for the family whilst e ensuring balanced diet, as well as wisely using a resource. Women in some areas (e. g. Mota Lava, north-western Ambae, west Tanna) were not interested in 'mass production' of salted fish, but contemplated the possibility of making good money from salted trochus and greensnail meat (where those resources occur - there are reported markets in Asia).
The various ways of preserving that are recommended for trial (adaptation of traditional methods, and introduction of new) are:
o salting and drying (e.g. for mangrou, sardines, picot. Mullet and flying-fish could be trialed but may be too oily; also trochus and greensnail)
o drying (e.g. for skipjack tuna - jerkey. Some communities already make jerkey from cattle; also shark fin)
o smoking (e.g. eel, mullet, flying fish, billfish, octopus)
o bottling and vacuum-sealing (method demonstrated by he Fisheries Training Centre in Santo suitable for fish pieces - most fish)
One item that will greatly improve the processing of dried fish, give a better quality product and which will save time (for women) is the use of a solar dryer. These lowcost covered driers are put on the roof of the house and the fish being dried is protected from dust, animals (pigs, chickens, dogs) and rain.
Marketing the product will again prove to be important. Whilst it cannot compete with tinned fish (which is viewed as a commodity 'other than' fish) it must be shown as at least as good as and relatively 'free'. Finally, it is advantageous that these methods should be tried (again), as Vanuatu is faced with feeding an increasing population.
E. Collection and domestic sale of rock salt (for fish processing). Large deposits of rock salt develop on several islands in Vanuatu and its collection is a traditional and present-day activity. Collection of rock salt (Tafea Province) and its sale to domestic fishing ventures.
F. Niche products.
Live stonefish command extremely high prices on Asian markets (to more than USD70/plate: 1994). The fish attract such prices because of its very white flesh and, possibly, its reputation. Live stonefish are exported from Papua New Guinea to Asia.
The consultant has no information on the marketability of stonefish fillets, yet enquiry may prove useful. There are stonefish 'in abundance' on mudflats in Vanuatu (e.g. Port Sandwhich). Impediments to exploitation (apart from marketing information) would include air freight of live product and the in-operable freezer.
Frogs legs are consumed in several countries and in recent years it has proven difficult to keep supply up to demand The people of Ambae informed the consultant that there are great numbers of frogs (not native) living around the island's lakes. Their harvest and processing (e.g. as smoked frogs legs) could be a very worthwhile industry and would be low technology.
Dried, salted sardines have been recommended as a product which is very acceptable in Asian markets. Chinese buyers in Vanuatu could act as middlemen for the product. This small industry could be developed as drying and salting techniques on local fish (point D.) are perfected. [see also appendix 4]
G. Reef management and ecotourism.
Women are efficient and adept harvesters of seafoods. Their fishing activities usually require keen eyesight and skill with the use of hands and feet. The women have an intimate knowledge and understanding of their immediate environment^10. They possess an excellent knowledge and understanding of their immediate environment reef ecology and general species biology. They understand the distribution patterns, relative abundance, catchability and biology of inshore fisheries resources. They should be consulted in matters about the use of those resources. This knowledge is also frequently overlooked by researchers^11. Women are the first in the community to identify changes in the reef or inshore habitat. Accordingly, women are the best people to enlist in programs concerned with reef management.
Ecotourism - where visitors pay to 'just look' - is an industry yet to develop in Vanuatu. Planners and operators of future ecotourism ventres would do well to engage women from certain coastal communities as guides.
H. Marketing of mud crab meat.
Mud crabs ('Caledonie crabs') are despatched to Santo and Vila markets, hotels and restaurants from places such as South West Bay and Lamap on an irregular basis. Crabs are also sold in local markets (and are harvested for subsistence).
Reportedly very abundant, their commercial exploitation has been hindered by high air freight rates and possibly maintenance of quality and seasonal abundance and irregularity of supply.
Mud crabs can be sold in two ways however: whole (preferred by the tourist market but more expensive to despatch) and meat-only. Here, the crabs are harvested then cooked (boiled, or baked in ground oven), shelled, the meat removed after cooling, then packed in plastic bags. Buyers of crab meat packs include restaurant and hotel chefs and home consumers.
This industry has advantages for women (communities) in that it can be done in the village and requires no special skills nor equipment, and the relative value of product offsets air freight charges. Its disadvantage is that the cooked meat may not keep for more than one day without refrigeration (and the Lamap ice plant is currently out of operation). Still, processing could be scheduled to co-incide with plane services. The meat could be sold direct to Natai Fish Market (freezer).
I. Marketing of whole crabs and oysters.
Mangrove crabs can remain alive for several days out of water, as can whole mangrove oysters. Southern and eastern Malekula communities occasionally send oysters by inter-island ferry to Vila (and Santo?) markets, but the consultant did not hear whether they also sent crabs. More regular supply of both items to the urban markets by boat, would benefit communities and should be encouraged. The communities need to be familiar with principles of supply and demand and keep watch over 'agent's commission'.
Land crabs inhabit dome islands of Vanuatu and are sold in strings or baskets at village markets or sent to Vila for sale^6. Their presence in markets appears to be dependent on their migration to spawn (when they are caught) and the motivation of people to catch them. Crabs sell for about 10 vatu each in times of market abundance - when a lot of vendors sell crabs at the same time. Effective marketing can yield a better return and was demonstrated by a lady the consultant met at Norsup. The lady had just purchased a string of 14 land crabs for 150 vt. She regularly buys crabs for her family of four: when she gets home she releases the crabs and puts them in a shaded enclosure with water, feeds them vegetable scraps, and uses them as she requires. The crabs stay alive indefinitely. The consultant suggests that harvesters should also practice this: by selling limited numbers of the crabs regularly and when there is not a glut on the market, they would make more money. (There
also would be less resource wastage.)
J. Fishing gear repair and construction.
There is work opportunity for a small number of women to engage in net repair and gear construction. There is at least one such business in Vila and probably another in Santo. Demand would be limited because ready-made nets are available in the larger towns and most communities have access to skilled net-menders. The high cost of new gillnets (c. 16,000 vt) may encourage business. Some women who received training in the recent Rural Women's Fishing Training Course at Santo have expressed interest in running such a business.
Women's skills could also be enlisted to make traditional traps and nets instead of synthetic ones; but social tabus may exist to prevent such enterprise in different islands.
K. Improvement of market facilities.
1. Storage; fees; ablutions.
Women vendors at the Santo and Vila markets sleep overnight on the concrete market floor. Many of the women have relatives or friends in the towns with whom they could stay, but they stay at the market otherwise they would have to pay another market fee if they left, and the problem of hiring a local transport to take their unsold produce to the overnight stop. The market floor is not the best place to sleep, especially when you have small children, are pregnant, ill or older.
The consult suggests that the market authorities be approached to see if
a) the fee could cover two days, and
b) they could construct lockers or some other storage system wherein the vendors could store unsold produce for the next day.
Some women also stated that the provision of more toilet and bathing facilities would be beneficial.
2. Coolroom
Access to a coolroom at the Santo market would be an advantage. Freshwater naura, coconut crabs, mangrou and fried fish could be sold there. It would stay in better condition for longer, so attract higher prices, hence mean that less resources would need to be harvested to attain the desired income.
The type of coolroom as at the Lautoka (Fiji) market is envisioned: tiled benches, concrete floor with drains for easy cleaning, flyscreen walls, plastic strip doors and hoses attached to taps.
The consultant suggests that an aid organisation such as the Australian or New Zealand high commissions, be approached to investigate the feasibility and construction of these facilities.
L. Shell and coconut crab sales.
Sale of shells to tourists is an established earner and, throughout the Pacific, provides a steady income^12. Selling shells is a suitable small venture for many women: the women gather tile shells while they are reef gleaning (i.e. requires no special collecting activity), processing and m maintenance are simple and the shells are nonperishable. Some women make simple necklaces and ornaments from shells. There is scope for one of the non-government organisations or churches to contract a craftsperson to teach more intricate designs and shapes. The (tourist) market exists in Vanuatu for shell products and the overseas market could be tapped with higher level product.
Collection and sale of coconut crabs is another easier activity for women. This issue is discussed by Preston^13 and is being monitored by the Department of Environment and the Fisheries Department. The consultant's only additional comment is that if supply is small and regular, Vanair may be persuaded to always provide cargo space. This cooperation would encourage resource security in that excess crabs are not destroyed.
8.2.2 Information and training
Women's earnings are modest and half of the women selling in markets earn less than 1,000 vt a week^14. Even then, they are a significant source of support for their families. The WBU^14 study showed that 89% of women's earnings are spent on basic household requirements such as food and 38% is spent on school fees and 38% on business licence fees for their businesses (marketing). A prominent local merchant of peanuts and kava in Vanuatu told the consultant that women are much better at handling money than men. When this merchant sets up a growing-selling arrangement with a community he ensures that the women take up bank accounts into which he deposits the community payments.
The spending pattern of men is usually very different to women's as they are subject to (societal) pressures of monetary distribution that women do not have^15 and are also not so responsible for providing for the family. Men spend a larger share of their income on luxury consumption items such as alcohol and cigarettes. Men are not as good as managing money as are women who generally have better concepts of budgeting (ANZDEC^15, pers. comm., Department of Industry, Trade & Commerce).
Women are good at starting 'small' in business and building up (pers. comm., WBU). They are often better negotiators than men who often listen to their opinions on community activities (e.g. Epi Island - pers. comm.)
1. Some of the main items needed are business management and marketing skills for rural women. To the WBU and to the consultant, women throughout Vanuatu expressed a lot of interest in business management and book-keeping courses. Courses for women in book-keeping, marketing skills, costing, credit, simple economics (profit and loss, supply and demand), negotiation skills, communication skills, decision making and time management should be made available to rural as well as urban women. Self-esteem (confidence) courses would be an advantage. In some of this training (such as personal development), it would be an advantage to include men.
2. An adjunct of this is the provision of a scholarship in business studies each year to a woman from a devoted fishing community each year (one community in southern Santo specifically requested this).
3. Training is required in fish quality (especially, invertebrates) and processing (smoking, drying, bottling); also product development and marketing. Training attachments - in-country - or a scholarship for institutional training in fish quality or fish farming techniques should also be offered to women from communities where such skills would be useful (e.g. Ambae, central Malekula, southern Santo).
4. The concept of small cooperatives of women partitioning tasks for the benefit the group: for example, extra childcare and cooking services done by some members to enable others to engage in commercial activity, and the money earned shared among the whole group. Some reports (e.g. pers. comm., WBU, VANGO) say that women cooperate well under informal arrangements and have strong organisational skills: they should be encouraged to participate more fully in cooperative ventures. An example of cooperative fishing is demonstrated by women villagers along the Rewa River (Fiji): the villagers divide into two groups which alternatively harvest 'kai' (shellfish) and sell it at the market. 'In this manner' (Vunisea^10: 29) 'an oversupply in markets is avoided and the women are also free to attend to other duties during their week off from fishing.'
Finally, just how much does women's fishing and understanding of inshore ecosystems contribute to national revenue, national well-being and the national information base? Apart from the agricultural surveys performed little comparative information is available, and those surveys are general, accenting commercial and artisanal fishing.
5. Surveys should be undertaken to collect data on women's fishing activities. The information from these surveys should be used to support government interest and expenditure on appropriate extension services and training programs. A 24hour recall nutrition survey performed recently by the Department of Health may give an indication of the contribution of fish to national health. A form for a small survey is provided in Appendix 3. SPC and the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR) should be approached for ideas for undertaking a more comprehensive survey. For example, one similar to that conducted by ACIAR in Fiji^16 Rawlinson et al., no date).
8.3 Summary, or "How can women be more involved in 'men's' fishing?"
For example,
o in gill netting: ® buy gear and esky ® need credit schemes
o to own a boat for droplining etc.: ® need credit scheme
(NB: social tabus may impede)
o transporting product
® learn negotiation skills
® get a driver's licence
® buy a four-wheel drive ® need credit schemes
o to manage a business ® learn business management, negotiation skills, etc.
o getting more money
- from product ® get fish quality information/skills
- from high value products
® use traps (safe gear)
® learn new harvest skills
® learn new processing skills
® fish more regularly
o making time:
® develop/use cooperative thinking (and employ assistance)
® learn time management skills.
IN ADDITION - OR ALTERNATIVELY: create different fisheries for them.
^1 UNICEF (1991). A situation analysis of children and women in Vanuatu. Vanuatu Government. 97 pp.
^2 Bowie, C. (1995). Voice blong ol woman. "The women's voice". Report of the rural women's needs assessment. Vanuatu National Council of Women. 183 pp.
^3 Liloqula, R. (1989). Paper (untitled), pp. 179-182, Workshop on Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. Fourth regional conference of Pacific women. Suva. Fiji, 17-23 September, 1988. South Pacific Commission, Noumea, New Caledonia.
^4 Fairbaim, T. (1992). Reef and lagoon tenure in the Republic of Vanuatu and prospects for mariculture development. pp. 153-168, in C. Tisdell (ed.), Giant clams in the sustainable development of the South Pacific. ACIAR Monograph no. 18.
^5 Mackenzie-Reur, V.L. (1995). Statistical profile on the situation of women in Vanuatu. ESCAP, Vila. 67 pp.
^6 Bell, L. A. J. and M. J. Amos (1994). Republic of Vanuatu fisheries resources profiles. FFA Report 93/49. Honiara. Solomon Islands: Forum Fisheries Agency.
^7 South. G.R. (1995). Edible seaweeds: an important source of food and income to indigenous Fijians. pp. 43-47, in E. Matthews (ed.), Fishing for answers. Women and fisheries in the Pacific Islands. Suva, Fiji: Women and Fisheries Network.
^8 Schoeffel, P. and S. Talagi (1989). The role of women in small-scale fisheries in the South Pacific. Report of case studies in Cook Islands, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu and Western Samoa. London: Commonwealth Secretariat, Food Production and Rural Development Division. 60 pp.
^9 David, G. (1990). Prospects as to the role of women in the valorisation of village fisheries products in Vanuatu. ORSTOM Scientific and Technical Reports. no 4-8 pp.
^10 Vunisea, A. (1996). Up against several barriers - Pacific invisibility. Samudra (International collective in support of fish workers) no. 15: 26-33.
^11 Matthews, E. (1993). Women and fishing in traditional Pacific Island cultures. pp. 29-33, in Workshop: People, society and Pacific Islands fisheries development and management. SPC, technical document 5.
^12 Tuara, P. N.(1995). The participation of women in fisheries in the South Pacific. 4 pp. Paper presented at the SPC regional workshop on the role of women in fisheries development, Iloilo City, Philippines, 17-21 July 1995.
^13 Preston, G.L. (1996). Masterplan for the sustainable management and development of Vanuatu 's inshore fisheries resources. Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations, Technical Cooperation Programme. TCP/VAN/4552, technical report no. 2. pag. var.
^14 Women's Business Unit (1995). A study of women in micro business: their resources and their needs. A study done by the Women's Business Unit of the Department of Cooperative & Rural Business Development in cooperation with Statistics Office.. Republic of Vanuatu. 46 pp plus.
^15 ANZDEC (1995) Ltd Consultants (1995). Fisheries management project feasibility study. Final report December 1995. Asian Development Bank TA no. 2258-PNG.
^16 Rawlinson, N.J.F., D.A. Milton, S.J.M. Blaber, A. Sesewa and S.P. Sharma (no date). A survey of the subsistence and artisanal fisheries in rural areas of Viti Levu, Fiji. ACIAR Monograph no. 35. 138 pp.
<section>9</section>
9. Fisheries department support for women - recommendations
9.1 Upgrade the fisheries extension service
9.2 Improve the department's administration
9.3 Extension officers attendance at courses; recruitment
9.4 Redefine the role of the Fisheries Training Centre
9.5 Employ a specialist in fisheries post-harvest technology
9.6 Enlist the short-term services of specialists in product marketing and fish farming.
9.7 Support the research section
9.8 Enhance the dissemination of fisheries information
9.9 Encourage a collaborative and integrated approach
9.10 Encourage the provision of business and personal skills for women relevant to fisheries
9.11 Investigate and support new credit scheme for women.
9. Fisheries department support for women - recommendations
9.1 Upgrade the fisheries extension service
Existing extension service.
The fisheries extension service came into being during the early 1980s as a support for the Village Fisheries Development Programme (VFDP). The objective of the service was to provide local back-up in villages to help people maintain their vessels and engines and to market fish locally or nationally by giving training. The problems encountered by the VFDP and subsequent commercial fishing venture' in Vanuatu were reviewed recently by Preston^1 and the difficulties of these ventures in relation to fisheries extension were highlighted earlier by Palfreman and Stride^2.
The 'raison d'etre' of the fisheries extension service (to develop fisheries) has not changed - although many of the fisheries have. Many boats and canoes have hand reels for drop-line fishing, gillnets and cast nets are in comparative abundance, duty-free fuel - introduced as an 'incentive' for village men to take up fishing - is still provided; and ice-plants are repaired if skills, parts and budget allows.
In the consultant's view the current fisheries extension service's operations need to be re-appraised and the service re-organised, because:
1. Fishing remains a part-time activity for most fishers. A comparative few fish regularly.
2. The small drop-line fishery resource is not being harvested efficiently, in spite of the past efforts.
3. In most villages visited at least one person has the skills to repair and join nets (and if there was no-one, a visit to a nearby village would solve the problem) and readymade nets can be bought in stores in main centres. Encouraging the unrestricted use of gillnets through making them more available (e.g. being distributed by the Fisheries Training Centre) does not encourage sustainable use of resources.
4. The criteria to qualify for access to duty-free fuel are loose and are greatly in need of tightening. Opportunities for abuse exist (and are suspected) in that catch records submitted to obtain the fuel are 'made-up' and the fuel can be used in boats transferring goods and passengers and in generators. There is no support given the fisheries extension officers from the department's database operators/analysts to assess and validate information from the fishermen (entry and analysis of returns is some years behind).
5. The cost of establishing, repairing and maintaining ice-plants is probably not offset by large regular catches of fish. There are relatively few fishers and the estimated landings and revenue from artisanal and commercial fish sales is not large^1. The subsistence fish catch is estimated to be at least four times greater than the artisanal catch (chapter 3) - yet it is not subsidised.
The fisheries extension service is said to be 're-orientating' towards reef management and development, yet does this step represent a façade for more export fisheries support? Trochus and greensnail (which represented the bulk of income from fishery exports in 1995) and sea cucumbers (for beche-de-mer production) inhabit reef areas. Is the extension service being enlisted to support 'blind' management of these fisheries?
Where the benefits go.
The Fisheries Department's administration and understanding of fisheries extension is inappropriate for the current fisheries activites and especially for women's fishing. Few of the service's activities assist communities as a whole, let alone women fishers. The extension service's predicament is an illustration of a department lacking in sound development policies and fisheries management criteria. Instead of directing programs at increasing national revenue per se, fisheries development programs should be aimed also at increasing community, household and inshore fisheries production so that not only are more people involved in fishing but the additional fishing activities engaged in encourage the distribution of more of the fisheries revenue in the communities.
The manner of spending income earned from harvested marine resources should be considered when planning fisheries extension programs. Reported spending patterns by PNG fishermen were found to be non-productive and may be typical of Vanuatu (and other western Pacific) fishermen. The study found that increased income from the sale of barramundi and lobster resources (PNG) hardly ever reaches the villages but is spent on alcohol, cigarettes and gambling in urban centres. 'This known pattern of spending preferences between women (who spend carefully - see chapter 8) and men... should provide planners with food for thought. If planners want the benefits of increased production to reach women and children as the most vulnerable group, ways must be found to ensure that women are direct beneficiaries of any expansion of opportunities in the fishing sector.' (ANZDEC^3: p.8, Appendix 3).
In concert with other western Pacific nations, the Vanuatu Government policy planners targeted export and higher value fisheries as recipients of public spending. Is there any information on how much revenue from these highly subsidised fisheries came back to the communities, or to the Government? A cost-benefit analysis is likely to have shown that a greater benefit to the nation would have come from putting equal or greater emphasis on encouraging the use of inshore and freshwater resources. These are in reach of most communities and do not require expenditure on larger vessels (and their fuel), are often low-technology, enhance the nutrition, employment and income of a large geographic range of communities, and may alleviate the dependence on imported fish.
Co-management and communities.
Another reason for a major change in the operation of the fisheries extension service is the department's advocacy for co-management in Vanuatu. This system incorporates customary marine tenure traditions and scientific advice. The department's research section has made sign ficant progress in this area to the extent that it requires the support of a trained extension service to both coordinate village-based data collection and give advice to the research section on village fishing situations. For the purposes of co-management, new skills and knowledge are required. Information on village marine management strategies and on practical local knowledge concerning resources must be obtained (current British O.D.A. project) and complementary biological knowledge and education on resource management needs to be provided^4. According to Johannes (1994) an appropriate extension program not only transfer technology and explains conservation to villagers, it is also concerned with
explaining fisher's customs and knowledge to government. In other words, there is a three-way link: fisheries « extension « research.
Women are part of communities. Their views and desires should be incorporate i into the planning and decision-making process, and because inshore fisheries management directly impacts much of their fishing they should be consulted.
Summary and new direction.
It is essential that the fisheries extension service rethinks its mission and aims to support women's and community (including co-management) fishing activities. These initiatives will increase income from fisheries throughout the country and also support conservation measures. Very few of the department's current and proposed activities will eventuate without the support of a re-modelled fisheries extension service' nor will the service be delivering support normally expected of fisheries extension.
The fisheries extension service should:
1. providing training and support for identified community projects:
Includes identified training and follow-up visits. Training would be at the Fisheries Training Centre or 'on-site', conducted by a small team of fisheries extension officers, depending on the project. Extension officers would also provide advice on projects to the managers of small-loans schemes.
Follow up the 1996 Rural Women's Fisheries Training course, yet offer appropriate training and ensure selection of candidates is done in consultation with fisheries extension officers.
Courses involving rural women should be run as often as practicable, in the villages: do not expect village women to travel to main centres.
2. encouraging resource sustainability through awareness instruction:
Environmental awareness education should be provided to communities. Actively campaign against the use of traditional fish poisons to harvest fish. ("When you want a breadfruit you don't chop down the tree; so don't kill the whole reef to catch fish for dinner" slogan: American Samoan Government). This work should be done in conjunction with the department's co-management initiatives.
Work with the research section and Department of Environment.
3. managing fishing effort in inshore waters:
Regulate the mesh-size, length and hanging ratio of nets used as gillnets, ring nets and seine nets.
Traditional fishing gear - record how to make it and use it; use trials (with village elders). This project would support the department's co-management initiatives.
4. demonstrating improvements in post-harvest handling and development of new products:
dried fish; salt fish; smoked eels and octopus; jerkey; bottled fish...
5. supporting the development of new fishery ventures:
Enhance opportunities for fish supply to key provincial markets or distribution centres - especially where population densities are high and fishing activity is low: e.g. for Tanna (fish from Futuna, Aniwa) and north Pentecost (fish from the south of the island). This activity could be supported by the Department of Health (to advise of areas most in need of fish nutrition?) and Department of Cooperative & Rural Business Deelopment to investigate relative demand.
Support the FAD program to enhance capture of inshore pelagics in certain areas: Tanna west coast;?the harbour at Lolowai, Ambae; off Efate..
6. providing support through networking:
Collate information on all fisheries businesses in Vanuatu, irrespective of size and initiating organisation. Extension officers should involve themselves (as dispassionate advisors) with the running of all of these businesses. Visit all areas of Vanuatu to assess needs and learn about existing fishing activities.
Encourage localised, low effort, fishing enterprises.
Have available fish marketing information, including prices of exported commodities - such as shark fin and beche-de-mer. Support management activities on beche-de-mer harvesting and processing (e.g. monitor and record buyers, traders and quantities of beche-de-mer - an essential task).
9.2 Improve the department's administration
There are serious flaws in the department's internal administration and communication which directly impede the nation's fisheries management and development and will impact on development of an improved role for women in the fisheries sector. Specific examples are in:
1) Direction. The department has no mission statement, set of objectives, nor policy on fisheries. Deadlines are not set no duties clearly identified. An example of this is the lack of up-to-date statistics on any fishery including urban and rural market sales.
2) Communication. There are no regular-staff meetings, formal and informal intersection discussions, such that decisions (e.g. to travel, to attend meetings) are made ad hoc and there is no reporting of meeting outcomes. Better human resource management skills (e.g. negotiation and communication skills, team building, conflict resolution) would assist the extension section at least to achieve good interactions with the public.
3) Project management (e.g. timelines, milestones, delegation, responsibility). Extension staff had had no guidance on how to manage their programs and this inability has led to inefficiencies in the service. There has also been no clear mission statement for the section.
4) Working together. Sections need to be know each other's role and to establish good working relationships. For example, the research and extension sections should be working closely together and the extension service should be working closely with the Fisheries Training Centre (for example, to carry out follow-up visits after training). The recent situation where the selection of participants for the Rural Women's Fisheries Training Course was poorly coordinated and misplaced is an illustration of lack of coordination which resulted in considerable waste of resources and should never have happened.
9.3 Extension officers attendance at courses; recruitment
The knowledge many officers have (such as of gear technology motor maintenance, boat repair) is inadequate for their new role in community fisheries development. The officers are aware of this, and cited insufficient knowledge of marine biology, reef ecology and environment issues, sustainable fishing practices, fisheries economic, and fish quality as examples.
Courses suitable for the officers can be provided by the Forum Fisheries Agency incountry. External courses are also available at Nelson Polytechnic (New Zealand) and the Australian Maritime College (Tasmania). The consultant suggests that FFA be contacted on this matter.
Some (e.g. Hunting-Fishtech^5 say that female extension officers should be recruited; yet it is the consultant's view that recruitment of a female officer should be consistent with normal selection procedures, and is recommended as a long-term objective. During the time spent 'in the field' with the department's officers the consultant did not detect any gender bias from them, and women interviewed generally seemed at ease in answering questions - except when any of the village men were present. Then there were real problems, the women being reticent to answer most questions and their menfolk answering in their stead. Accordingly, fisheries extension officers should be made aware of women's issues in fisheries (gender issues training) and ensure they meet only with women in the villages or in some other 'neutral' manner.
9.4 Redefine the role of the Fisheries Training Centre
The role of the Fisheries Training Centre should be re-modelled so that it:
o continues to provide a back-up service (only) to offshore and artisanal fishers;
o investigates and develops appropriate technologies for village post-harvest handling and product development;
o investigates ways of reducing fishing effort through the use of traditional fishing gears (this work would support the current inshore fisheries comanagement project being undertaken in Malampa and Shefa provinces), and
o develops appropriate low technology freshwater fish farming methods.
9.5 Employ a specialist in fisheries post-harvest technology
A post-harvest specialist should be based at the Fisheries Training Centre and his/her tasks should include:
o researching traditional preserving techniques and improving on them (if necessary)
o trialing the different preserving techniques with different products
o running pilot training programs in fish preserving for selected women (identified by the extension officers)
o running workshops on fish preserving in rural communities (i.e. 'on-site')
o developing processing techniques for 'niche' products (smoked nawita, smoked eel, frogs)
o identifying ways to keep freshwater naura and lobsters in good condition after harvesting
o developing economic and appropriate packaging for fish products (for transport)
o developing educational material on fish quality for inland communities (i.e. to protect them against vendors of low quality fish)
o offer training to women in fish quality, paying particular attention to the transportation of product. The training should concentrate on shellfish (including lobsters), sardines, picot, mangrou, freshwater prawns, lobsters and eels.
o develop a solar dryer and trial it with different products and different weather conditions
o prepare information on shark fin removal and drying and demonstrate it
o identify attachment or training opportunities for Ni-Vanuatu women in product handling.
9.6 Enlist the short-term services of specialists in product marketing and fish farming.
A lack of adequate marketing infrastructure and transport of island-produced goods appears to be a serious problem. It hinders the extra-marketing of any items, let alone fish.
The marketing specialist should
o identify markets for products
o trace the different marketing chains in Vanuatu and identify where improvements in turn-over and transportation can be made
o negotiate with air and sea freight services for better arrangements for product handling and transport. Work with the air service to educate villagers on appropriate packaging for air freight of sea products
o consider women's situations and advise on siting of markets and improvements in marketing and product transportation relevant to women
o arrange for attachment training in marketing for an officer
o educating families/wantoks about what is a fair commission for handling and receiving.
The fish farming specialist should
o advise on appropriate ways to farm freshwater naura, eels and mullet (and any other suitable product)
o arrange for attachment training in fish farming for an officer.
9.7 Support the research section
Surveys Undertake surveys of freshwaters and reef areas. Define areas of species occurrence and, if possible, suggest resource size (relevant to community fisheries). The department could offer support to ORSTOM which is preparing an atlas of Vanuatu fish resources. There is an inherent problem in suggesting the development of a fishery (e.g. eel or mullet grow-out farming, mangrove crab abundance) if there is no information on the resource.
Ouantify subsistence and artisanal fishing
Work with the Statistics Office in preparing relevant questions for the national census. Perform village surveys in selected areas including household consumption studies performed in coastal rural, inland rural and urban centres. Collaborate with the Department of Health.
Collect artisanal fisheries landing information.
Monitor ciguatera
Record v hich reef fishes are inclined to be ciguatoxic, monitor the prevalence of ciguatoxic fish and determine whether it is matched to species, size of fish, season and region. Provide information to the public (information unit). Seek out information on local knowledge about ciguatera - including traditional cures (said to exist in some islands: Akimichi^6 and general comments).
Studies
Determine the distribution and seasonality of freshwater eels. Perform similar studies on freshwater prawns, including their life cycle in different islands.
In the resource sense, it is important to be aware that subsistence fishing is also exploitation and can have significant harmful effects. Studies should also consider the effects women's fishing and gleaning have on inshore stocks, including juvenile fishes.
9.8 Enhance the dissemination of fisheries information
The work of the information section should be expanded so that its tasks include:
o making representation to the Curriculum Studies Section of the Education Department to develop more emphasis on marine studies in secondary school curricula;
o each year (through provincial fisheries extension officers) visiting the junior and secondary schools to inform final year students of career possibilities in fisheries.
More women could be encouraged to enter the fisheries profession (e.g. as extension officers).
o developing environmental awareness information. This work should be done in collaboration with the Department of Environment. Environmental issues (such as over-harvesting and wasteful capture methods) should be pointed out to communities. Although women are criticised for using destructive fishing methods such as poisons and iron bars in their harvesting, these issues may be ignored in education programs on sustainable fishing practices.
o developing an arrangement with the public media whereby women's fishing activities are highlighted.
9.9 Encourage a collaborative and integrated approach
Encourage a collaborative and integrated approach to support women's involvement in fisheries. Working together saves resources and encourages best outcomes. National support and a national policy should come from discussion between ALL parties, and the Fisheries Department should take the initiative in orchestrating it. Working and consulting with the departments of Environment, Cooperative & Rural Business Development and Agriculture & Livestock are particularly relevant, and should be both informal and formal (e.g. bi-monthly meetings).
Several recent authors^7,8 pointed out that the actions concerning women's development have suffered and still do, from a 'lack of capacity in long term development plans and formulation of policy' and that more manpower and technical assistance are needed to the existing organisations They state that groups already working on women's issues should work together to 'formulate policies and plans and implement, monitor and evaluate strategies and work programs for women.'
9.10 Encourage the provision of business and personal skills for women relevant to fisheries
Knowledge of marketing and business are skills many women lack. Training is needed in marketing strategies and income control, book-keeping skills, simple economics (e.g. supply-and-demand) and accounting. Depending on the situation and the type of training being offered, the most efficient use of money is for the trainer to go to the communities. Such training reaches many people, is much cheaper (e.g. one fare) and is done in 'real' situations.
The Vanuatu Credit Union League, the Department of Rural Business & Cooperatives and the Department of Industry offer courses in business management and associated skills, and these courses can and sometimes do, have women participants. The Fisheries Department should advocate strongly with NGOs and government departments for there to be extra attention paid to women in these areas. The department should encourage a more applied and relevant approach by the NIXON especially. There is no justification for a split in programs such that only 'home care' and traditional female role courses are offered to rural women. Business opportunities and money management advice must be offered to all women in Vanuatu and not just to those with a higher education or who live in areas already accessible to the market place. Training programs should be developed specifically for women in ALL situations, be responsive to training requests from women (even after guidance).
Personal development opportunities should also be made available to women to augment their business skills. Being better or more effective at communication and negotiation, able to manage conflicts, and more confident are abilities sorely needed by many Ni-Vanuatu women wishing to enter or remain in commercial activities dominated by men.
Cooperative activity itself is an effective way whereby women can handle extra work loads (e.g. processing of mangrou) and carrying out fisheries businesses. The Fisheries Department should work with the Department of Cooperative & Rural Business Development on developing fisheries business activities.
Cooperatives have an important role in the economy of Vanuatu^9, and they are potentially useful in promoting community projects. Most of the c. 150 cooperatives are in the outer islands, and they are involved in retailing and trading. The consultant encountered a strong cooperative in northern Ambae, where garden produce, fish, copra and retail items were marketed. Strong cooperatives are also in Pentecost, Ambryn and Tanna (The Department of Cooperative & Rural Business Development acts as an advisory service to the cooperatives. Some cooperatives have accumulated substantial funds and are well-organised^9. Fishers in Sanma and Malampa provinces are presently forming a cooperative.
Women participation in cooperatives is lower than males, but women are the main users of the cooperatives^8. They are also better managers and secretaries and are more committed to the running of the cooperatives than are their male counterparts. However, only 7% of the 135 cooperatives (in 1993) were managed by women (43% of membership was female).
9.11 Investigate and support new credit scheme for women.
Lack of having 'enough' money is one of the biggest constraints facing women who want to become more involved in commercial fishing activity.
The Department of Fisheries should urge the Department of Finance, the Development Bank, the DWA, other financing organisations and potential donors to investigate means whereby credit can be made available to women through a small-loans scheme. 'Pay later' schemes have been identified by the WBU as most appropriate for women.
The failures and successes of past schemes in Vanuatu and other Pacific Island nations should be assessed before drafting a program and seeking donors. The Vanwood program may be an appropriate one to trial as it appears that the risk of failing to pay back loans is minimal. This is a program based on small groups of women, all undertaking different businesses. Originating in India and operating in Fiji, the microcredit scheme is being considered by the DWA and the Development Bank. The concept is that five women form a group, of which two are given loans. When they have repaid their loans, the next two women receive a loan, and when those are paid off, the last woman receives a loan. Under the scheme there is no necessity for borrowers to have money in a bank, and the women receive guidance in money management as part of the loan. By all accounts this lending programme is working well in Fiji, as it is based on peer (societal) pressure. The consultant understands that money
is available for the scheme through the United Nations' Plan of Action Against Poverty.
It would be appropriate if whatever scheme is used it is managed by a neutral organisation rather than by a women's interest group - such as an accounting firm operating under strict guidelines, or the Development Bank. The scheme should be widely advertised by the Fisheries Department. The department's assistance in advising on potential of businesses and clients should be an important part of the loans scheme's structure (and again, would involve fisheries extension officers).
^1 Preston, G.L. (1996). Masterplan for the sustainable management and development of Vanuatu's inshore fisheries resources. Food and Agncultural Organisation of the United Nations, Technical Cooperation Programme. TCPNAN/4552, technical report no. 2. pag. var.
^2 Palfreman, A. and R. Stride (1996). Evaluation of fisheries extension service and training centre project in Vanuatu. Evaluation Project No. 6/ACP/VA/OOS. Mimeo., pag. var.
^3 ANZDEC (1995) Ltd Consultants (1995). Fisheries management project feasibility study. Final report, December 1995. Asian Development Bank TA no. 2258-PNG.
^4 Johannes, R.E. (1994). Co-operative fisheries management: major changes in training required for government fisheries personnel. SPC Traditional marine resource management and knowledge information bulletin, no. 4: 7-10.
^5 Hunung-Fishtech (1990). The role of women in coastal fisheries of Papua New Guinea. Report for the Commonwealth Secretariat, September 1990. Hertfordshire, U.K.
^6 Akimichi, T. (1990). Inshore fisheries and marine resource management in Vanuatu: an anthropological study. pp. 195-140, in Report on a technical and socio-economic baseline study for fisheries development in Oceania, with special reference to reef and lagoon resources and to aquaculture. Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA).
^7 Bowie, C. (1995). Voice blong ol woman. "The women 's voice ". Report of the rural women's needs assessment. Vanuatu National Council of Women. 183 pp.
^8 Mackenzie-Reur V L. (1995). Statistical profile on the situation of women in Vanuatu. ESCAP. Vila. 67 pp.
^9 Fairbaim, T. (1992). Reef and lagoon tenure in the Republic of Vanuatu and prospects for mariculture development. pp. 153-168, in C. Tisdell (ed.), Giant clams in the sustainable development of the South Pacific. ACIAR Monograph no. 18.
<title>Vanuatu - Technical Report: An assessment of the role of women in fisheries in Vanuatu</title>
10. References
10. References
Akimichi, T. (1990). Inshore fisheries and marine resource management in Vanuatu: an anthropological study. p p. 195- 140, in Report on a technical and socio-economic baseline study for fisheries development in Oceania, with special reference to reef and lagoon resources and aquaculture. Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)
Amos, M. (1993). Traditionally based marine management systems in Vanuatu. SPC Traditional Marine Resources Management and Knowledge Information Bulletin, no 2: 14-17.
ANZDEC (1995) Ltd Consultants (1995). Fisheries management project feasibility study. Final report, December 1995. Asian Development Bank TA no. 2258-PNG.
Bell, L. A. J. and M. J. Amos (1994). Republic of Vanuatu fisheries resources profiles. FFA Report 93/49. Honiara, Solomon Islands: Forum Fisheries Agency.
Bowie, C. (1995). Voice blong ol woman. "The women 's voice ". Report of the rural women 's needs assessment. Vanuatu National Council of Women. 183 pp.
C.I.D.A. (1993). Women and fisheries development. Quebec, Canada: Canadian International Development Agency. 12 pp.
Dalzell, P., T. Adams and N. Polunin (1995). Coastal fisheries of the South Pacific. Paper presented at the joint FFA/SPA Workshop on the Management of South Pacific Inshore Fisheries, SPC, Noumea, New Caledonia, 26 June-7 July 1995.
David, G. (1990). Prospects as to the role of women in the valorisation of village fisheries products in Vanuatu. ORSTOM Scientific and Technical Reports, no. 4. 8 pp.
Done, T.J. and K.F. Navin (1990). Vanuatu marine resources: report of a biological survey. A project of the Australian International Development and Assistance Bureau. A.1.M.S., Townsville. 272 pp.
Fairbairn, T. (1992). Reef and lagoon tenure in the Republic of Vanuatu and prospects for mariculture development. pp. 153-168, in C. Tisdell (ed.), Giant clams in the sustainable development of the South Pacific. ACIAR Monograph no. 18.
Gina-Whewell, L. (1992). Roviana women in traditional fishing. SPC Traditional Marine Resources Management and Knowledge Information Bulletin, no. 1: 12-13.
Hunting-Fishtech (1990). The role of women in coastal fisheries of Papua New Guinea. Report for the Commonwealth Secretariat, September 1990. Hertfordshire, U.K.
Johannes, R.E. (1994). Co-operative fisheries management: major changes in training required for government fisheries personnel. SPC Traditional marine resource management and knowledge information bulletin,. 4: 7-10.
Josephides, L. (1982). The socio-economic condition of women in some fisherfolk communities of Papua New Guinea. Report on ESCAP/FAO survey. 77 pp.
Liloqula, R. (1989). Paper (untitled), pp. 179-182, Workshop on Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. Fourth regional conference of Pacific women. Suva, Fiji, 17-23 September, 1988. South Pacific Commission, Noumea, New Caledonia
MacAlister Elliott & Partners Limited (1992). Urban fish marketing in Vanuatu. Final Report. Lymington, England, United Kingdom. 41 pp plus.
Mackenzie-Reur, V.L. (1995). Statistical profile on the situation of women in Vanuatu. ESCAP, Vila. 67 pp.
Matthews, E. (1993). Women and fishing in traditional Pacific Island cultures. pp. 29-33, in Workshop: People, society, and Pacific Islands fisheries development and management. SPC, technical document 5.
Matthews, E. (1995) (ed.). Fishing for answers. Women and fisheries in the Pacific Islands. Suva, Fiji. Women and Fisheries Network. 177 pp.
Naqasima, M. (1994). Women and Fisheries Network. SPC Traditional marine resource management and knowledge information bulletin, no. 4: 24-25.
Palfreman, A. and R. Stride (1996). Evaluation of fisheries extension service and training centre project in Vanuatu. Evaluation Project No. 6/ACP/VA/005. Mimeo., pag. var.
Preston, G.L. (1996). Masterplan for the sustainable management and development of Vanuatu's inshore fisheries resources. Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations, Technical Cooperation Programme. TCP/VAN/4552, technical report no. 2. pag. var.
Rawlinson, N.J.F., D.A. Milton, S.J.M. Blaber, A. Sesewa and S.P. Sharma (no date). A survey of the subsistence and artisanal fisheries in rural areas of Viti Levu, Fiji. ACIAR Monograph no. 35. 138 pp.
Republic of Vanuatu (undated). Third National Development Plan, 1992-1996. National Planning and Statistics Office, Office of the Prime Minister, Port Vila, Vanuatu.
Schoeffel, P. and S. Talagi (1989). The role of women in small-scale fisheries in the South Pacific. Report of case. studies in Cook Islands, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu and Western Samoa. London: Commonwealth Secretariat, Food Production and Rural Development Division. 60 pp.
South, G.R. (1995). Edible seaweeds: an important source of food and income to indigenous Fijians. pp. 43-47, in E. Matthews (ed.), Fishing for answers. Women and fisheries in the Pacific Islands. Suva, Fiji: Women and Fisheries Network.
Slatter, C. (1995). For food or foreign exchange? Subsistence fisheries and the commercial harvesting of marines resources in the Pacific. pp. 137-147, in E. Matthews (ed.), Fishing for answers. Women and fisheries in the Pacific Islands. Suva, Fiji: Women and Fisheries Network.
Statistics Office (1993). Report on the smallholder agricultural survey 1992. Department of Agriculture & Horticulture. Statistics Office, Office of the Prime Minister, Port Vila, Vanuatu.
Statistics Office (1994). Vanuatu national agriculture census 1994 [sic]: main report. Statistics Office, Office of the Prime Minister, Port Vila, Vanuatu.
Tuara, P. N. (1995). The participation of women in fisheries in the South Pacific. 4 pp Paper presented at the SPC regional workshop on the role of women in fisheries development, Iloilo City, Philippines, 17-21 July 1995.
Tuara, P. N. (1996). Women's fisheries development section: supporting women in fisheries. Paper presented at the South Pacific Commission Twenty-sixth Regional Technical Meeting on Fisheries, Noumea, New Caledonia, 5-9 August 1996. SPC/Fisheries Information Paper 11. 5 pp.
UNICEF (1991). A situation analysis of children and women in Vanuatu. Vanuatu Government. 97 pp.
Vunisea, A. (1996). Up against several barriers - Pacific invisibility. Samudra (International collective in support of fish workers) no. 15: 26-33.
Women's Business Unit (1995). A study of women in micro business: their resources and their needs. A study done by the Women's Business Unit of the Department of Cooperative & Rural Business Development in cooperation with Statistics Office. Republic of Vanuatu. 46 pp plus.
<title>Vanuatu - Technical Report: An assessment of the role of women in fisheries in Vanuatu</title>
<section>1</section>
Appendix one - Terms of reference
Appendix one - Terms of reference
The consultant will. in close collaboration with Vanuatu's Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Forestry and Fisheries abdm as appropriate. with other Government ministries and agencies, and non-government organisations:
1) with appropriate awareness paid to cross-sectorial involvement of women, review the social and economic role played by women in the fisheries sector, including activities undertaken by them in the harvesting, processing and marketing sub-sectors, outlining the relative importance of their involvement in each of the sub-sectors;
2) in the context of the fisheries community, determine whether the role of women in the fisheries sector is changing, and if so, in what directions and to what extent;
3) indicate broadly whether important regional differences exist for women in Vanuatu in each of the three sub-sectors in (1), and if so, evaluate the extent of these differences and their implications for policy;
4) assess the importance of the role played by the Government, regional organisations: such as FFA and SPC, NGOs, the churches and other national groups, in promoting or otherwise, the interests of women in the fisheries sector;
5) outline social and economic constraints facing women in Vanuatu in increasing their effective participation in harvesting, processing and marketing of fish and fishery products, taking into account, inter alia, social taboos. access to fisheries resources, access to financial resources to support small-scale activities, and opportunities for processing and marketing; and
6) propose comprehensive, realistic and consistent measures that might be adopted by Government to form the basis of an effective national policy for strengthening the participation of women in Vanuatu's fisheries sector.
<section>2</section>
Appendix two - Acknowledgements & persons consulted
Appendix two - Acknowledgements & persons consulted
1. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The director and staff of the Department of Fisheries in Vanuatu have helped me considerably in researching the aims of this study and in facilitating my domestic travel and interview opportunities. The extension staff in Malampa, Tafea, Shefa and Sanrna provinces were particularly supportive.
2. PERSONS CONSULTED
Communities
Torba Province:
Mota Lava - Ra Island,
Ngerenigman village, Var village, Kweyemangde village, Valuwa village.
Sanma Province:
Santo - Port Olry, Hog
Harbour, Nakere village,?Tanowol village.
Penama Province:
Ambae - Longana village,
Lolowai, Lovonivili village, Tavalovola village, Lolovinua village.
Malampa Province:
Malel;ula Island - Litslits
village, Uripiv Island, Sanwar village (Wala mainland). Serser village (Wala Island), Dravail village, Aulua village, Fotinweiu (Atchin mainland)
Shefa Province:
Efate Island - Lelepa landing.
Siviri village, Saama village, Takara village,?Epule village, Epao village, Forari village, Eton village, Ifira Island
Tafea Province:
Futuna Island - Ipao village,
Itaromara & Isia village
Tanna Island - Itunge village
Department of Fisheries
Dorosday Kenneth
Director
Lillian Sokomanu
Personal Assistant
Nettie Joseph
Information Technologist
Naomi Sope
Administrator/ Accountant
Peter James
Senior Extension Officer (Southern)
Glen Alo
Extension Officer, Sanma Province
Kaven Mores & Brownie Dona
Extension Officers, Malampa Province
Andrew Firiam
Extension Officer, Shefa Province
Wilson Yuri
Extension Officer, Tafea Province
Fabian Mabel
Principal Fisheries Extension Officer, Vila
William Naviti
Principal Fisheries Officer (Northem)
Henry Takau
Enforcement Officer, Vila
Moses Amos
Principal Research Officer, Vila
Robert Jimmy
Research Officer, Vila
Pakoa Kalo
Research Officer, Vila
Felix N'guyen
Research Officer, Vila
Simon Maeve
Previous manager, Fisheries Training Centre, Luganville, Santo
Joseph Ouma
Deputy manager, Fisheries Training Centre, Luganville, Santo
Wesley Obed
Surveillance Officer, Vila
Wesley Samuel
Luganville, Santo
Karie, David, Henry & John
Fisheries officers, Vila
Government departments
Ben Asmus
Department of Rural Business & Cooperatives, Lakatoro, Malekula Island
Alice Athi
Rural Water Supply Department, Vila
Ernest Bani
Director, Environment Department, Vila
Jacob Isaiah &: Paul Collins
Senior statistician and Consultant, Statistics Office. NPSO, Vila
Peter Kalmos
Department of Youth, Sport & Community Development, Luganville, Santo
Donna Kalfatak
Environment Department, Vila
Hanson Matas Kelekele
Secondary Curriculum Coordinator, Curriculum Development Centre, Department of Education, Vila
Lyn Muller & Marie Kota
Women's Business Unit, Department of Rural Business & Cooperatives, Vila
Miriam Abel & Merena Laklotal
Department of Health, Vila
Theto Nimae Moses
Dietician, Department of Health, Vila
Gaston * & Russell Nari
Environment Department, Vila
John Niroa
Headmaster, Malapoa College, Vila
George Plant & Johnson Naviti
Resource Advisors, National Planning & Statistics Office, Vila
Madlene Regenvanu
Department of Women's Affairs, Norsup, Malekula Island
John Wasi Selwyn
Principal Extension Officer, Department of Agriculture & Liveestock, Vila
Juliet Sumbe
Department of Women's Affairs Luganville, Santo
Job Talesa
First Secretary, Ministry of Justice, Culture & Women's Affairs, Vila
Japin Tari
Department of Industry, Trade & Commerce, Vila
Gloria Tarileo
Department of Women's Affairs, Isangel, Tanna Island
Roselyne Tor
Director, Department of Women's Affairs, Vila
Non-Government organisations, individuals & firms
Albert Adams
Luganville, Santo
Derek Alexander
Loans Officer, Development Bank of Vanuatu, Luganville, Santo
Jim Anderson
Marine Research & Assessment Group (MRAG), London. U.K.
Marilyne Arhnambath
Mayoress, Luganville, Santo
Simon Bea
Director, World Vision Vanuatu, Vila
Renold Boeson
Vanair Air Cargo manager, Vila
Ann Carlo
Director, Vanuatu National Council of Women, Vila
Celia, Estella & Doralyn
Seventh Day Adventist Dorcas Society, Luganville, Santo
Andrea Fella
Loans Officer, Development Bank of Vanuatu, Vila
Sue Flemming
Department of Social Anthropology, University of Manchester Manchester, U. K.
Kathy Fry
Foundation for the Peoples of the South Pacific, Vila
Augustin Garae
Director, Development Bank of Vanuatu, Vila
Roslyn Garae
Natai Fish Market, Vila
Francis Hickey
CUSO, Luganville, Santo
Caroline Kami
Buyer/middleman, Erakor Island
Kathy*
VNCW representative, Torba Province
Marian Kaun
Rural Skills Training Program, Vila
Mr Kwon
Hong Shell Products Co. (Vanuatu) Ltd., Vila
John Laan
Peace Corps, Vila
Moira Bloom & Anne-Marie Lalonde
Vanuatu Association of Non-government Organisations (VANGO), Vila
Michel Lardy,
Director, ORSTOM, Vila
Lidia Lee
Santo Fish Market, Luganville. Santo
Rolenas Lolo
ex-Director, Vanuatu National Council of Women, Vila
Charles Long Wah
Kava Store, Vila
Faye Lowe
Save the Children Fund Australia, Vila
Charles Maon
Anglican Church, Luganville, Santo
Rod Menere
Director, Save the Children Fund Australia, Vila
Jocelyn Mete
British High Commission' Vila
Helen Michael
Vanuatu Rural Development Training Centres Association, Vila
Agnes * & Jean Mitchell
CUSO (Canadian University Students' Organisation), Vila
Augustin & Anne Pheu
Owners/managers, La Touque a Poisson, Vila
Garry Preston
Fisheries consultant, Noumea, New Caledonia
Mark Ramsden
New Zealand High Commission, Vila
Ralph Regenvanu
Director, Vanuatu Cultural Centre, Vila
Mark Robertson & Marian*
ANZ Bank (Vanuatu) Limited, Vila
Marie Sadlam
Vila Toun Council of Women, Vila
Lai Sakita
National Community Development Trust, Vila
Noa Saksak
Vanuatu Credit Union, Vila
Idau Nafuki, Leisale Mangawai, Mary Luan, Anna Samson
Presbyterian Women Member's Union, Vila
Margaret Sarki
Church of Christ office, Luganville, Santo
Toulel Sope
Foundation for the Peoples of the South Pacific, Isangel, Tanna Island
Neil Stevens
Director, Vanuatu Association of Nongovernment Organisations (VANGO), Vila
John Stewart
Consultant, Bay of Plenty Polytechnic, New Zealand
Amon Tavoa
Senior Loans Officer, National Bank of Vanuatu, Vila
Melinda Tsuchiya
Economic & Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, United Nations, Vila
Patricia Tuara
South Pacif c Commission, Noumea, New Caledonia
Annie Walter
ORSTOM, Vila
Victoria Hillman & Bronwyn Wood
Australian High Commission, Vila
<section>3</section>
Appendix three - Draft questionnaire on fish consumption, Vanuatu
Appendix three - Draft questionnaire on fish consumption, Vanuatu
1. Have you eaten fish or shellfish this (seven day) week?
2. How many times?
3. Did you eat
tinned fish (no. of times)
big short thin
poulet fish or tuna (no. of times) (drop-lined or trolled fish)
reef fish or laplap fish (no. of times)
shellfish, octopus, clams etc. (no. of times)
4. Did you (or your father/mother/family)
buy the fish
or
catch/gather the fish
5. If you (they) bought the fish, did you buy
from a shop
at a market
from a fisherman
6. If you (they) bought the fish, how much did you pay?
per kg (fish)
per piece
per basket/item
per tin: big
small
thin
7. How many people in your household (eat together)?
8. When your household has a meal including fish, does everyone eat it? (if no, who doesn't: child, man, woman?)
9. How many people in your household get paid for their work? (have regular. paid work or sell produce on a regular basis)
10. Where do you live?
11. Are you Ni-Vanuatu or other Pacific Islander (what)
12. To women who fish and/or gather shellfish and octopus:
What is the age range of your children/ how old are they now?
Appendix four - Small grants scheme draft application - salt fish
1. Project name:
Salt fish. Vanuatu
2. Managers:
Fisheries Training Centre. Santo and?
3. Location:
Aneityum. Tanna. Malekula and Santo islands, Vanuatu
Beneficiaries: rural communities, women, low income households (urban and rural), national export income
4. Description:
Production of dried, salted fish for local and export consumption.
A suite of nearshore pelagic fishes, commonly termed 'mangrou', are seasonally abundant in Vanuatu from about late January to the end of August (depending on the island group). The fish are targeted by communities mainly with seine and cast nets and are consumed in villages and sold in local markets. The fish include sardines (Clupeidae), small carangids (e.g. Selar, Decapterus) and mackerel (e.g. Rastrelliger). In some western Pacific countries the resource is used locally for longline bait, bait for sports fishing or for pole-and-line fishing, but there does not appear to be sufficient demand from these in Vanuatu.
Several factors mean that there is considerable wastage of the resource. It cannot be kept more than a day where there is no ice nor refrigeration - i.e. in most areas. It occurs in such abundance that each well-directed net sweep catches many fish (surplus to home requirements). Its local abundance means that surplus fish offered for sale attracts low prices or cannot be sold. Ni-Vanuatu have no traditional means of keeping the fish and generally are untrained in appropriate postharvest handling.
Simple salting and drying of fish is performed in some tropical countries, but frequently the success of the drying and the time it takes is affected by rain; and under those circumstances driers fanned by hot air or fires are used and these are generally larger constructions (as for beche-de-mer drying). A simple method of solar drying has been recently identified: it uses galvanised tin, perspiglass and fly-wire and is placed on the roofs of houses. Because product drying in it is protected from rain, it is simple to use, is inexpensive, and offers protection from pests (screens, positioning) it is considered appropriate to drying fish fish in Vanuatu in the village or community situation. The only other 'ingredients identified for the project (apart from fish) are large contained (e.g. 44-gallon drum), a supply of salt, water, plastic sheeting and a heat sealer.
A export market for the dried product is already available and a Vanuatu businessman has already established links into that market. A new, domestic market could be established - and indeed, is desirable (point 6 below).
Salted/dried fish will last 1.5-4 years if vacuum sealed. Small mullet, mangrou, sardines are suitable. Larger fish (not fifing in jars, for example) can be sold to Vila and Santo consumers.
Rural processors can pack the finished product into plastic bags, seal them, and airfreight or sea freight) the packs to Vila where a buyer/middleman will repack and vacuum seal in presentation jars (or whatever would be appropriate).
It is suggested that 2-3 years would be required for the project to become fully operational.
Prices ranging from 400 vt-600 vt/150 g could be realised for good quality dried sardines. However, product of this quality can only be achieved by 'practising' on lower quality fish and selling it to local consumers.
Quality assurance and marketing are elements of the project that must be built in at the beginning.
5. Objectives and planned output:
This project is aimed at addressing several needs.
1. bringing income to rural areas.
2. involving women in commercial production of a fish product.
3. providing women with income from fisheries resources with moderately little extra work and expense.
4. providing an alternative, low cost fish product for domestic urban markets.
S. developing a product which is economical in freight costs. post-harvest care and has little spoilage capability.
6. utilises a resource that is seasonally abundant.
7. provides a new export to an established market (Asia).
8. introducing a new skill to coastal communities.
6 Justification and expected outputs:
This project will provide a steady income to low income families in urban Vanuatu and to rural communities through utilising an apparently abundant. seasonal resource. The fish can be processed and stored so that there is minimum of wastage and they will provide fish protein to families in urban and rural areas long after the fresh fish have disappeared.
Presently, stocks of mangrou and sardines/herrings are negatively impacted by the combination of
o - people fishing with gillnets and cast nets of small mesh size (unregulated)
o - inadequate knowledge of and facilities for good post-harvest handling, such that many caught fish have to be discarded
o - the limited buying power of communities where the fish are caught and the communities inadequate storage capabilities
o - too many people fishing
o - limited access to markets (or uneconomic)
o - lack of ice
The outputs cannot be quantified at present because there have been no studies done on stock size (anecdotal information is that it is/was substantial) and product processing/yield.
7. Project costs. inputs, local contribution and amount of funding requested
Inputs:
o training at the Fisheries Training Centre, Santo - pilot studies (different species, salting levels, access to local supplies, quality management, post harvest handling; business management)
o instruction by expert (Filipino suggested) in appropriate brining technique
o follow-up in pilot areas
o market investigation, product testing
o contruction of solar drier and instruction on use
o testing of solar drier in local conditions
o plastic sheeting and heat sealers
o provision of glass jars, preserving, export shipping
8. Assessment of project's technical feasibility, financial viability and sustainability
Technical
o Does not rely on the regular contribution from one area. as the fish are seasonal i.e. any communities can harvest
o Does not deteriorate while awaiting transport
o Does not require electricity
o Does not sustain damage in the wet season
o Is light-weight, hence freighting costs are low
o No immediacy of transporting required as properly prepared product will not deteriorate
o Identified expert is familiar with quality required for the identified market
Financial
Funds for villagers to attend Fisheries Training Centre. Suggest two from several local villages, then continuing training program
Follow-up program - trainer travelling to villages
Expert (fares, DSA,...)
Sustainable
o Presence of resource
o Presence of market and routes
o Presence and skills of middlemen in Vanuatu
o Maintenance of quality product
9. Assessment of any benefit to women
Women are the target beneficiaries of the project. Rural women will benefit from being able to earn income that does not take them away from their communities and which should not impact greatly on their busy daily schedule. Ultimately urban women from low income households would benefit from having access to a low priced protein food (as 'stretchable' as tinned fish, and flavoured). Community nutrition should improve as the new food is accepted in the community. Harvesting of alternative and traditionally targeted inshore fish resources - especially near urban areas - should be relieved. Finally, the national economy should benefit from a reduction in the amount of imported tinned fish.
10. Implementation schedule
The mangrou season begins early each year - January-February.
Work needed:
o resource assessment - species composition, occurrence, seasonality. sustainable yield (susceptibility to toxicity). Fisheries Department.
o development and manufacture of solar drier
o development of suitable brining technique. Fisheries Training Centre +?Filipino expert +? (businessman)
o identification of market
o development of quality standards
o preparation of extension information on drying and utilising (eating: recipes)
<section>4</section>
Appendix five - Notes from the villages
Appendix five - Notes from the villages
Relevant records of discussions with women in villages visited by the consultant are given here as well as verbal information from numerous informants.
TORBA
Torres Islands
Hiu, Tegua. Lob & Linua, Toga:
Coconut crabs and lobster fishing.
Fisheries officers reported from a recent visit that one small island in the group is being managed as a coconut crab reserve by the sole resident. The officers also reported that the community was very interested in their presentations.
Anglaise (fish) never has ciguatera here.
Banks Islands
Mota Lava:
* Flying fish caught dry season by men and women: use a line from a canoe - like trolling; done in daytime. No memory of custom use of nets and fire on canoe stern
* Use goggles (men and women), handlines (women); bamboo rods (men and women); bow and arrow, spear (men only); short fishing spears (women)
* Diving (speargun, underwater torch) for lobsters and reef walking (men). No lobster pots (?custom memory of pots; one person said they did but may have been from another island, as other people always said no). Are paid 600 vt/kg clear by their friends in Vila and Santo after the Banks people pay the airfreight (150/kg) ® profit of 450 vt/kg.
* Gillnets used in several in villages. The three measured were 2" stretched mesh. Said to have 2 cm mesh ones also - both gillnets and as cast ('parachute') nets. Scoop net in Valuwa village (near airport).
* Do have customary ownership but until recently no tabus been put. Short (3 month) tabu on a one kilometre reef section (opened when we were there)
* Sell trochus when buyer comes.
* No green snail.
* Have sold beche-de-mer: two buyers. Sell either fresh of dry (max. 400 vt/kg). Ra Island women reported the price is 600 vt/kg for fresh sandfish. 800 vt for dried.
* Fish drive (coconut sweep net) during change of tide; for celebrations or special occasions, e.g. for St Bartholomew's day. Whole community engaged; beat water.
* No (few) pearl oysters
* Have natalai (at least two kinds) - no buyers. Said they do/did make clam gardens (Ra Island)
* Only one kind of mangrou - season from about July. Size described would be either Selar or Decapterus. Short season, but in some years it is longer (no length stated).
* Have sardines.
* Three poisons used - narvel, a bush wood and leaves, and roots and stems of another.
* Custom use of stone weirs.
* No tabus specific to women, except that only men go in boats beyond the reefs (would troll) (women don't prefer to)
* Have rock salt (Ra Island)
* Eat some species of sea cucumber (cooked) - couldn't say which (Var village)
* Churches on the island: Anglican, Assemblies of God, SDA and Renewal
* First time I have observed bottle-feeding babies.
Santa Maria (Gaua):
* Freshwater prawns (man has a business there - grow-out)
* Custom and current use of double freshwater prawn traps; also divert streams to catch
* Crater lake is the largest freshwater lake in the western Pacific outside of PNG. Eels and freshwater prawns in the lake.
Mere Lava:
* Lobster fishing using chiton as bait and a coconut mid-rib line
* Women here also fish with arm extensions of coconut leaves (to keep them afloat)
* Women (and men) use goggles and handlines.
* Women and men go in canoes to fish
* Women fish a lot - 'every day'
Mota:
No information.
Vanua Lava (Sola);
* Stone weirs (custom) still in use.
* The double freshwater prawn trap is also used here (still)
Reef Islands:
The only atolls in Vanuatu. Said to have abundant fish. Also said that many of the fish there have ciguatera.
Ureparapara
No information
SANMA
Espiritu Santo
Freshwater prawns, southern Santo: catch prawns with hook on a line, or by hand. As fishing, put the prawns in a woven basket hanging from person's neck. If keep the catch cool and wet (with leaves) the prawns survive 9-10 hours after being caught enough time to walk out of the bush to pick-up point where have esky and ice ® market. Price to the fisher has risen ® now gets 450-650 vt/kg in Luganville. If no seasonal tabu stock always wiped out. Now some chiefs put a 2-3 year tabu on freshwater naura and this led to better harvest. The Land Use Program in Santo monitors prawn resources.
Buyers of freshwater prawns in Luganville: if from market product has always been speared; wrapped in laplap leaves; sells for 400-450vt/kg. Quality not good - must cook same day. One restaurant gets from the Maewo farmer (irregular - Maewo relative brings). Hotel Santo gets from market or direct from fishermen in southern Santo. Fishermen walk down, then put prawns in eskies at places where the road ends, and deliver. Hotel pays 650 vt/kg.
Three buyers of beche-de-mer in Santo.
Port Olry.
* Very big village. Men do most fishing; women spend most time in garden. Port Olry a large embayment with outer islands - almost a surf on the beach, and rolling waves further out on the reef. Seagrass, two dugongs (reported).
* Beche-de-mer (men only) and process; buyer comes
* Men only gather lobster, greensnail and trochus
* Natalia: two kinds - the ones that stand alone on the sand (are small now -?over harvested) and those in the rocks.
* Women and men gather octopus.
* Only one kind of mangrou - comes from about '`the Day of Pentecost" to into December. Also sardines and picot.
* Men have gillnets - many canoes each with at least one gillnet. 1/2" to 3 " (they said - the ones I looked at are 2"); use nets to encircle mangrou - daytime. Sell mangrou in village (5 fish/string = 100 vt) and sell in Santo. Buy ice (esky) from FTC, truck it back to Port Olry, then truck mangrou back. Travel to Santo is about 200 vt/person/truck. There are people in village who can make, and mend, nets (men and women). A new gillnet costs c. 18,000 vt.
* Drying fish: use the fresh fish in breadfruit leaves method.
* Turtles come ashore (probably green turtles) and the people harvest them and their eggs.
* No? tabus. Say there is CMT (are inland people originally).
* Women generally don't own fishing nets and aren't allowed to use their husband's. Women use handlines and also bamboo rods - both are rather new things.
* Women fish probably less than twice a week. Too busy in garden [and also the reef is offshore - not that easy. Would probably only go when there is a very low tide.]
* To make extra money, women sell fish (that their husbands caught), laplap, cooked food and vegetables. Don't do weaving [another indication that they are inlanders - no pandanus, native hibiscus]
* Some women have businesses: sew clothes, cook (cakes); some pick and dry cocoa. Price of transport to town is 5000 vt return for a vehicle ® group hires together.
* If want to start a business or need extra money. women don't borrou: save up; otherwise their menfolk give them some. Didn' t know if their husbands had loans.
* Women seemed ignorant of profit and loss. supply and demand. Their husbands determine price of items for sale.
* Training given: soap and water tanks (DWA), sewing. There is a VNCW rep. There, (attended the FTC women's course): not at meeting; was appointed from Vila office. Never gives training classes. Some women asked if the FD would give them a net - as have no access otherwise.
* Village appears to have several sources of income: beef, copra and cocoa, mangrou...
* Ciguatera fish: say the red and the black loche are poisonous.
* Tinned fish in local co-opt stores (there are two in the village) is 160-170 vt (big tins).
* A large Catholic mission. All are Catholics; Frenchspeaking.
Hog Harbour.
* Women harvest the green snail dive.
* Not much trochus.
* All are Presbyterian.
* Otherwise, fairly similar to Port Olry
Nakere village south Santo.
* People originally from Tangoa Island, moved to mainland because of population pressure and also land vacant after blackbirding and plantation; 40-50 houses.
* All are Presbyterian
* Men do droplining and netting.
* Used to be trochus but were harvested in late 1970s and not returned(!); few greensnail. Have beche-de-mer and did some processing, but is hard work so have discontinued. Prices offered by Chinese buyer varied from 500 vt/kg (dried) for sandfish - which they don't have - to c. 300 vt/kg for curryfish and greenfish.
* Mangrou - same as for Port Olry fishers (ice from FTC). If sell at Santo fish market get 200-250vt/kg, if at Chinese stores get 300vt/kg. Two kinds of mangrou - 'scaled', with yellow mark (?Selar) and 'unscaled' with thin tail (?Decapterus). Not sure of season.
* Women use handline, go in canoes to fish. No netting (as don't own, not enough time). Also fish in fresh water.
* No CMT (they say) but the whole community put a tabu in July 1996 for one year: will open for one day on family day (26th December) for a small catch, then re close. Tabu is for everything but people may fish from offshore islands (same community as Tangoa people).
* Have palolo worm in September. Whole community collects with mosquito nets and coconut brooms.
* Two species of turtles - used to harvest + eggs, but now follow Fisheries Department advice and don't.
* Octopus - 'seasonal' (lunar cycle).
* Lots of mud crabs (in the big rivers only).
* Ciguatera: in 'Anglaise' and a black Anglaise; sometimes in karong and red loche.
* Get freshwater eels and prawns in rivers. Spear/bonaro the prawns.
* Earn extra money from selling vegetables and copra cutting/drying.
* Training: have a VNCW rep at Tangoa - elected - gets training but never visits to give training. Instead get training from DWA: cooking and sewing.
* Dry fish in glass jars.?Say they put fish with salt and keep in glass jar - dries. Stays OK for 1-2 years. Previously used bamboo. Perhaps they boil the fish first and then do this?.
* Say they make dried beef- cut in strips and put with salt in layers (must have been shown). Don't do the fish the same way as that.
* Salt for drying is store-bought, but before they used rock salt.
Tanowol village.
* Inland people who came to the coast - land vacant after traders etc.
* Four religions: Holiness. Presbyterian. Pentecost and Jehovah's Witness.
* Woman handline and collect from rivers and reef. Could go netting but not bothered: can go in canoes.
* Rivers with black loche blong freswara' (not tilapia). plenty of mullet. namarai and naura. Lots of mullet in west. south-west and south Santo rivers.
* No tabus in place. but CMT exists
* Have sold beche-de-mer to Chinese buyer - once?
* Have mangrou.
* Fish preserving: do/are familiar with breadfruit leaf method. A lady there told us how west coast women dry fish (she's from west coast): slowly boil fish first in very little water, then layer with salt; put fish in earthen pot ('sospen blong gratin') and put special leaves on the top. Keeps for 2 years at least.
* Asked for support from Fisheries Department to have business training for one of their young women.
* First time someone's come to visit them from a government department: otherwise information sent from town for them to attend courses etc.
Surunda (south-east):
A fish fence - been broken because built it without permission. Builder from Pango on Efate (Samoan influence).
Malo & Aore
Did not visit. No information
PENAMA
Ambae
Ambae people used to salt fish (custom).
Dry in the south-west (Walaha) and water sometimes runs out in dry season. Manaro Lake (crater lake) is freshwater but not utilised. No fish, prawns nor eels there. Eels and prawns said to be in the south-western streams. High population on west and north coasts.
Longana.
* People use gillnets (including bush material ones) as ring nets; also cast nets.
* Women use bamboo fishing rods (and handlines). Women may go in canoes to reef edge but don't. Women also dive for trochus, greensnail and giant clam (i.e. are good divers).
* Income: beef and pigs; also a pi-Vanuatu owns a copra plantation and employs most of the villagers ® don't go fishing now.
* Mangrou: not here, but present in the northwest and south.
* Trochus, greensnail and octopus - caught with sharp stick or knife. Local buyer for trochus and greensnail - people bring them to him occasionally and when he gets a lot he sends them off. Trochus and greensnail not very abundant.
* Lobsters - few; only men dive (speargun) or collect on reef.
* Few turtles.
* Lots of beche-de-mer but don't collect No buyer.
* Rock salt can be collected after rough seas.
* No-one has boats moored there (east coast) but there is facility for mooring boats in harbour in north (Lolowai).
* Used to be a fish market.
* Are two outboard engine owners on east coast.
* Representatives of VNCW and DWA used to come - not now.
Lolowai.
* Use handlines (women). One Mere Lava lady has a canoe - fishes every day.
* Mullet, one species of mangrou; shark (hook and line)
* Two men have 2-3" gillnets
* People here can make and repair nets
* WBU officer came. Would like more information on business management, income and expense calculating
* Anglican = only religion
* Get ciguatera fish: loche, large karong, Anglaise. Redmouth never poisonous.
* Had FAD in the harbour but was lost.
* Would like training on fish drying, processing, quality; also business
Lovunivili.
* Inland village on north-east. A few active women leaders, one being the area women's representative (?for VNCW)
* Eat fish for protein, but no harvesting from streams.
* Have access to the sea and sometimes go there and gather shells, handline. CMT and a tabu in place on one section of reef.
* Also buy tinned fish, and before freezer broke down (Lolowai) purchased fish - buyer would come to village and sell.
* A cooperative market near the village where goods are exchanged and sold each Tuesday: vegetables from Lovunivili and fish from Lolowai.
* Landcrabs: five kinds in Ambae = possible income generator.
* Frogs (smoked): very many non-native frogs around the crater lakes: could be smoked and sold (Ambae people don't eat frogs)
* Coconut crabs in south and south-west of island: could have as a reserve 'breeding stock' for Torba Province.
* Training: interested in business awareness. Two people from WBU? came in 1996.
* Would like to eat more fish, but hard to get from the coast (no freezer; little time for fishing; men don't seem to go). Interested to get fish by exchange or as regular trade item.
* Fish quality an issue (from vendors: low quality ice, time out of water)
Tavolavola.
* Village on north-west coast, no beach - cliffs, but reef platforms. Deepwater nearshore.
* No mangrou. Money from copra, beef.
* Trochus, greensnail and naura harvested only by men.
* Few beche-de-mer - not harvested.
* Women rarely (once/month) go fishing (income from other sources such as copra selling: also too busy with gardening and babies). Not very interested. Are familiar With the breadfruit leaf preserving method; showed some interest in smoked fish method.
* Women glean use bamboo rods can fish from canoes.
* Rocksalt collected occasionally.
* Use narvel. a leaf and a rope for fish poison.
* Lots of canoes (men)
* Have had training courses (from?): sewing and sewing machine repair. soap. screen printing. rural water tanks. One woman school teacher runs a small retail store.
* Two religions there: Anglican and Christian Orthodox Centre.
Maewo
* A fish farm for freshwater prawns in north Maewo - owner has series of ponds; diverts stream; sells naura in Vila and Santo irregularly.
* Many rivers and freshwater containing eels, freshwater prawns and fish.
* Many residents originally from Mere Lava (nearest of the Banks islands)
Pentecost
* High population in north and central of island
* Custom breadfruit leaf fish drying (bamboo). Also dried/smoked fish filets above fire. Had a custom way of salting and drying fish. Used rock salt.
* A man has a truck and drives inland to sell fish
* Have mangrou - caught with torchlight at night (men and women). Also have picot.
* Men and women gather trochus. Get a trader once a year. Pays about 250 vt/kg for trochus
* Men only dive. Women and men handline. Men only net. Women use canoes over the reef.
* Have beche-de-mer, but don't sell/harvest
* Women sell vegetables to get money
* Women don't fish very often - get more money from sending kava and water taro to Vila and other islands.
* Use poisons to fish - leaf: rub in holes in reef Use sea cucumber poison for fish.
* Few octopus all year. Women harvest shells to eat.
* Have roadside markets
* Tabus sometimes in place for one year - all fish
* In South Pentecost, there is poulet fishing by women and men - wooden boat
MALAMPA
Malekula
Women fish on reef flats. Use bamboo poles (traditional) and fishing lines (new).
Litslits.
* Have two kinds of oysters - mangrove and 'stone'. Collect during the week and keep in pools near village. Numbers gone down a lot - tabu didn't work
* Women go fishing about twice a week. Use handline (bait = nakito).
* Harvest giant clams and sell in market
* Women may go in canoes over reef but not in boats: use handlines
* Women dive for octopus (always plenty) trochus and giant clams - especially at low tide
* Women and men collect lobsters at night with lamp - wall; on reef
* Large tin of fish costs 180 vt.
* Sell vegetables if want to make extra money.
Uripiv.
* Use narvel poison: also a leaf and a root.
* Harvest mangrove oysters on order - collect during week and keep in pool near village
* Natalai there (two kinds) but smaller and fewer.
* Trochus too far out/down - women don't collect.
* Greensnail - more common. Women dive
* Men and women collect beche-de-mer.
* Women use handlines; may go in canoes to fish
* Go fishing if there is no other work to do.
* If want to make more money, sell fresh fruit, vegetables and weaving. Say no Malekula women have bank loans
* Custom way of keeping mangrou - put in bucket with salt, keep for 2-3 days, then cook it. Also do breadfruit leaf preserving of fish.
* Have had training - of sewing, cooking, business management, personal esteem
* Say too many nets in village (yet est. less than 10 nets to the large village)
* One lady runs a store; another runs the ferry/transport boat between island and mainland (church-run cooperative)
* the only fishing business is run by men
* interested in fish handling - quality
* women collect shells at low tide
Sanwar village. Wala mainland
* Men and women collect beche-de-mer - buyer comes
* Men dive for beche-de-mer, men and women collect on reef
* Use poison to fish.
* Have had training from DWA: soap making, water tank construction
* Trochus and greensnail on reef; not many
* Men collect lobsters with speargun and diving; women collect on reef by walking
* Tabu been in place three years in two places
* Interested in learning how to dry fish
Serser village. Wala Island
* Have had training courses: soap making, cooking, knitting, crocheting.
* Have heard of smoking fish - would like to learn more, also on drying and salting (mangrou)
* If need more money, usually sell shells and weaving
* Both men and women process beche-de-mer - don't collect now as there used to be a buyer but he doesn't come anymore
* Women fish from canoes and may go beyond the reef.
Dravail village. Lamap
* Women don't have boats or canoes (nor do men)
* Have at least four kinds of crabs, including 'Caledonie crabs'. Crabs are collected at all seasons and there are always some in berry. Get paid 200-300 vt/kg. Order comes through Vanair - irregular.
* For extra money. women sell copra
* Have three kinds of mangrou. Also picot. Collect with seine net. handline; women use bamboo poles also. Only men use cast nets (?price).
* Use poison root to go fishingThree kinds of beche-de-mer. Collected by men and women and sold to a Maskelynes dealer - 200-400 vt/kg (varies with kind)
* Get irregular orders for mangrove oysters. Collect the day the plane comes.
* Are familiar with breadfruit leaf fish preserving
* Tabu on half the reef - all fish. Tinned fish is 180 vt/big tin
* Very interested in salting and drying of mangrou
* Have had training in water tank construction, sweing, cooking, soap making, smokeless stove manufacture; also marine resource management(!)
* Have abundant stonefish inshore areas
* Picot - Lamap to Arkamb; spawn in the mangroves. Caught w. bonaro, spear, nets
(men)
Fotinweiu. Atchin mainland
* Five religions: SDA, Presbyterian, Anglican, Assemblies of God, Catholic
* Get plenty of mangrou and mullet. Use seine net on beach
* Women fish a lot from canoes. Some women go poulet fishing when water calm
* Sometimes men go to gardens while women go fishing (women are skillful fishers)
* Women use bamboo rods and handlines
* Community collects greensnail and trochus (dive). Reef accessible, so trochus numbers have declined.
* Whole community did a big beche-de-mer harvest about 10 years ago - sold. Stocks not recovered.
* Familiar with fish preserving technique (special leaf + laplap, seaweed?, do in ground oven)
* Use poisons to catch fish (e.g. narvel)
* Still use custom fish tras
* Say have large population and lot of gear but still plenty of fish
Southwest Bay:
* Still use a sweepnet for mangrou
* 'Plenty' of mangrove crabs
Ambrym
* In south-east, women fish with handlines, even though coast rocky
* Women don't fish from canoes
* Women collect shellfish; only men collect naura.
* Know how to preserve fish in breadfruit leaves.
* No mangrou.
* Have palolo worms in September.
Paama
* Women only recently started fishing for finfish -with handlines and from canoes. Before only collected shellfish. Men collect naura.
* Preserve in breadfruit leaves.
* Had mangrou. but used dynamite. This new activity for subsistence.
* Community asked to set aside area for trochus
SHEFA
Epi
* Tilapia in freshwaters there - lots;?stunted.
* Drying fish performed in south Epi island - fish from a freshwater lake near ?Nalema village
* Women dive for trochus
Tongoa
* Rough coastlines in many places - women don't go in canoes. Women fish on reef flats.?Bamboo rods.
* Smoking of herron-type birds is carried out at three small islands near Epi (Laika Island?). The birds are sold in pairs, in leaves.
* Men use handline only; men catch naura by hand; only men use nets
* Narvel and 'natua' are native poisons - used by women
Emae
* Beche-de-mer fishing - community
* Three-year tabu in place
* Poison used by women
* Men use handlines only; men only catch naura (hand)
Makura
* Women dive for trochus and turban shells.
* Men only target finfish
Efate
* Islands in north Efate (Emau, Nguna, Pele, Moso, Lelepa): women use simple rods, handline, gleaning. Are very good at octopus catching. Some places there is overfishing of reef fish (e.g. Moso)
* Picot spawn in northern Efate in Oct-Dec.
* Women use poisons (e.g. narvel)
Siviri village
* Men use gillnets, cast nets, seine nets for picot, mangrou, sardines. Few nets in village.
* Men fish more than they used to. Sell in Vila.
* Tabu in place for trochus (three years)
* Women and men dive for trochus and greensnail (men)
* Beche-de-mer buyer comes. Shoeed them how to process No more left now so doesn't come.
* Eat fish or shellfish every day
* Use nagato for bait - handlining (wonton)
* Lots of nawita
* Still have plenty of giant clams
* Men collect naura - sell dead to Vila [must spear them]. Sometimes get orders.
* If want to make more money. sell vegetables
* Had first training from WBU (business management and money management): women liked it. DWA and VNCW don't come (have rep.).
* One woman has a business (pigs and mat-weaving)
* Transport to town is 3,000 vt one way if no goods to carry, 4,000 vt if have goods.
Saama village
* Women fish 1-2 times a month (too busy)
* Men have castnets and gillnets. Fish to sell ® less in the village
* Women may go in canoes but don't (time)
* Men only catch lobsters - speargun, also net
* Women collect nawita, shells, natal)
* Girls use handlines in reef holes - women don't have time
* Preserve fish in breadfruit leaves
* No mangrou - turn off at Siviri
* Religions are Presbyterian and Assemblies of God
* Use poison (narvel)
Forari village (Wallace and Futuna people)
* Men collect trochus by hand and diving; men dive for geensnail
* Women may use handlines, not rods
* Women may not go in canoes to fish
* Tabu in place for one year on reef - everything
* No-one sells fish. Village sells a lot of vegetables, mats, shells
* Haven't had any training; no loans, no business ventures
* Have mangrou
* Men catch naura by hand - used to use trap
* Lot of nawita, kai shells, natali
Eton village
* No tabus in place, but seas often rough so fishing less.
* Men and women collect beche-de-mer. Buyer comes from Vila
* Collect naura by hand - sell live to Vila. Get 500 vt/kg
* Women dive (shallow) and walk on reef. Use lamp at night.
* Women fish little - not enough time
* Lot of nets in village
* No canoes (rough sea)
* No trochus; some greensnail
* Women not in business except for market (Vile)
* Three religions: SDA, Presbyterian, Christchurch
* Large tin of fish costs 180 vt
* Transport to town is 3,000 vt one way
* Training: soap making, sewing; one from WBU two months ago (business management)
Takara village
* Three-yea tabu on some areas
* Women dive and reef glean (octopus, shells)
* Women sell laplap fish and laplap octopus in Vila
* Freshwater naura there: sell for 500 vt/kg to hotels
* Women collect shells for sale to tourists
* No training in the village - had messages from town
* Women fish 1-2 times a week. No time
Epao villag
* Women fish 1-2 times a week (time)
* Collect shellfish, nawita. Sometimes eat tinned fish (80 vt/large tin)
* Women make extra money by selling copra and vegetables
* Women and men collect trochus and beche-de-mer (buyer). Sell trochus for 200-250 vt/kg
* Women sell reef fish: 270-300 vt each
* Catch octopus with wire
* Mangrou: sell for 300 vt/kg.
* Ice costs 100 vt/kg (crushed) and 750 vt/block- Chinese store
* Transport to Vila costs 3,000 vt one way, but 300 vt/person if a lot of people (charter)
* No training been to village?
?Epule village
* Women fish 1-2 times a week (time)
* Collect octopus, shells. Sometimes men collect octopus (in nets)
* Mangrou present - men catch with nets
* If want to get more money, sell vegetables in market
* Women use handlines; can go in canoes (but don't - time)
* Men and women collect beche-de-mer
*?Tabu in place
TAFEA
Futuna
Mission Bay and Herald Bay.
* Flying fish - men catch from boats
* Not much mangrou
* Preserve fish with breadfruit leaves
* No trochus and greensnail, but have plenty of rock salt
* Beche-de-mer: say are abundant. Don't eat and don't gather - no-one come to ask for it/show them
* Women and men catch lobsters in pots with chiton bait. Lobsters mainly from August to early wet - traps of pandanus. Sell live to Tanna or Vila, 600 vt/kg
* Women may fish (bamboo poles) from shore and rocks but not allowed in canoes to fish
* CMT on the north and west (where sea calmer; anchorages): none on rougher east coast.
* Coconut crabs - not harvested
* Women gather when sea calm (dry season). Plenty of octopus all year.
* Catch octopus with stick and knife. Use beche-de-mer poison to catch octopus also.
* Have freezer via VNCW but no generator. Are keen to start sending flying fish to Tanna market.
* Seaweeds in abundance
Tanna
* Women and men fish with bamboo rods
* CMT exists
* Trochus present but not very abundant; no greensnail
* Reef fish sold at institutions; lot caught on west coast in late dry season.
* Land crabs - keep alive for up to a month
* High human population density
Itunge.
* Women work long hours in garden. Don't have time to go fishing: go 1-2 times a month.
* Mangrou present. Not interested in processing it.
* Women are interested in beche-de-mer. Haven't collected it so far(?)
Erromango
* Women use fishing nets.
* Low population. CMT exists
* Said to be rich resources there. Women can fish with lines and poles but only men go in boats.
* Trochus (plenty) and greensnail (not plenty); beche-de-mer (plenty)
* Reasonable income to some areas through logging companies, but other areas said to be poor
Aniwa
* CMT; moderately high human population density
* Females may fish from shore and rocks with bamboo and lines but not allowed in boats.
* Rock salt; no trochus
* Caledonie crabs and land crabs
Aneityum
* No CMT "because of the church".
* Pollution of coastal waters in north and north-west coast from forest clearing and burning of grasslands. Reefs covered with red silt.
* In south, reefs OK but villagers say they have to go out further now to get their harvest
* Trochus (plenty) and greensnail present. A 3-year moratorium is being imposed by the CMT owners next month for trochus only.
* Send reef fish and lobsters to Vila.
* Reef to the south-west of Aneityum said to always have ciguatoxic fish.
* Community in south (at Anelghowhat) uses gillnets and native poisons.
<section>e</section>
List of abbreviations
List of abbreviations
A.I.M.S. - Australian Institute of Marine Science, Townsville
CMT - customary marine tenure
DWA - Department of Women's Affairs
ESCAP - Economic & Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, United Nations
FAD - fish aggregating device
FAO - Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FFA - Forum Fisheries Agency
FTC - Fisheries Training Centre at Luganville, Santo
NGO - Non-Government organizations
NPSO - National Planning and Statistics Office
ORSTOM -
SPC - South Pacific Commission
vatu (vt) - Vanuatu currency. 100 vt = c. USD0.95
VFDP - Village fisheries development programme
VNCW - Vanuatu National Council of Women
WBU - Women's Business Unit. Department of Cooperative & Rural Business Development
and local terms
"bonaro" - bow and arrow
karong - Spanish mackerel? or wahoo?
laplap - a staple made from grated rootcrop or banana and coconut cream baked in a ground oven
mangrou - nearshore small pelagic fish comprising Selar boops. .S. crumenophthalmus and two species of Decapterus. Also possibly a herring.
nagato - small turban shell
nakato - hermit crab
namarai - eel
narvei - the poisonous seed pod of a tree commonly used to poison fish
natalai - giant clam (Tridacnidae)
naura - lobster (solwara) or prawn (freswara)
nawita - octopus
picot - rabbitfish (Siganus species)
Santo - refers as often to the main town (Luganville) as it does to the island (Espiritu Santo)
tuluk - a snack-sized item of beef. pig or fish encased in laplap
