<title>Consultancy report. Improving the Status of Disadvantaged Women in Small-Scale Fishing Communities </title>
<section>1</section>
Basic project data
Basic project data
"IMPROVING THE STATUS OF WOMEN (THROUGH INCOME GENERATION AND FAMILY PLANNING) IN SMALL-SCALE FISHING COMMUNITIES IN CAPIZ AND PANGASINAN"
PHI/86/P16
KEY DATES
PANGASINAN
Appraisal
Negotiations
Approval
Feb. 1990
LBP-Pangasinan Memorandum Of Agreement
July 1991
Effectivity
Jan. 1991
Tripartite Review
Jan. 1992/Oct. 1994
Project Extension
Project Completion
31 Dec. 1994
Loan Closing
31 Dec. 1994
Post-Evaluation
KEY PROJECT DATA
Total Project Cost
P
Guarantee Fund
(As of 1990)
2.7 Million
(As of Sept. 1994)
3.3 Million
LOP Co-Financing
Interest Pate
CREDIT PROGRAMME
No. of Women's Groups Assisted
(As of 31 Aug. 1994)
Total Amount of Loans Releases
(as of 31 Aug. 1994)
P 4.501 Million
Outstanding Balance
0.896 Million
Current Accounts
0.795 Million
Past Due Accounts
0.101 Million
Collection Pate
Guaranteed Accounts
Past Due Accounts
Figure 1 - Map of Pangasinan
<section>2</section>
I. Executive summary
I. Executive summary
I. Background
1. This Report documents the outputs of the Credit /IGP Consultant pursuant to her Service Contract (SO) 94/014 covering the period 01 June to SC, September 1994.
II. Terms of Reference
2. This Consultancy Report therefore summarizes the
project proposals identified appraised prepared for 10 women's groups in Pangasinan for credit extension by the Land Bank. It highlights new and larger-scale IGPs identified for women associations and reports on the analysis of the use of loan funds. Finally, conclusion and recommendations were drawn on project implementation problems, issues and concerns in so far as they are relevant to the Consultant's scope of work as defined in the Terms of Reference.
III. Identification and Appraisal of IGPs
3. As of 30 September 1994, 32 IGPs categorized into 10 project types have been identified and corresponding project appraisal reports/proposals were prepared based on the results of the feasibility studies. The IGPs proponents consist of 10 women's groups in seven coastal barangays with a total membership of 288 participants.
4. A total of P 2,511,768.00 is required to implement the 32 IGPs. The loan component amounts to P 1,754,786.00 which is 70 % of the total investment, while P 756,982.00 or 30 % will be provided by the participants as their equity contribution to their projects.
IV. New IGPs for Development
5. This section focuses on new and larger-scale IGPs that contribute significantly to value-added formation. These IGPs will involve investments in productive assets in addition to working capital in order to increase income and create employment opportunities in the fishing communities. These proposed IGPs are presented in the form of concept plans or financial feasibility studies.
V Development of Transportt and Marketing Services
6. The provision of transport and marketing services as a project by itself or a support service to program assisted IGPs is deemed essential for the attainment of sustainable level of operations. A concept plan with implementing strategies and guidelines is presented for further refinement during the expansion/extension phase of the project.
VI Analysis of Loan Fund Use
7. In general, the loan funds were utilized by the women's groups for the intended purpose, i.e., as working capital for operating their chosen IGPs. There are, however, a few cases of fund diversion, three of which are highlighted in the Case Studies (Append): 2). Recommendations were also developed to avert such mal-practices in the future.
VII. Conclusion and Recommendations
8. In general, the credit program as a component of PHI/89/P16 is an effective strategy for providing women in selected fishing communities in Pangasinan an opportunity to engage in their chosen micro-enterprises.
9. Endorsement of the project extension/expansion is merited. Recommendations along this direction are as follows:
a) Improvement of project planning/appraisal process;
b) Emphasis and phasing of project extension expansion;
c) Redefinition of acceptable level of household income to reflect the effect of inflation as a criteria for project beneficiaries,
d) Funding process/terms and conditions;
e) Strategies to ensure sustainability of assisted IGPs after 1994;
f) Other lending channels; and
g) Strengthening of project management and administration.
<section>3</section>
II. Terms of reference
1. Project background
2. Objectives
3. Scope of work
4. Expected outputs
II. Terms of reference
1. Project background
In the past, population control program alone was not effective. It was therefore deemed essential that the two fundamental principles expressed in the Philippine National Population Plan 1989 - 1993 be integrated. Hence population related concerns must be seen by the people as part of the government broader developmental concerns and not to be pursued in isolation.
Towards this direction' the Project covering the Provinces of Capiz and Pangasinan was conceptualized and implemented as a community-based approach to family planning. It is envisioned that in the long run, such as an integrated strategy will build a lasting and meaningful commitment on the part of the people.
2. Objectives
The project therefore, aims to achieve the following objectives:
a) Long-Term Objectives: To contribute to the achievement of the goals and objectives of National Population Plan through an integrated approach to improve the living conditions of small-scale fisherfolk with particular emphasis on women;
b) Short-Term Objective: By the end of the project life:
b.1 At least 50 % of project participants would have increased their income and improved their skills in managing their micro-enterprises;
b.2 At least 50 % of project participants would have manifested positive changes in attitude, knowledge and practice in family planning! population education and MCH-related matters; and
b.3 A community-based,' managed integrated system would have been developed and tested.
3. Scope of work
As provided in the Terms of Reference for Consultancy work as Credit/IGP Consultant for Pangasinan, under Service Contract (SC) 94/014 for a duration of two months spread over four months from 01 June to 30 September 1994, the following were the tasks performed:
a) Assisted the new members of women's groups in Pangasinan in the identification of income-generating projects (IGPs) and preparation of project feasibility studies;
b) Assisted new borrowers in completing loan applications;
c) Prepared summary appraisal reports for submission to the Provincial Project Coordination Committee (PPCC);
d) Identified new and larger-scale income-generating activities for women which, in addition to working capital advances, involve capital assets such as equipment and facilities used for aquaculture, fish/food processing, transport, storage, catering, tailoring, etc., and which can be carried out on an individual basis or by several women on a voluntary basis but not necessarily by all the members of a women's group;
e) Reviewed and analyzed the use of loan funds already granted to women's groups;
f) Coordinated with the National Consultant, Fish Processing Expert, in the preparation of marketing enterprises for women in the province; and
g) Prepared a Consultancy Report at the end of the assignment.
4. Expected outputs
The initial outputs expected from the Consultants are the following:
a) Project appraisal reports in the form of project proposals for submission to the PPCC;
b) Assistance in the identification of IGPs and preparation of feasibility studies;
c) Assistance in presentation of the project proposal to the participants; and
d) Assistance in completing loan applications.
At the end of the tour of duty, the Consultant shall submit the following outputs:
e) Concept Plans and/or financial studies for new asset-based IGPs/micro-enterprises;
f) Analysis of loan fund use; and
g) Consultancy Report consolidating all the above-mentioned outputs as well as conclusions and recommendations.
The work plan indicating the objectives/activities, linkages timetable and expected outputs, a" approved by the National Project Coordinator, is presented in Appendix 1.
<section>4</section>
III. Identification and appraisal of income-generating projects
1. Project types
2. Financing schemes
3. Gestation and sustainability
4. Status of loan applications
III. Identification and appraisal of income-generating projects
1. Project types
As of 26 September 1994, a total of 32 IGPs categorized into 10 project types has been identified and corresponding project appraisal reports/proposals have been prepared based on the results of the feasibility studies. The IGPs are proposed by 10 women's groups to benefit 288 participants in seven barangays within the project area (Table 1).
2. Financing schemes
Table 2 presents the financing plan for each of the 32 IGPs prepared, indicating the key components (LBP loan and participants' equity contribution) and total project cost. As a whole, the 32 projects require a total investment of P2,511,768.00, of which 70% or P1,754,786.00 will be provided in loan proceeds and P756, 982.00 or 30% as equity contribution of the participants.
By project type, the average percentages of total project cost per key components are as follows:
PROJECT TYPE
NO. OF PROJECT
AVE. PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL PROJECT COST
LOAN COMPONENT
EQUITY CONTRIBUTION
a) Fish Trading Retail
Wholesale
b) Commodity Trading
c) Hog Fattening
d) Bamboo Trading
e) Fish Capture
f) Fish Nets
g) Canteen Operation
h) Dried Fish Trading
i) Rolling Store
i) Bagoong Trading
k) Palay Trading
TABLE 1
PROJECT TYPES BY PROPONENT
PROPONENT
LOCATION
TOTAL NO. OF PROJECTS
NO. OF PAX
PROJECT TYPES
1. Mona Mothers' Association
Mona, Alaminos
Fish Trading
Commodity Trading
Hog Fattening
2. Dangley Loving Mothers' Association
Fish Trading
Dangley, Agno
Commodity Trading
Bamboo Trading
Fish Captureng
3. Masiden Loving Mothers' Association
Masidem, Bani
Wholesale Fish Trading
Retail Fish Trading
4. San Isidro Women's Action Club
San Isidro, Binmaley
Fish Trading
Commodity Trading
5. Boracay Women's Ass'n.
Pao-llio-llio, Burgos
Fish Trading '
Commodity Trading
Fish Capture
Fish Nets
6. Samahan Ng Mga kababaihan sa Bolasi (SAKABO)
Bolasi, San Fabian
Fish Trading
Commodity Trading
Hog Fattening
7. Longos Women's Ass'n.
Longos, Amangonan,
Fish Trading
San Fabian
Commodity Trading
8. Rang-ay Women's Ass'n.
Mabilao, San Fabian
Fish Trading
Commodity Trading
Canteen Operation
Hog Fattening
9. Narvarte Women's Ass'n.
Nibaliw, San Fabian
Fish Trading
Commodity Trading
10. Pangascasan Mothers' Association
Pangascasan, Sual
Dried Fish Trading
Rolling Store
Bagoong Trading
Palay Trading
Fish Trading
Commodity Trading
TOTAL
SUMMARY:
TOTAL NO. OF PROPONENTS : 10
NO. OF PROJECT TYPES : 12
TOTAL NO. OF PARTICIPANTS : 288
TOTAL NO. OF PROJECTS : 32
TABLE 2
FINANCING SCHEMES BY PROJECT, TYPE/PROPONENT
PROPONENT/LOCATION
PROJECT TYPE
LOAN COMPONENT
PARTICIPANTS' EQUITY CONTRBN
TOTAL PROJECT COST
AMOUNT
AMOUNT
AMOUNT
1. Mona Mothers Association Mona, Alaminos (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 52,620
P 7,040
P 59,660
Cmdty Trading
Hog Fattening
SUB-TOTAL
P 208,273
P 83,834
P 292,107
2. Dangley Loving Mothers' Ass'n. Dangley. Agno (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 96,075
P 16,100
P 112,175
Cmdty Trading
Bamboo Trdg.
Fish Capture
SUB-TOTAL
P 203,835
P 68,610
P 272, 445
3. Loving Mothers' Association Masidem, Bani (2nd Round of Loans/*New IGP)
Wholesale Fish Trig.*
P 102,000
P 6,882
P 108,88
Retail Fish Trading
SUB-TOTAL
P 161,500
P 20,907
P 182,407
4. Women's Action Club, Sn. Isidro Norte, Binmaley (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 69,175
P 15,725
P 84,900
Cmdty Trading
SUB-TOTAL
P 96,720
P 129,74
5. Boracay Women's Association Pao-Ilio-Ilio. Burgos (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 81,230
P 15,295
P 96,525
Cmdy. Trading
Fish Capture
36,4S
Fish Nets
SUB-TOTAL
P 163,370
P 350,275
6. Samahan ng mga Kababaihan sa Bolasi (SAKABO) Bolasi, San Fabian (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 58,420
P 68,26
Comdty Trdg.
Hog Fattening
SUB-TOTAL
P 311,446
P 114,480
P 425,926
7. Longos Women's Association Longos Amangonan, SF. (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 80,885
P 17,860
P 98,745
Comdty Trdg.
SUB-TOTAL
P 106,152
P 31,300
P 137,452
8. Rang-Ay Women's Association Mabilao, San Fabian (1st Round of Loans/New IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 24,640
P 6,965
P 31,60
Comdty Trdg.
Canteen Optn.
Hog Fattening
SUB-TOTAL
P 207,190
P 320,02
9. Narvarte Women's Asssociation Nibaliw, SF. (2nd Round of Loans/Same IGPs)
Fish Trading
P 94,895
P 17,290
P 112,18
Commodity Trading
SUB-TOTAL
P 123,184
P 33,290
P 156,474
10. Pangascasan Mothers' Ass'n. Pangascasan, Sual (2nd Round of Loans/ Same IGPs)
Dried Fish Trading
P 6,400
P 300
P 6,70
Rolling Store
Bagoong Trdg.
Palay Trading
Fish Trading
Comdty Trdg.
SUB-TOTAL
P 173,116
P 71,792
P 244,908
GRAND TOTAL
P 1,754,786
P 756,982
P 2,511,768
3. Gestation and sustainability
The results of the feasibility studies indicate that that the IGPs submitted for financing are viable from the marketing, financial and operational viewpoints and, consequently, favorably recommended for approval.
Through series of financial projections, the financial profitabilities of the project were appraised, including their capability to generate the cash requirements of project operations as well as the debt-service obligations of the proponents.
Hereunder are the selected financial profitability indicators for each project type (based on the average):
PROJECT TYPE
RETURN ON INVESTMENT
PAYBACK PERIOD
PROFIT MARGIN
MONTHS
a) Fish Trading
· Wholesale Trading
· Fish Retail Trading
b) Commodity Trading
c) Hog Fattening
d) Bamboo Trading
e) Fish Capture
f) Fish Nets
g) Canteen Operation
h) Dried Fish Trading
i) Rolling Store
j) Bagoong Trading
k) Palay Trading
The foregoing indicates the potentials of the IGPs for sustained profitability and higher income with the proper management guidance and direction.
4. Status of loan applications
As of 22 September 1994, proposals for seven women's associations have been submitted, out of which loans of three women's groups were released for the month of September
The project proposals of three remaining women's associations are due for submission to the Land Bank within the week of 22 September 1994.
<section>5</section>
IV. New IGPs development
1. Fish drying
2. Improved processing technologies for various fishery products
3. Other potential IGPs
IV. New IGPs development
In the future, the planning direction is to put up new and/or related but are larger-scale IGPs that contribute to value-added formation. These IGPs involve investments in productive assets, in addition to working capital, in order to increase income and create employment opportunities in the fishing communities of Pangasinan. Such asset-based, larger-scale IGPs can be carried out on an individual basis or by several women's groups as whole.
Some of these IGPs are hereunder presented by way of concept plans or financial studies. Proposed IGPs involving improvement of fish processing technologies were developed/studied in consultation with Mrs. Anselma S. Legaspi, Fish Processing and Marketing Consultant, PHI/89/P16.
1. Fish drying
1.1 Background
Pangasinan is rich in aquatic resources which have made its people highly dependent on the marine waters for food and livelihood, especially those living in coastal communities.
Because of the abundance of fresh fish and the shortage of supply at different seasons, a participant from the Narvarte Women's Association, Mrs. Norma Orjeda of Nibaliw, San Fabian, Pangasinan, has identified the prospects of a fish drying project. She decided to engage in this IGP with the initial batch of loan she obtained from the Land Bank.
Although her second tranche of loan is being processed at present, Mrs. Orjeda hopes that in the future, she could invest in productive assets that would improve the project's earning capacities.
1.2 Objective
This section focuses on the development of an appropriate fish drying technology and analyzes its effects on the production, finance and management of the project, in order to provide a guiding tool in the preparation of a feasibility study in the future.
1.3 The Product
Dried "tuyo" ("lapad" and "tulis") and bolasi constitute the project's main product lines. The dried fish are packed in corrugated boxes at 20 kilograms per box for wholesale buyers, or in plastic bags of varying sizes depending on the number of kilograms ordered by retail buyers.
1.4 Market Prospects
In general, the dried fish industry is a sellers market since consumers as well as wholesale and retail buyers purchase dried fish as fast as the processors can produce them.
The market for dried fish in the project area is composed of households and eateries. The present market coverage of the project includes Mangaldan, Dagupan City and Baguio City. Market expansion towards the northern provinces is projected.
Due to the shortage of supply against an increasing demand, the price of dried fish has steadily increased. The prevailing market prices follow the law of supply and demand. To the processors, this is the safest pricing scheme in order for their product to compete in the market. At present, the proponent sells "tuyo" at P60.00 and dried bolasi at P65.00 per kilogram on wholesale basis.
1.5 Trends in the Industry That Warrant Improvement in Processing Technology
a) Seasonality of Fresh Fish Supply
The processing of dried fish in closely associated with the supply of fresh fish available locally. When supply of fish is high and prices are relatively low, the proponent cannot engage heavily in the purchase of fresh fish due to lack of storage facilities. A glut in the supply of fresh fish normally occurs during the rainy season, when sundrying is limited.
As practiced, fish are dried in bamboo trays with nylon netting to allow adequate air circulation. Fish are covered with plastic sheets to protect them from the rain and flying insects.
b) Severe Competition
Processors in the project area and the rest of Central and Northern Luzon are faced with keen competition from dried fish produced in the Visayas, Palawan and Bicol areas due to their higher quality.
c) Small-Scale Production
The proponent like the other processors in the area has low volume operation. As a result, optimum production could not be achieved and production cost per unit becomes relatively high. Efforts should be exerted to increase production volume to attain greater efficiency and reduce production costs.
1.6 Proposed Technological Improvement
a) Technical Description
The drying process can be improved by setting up a bunkhouse for drying fish. This structure (Schematic Diagrams are presented in Figure 2) can serve dual purposes: working area for splitting and cleaning of fish and drying area. It utilizes indigenous materials and may be constructed by modules of 6 meters by 4 meters per unit depending on the target production volume.
Other technical specifications are as follows:
- 31.50 m. in height
- 0.5 concrete sidings
- Concrete flooring (or natural earthfill flooring)
- Transparent roofing
- Fully screened
- With movable drying shelves/trays
The bunkhouse for drying has a maximum capacity of one ton and reduces drying time by 35%. Moisture content can be controlled, unlike in sundrying where there is a tendency to overdry.
b) Advantages
i) Duration of drying-during sunny days is reduced from 1-1/2 to one day and during rainy days from 2 days to I-1/2 days;
ii) The operation from fish splitting to cleaning and sundrying is completely free from flies and other insects;
iii) Pat infestation is avoided;
iv) Higher quality is achieved since moisture is controlled and overdrying due to direct sunlight is avoided;
v) Manpower utilization during drying time is kept to a minimum since there is no need to cover the fish when rain falls; and
vi) As a result, production increases by 30 to 35% quality is improved.
Schematic Diagrams - Bunkhouse for Fish Drying, A
Schematic Diagrams - Bunkhouse for Fish Drying, B
Schematic Diagrams - Bunkhouse for Fish Drying, C
Schematic Diagrams - Bunkhouse for Fish Drying, D
1.7 Results of Financial Study
Based on the financial profitability analysis (the results of which are presented in Annex 1), the adoption of the proposed bunkhouse for drying will increase production per month by approximately 35% and, correspondingly, monthly sales revenues will increase by 35% and month net profit by 65%.
1.8 . Recommendations
In view of the favorable result of the financial study, the proposed technology may be considered for further refinement/improvement of design and, subsequently, for pilot testing possibly using a fund to be set up for purposes of technology testing, among others, as proposed in item 4.4 of the overall recommendations.
2. Improved processing technologies for various fishery products
2.1 Introduction
With the presence of abundant and very cheap fishery resources in various project sites in Pangasinan, the Office of the National Project Coordinator has initiated the development of fish processing technologies that will enhance not only the marketability but likewise add more economic value to the fishery raw materials available in the areas. At the same time, introduction of improved technologies will also promote the income-generating capability and sustainability of the various women's associations in the province.
Determining the technical feasibility of improved technologies as well as the market acceptability of the end products does not guarantee the financial viability of undertaking the projects; thus, the need for a financial study.
The objective of the present study is, therefore, to assess the projects financial profitability and capability to service loan obligations.
2.2 Basic Assumptions
The appraisal of the projects profitability and debt-service capacity is based on the following assumptions:
a) Production processes to be utilized are technologically sound;
b) Market acceptability of final products has been clearly established;
c) Each project will be implemented by a women's association as a group;
d) The project duration is six months;
e) The loan conditions are as follows:
i) The women's association will provide as equity contribution at least 5/. of the total project cost;
ii) The loan proceeds will be utilized only for the intended purpose; and
iii) The loan is payable within a six-month period at 14% interest per annum.
f) The project is financially feasible if it meets the following criteria:
i) The project is commercially profitable, i.e., it generates a rate of return of at least 15%; and
ii) The project can meet its debt-service obligations.
2.3 Results of Financial Studies
Included in this section are the results of the financial profitability analysis (Annex 2) of two fish processing technologies applicable/appropriate to Pangasinan, namely: fish smoking and oyster sauce making.
Smoked fish preparation was prepared particularly for Pangasinan, while the latter, although designed for women's associations in Capiz, can be looked into for possible adoption in Pangasinan when oyster farming is pursued by women's groups so that the prices of the raw materials could be reduced.
The financial feasibility studies conducted by the IGP Consultant for other fish processing technologies in Capiz are likewise included in Annex 2 for information and reference.
a) Fish Smoking
The study looked into the financial viability of three options based on the type of smoked fish products, namely:
Option 1: Smoking of Milkfish - Traditional Way
Option 2: Smoking of Boneless Milkfish
Option 3: Smoking of Small Fish (Herring and Scads)
The project cost consisting of loan component and equity contribution and selected financial indicators for each option are presented below:
Option 1
Option 2
Option 3
Project Cost
(P)
Loan Component
(P)
Equity Contrbn.
(P)
Total Monthly Sales
(P)
Gross Profit on Sales
(P)
Ave. Monthly Net Profit
(P)
Return on Investment
Payback Period
(Mos.)
Profit Margin
Break-Even Sales Vol. Per Month
(Packs)
Break-Even Selling Price Per Unit
(P/Pack)
On the basis of the above indicators, Option 2 is recommended for implementation with credit extension from the Land Bank. As shown in the projected cash flows, the project under Option 2 will be able to provide the daily cash requirements for its operation as well as the monthly loan amortizations.
b) Oyster Sauce Making
The project requires a total of P14,868.00 for implementation. This amount will be financed through a P2,995.00-loan from the bank and P1,870 will be contributed by the women's association as equity. These figures represent 87.4% and 12.6% respectively of the total project cost.
The project has been found to be financially profitable on the basis of the following indicators:
Monthly Sales Revenues:
P17,920.00
Ave. Monthly Net Profit:
P 4,645.00
Return on Investment:
Payback Period:
3.20 Months
Profit Margin:
Break-Even Sales Vol. Per Month:
54 Bottles
Break-Even Selling Price Per Unit:
P10.37
In view of the foregoing, the project may be pilot tested in Pangasinan when oyster farming shall have been fully operationalized and prices have been brought down to acceptable level for purposes of processing.
3. Other potential IGPs
The following projects have been identified by the Consultant as potentially viable and have forward and backward linkages to the existing IGPs. These projects may be the subject of detailed feasibility studies in the future.
3.1 Hog Breeding
About five women's groups are engaged in hog fattening projects of various production scales: 3, 4 and 6 heads. The financial profitability of this project has been proven by the participants and accepted by the Land Bank itself. However, one crucial factor to the continued success of the project is the availability of reliable and quality stocks of hybrid piglets.
Along this direction, the development and implementation of a hog breeding program may be explored as an income-generating activity of the Federations of Women's Groups at the provincial or municipal level, or as an inter-federation undertaking.
The hog breeding program should take into account the production requirements and scheduling of various women's associations engaged/to engage in hog fattening projects and will need a strong technical support through linkages with appropriate agencies/institutions, both government and private, within the province.
Capital assets in the form of hog breeding facilities and equipment as well as initial working capital may constitute the loan component of the project.
3.2 Meat Processing
Various meat processing/preservation methods can be taught to the women with the end in view of increasing the value-added to fattened hogs. Such methods include the preparation of the following processed meat products:
Tocino
Fork Hamonado
Longaniza
Bola-Bola (Meat Balls)
Embutido
Pork Nuggets
Pork Ham
Corned Pork
Capital assets that may have to be put up for this project include:
Pressure Cooker
Kitchen Tools/Utensils
Gas Stove
Weighing Scales
Cooking Kettles
Plastic Sealing Machines
Working Tables
Comparative cost and income per unit as well as break-even volume and selling price should be established through detailed financial feasibility study.
3.3 Catering Services
Two participants from Mabilao's (San Fabian, Pangasinan) Rang-Ay Women's Association have embarked on their respective projects involving canteen operation. As their capability is developed, they and other participants could expand into larger-scale operation as canteen concessionaire and/or catering service outfit.
Facilities and equipment for large volume food preparation, dining/food service, catering and other paraphernalia are the capital assets that are needed.
A detailed feasibility study is again called for as basis for financial assistance and as a guide to project management operation.
<section>6</section>
V. Development of transport and marketing services
1. Rationale and objectives
2. Proponent
3. Strategies of implementation
4. Guidelines fop transport operation
5. Recommendations
V. Development of transport and marketing services
1. Rationale and objectives
For LOP-assisted IGPs to attain sustainable level of operations, a viable marketing support mechanism and transport/delivery services should be put in place. Provision of these two basic services will ensure the availability of fishery products, basic commodities and other commercial goods to target clients/customers at the right volume, price and quality.
2. Proponent
The development and implementation of transport and marketing services may be undertaken as a project itself or as a support service by either of the following proponents:
a) New or existing women's associations or fishermen' 5 groups (under the proposed expansion plan for 1995 onwards);
b) Federation of women's/men's groups at the municipal level; and
c) Coalition of women's/men's groups at the district or provincial level.
3. Strategies of implementation
Any or a combination of the following strategies may be considered in pursuing the proposed project:
a) Market matching as a strategic intervention in linking buyers and suppliers in a cost-effective and sustained manner;
b) Development of market information system to provide timely and reliable information needed by both buyers and sellers;
c) Market explorations through meetings/discussions with buyers/sellers' groups, producers, processors, exporters and coordinating agencies;
d) Linkage with government agencies and private institutions providing technical assistance, such as :
- Department of Trade and Industry - Trade Exhibits
- Cooperative Development Authority - Nationwide Marketing Grid
- Fisheries Development Support Services Division (FDSSD), Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources - Promotion and Market Matching
- Development Bank of the Philippines/Dept. of Transportation and Communications- Transport Cooperatives
4. Guidelines fop transport operation
a) Choice of trucking fleet should be appropriate to the requirements of the products to be delivered. Based on interviews with project participants, 2-tonner Elf Trucks with insulated aluminum vans will be most appropriate for fishery products and dry goods.
b) Availability of spare parts from nearby auto/truck supplier at any time should be a prime factor in the selection of truck brand and model.
c) Supplier of the trucking fleets should be able to provide one-year guarantee on parts and service, availability of back-up spare parts and free truck registration;
d) Trucking operation should emanate from an accessible location from the standpoint of clients and delivery points;
e) The proponent or any member of the group should be knowledgeable on the repair/maintenance of vehicles.
f) Prior to commencement of trucking operations, the proponent must secure the requisite franchise from the Land Transportation Franchise Regulatory Board (LTFRB) of the Department of Transportation and Communication (DOTC).
g) A business license shall likewise be obtained from the Municipal Mayor's Office.
5. Recommendations
A full development of the concept and implementation plan for pursuing the project is necessary. Likewise a thorough marketing and financial study should be undertaken to assess its viability.
<section>7</section>
VI. Analysis of loan fund use
1. Introduction
2. Analytical tool
3. Limitations of the study
4. Findings and analysis
5. Recommendations
VI. Analysis of loan fund use
1. Introduction
During the three-year project implementation, in general group members of different women's associations have utilized their loans for the intended uses. Most of them made use of their loans as working capital for various trading projects. A few others have invested in assets such as engines for fishing boats and fish nets.
It cannot be denied, however, that there have been instances of fund diversion which should be prevented in the future for greater program outreach and project sustainability. The analysis of loan fund use, therefore, has been conducted with the end in view of formulating appropriate strategies, safeguards and control measures to ensure proper use of loan funds.
2. Analytical tool
To generate the information necessary for analysis, interviews with women members and project staff were undertaken with the aid of guide questions (Appendix 2).
The basic premise of the program is that a credit line extended to the women members can make any or a combination of the following happen:
a) It will enable the member to engage in her chosen IGP which will harness and develop her capability to generate more income;
b) It will expand her existing project to generate more income and thus, with the enhancement of her project management capability , enable her to diversify her livelihood project and support other microenterprises and in the process generate employment opportunities in the community;
c) As a result, the level of her household income will increase, thus improving her capability to service loan obligations and generate savings. In time, the member will become bankable and sought after by the bank, for both savings and credit, even after termination of the lending program.
The analysis, therefore, intends to address the following key questions:
a) Were there clear understanding and appreciation of the loan purpose as indicated by the actual use of the loan funds?
b) Were there enough safeguards against fund diversion as part of the program management support system?
c) What can be recommended in the future as pro-active approaches/strategies to forestall any occurrence of fund diversion?
3. Limitations of the study
The study is not intended as a comprehensive one. Only random survey and interviews were conducted with group members and project staff. Initially, 13 questionnaires were distributed to the two Area Supervisors for distribution to each Area Coordinator and project participants. Four of them were interviewed while two answered the questionnaires on their own. The results are presented in the next section.
4. Findings and analysis
4.1 Background of Respondents
The respondents consisted of two group members, three Area Coordinators (ACs) and One Area Supervisor (AS). Three of them come from District I and three from District II.
4.2 Purpose of Loan
All the respondents said that the loans were intended for working capital for the selected IGPs: three commodity trading, one fish trading and two hog fattening projects.
4.3 Understanding of Loan Purpose
In general, the group members have a clear understanding of the intended purpose of the loans. This has been transmitted to them during the team-building, organizing and training seminars conducted by the Project Management Staff, as well as the orientation seminar undertaken by the Land Bank personnel.
It appears, however, that a few association officers, members and former Area Coordinators had been overpowered by personal interests to the point of diverting/misusing the associations' loan funds.
4.4 Loan Fund Use
In general, the loan funds were utilized for the intended purpose. Safeguards/measures that have been adopted to ensure proper use of loan funds including:
a) Regular monthly meetings to coincide with the schedule of loan amortization payment)
b) Close monitoring, spot checking and frequent follow-ups by Area Coordinators/Supervisors and Community Development Specialist.
4.5 Fund Diversion
There are however a few instances of fund diversion. Among the six respondents, five cited cases of diversion of loan funds: three cases of diversion to IGPs other than what had been approved by the bank and two cases involving misuse of loan funds by the assigned ACs (please see Appendix 3 for case studies.
4.5.1 Extent of Fund Diversion
Among cases of fund diversion to other IGPs, two respondents reported that 100 % of the loan funds were diverted, only one had partial (20%) fund diversion.
4.5.2 Reasons for Fund Diversion
The following were cited as reasons for the diversion of funds:
a) The project timetable for chosen IGP has lapsed due to long/delayed processing of loans;
b) Lack of transparency/consultation between and among officers and members of the women's association paving the way for unilateral decisions by association officers and AC.
c) Difficulty in getting fish stock for sale during lean months;
d) Lax monitoring by former Area Supervisors/ Coordinators; and
e) Too much hurry to increase income.
4.5.3 Actions Taken
As part of the project monitoring system and standard operating procedures of the Land Bank, the following measures were taken:
a) The fund diversion incident was included in the Monthly Assessment Report of the Area Supervisor concerned stating, among others, the name of the participant, outstanding balance and IGP to which funds were diverted;
b) Upon notification, the LBP investigated the incident and notified the concerned participant that her loan was due and demandable;
c) The participant executed a promissory note to pay the loans and interest immediately;
d) Upon payment of previous loan, the bank may allow a renewal of the loan provided a resolution is obtained from the women's association and the participant undergoes another team building and orientation seminar)
e) In the case where the AC took a portion of the loan funds, the members were made to assume the responsibility for payment of the funds through execution of a promissory note on top of their individual loan amortizations;
f) The ACs guilty of personally divesting the loans were terminated and replaced by others;
g) The association officers found to have diverted loan funds were replaced by other group members.
h) A Special Savings Deposit (SSD) arrangement was adopted by the LBP to accommodate deferred releases of group members whose projects' timetables have lapsed. SSDs may be withdrawn by their respective owners at a later date.
5. Recommendations
Although there were few cases of fund diversion, the following recommendations may be looked into in order to avert such malpractices in the future:
a) Timely loan processing and releases in consideration of the production/operating schedules of the IGPs;
b) Checking of availability of materials/products/ commodities required for project operations;
c) Allowing participants a certain degree of flexibility in utilizing earned income/generated savings for supplementary livelihood activities (in addition to their IGPs) especially during lean months;
d) Group rather than individual project implementation;
e) Advisory to participants to request in writing the LBP/Project Management Office for a change in IGP, to be accompanied by an approved resolution from the women's association; and
f) Conduct of orientation seminar and value formation (self-discipline' strong determination and perseverance).
<section>8</section>
VI. Conclusions and recommendations
1. Conclusions
2. Lessons learned
3. Recommendations
3.1 Project extension/expansion
3.2 The criteria for project beneficiaries
3.3 Funding process, terms and conditions
3.4 Sustainability after project termination
3 5 Other lending channels
3.6 Project management and administration
VI. Conclusions and recommendations
1. Conclusions
In general, the credit program as a component of PHI/89/P16 appears to be an effective strategy for providing seed capital for micro-scale livelihood enterprises. The short term financing has allowed the participants to put up and operated their choice IGPs within their level of capabilities.
The program has certainly proven the important role of women in national development and socio-economic upliftment of the family. Individually, they have established more self-confidence in dealing with government and bank personnel. They are now perceived by their husbands as copartners in running their households as enterprises themselves.
Except for a few, most participants in Pangasinan, however, have not taken the opportunities to expand, diversify and fully utilize the earning capacities of their IGPs towards more sustainable operations. They depended more on succeeding tranches of credit rather than expanding their capital base and utilizing it for higher earning capacities, thereby boosting their loan repayment capability.
2. Lessons learned
The following are the key lessons that can be derived from the project planning/appraisal process and technical assistance relative thereto:
a) While the current approach ensures that the project staff, group members and IGP Consultant together go through the whole procedure, it is designed to work effectively well for group projects, rather than individual borrowers. While undertaking project identification/developmemnt workshops, the IGP Consultant, therefore, has to adopt, right there and then, innovative but practical approaches to come up with the required outputs;
b) The project proposal is simply looked upon as a requirement to obtain credit, not as a busines plan to guide the participant in the operation of her project, nor as a management tool leading to sound business decision-making. This aspect should be properly communicated to the participants and made
a) Extension of the project/program should focus on attaining sustainability of existing IGPs financed under the lending arrangements, while strengthening project management operation in the covered localities.
b) Expansion especially of the credit component, should proceed moderately and be selective in terms of area; phasing of expansion may be according to the following scheme:
i) Acceptance of new beneficiaries for the same women's associations subject to beneficiary selection criteria (this may include membership of fishermen into the existing groups);
ii) Organization of fishermen into separate associations;
iii) Coverage of other coastal barangays should follow site selection criteria with consideration to the presence of similar development projects and viable/dependable financing channels; and
iv) Coverage of upland barangays of Eastern Pangasinan as the final phase.
c) With the involvement of all layers of program implementation including beneficiaries/ participants, a short-term expansion plan which defines the direction and goal of the project/program within the timeframe should be developed. An institutional development component directed towards cooperativizing the existing and new associations should likewise be specified in the plan. Adjustments in the plan may be done every year-end. As a tool, the plan will also be a basis for annual evaluation of accomplishments.
d) At the level of the National Project Coordinator, "Appraisal Teams" may be constituted to verify, validate and appraise proposals for IGP expansion, new site for selection including resource inventory and assessment, new asset-based IGPs, development of prototype projects in the upland areas. part of the prescribed topics for the enterprise management seminar;
c) On the onset of the IGP Consultant's assignment, a thorough briefing on project planning and appraisal process and particular requirements of the reviewing/approving authorities in the LOP Branches is deemed necessary so that project proposals can be prepared accordingly. IGP Consultant had to spend much more time than what was originally planned on re-appraisal and rewriting of several proposals. As a solution, the Consultant took the initiative of discussing the bank's requirements and expectations from the project proposals; and
d) In view of the foregoing, there is a need to reassess and make necessary changes/improvements to streamline the project planning/appraisal design in the light of the experience gained.
3. Recommendations
The existing IGPs of various women's associations in Pangasinan have yet to achieve sustainable operation whether or not PHI/89/P16 is extended/expanded or terminated. To expect such level of operation in the future is highly dependent on the actions of the Provincial Government, as recipient of the entire project after UNFPA/FAO withdraw in December 1994, with respect to providing a viable mechanism for the guarantee loan programme with the continued participation of the LBP.
Based on the outcome of the 22 September 1994 meeting of the PPCC, a more positive approach is for the Provincial Government through the Project Management Office to formally es press to UNFPA/FAO the need to continue the project with their support. The LBP should also formalize its intent to continue serving as fund conduit.
Soon after the decision is firmed up during the 10 October 1994 Tripartite Review in Capiz, the two parties can re-negotiate for a new memorandum of agreement to take effect in January 1995.
3.1 Project extension/expansion
Endorsement of the project is merited. Hereunder are some guidelines along this direction:
3.2 The criteria for project beneficiaries
The original project guidelines on the selection of participants based on the acceptable level of household income should be re-defined to ensure that poorer women in the fishing communities are included. A policy may be adopted on the proportion of poorer to relatively better-off households. Acceptable income level may be adjusted yearly to reflect inflation.
3.3 Funding process, terms and conditions
a) Processing of incoming loan applications from July 1994 to date has been slower than expected reportedly due to other commitments of the bank and the change in the managership of the LBP Dagupan Branch. This instance would usually require higher level intervention from the PMO and Office of the National Project Coordinator, if necessary;
b) Timely adjustment of loan ceilings per type/batch of project is required to reflect increase in costs of goods, supplies and materials inputs with due consideration to geographic locations of various projects. In practice, the IGP Consultant is still guided by the original loan ceilings. The process for adjustment of loan ceilings should be clarified, but it is clear that the Project Manager upon recommendation of the IGP Specialist/IGP Consultant should be given leeway to revise the loan ceilings up to a certain percentage to be agreed upon later without the need for approval of the LBP.
c) Considering the process of community organizing, training, project development, financing and implementation and the period during which developement change is catalyzed, the project implementor, at the national level, should now declare as a matter of policy the maximum limit wherein the loan component will be provided to any group and be able to set targets in terms of project performance and capital build-up for the initial, second and subsequent loan batches.
d) Overall, there is a need to streamline the project planning and appraisal and funding processes to cut down costs and optimized the Project Management Staff and Consultant's involvement.
3.4 Sustainability after project termination
Most borrowers interviewed by the IGP Consultant in the course of project indentification/planning workshops with various women's associations said that the credit line provided to members has given them regular and higher earnings from their own IGPs. In addition, some women have been engaged in paid work as fish sorter/processor of their co-participants.
This indication, however, should be supported by hard data which may have been generated by the impact survey which was conducted in July-August 1994. As it is, group members seem to remain dependent on the loan proceeds for sustaining their existing projects, but certainly, there are potentials for them to sustain higher incomes.
The following strategies may be considered to address this issue, notwithstanding the possibility of instituting an intermediary mechanism for the guarantee fund when it reverts to the control of the Provincial Government after UNFPA and FAO participation ends in December 1994 (Tripartite Review, 1993), or of project e tension/expansion in 1995.
a) Capital Build-Up (CBU)/ Savings Mobilization
The long-term sustainability of various IGPs set up through the credit component should not be hinged on the financial sustainability of the loan fund after UNFPA and FAO pull out from the project. As such, the immediately available source of working capital is the CBU. A scheme should be developed by which individual group member can access her association's CBU and the corresponding terms and conditions of fund access. One factor to be considered is the borrower's contribution to the CBU.
However, the key to continued build-up of the capital base is sustaining the project's capacities for increased incomes. Marketing strategies, technology transfer and product diversification which are discussed in the next section are some of the recommendations along this line. Some of these recommendations may be undertaken by existing or new members/ associations and may have to be financed from the guarantee fund programme (after PHI/89/P16 termination) or under the proposed extension! expansion of the project.
At this point, the recommendation in the Mission Resort of 1993 is reiterated. i.e.. the use of group savings for group-guarantee mechanism while maintaining a high level of discipline on loan repayment.
b) Marketing System
Part of the interest income from the guarantee fund may be set aside as "Incentive or Matching Fund" to be utilized for the following ancillary/support services to the IGPs:
- Input or product marketing
- Pilot testing of technologies
- Transport and delivery services
Any amount to be raised by the group members members for the above purposes be matched by the funds in proportions to be set later.
c) Technology Transfer
c.1 The PMO should be able to link women's groups to and/or enjoin other agencies to provide training on better management of projects, technical know-how on existing/new IGPs and identify suitable rural industries to supplement their household income.
c.2 As the women are trained on various capabilities, they can be tapped as trainors or resource persons in conducting echo seminars to other groups even outside the project. They may given incentives as additional source of income for this activity.
3 5 Other lending channels
Alternative channels or lending conduits should be tapped in view of the possibility that the loan fund will revert to the control of the Provincial Government and for that matter, utilized for other purposes or moved to fund another project (Mission Report, p. 127).
However, other lending channels (also the LOP) usually extend credit only to cooperatives and hence, women's groups may have to cooperativize and register as such with the Cooperative Development Authority (CDA).
In the event the LOP does not agree to renegotiate direct agreement with the Provincial Government, without UNFPA/FAO involvement, on the bank's continued participation in the guarantee loan programme, then a rural bank or a commercial bank may be explored as a last resort. It is also the contention of this report that the guarantee loan programme would fail if the Provincial Government directly manages the loan fund.
However, in the PPCC meeting on 22 September 1994, the Province as represented by Governor Aguedo F. Agbayani and the LOP have agreed in principle to continue their involvement in the project beyond 1994.
3.6 Project management and administration
a) The need for full time staff
If the project is extended/expanded full-time staff for the loan component should be appointed with funding support from the interest income along the following expertise: project development and appraisal, and financial analysis. Full-time staff work would be necessary as the IGPs move towards more sustainable operations and for planning packaging of asset-based projects. The involvement of full-time staff can be appreciated more in the succeeding discussion.
b) Strengthening of Project Monitoring and Evaluation System
The entry point of the Consultant's work should ideally be the assessment of the financial performance of LBP-LBP assisted projects. In the absence of data on the financial operation of these projects, the Consultant just interviewed the borrower, the association President Treasurer and the concerned Area Coordinator/Supervisor.
Nevertheless, the importance of data on the financial results of project operation cannot be overemphasized. In view of this, strengthening of the monitoring and evaluation system (Project Monitoring Tools) is proposed through addition of a Financial Management Module or the integration of the same in the appropriate module of the existing system.
The specifications of the said module can be defined later on. Basically, the system will enable the project implementor to construct the financial statements based on the actual performance of the project. These will provide a basis for extension of subsequent tranches of credit. The system should be simple and easy to follow to be able to effective and efficient, both from the point of view of the participants and the Project Staff (PMO).
Suplemental training courses should be designed and conducted to orient and familiarize participants on the basic accounting procedures, in conjunction with other training needs. The PMO, through the full-time staff for credit component, will be responsible for analysis and interpretation of financial data.
<section>9</section>
Appendices
Appendix 1
Appendix 2
Appendix 3
Appendices
Appendix 1
WORK PLAN
OBJECTIVE/ACTIVITY
LINKAGE
PLACE
TIMETABLE
EXPECTED OUTPUTS
1. To identify IGPs and prepare project feasibility studies
1.1 Resource/technology/capability assessment
Acs
Longos Amangonan
June 7
Project Proposals
Nibaliw
- do -
1.2 Project identification
WGs
Masidem
June 14
1.3 Project planning workshops
WGs, Acs
Cayungnan
June 15
Mabilao
June 17
Bolasi
- do -
Pao
2nd week July
Cato
- do -
1.4 Preparation of project proposals
LBP
FAO Office
June 20 - July 15
1.5 Review of draft proposals Dangley, Mona, Pangasinan San Isidro
FAO Office
June 23 -
July 15
1.6 Finalization
1.7 Preparation of Project Appraisal Reports
FAO Office
up to July 30
2. To assist new borrowers in
WGs, Acs, LBP
:(To be identified later)
June 23 -
Accomplished Loan Applications
completing loan applications
July 30
2.1 Identification of WGs needing assistance
2.2 Secure/accomplish loan applications
3. To identify new and larger- scale IGPs involving capital assets
Fish Processing
June 1 - July 30
Project Proposals
Expert, WGs
3.1 Identification of IGPs
Pangasinan institutions
3.2 Research activities
(Various agencies)
3.3 Discussion with proponents
Pangasinan, FAO Office
3.4 Development of project concepts/design
4. To review and analyze the use of
PMS, ACs, WGs
Pangasinan, FAO Office
Analysis of the Use of
loan funds
Loan Funds
4.1 Formulation of survey design
June 1 - 2
4.2 Preparation of questionnaire
June 3
4.3 Questionnaire administration and retrieval
June 6 - July 30
4.4 Processing of questionnaire
August 1 - 3
4.5 Consolidation
August 4 - 5
4.6 Analysis of findings
August 8 - 10
4.7 Report Preparation
August 10 - 15
5. To prepare marketing enterprises for women in coordination with the National Consultant. Fish Processing Expert
Fish Proceesing Expert
Pangasinan. FAO Office
August 16 - 30
Conceptual Plans for Marketing Enterprises
BFAR. WGs
5.1 Identification of marketing enterprises
5.2 Consultation with Fish Processing Expert
5.3 Conceptualization and Development
5.4 Report Preparation
6. To prepare Consultant's Report
NPC
FAO Office
Sept. 1 - 20
Consultant's Report
6.1 Consolidation/Integration all outputs
6.2 Formulation of Recommendations
6.3 Preparation of Over-all Report
6.4 Submission of Draft Report
Sept. 22
6.5 Finalization of Report
Sept. 23 - 30
Prepared by:
DOLORA N. NEPOMUCENO
IGP Consultant
Approved by:
MEDINA N. DELMENDO
National Project Coordinator
Appendix 2
INTERVIEW QUESTIONNAIRE
RE: USE OF LOAN FUNDS
1. Name of Respondent (Optional): ________________________________
2. Position in the WG: __________________________________________
3. Name of WG: _______________________________________________
4. Type of Project
5. Amount of Loan
6. Date Availed
P
7. Do you think WG members had a clear understanding of the purpose for which the loan fund was to be used?
( ) Yes. How were they made to understand?
( ) No. What measure/s do you think should have been done to ensure clear understanding of the use of the loan funds?
8. Was the loan fund used by the members properly?
( ) Yes. a) Where was it utilized?
b) What safeguards were undertaken to ensure loan funds were used properly? On the part of:
b.1 WG
b.2 PMS
b.3
( ) No.
a) Where was it utilized?
b) What percent of the fund was diverted? ____ %
c) What were the actions taken by the:
c.1 WG
c.2 PMS
c.3 LBP
d) What do you think were the reasons for the fund diversion?
e) What in your opinion should have been done due to prevent fund diversion? On the part of the:
e.1 WG
e.2 PMS
e.3 LBP
9. Was the WG able to get a loan re-availment?
( ) Yes.
a) How much? P _______
b) Was the loan re-availment for the same projects?
( ) Yes
( ) No, identify project _____________
c) What were the pre-conditions for loan re-availment?
( ) No. Why?
10. Do you have any suggestion/recommendation to prevent occurrence of fund diversion?
Appendix 3
CASE STUDIES
The case studies in this Appendix relate to three of the loan fund diversion incidents in 1993.
1. CHANGE OF IGP
The respondent is an Area Coordinator (AC) in charge of a 18-member women's association. She took over as AC from the former coordinator three years ago.
The association obtained its second loan release amounting to P 102,270.00 in January 1993 for implementation of fish and vegetable trading and hog fattening projects. In April 1993 due to difficulty in purchasing fish stocks for sale, three of the participants with approved loans for fish trading decided to utilize their loan funds instead for hog fattening reportedly with the consent of the Association President.
Upon learning of the incident, the AC immediately reported the matter to her Area Supervisor, who, in turn, included the same in his monthly Assessment Report to the Project Management Office (PMO) in Lingayen, Pangasinan for proper action. After appropriate verification, the PMO notified the LBP.
In line with the bank's policies and operating procedures, the loan became due and demandable. Since the concerned participants were not capable of immediately paying their loans, they were allowed to continue the new IGP and were granted an extension of the loan due date, but they were required to execute a promissory note and submit a resolution approved by the women's association.
To date, the three participants have been operating the hog fattening projects individually. Their loans will mature in October 1994.
2. MISUSE OF LOAN FUNDS
2.1 Case Study No. 1
The respondent is an Association Treasurer who assumed her position from the former treasurer. Her group, obtained a P 74,245.00, loan from the LBP in 1993 for the working capital requirement of a commodity trading project. The Association President received the loan release from the LBP together with the Area Coordinator.
During the distribution of individual loan allocations, many association members were not present because of an inherent or perceived fear to take responsibility for a loan. In view of this, some of the group members opted not to avail of their approved loans.
As a consequence, the President took much more than what was approved for her. Furthermore, the assigned AC partook of the loan funds amounting to P 10,000 which she used to venture into a business on her personal capacity, with the intention of returning the money later on.
While other members were able to get their approved loans, some would like to get additional amount but the President had already taken the funds allocated for those who decided to back out.
The AC was able to return only P 2,000.00. The President was forced to assume the responsibility for payment of the P 8,000.00 balance. The AC was terminated and replaced by another.
The loan of the association has been fully paid as of July 1994. The group is proposing a renewal of their loan for the same IGPs.
2.2 Case Study No. 2
The respondent was a former Treasurer and is presently the President of a women's association engaged in commodity and fish trading. The group members received a loan amounting to P 80,000.00 as part of LBP's initial releases in 1993.
Under circumstances she could hardly explain, the former AC was able to obtain portion of the loan funds, in cash and in kind, amounting to P 16,472.00 from two women's associations which were assigned to her.
The incident was properly reported to concerned authorities in the PMO and LBP. Aside from paying their respective approved loans (which they already paid in early 1994), the group members assumed responsibility for payment of the P 16,472.00 taken by their former AC as a precondition for availment of the second tranche of loan.
The association likewise went through a process of reorganization and a new set of officers were elected including the new President.
At the time of interview (31 May 1994), the President, Treasure, and newly assigned AC had just received the release of the second loan availment.
<title>Consultancy report. Improving the Status of Disadvantaged Women in Small-Scale Fishing Communities </title>
Annexes
Annex 1
Annex 2
1. Bottled Cooked Shrimp Paste
2. Smoked fish
[3. Tuna ham]
[4. Oyster sauce ]
Annexes
Annex 1
1. PROJECT TITLE: BUNKHOUSE FOR FISH DRYING
2. LOCATION: Nibaliw, San Fabian, Pangasinan
3. TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS: (Please refer to the Schematic Diagrams for details)
Scheme No. 1:
All lumber to be used are of good quality coco lumber
Flooring shall be of plain cement finish with 12 mm rsb
Seven layers of drying shelves made of bamboo slats on coco lumber framing
Scheme No. 2:
All lumber to be used are of good quality coco lumber
Flooring shall be of natural earthfill flooring
Seven layers of drying shelves made of bamboo slats of coco lumber framing
4. INVESTMENT REQUIRED:
Two schemes were prepared based on the floor finishing: Scheme 1 - with concrete flooring and Scheme 2 - natural earthfill flooring costing as follows (Annex 1):
TOTAL COST
Scheme 1 -
P 34,500.00
Scheme 2 -
To reduce cost for both schemes, the existing drying trays being used by the proponent may be utilized with minor modifications.
The proposed structure has an estimated economic life of 10 years with minor repairs at 5 X. of total cost every three years. Hence, depreciation cost is estimated at :
DEPRECIATION COST
ANNUAL
MONTHLY
Scheme 1 -
P 3,450
P 287.50
Scheme 2 -
5. COMPARATIVE INCOME AND COST PROFILES
WITHOUT BUNKHOUSE
WITH BUNKHOUSE
SCHEME 1
SCHEME 2
GROSS SALES
P 531,250
P 717,188
P 717,188
Less: Cost of Raw Mat'ls/Inputs
Fresh Fish
Salt
Packaging Mat'ls
TOTAL
P 432,285
P 556,042
P 556,042
NET SALES
P 98,965
P 161,146
P 161,146
Less: Optng. Costs
Labor Cost
Rep & Maint. Cost
Deliver Expense
Depreciation Cost
TOTAL
P 8,353
P 11,241
P 11,127
GROSS PROFIT
P 90,612
P 149905
P 150,019
Less: Interest Exp.
NET PROFIT
P 90,612
P 149,823
P 149,250
6. PROFITABILITY INDICATORS
Return On Investment (%)
Payback Period (Months)
Profit Margin (%)
BILL OF MATERIALS
PROJECT: PROPOSED BUNKHOUSE FOR DRYING FISH (Scheme 1)
LOCATION: Nibaliw. San Fabian, Pangasinan
CODE
DESCRIPTION
QTY
UNIT
UNIT COST
TOTAL COST
REMARKS
I
Excavation
cum
II
Backfilling
III
Concrete and Masonry
Portland Cement
bags
100/bag
P 2,500.00
Ordinary Sand
cum
240/cum
Ordinary Gravel
cum
350/cum
150 mm CHB (ord.)
pcs
650/pc
10 mm RSB x 6.00 mm
pcs
48/pc
12 mm RSB x or., mm
pcs
60/pc
6.1 # 16 Wire
kl
30/kl
SUB-TOTAL
P 7,195.00
IV
Carpentry
Nets (use nets second)
lnm
P 500.00
Bamboo
pcs
45/DC
4x4x12 Oost Coco lu
pcs
7.50/bdf
2x6x10 GIRTS
pcs
7.55g/bdf
2x5x10 Rafter
pcs
7.50/bdf
2x3x10 Purlins
pcs
7.50/bdf
2x3x8 Vert/Hor. stud
pcs.
7.50/bdf
2x3x8 Shelves Framing
pcs.
7.50/bdf
2x2x10 Shelves Framing
pcs.
7.50/bdf
SUB-TOTAL
P 12,655.0
V
Roofing
Corr. Plastic Roofing
pcs
120/pc
P 3,960.00
SUB-TOTAL
P 3,960.00
VI
Miscellaneous H'ware
#5 CWN
kls
27.50/kl
P 165.00
#4 CWN
kls
27 50/kl
#3 CWN
kls
27 50/kl
#2 CWN
kls
27.50/kl
#1 CWN
kls
27.50/kl
Roofing Nail (Umbrella)
kls
60/kl
1/8x2x12 Post Scrap/Bolts & Nuts
sets
70/set
SUB-TOTAL
P 1,310.00
SUB-TOTAL
P 25,120.00
GRAND TOTAL
P 34,351.60
SAY
P 34,500.00
I TOTAL MATERIAL COST
II LABOR COST (35%)
III CONTIGENGENCIES (5%)
NOTE:
* ALL LUMBER TO BE USED ARE OF GOOD QUALITY COCO LUMBER
* FLOORING SHALL BE OF PLAIN CEMENT
* SEVEN LAYERS OF DRYING SHELVES MADE OF BAMBOO SLATS ON COCO LUMBER FRAMING
PROJECT: PROPOSED BUNKHOUSE FOR DRYING FISH (Scheme 1)
LOCATION: Nibaliw. San Fabian, Pangasinan
CODE
DESCRIPTION
QTY
UNIT
UNIT COST
TOTAL COST
REMARKS
I
Excavation
II
Backfilling
III
Concrete and Masonry
Portland Cement
bags
100/bag
P 1,000.00
Ordinary Sand
cum
240/cum
Ordinary Gravel
cum
350/cum
150 mm CHB (ord.)
pcs
650/pc
10 mm RSB x 6.00 mm
pcs
48/pc
6.1 # 16 Wire
kl
30/kl
SUB-TOTAL
P 3,855.00
IV
Carpentry
Nets (use nets second)
lnm
P 500.00
Bamboo
pcs
45/DC
4x4x12 Oost Coco lu
pcs
7.50/bdf
2x6x10 GIRTS
pcs
7.55g/bdf
2x6x10 GIRTS
pcs
7.55g/bdf
2x5x10 Rafter
pcs
7.50/bdf
2x3x10 Purlins
pcs
7.50/bdf
2x3x8 Vert/Hor. stud
pcs.
7.50/bdf
2x3x8 Shelves Framing
pcs.
7.50/bdf
2x2x10 Shelves Framing
pcs.
7.50/bdf
SUB-TOTAL
P 12,355.0
V
Roofing
Corr. Plastic Roofing
pcs
120/pc
P 3,960.00
SUB-TOTAL
P 3,960.00
VI
Miscellaneous H'ware
#5 CWN
kls
27.50/kl
P 165.00
#4 CWN
kls
27 50/kl
#3 CWN
kls
27 50/kl
#2 CWN
kls
27.50/kl
#1 CWN
kls
27.50/kl
Roofing Nail (Umbrella)
kls
60/kl
1/8x2x12 Post Scrap/Bolts & Nuts
sets
70/set
SUB-TOTAL
P 1,310.00
SUB-TOTAL
P 21,480.00
GRAND TOTAL
P 29,373.90
SAY
P 30,000.00
I TOTAL MATERIAL COST
II LABOR COST (35%)
III CONTIGENGENCIES (5%)
NOTE:
* ALL LUMBER TO BE USED ARE OF GOOD QUALITY COCO LUMBER
* FLOORING SHALL BE OF PLAIN CEMENT
* SEVEN LAYERS OF DRYING SHELVES MADE OF BAMBOO SLATS ON COCO LUMBER FRAMING
PROPOSED BUNKHOUSE FOR FISH DRYING
ASSUMPTIONS TO THE FINANCIAL PROJECTIONS
1. No. of Operating days per auntie : 20
2. The Bunkhouse can accommodate about 1,000 kilograms of fish for drying everyday
3. Volume and cost of fresh fish Per Month
SPECIES
VOLUME
FREQUENCY
TOTAL VOL. PER MONTH W/O B'HSE
TOTAL VOL PER MONTH W/ B'HSE
COST PER
WITHOUT BUNKHOUSE
WITH BUNKHOUSE
(kg)
(kg)
(kg)
KG
SCHEME 1
SCHEME 2
BOLASI
4 x/week
P20.00
TUYO
15 boxes
daily
@ 30 kgs
TOTAL
4. Cost of Salt Per Month
SPECIES
TOTAL VOLUME PER MONTH
RATIO OF SALT TO FISH
TOTAL VOL. OF SALT
COST OF SALT
WITHOUT BUNKHOUSE
WITH BUNKHOUSE
WITH
W/O
WITH
W/O
/ SACK
SCHEME 1
SCHEME 2
BOLASI
1 SACK TO
P 7,560
P 9,765
P 9,765
10 BOXES
TUYO
-DO-
TOTAL
P 17,010
P 22,050
P 22,050
5 Labor Cost Per Month
WITHOUT
WITH BUNKHOUSE
BUNKHOUSE
(Both Schemes)
No. of Persons
No. of Mandays/ Month *
Rate Per Day
TOTAL LABOR COST
P 6,000
P7,800
* Every other day
6. Packaging Materials
Total Production Per Month
P 8,500
P 11,475
No. Of Boxes required
Cost per Box
Total Cost of boxes
7. Delivery Expense (Rent of Delivery Jeep Per Month)
No. of Boxes Per Month
Delivery Cost Per 80x
TOTAL
P 2,125
P 2,870
8. Production/ Sales Per Month
Production Per Month (kg)
Average Price Per Kilo
P 62.50
P 62.50
Sales Per Month
P 531,250
P 717,188
9. Total Project Cost
SCHEME 1
SCHEME 2
LBP LOAN
EQUITY
TOTAL PROJECT COST
LBP LOAN
EQUITY
TOTAL PROJECT COST
Bunkhouse Capital Cost
P 34,500
P 34,500
P 30,000
P 30,000
Incremental Cost of
Fresh Fish
Salt
Packaging Materials
Incremental Optng. Cost
Labor Cost
P 1,800
P 1,800
Delivery Expenses
SOB-TOTAL
P 158,257
P 2,545
P 160,802
P 153,757
P 2,545
P 156,302
Cost without Bunkhouse
Cost of Fish
Cost of Salt
Cost of Pckg'g. Mat'ls.
1,27S
Optag. Costs - Labor
Delivery Expense
SUB-TOTAL
P -
TOTAL PROJECT COST
P 158,257
P 442,955
P 601,212
P 153,757
P 442,955
P 596,712
10. Repair & Maintenance Cost is 5 X of capital cost of Bunkhouse divided by 12 months.
11. Schedule of Loan Amortization
The loan is payable in 12 months at 14 X interest per annum.
MONTH
SCHEME 1
SCHEME 2
TOTAL AMORTIZATION
PRINCIPAL
INTEREST
BALANCE
TOTAL AMORTIZATION
PRINCIPAL
INTEREST
BALANCE
TOT
NOTE: Some figures may not add up to totals due to rounding.
12. Computation of Depreciation Cost
ITEM
TOTAL COST
LIFE SPAN (yrs)
WITHOUT BUNKHOUSE
WITH BUNKHOUSE
SCHEME 1
SCHEME 2
Drying Trays
Banera (35 pcs X 140/pc.
Bunkhouse
Scheme 1
Scheme 2
Annex 2
FINANCIAL FEASIBILITY STUDY FOR VARIOUS FISHERY PRODUCTS IN CAPIZ AND PANGASINAN
1. Bottled Cooked Shrimp Paste
1.1 Project Cost and Financing Plan
To implement the project, a total of P24,575.00 is required. Breakdown of the project cost and the corresponding fund sources are presented below:
Item
LBP Loan
W.A. Equity
Total Project Cost
Cost of Raw Mat'ls/
Ingredients
P6,125
(Item 3, App. 1)
Bottles
Facilities & Equipment:
Salting Vats
P1,500
Working Table
Gas Stove
Pressure Cooker
Weighing Scale
Misc. Kitchen Tools
Operating Costs:
Fuel/Water
Labor Cost
Transportation Cost
Misc. Optng. Cost
TOTAL
P20,025
P4,550
P24,575
Percent of Total (%)
1.2 Result of Financial Projections
Through a series of financial projections shown in Schedules 1-A to 1-C, the project's financial profitability was appraised.
The project is expected to generate total sales revenues amounting to P67,200.00 per month yielding an average monthly net profit of P7,078.00
(Schedule 1-A).
As shown in Schedule 1-B, the project will be able to provide its cash requirements for operations as well as amortize the loan and the corresponding interest payments as presented in Schedule 1-C.
1.3 Measures of Financial Profitability
Selected profitability indicators were estimated using the financial projections, the results of which are as follows:
Return on Investment (ROI):
Payback Period:
3.47 Months
Profit Margin :
1.4 Break-Even Point Analysis
Since the project is a manufacturing concern, break-even point analysis is very significant. With the use of the break-even formula, the following break-even points were arrived at:
Break-even Sales Volume Per Month:
170 bottles
Break-even Selling Price:
P10.736/bottle
Therefore, on a monthly basis the project should be able to sell 170 bottles of cooked shrimp paste in order to cover all costs including interest payments on the LBP loan. At this sales volume level, the project would neither incur loss nor make a profit. The project's sales volume should never go beyond this level.
Similarly, selling price per bottle should not be lower than P10.736. It is this price which covers both variable and fixed costs, but provides no profit.
1.5 Conclusion as to Financial Viability
The results of this study indicate that the project is highly profitable. Coupled with its economic significance, in the micro scale, of increasing the value-added to the raw materials, the project is highly recommended for financing.
Appendix 1
ASSUMPTIONS TO THE FINANCIAL PROJECTIONS
1. Production Cycle:
One week (7 Man-days)
Preparation of Shrimp:
One Man-day
Fermentation:
Six Man-days
Cooking, bottling, washing and labelling:
One Man-day
2. No. of Production Cycles Per Month: Four
3. Raw Materials Cost per Cycle (Variable Costs)
Kind
Qty.
Unit
Unit Cost
Total Cost
Small Shrimps
kg.
P15.00
P1,500.00
Salt
kg.
Corn Oil
gal.
Garlic
kg.
Sugar
kg.
Vinegar
liter
TOTAL
P6,125.00
Cost of Raw Materials/Ingredients Per Month' P24,500.00
4. Operating Expenses Per Cycle (Variable Costs)
Item
Amount
Fuel/Water
P 50.00
Labor Cost (3 man-days x P100/day)
Transportation Cost (P1.00 per bottle)
Miscellanous Expenses
TOTAL
P1,850.00
Total Operating Costs Per Month: P7,400.00
5. Computation of Depreciation Cost
Item
Qty.
Unit Cost
Total Cost
Est. Life
Annual Dep'n
(Yrs.)
Cost
Salting Vats
2 pcs.
P750
P1,500
P 150
Working Table
1 pc.
Gas Stove
1 pc.
Pressure Cooker
1 pc.
Weighing Scale
1 pc.
Misc. Kitchen Tools
1 set
TOTAL
P1,012.50
Total Monthly Depreciation Cost
6. Cost of Bottles
1,400 pcs. x P5.00/bottle
Per Cycle : P7,000.00
Per Month : 28,000.00
7. Pricing Scheme
Cost Per Bottle
Variable Costs:
Raw Mat'ls/Ingredients
P4.375
Bottles
Operating Costs
SUB-TOTAL
P10.696
Fixed Costs:
Depreciation Cost
Interest Expense
SUB-TOTAL
P 0.040
TOTAL COST PER BOTTLE
P10.736
MARK-UP (12% of Total Cost)
SELLING PRICE PER BOTTLE
P12.000
8. Sales Revenues
Per Week (1,400 bottles x P12.00/bottle):
P16,800.00
Per Month (5,600 bottles x P12.00/bottle):
2. Smoked fish
2.1 Project Cost and Sources of Funds
Implementation-of the project necessitates the following cost components which will be drawn from the fund sources as indicated- below:
Item
LBP Loan
Pax Equity
Raw Materials/Ingredients
(Item 3, Appendix 2)
a. Milkfish Traditional
P1,300
b. Milkfish Deboned
c. Small Fish
Packaging Materials
(Item 4, Appendix 2)
a. Milkfish Traditional
P 60
b. Milkfish Deboned
c. Small fish
Facilities and Equipment
Smoke House
P1,000
Working Table
P1,200
Cooking Vat
Basins/Pails
Weighing Scale
Plastic Sealing Machine
Misc. Kitchen Tools
TOTAL
P5,900
P1,200
Operating Costs: P 350
The project may be implemented using either of the following three options based on the type of smoked fish products:
Option 1: Smoking of Milkfish- Traditional Way
Option 2: Smoking of Boneless Milkfish
Option 3: Smoking of Small Fish (Herring and Scads)
The project cost and fund sources for each option is hereunder-presented for comparison:
Item
LBP Loan
Pax Equity
Total Project Cost
OPTION 1: Milkfish - Traditional
Raw Mat'ls/Ingredients
P1,300
P1,300
Packaging Materials
Facilities & Eqpmt.
P1,200
Operating Expenses
TOTAL
P7,260
P1,150
P8,810
Percent of Total (%)
OPTION 2: Milkfish - Deboned
Raw Mat'ls/Ingredients
P1,480
P1,480
Packaging Materials
Facilities & Eqpmt.
P1,200
Operating Expenses
TOTAL
P7,440
P1,150
Percent of Total (%)
OPTION 2: Small Fish
Raw Mat'ls/Ingredients
P2,000
P2,000
Packaging Materials
Facilities & Eqpmt.
P1,200
Operating Expenses
TOTAL
P7,972
P1,550
Percent of Total (%)
2.2 Results of Financial Projections
Using accepted tools for financial analysis, the project's financial profitability under the different options was assessed the results of which are shown in Schedules 2-A to 2-C and summarized below:
Financial Results
Option 1
Option 2
Option 3
Total Monthly Sales
(P)
Gross Profit On Sales
(P)
Average Monthly Net Profit
(P)
2.3 Measures of Financial Profitability
The following profitability indicators were selected and estimated: for the three alternatives:
Financial Indicators
Option 1
Option 2
Option 3
Return on Investment
Payback Period
(Mos.)
Profit Margin
2.4 Break-Even Point Analysis
Project operations should be guided by the breakeven points in terms of sales volume and selling price per unit on a monthly basis as indicated below for each options:
Break-Even Points
Option 1
Option 2
Option 3
Break-Even Sales Volume Per Mo.
(Packs)
Break-Even Selling Price Per Unit
(P/pack)
Therefore, in: order to operate at break-even monthly sales volume should never be lower than the figures indicated. Correspondingly, with selling prices at break-even point, the project will recover both the fixed and variable costs.
2.5 Conclusion as to Financial Viability
On the basis of the above indicators Option 2 is recommended for implementation. As shown in Schedule 2-B, the project under Option 2 will be able to provide the daily cash requirements for the operation, as well as the loan amortizations according to the schedule (Schedule 2-C).
Appendix 2
ASSUMPTIONS TO THE FINANCIAL PROJECTIONS
1. Production Cycle:
One Day
2. No. of Production Cycles Per Month:
Four (4)
3. Paw Materials and Ingredients (Variable Costs) Per Cycle
Unit
Milkfish Traditional
Deboned
Small Fish
kg.
kg.
kg.
Quantity
Unit Cost
P65.00
P74.00*
P50.00
Total Cost Per Cycle
P1,300.00
P1,480.00
P2,000.00 .
Total Cost Per Month
*Includes cost of fish (three pieces per kilo) of P65.00 per kilo and labor cost for deponing of P3.00 per piece.
4. Packaging Materials
Milkfish
Traditional
Deboned
Small Fish
No. of Kilos Per Cycle
No. of Pieces Per Kilo
No. of Pieces/kg. Per Pack
1 pc.
1 pc.
1/2 kg.
No. of Packs Per Cycle
Cost of Packaging Mat'.ls. Per Piece
P1.00
P1.00
P1.00
Total Cost Per Cycle.
Per Month
6. Operating Costs per Cycle (Variable Costs)
Item
Amount
Fuel/Water
P 50.00
Labor Cost (2 mandays x P100/day)
Misc. Expenses
TOTAL
P 350.00
Total Operating Cost Per Mo:
P1,400.00
7. Computation of Depreciation Cost
ITEM
QTY.
UNIT COST
TOTAL COST
EST. LIFE SPAN. (Yrs.)
ANNUAL DEP'N.
Smoke House
(Barrel Type)
P1,000
P1,000
P 100
Working Table
Cooking Vat
Basin/Pails.
1 set
Weighing Scale
Plastic Sealing Machine
Misc. Kitchen Tools
1 set
TOTAL
P7,100
P1,005
Total Depreciation Cost Per Month: P 83.75
8. Selling Prices and Sales Revenues
Option
Selling Price Per Pack
No. of Packs Per Cycle
Sales Per Cycle
Per Mo.
Milkfish:
Traditional
P 35.00
P2,100
P8,400
Deboned
Small Fish
9. Pricing Scheme
Cost Per Pack
Milkfish
Small Fish
Traditional
Deboned
Variable Costs
Raw Mat'ls/Ingredients
P 21.67
P24.67
P 28.00
Packaging Materials
Operating Costs
SUB-TOTAL
P 28.50
P 31.50
P 33.86
Fixed Costs
Depreciation Cost
(P83.75 / 4 cycles - No. of Packs)
P 0.34
P 0.34
P 0.34
Interest Expense .
(Ave. Mo. Int / 4 cycles - No. of Packs )
SUB-TOTAL
P 0.55
P 0.55
P 0.53
TOTAL COST PER PACK
P29.05
P32.05
P34.39
MAPK-UP
Percent of Total Cost (%)
SELLING PRICE PEP PACK
P35.00
P40.00
P40.00
10. The loan is payable within a period of six months at 14% interest per annum.
Schedule 2-A1
SMOKED FISH
OPTION 1: MILKFISH-TRADITIONAL
PROJECTED INCOME STATEMENT
GROSS SALES
Less: Cost of Sales
Raw Material/Ingredients
Packaging Materials
TOTAL
GROSS PROFIT ON SALES
Less: Operating Costs
Depreciation Cost
TOTAL
Operating Profit
Less: Interest Expense
NET PROFIT
Computation of:
1. Return On Investment
[2. Payback Period]
[3. Profit Margin]
[4. Break-Even Analysis]
[4.1 Break-Even Sales Volume Per Month]
[4.2 Break-Even S.P. Per Unit]
[Schedule 2-A2]
[SMOKED FISH]
[OPTION 2: DEBONED MILKFISH]
[PROJECTED INCOME STATEMENT]
[GROSS SALES]
[Less: Cost of Sales]
[Raw Material/Ingredients]
[Packaging Materials]
[TOTAL]
[GROSS PROFIT ON SALES]
[Less: Operating Costs]
[Depreciation Cost]
[TOTAL]
[Operating Profit]
[Less: Interest Expense]
[NET PROFIT]
[Computation of:]
[1. Return On Investment]
[2. Payback Period]
[3. Profit Margin]
[4. Break-Even Analysis]
[4.1 Break-Even Sales Volume Per Month]
[4.2 Break-Even S.P. Per Unit]
[Schedule 2-A3]
[SMOKED FISH]
[OPTION 3: SMALL FISH]
[PROJECTED INCOME STATEMENT]
[GROSS SALES]
[Less: Cost of Sales]
[Raw Material/Ingredients]
[Packaging Materials]
[TOTAL]
[GROSS PROFIT ON SALES]
[Less: Operating Costs]
[Depreciation Cost]
[TOTAL]
[Operating Profit]
[Less: Interest Expense]
[NET PROFIT]
[Computation of:]
[1. Return On Investment]
[2. Payback Period]
[3. Profit Margin]
[4. Break-Even Analysis]
[4.1 Break-Even Sales Volume Per Month]
[4.2 Break-Even S.P. Per Unit]
[Schedule 2-B]
[SMOKED FISH]
[OPTION 2: MILKFISH - DEBONED]
[PROJECTED CASH FLOW STATEMENT]
[CASH BALANCE, BEG.]
[Sources of Funds]
[Loan Proceeds]
[Equity]
[Sales]
[TOTAL CASH AVAILABLE]
[APPLICATION OF FUNDS:]
[Facilities & Equipment]
[Raw Materials & Ingredients]
[Packaging Mat'ls.]
[Operating Exp. *]
[Loan Amortization]
[TOTAL CASH OUTFLOW]
[* Net Depreciation Cost]
[Schedule 2-C]
[SMOKED FISH]
[LOAN AMORTIZATION SCHEDULE]
[OPTION 1: MILKFISH TRADITIONAL]
[MONTH]
[TOTAL AMORTIZATION]
[PRINCIPAL]
[INTEREST]
[BALANCE]
[TOTAL]
[OPTION 2 : MILKFISH - DEBONED]
[TOTAL]
[OPTION 3: SMALL FISH]
[TOTAL]
[* May not add up to totals due to rounding.]
[3. Tuna ham]
[3.1 Project Cost and Financing Plan]
[A total of P32,143.00 is required to implement the project. This amount will be sourced and utilized as follows:]
[Item]
[LBP Loan]
[Pax Equity]
[Total Project Cost]
[Cost of Raw Mat'ls./Ingredients]
[P13,753]
[P13,753]
[- Packaging Materials]
[P 240]
[Facilities & Eqpmt.]
[Refrigerator]
[Smoke House -]
[Kitchen Utensils]
[Plastic Sealer]
[Operating Costs]
[Electricity/Water/Fuel]
[Labor Cost]
[Misc. Expenses]
[TOTAL]
[P29,753]
[P2,390]
[P32,143]
[Percent of Total (%)]
[3.2 Results of Financial Projections]
[A series of financial projections was undertaken to ascertain the financial profitability of the project. The results are shown in Schedules 3-A to 3-C.]
[The project will generate gross sales amounting to P76,000.00 per month yielding an average monthly net profit of PS,471.50 (Schedule 3-A).]
[No serious cash flow problem is foreseen as the project is expected to generate adequate funds to sustain its operation and pay for its-debt-service obligations as presented in Schedule 5-C.]
[3.3 Measures of Financial Profitability ]
[The project has been found to be financially viable based on the following indicators]
[Return on Investment (ROI):]
[Payback Period:]
[5.87 Months]
[Profit Margin]
[3.4 Break-Even Point Analysis]
[Using the break-even formula, determination of the break-even points will provide very important guideposts in the operation of the project. On a monthly basis, the project should be able to dispose 10.31 packs of tuna ham to cover all costs including interest payments on the. loan. At this level of sales volume, the project will just break-even, i.e., no loss nor profit. The project's sales volume should at all times never be lower than this level.]
[On the other hand, selling price should never go beyond P146.32 per pack in order to cover both variable and fixed costs. However, there is no profit at the break-even selling-price.]
[Please refer to Schedule 3-A for details.]
[3.5 Conclusion a- to Financial Viability]
[The ensuing study, therefore, points out the financial profitability of the project which also demonstrates how fish processing technologies can add economic value to fishery products and help expand the income opportunities of women in fishing communities.]
[The potentials : of the finished product in the export market is another plus factor that should be developed through technology improvement, quality control and packaging innovations, among others.]
[The project is, therefore, recommended for financing.]
[Appendix 3]
[ASSUMPTIONS TO THE FINANCIAL PROJECTIONS]
[1. Production Cycle : One Week]
[Preparation of tuna fillets:]
[One man-day]
[Curing:]
[Five man-days]
[Washing/draining, smoking and cooling/packing:]
[One man-day]
[2. No. of Production Cycles Per Month: Four]
[3. Production Volume]
[Per cycle:]
[100 Packs]
[Per Month:]
[400 Packs]
[4. Raw Materials Cost Per Cycle (Variable Costs)]
[Kind]
[Unit]
[Qty.]
[Unit Cost]
[Total Cost]
[Fresh Tuna]
[kg.]
[P50.00]
[P15,000.00]
[Sugar]
[kg.]
[Salt]
[kg.]
[White wine]
[liter]
[Salt Peter]
[tsp.]
[Ascorbic acid]
[pc.]
[Pineapple Juice]
[gal.]
[Brown Sugar]
[kg.]
[Bay leaves]
[gram]
[TOTAL]
[P16,753.00]
[Cost of Raw Mat'ls./Ingredients Per Mo:]
[P61,012.00]
[5. Operating Expenses Per Cycle (Variable Casts)]
[Item]
[Amount]
[Electricity/Water/Fuel]
[P150.00]
[Labor Cost (3 man-days x P100/day)]
[Miscellanous Expenses]
[TOTAL]
[P550.00]
[Total Operating Costs Per Mo.:]
[P2,200.00]
[6. Computation of Depreciation Cost]
[Item]
[Qty.]
[Unit Cost]
[Total Cost]
[Est. Life Span (yrs.)]
[Annual Dep'n.]
[Refrigerator]
[P15,000]
[P15,000]
[P1,500]
[Smoke House]
[Kitchen Utensils]
[1 set]
[Plastic Sealer]
[TOTAL]
[P17,600]
[P1,825]
[Total Monthly Depreciation Cost: P152.08]
[7. Cost of Packaging Materials]
[Per Cycle (100 pcs. x P2.40/pc.):]
[P240.00]
[Per Month (400 pcs. x 2.40/pc.):]
[8. Pricing Scheme]
[Cost Per Pack]
[Variable Costs]
[Paw Materials/Ingredients]
[P 137.53]
[Packaging Materials]
[Operating Costs]
[SUB-TOTAL]
[P 145.43]
[Fixed Costs:]
[Depreciation Cost]
[P 0.38]
[Interest Expense*]
[SUB-TOTAL]
[P 0.89]
[TOTAL COST PER PACK]
[P 146.32]
[MARK-UP (23% of Total Cost)]
[SELLING PRICE PEP PACK]
[P 180.00]
[* Based on average monthly interest. ]
[9. Sales Revenues]
[Per Week: ]
[Tuna Ham (100 packs x P180/pack)]
[P18,000.00]
[Fresh Head & BeIly Scrap (50 kgs. x P20/kg.)]
[Total Sales Per Week]
[P19,000.00]
[Per Month]
[P76,000.00]
[10. The loan is payable within six months at 14/. interest per annum.]
[Schedule 3-A]
[PROJECTED INCOME STATEMENT]
[GROSS SALES]
[Less: Cost of Sales]
[Raw Material/Ingredients]
[Packaging Materials]
[TOTAL]
[GROSS PROFIT ON SALES]
[Less: Operating Costs]
[Depreciation Cost]
[TOTAL]
[Operating Profit]
[Less: Interest Expense]
[NET PROFIT]
[Computation of:]
[1. Return On Investment]
[2. Payback Period]
[3. Profit Margin]
[4. Break-Even Analysis]
[4.1 Break-Even Sales Volume Per Month]
[4.2 Break-Even S.P. Per Unit]
[Schedule 3-B]
[PROJECTED CASH FLOW STATEMENT]
[CASH BALANCE, BEG.]
[SOURCES OF FUNDS:]
[Loan Proceeds]
[Equity]
[Sales]
[TOTAL CASH AVAILABLE]
[APPLICATION OF FUNDS:]
[Facilities & Equipment]
[Raw Materials & Ingredients]
[Packaging Mat'ls.]
[Operating Exp. *]
[Loan Amortization]
[TOTAL CASH OUTFLOW]
[* Net Depreciation Cost]
[Schedule 3-C]
[LOAN AMORTIZATION SCHEDULE]
[MONTH]
[TOTAL AMORTIZATION]
[PRINCIPAL]
[INTEREST]
[BALANCE]
[TOTAL]
[* May not add up to totals due to rounding.]
[4. Oyster sauce ]
[4 1 Project Cost and Sources of Funds]
[The project requires a total amount of P14,868.00 for its implementation. The sources and uses of funds are as follows:]
[Item]
[LBP Loan]
[Pax Equity]
[Total Project Cost]
[Cost of Raw Mat'ls. Ingredients]
[P 998]
[P 998]
[Bottles]
[Facilities & Eqpmt.:]
[Pressure Cooker]
[Osterizer]
[Gas Stove]
[Cooking Kettles]
[Working Table]
[P1,200]
[Weighing Scale]
[Misc. Kitchen Tools]
[Operating Costs:]
[Fuel/Water]
[Transportation Cost]
[Labor Cost]
[- Misc. Expenses]
[TOTAL]
[P2,998]
[P1,870]
[P14,868]
[Percent of Total (%)]
[4.2 Results of Financial Projections]
[As shown in Schedules 4-A to 4-C, the project has been found to be financially profitable. In fact, it is expected to generate sales amounting to P17,920..00 per month yielding an average monthly net profit of P4,645.00]
[Income and cash flow projections indicate continuous profitable project operation wit-in no cash flow problem. Funds generated from operations will be able to provide the daily cash requirements of the project as well as the loan amortizations to be paid to the bank.]
[4.3 Measures of Financial Profitability]
[To assess the profitability of the project, the following financial indicators were computed and summarized below:]
[Return on Investment (ROI):]
[Payback Period:]
[3.20 Months]
[Profit Margin:]
[4,4 Break-Even Point analysis ]
[Like any manufacturing concern, break-even point analysis is a very significant tool for financial analysis. Using the break-even formula, the following breakeven points were computed:]
[Break-Even Sales volume Per Mo.:]
[Bottles Break-Even Selling Price Per Unit:]
[P10.371]
[4.5 Conclusion as to Financial Viability]
[The project is highly profitable as indicated by the results of the study. It is likewise economically desirable since the processing technology increases the value-added to the raw materials.]
[It is therefore recommended for financing.]
[APPENDIX 4]
[ASSUMPTIONS TO THE FINANCIAL PROJECTIONS]
[1. Production Cycle: One day]
[No. of Cycles]
[- Per Week:]
[One]
[- Per Month:]
[Four]
[2. Production Volume]
[- Per Cycle:]
[320 Bottles]
[- Per Month:]
[1,280 Battles]
[Raw Materials and Ingredients (Variable Casts) Per Cycle]
[Kind:]
[Unit]
[Qty.]
[Unit Cost]
[Total Cost]
[Oyster Meat]
[kg.]
[P 10.00]
[P 100.00]
[Brown Sugar]
[kg.]
[Corn Starch]
[kg.]
[HVP ]
[gram]
[Caramel Color]
[liter]
[Sodium Benzoate]
[gram]
[Salt]
[kg.]
[TOTAL]
[P 997.50]
[Cost of Paw Materials/Ingredients Per Mo.:]
[P3,990.00]
[4. Cost of Bottles ]
[Per Cycle (320 bottles x P5.00/bottle):]
[P1,600.00]
[Per Month (320 bottles x 4 x P5.00/bottle):]
[5. Operating Costs Per Cycle (Variable Costs)]
[Item]
[Amount]
[Fuel/Water]
[P 50.00]
[Transportation Cost (320 bottles x P1.00/bottle)]
[Labor Cost (2 man-days x P100.00/day)]
[Miscellaneous Expenses]
[TOTAL COST]
[- Per Cycle]
[P670.00]
[- Per Month]
[P2 680;00]
[6. Computation of Depreciation Cost]
[Item]
[Qty.]
[Unit Cost]
[Total Cost]
[Est. Life Span (Yrs.)]
[Annual Dep'n.]
[Pressure Cooker]
[P5,000]
[P5,000]
[P500]
[Osterizer]
[Gas Stove]
[Cooking Kettles]
[Working Table]
[Weighing Scale]
[Misc. Kitchen Tools]
[1 set]
[TOTAL DEPRECIATION COST]
[- Annual]
[P1,392.50]
[- Per Month]
[P 116.04]
[7. Pricing Scheme]
[Cost Per Bottle]
[Variable Costs:]
[Raw Materials/Ingredients]
[P 3.117]
[Bottle]
[Operating Costs]
[SUB-TOTAL]
[P10.211]
[Fixed Costs:]
[Depreciation Cost]
[P 0.014]
[Interest Expense]
[SUB-TOTAL]
[P 0.025]
[TOTAL COST PER BOTTLE]
[P10.236]
[MARK-UP (36X. of Total Cost)]
[SELLING PRICE PER BOTTLE]
[P14.000]
[* Based on Average Monthly Interest. ]
[8. Sales Revenues]
[Per Cycle (320 x P14.00/bottIe):]
[P 4,480.00]
[Per Month (320 x 4 cycles/week x P14.00/bottle):]
[9. The loan is payable within a period of six months at 14% interest per annum.]
[Schedule 4-A]
[PROJECTED INCOME STATEMENT]
[GROSS SALES]
[Less: Cost of Sales]
[Raw Material/Ingredients]
[Packaging Materials]
[TOTAL]
[GROSS PROFIT ON SALES]
[Less: Operating Costs]
[Depreciation Cost]
[TOTAL]
[Operating Profit]
[Less: Interest Expense]
[NET PROFIT]
[Computation of:]
[1. Return On Investment]
[2. Payback Period]
[3. Profit Margin]
[4. Break-Even Analysis]
[4.1 Break-Even Sales Volume Per Month]
[4.2 Break-Even S.P. Per Unit]
[Schedule 4-B]
[PROJECTED CASH FLOW STATEMENT]
[CASH BALANCE, BEG.]
[SOURCES OF FUNDS:]
[Loan Proceeds]
[Equity]
[Sales]
[TOTAL CASH AVAILABLE]
[APPLICATION OF FUNDS:]
[Facilities & Equipment]
[Raw Materials & Ingredients]
[Packaging Mat'ls.]
[Operating Exp. *]
[Loan Amortization]
[TOTAL CASH OUTFLOW]
[* Net Depreciation Cost]
[Schedule 4-C]
[LOAN AMORTIZATION SCHEDULE]
[MONTH]
[TOTAL AMORTIZATION]
[PRINCIPAL]
[INTEREST]
[BALANCE]
[TOTAL]
[* May not add up to totals due to rounding.]
[5.1 Project Cost and Financing Scheme]
[The project :requires an investment amounting to P19,623.00 for implementation to be financed according to the following scheme:]
[Item]
[LBP Loan]
[Pax Equity.]
[Total Project Cost]
[Cost of Raw Materials/Ingredients (Item 4, Appendix 5)]
[P5,323]
[P5,323]
[Bottles]
[Facilities & Eqpmt. (Item 7, Appendix .5)]
[Operating Costs (Item 6, Appendix 5)]
[P1,400]
[TOTAL]
[P18,223]
[P1,400]
[P19,623]
[Percent of. Total (%)]
[5.2 Results of Financial Projections]
[The-project's financial profitability was appraised through a series of financial projections and analyst 5 the results of which are presented in Schedules 5-A to SC.]
[The project its expected to generate total. sales revenues reaching P50,400.00 per month yielding an average monthly net profit of P5,300.00 (Schedule 5-A).]
[As shown in Schedule 1-B, the project's cash requirements will be adequately. provided from its operation, and at the sane time,. providing for its debt-service obligations.]
[5.3 Measures of Financial Profitability]
[Selected profitability indicators were estimated using the financial projections. The results are as follows:]
[a) The project will generate 28.98. return on its initial investment of P19,623.00;]
[b) This. initial investment will- be recouped within a period of 3.70 months; and]
[c) Product sales will yield a profit margin of 47.7%.]
[5.4 Break-Even Point Analysis]
[Being a manufacturing concern, the project should observe and be guided by the break-even points which have been computed and are hereunder presented:]
[Break-even Sales Volume Per Month:]
[136 Bottles]
[Break-even Selling Price Per Unit:]
[P12.53]
[It is significant to note 'that at the break-even sales . volume level, all costs including- interest payments on-the loan are covered. However, the project will neither make profit nor incur looses. The project, therefore', should be able to sell more-than this breakeven sates volume per month.]
[Similarly, selling price per bottle should not be lower than P12.53. It is this price per unit which covers both- variable and fixed costs, but provides no profit.]
[5.5 Conclusion as to Financial Viability]
[This study indicates that the project is highly viable from the financial standpoint. At the same time, it is economically significant due to its ability to add more economic value to the fishery raw materials which would otherwise have lower economic value without the introduction of the processing technology. ]
[All these benefits will redound to the socio-economic uplifting of the women-participants through improvement of their income opportunities.]
[APPENDIX 5]
[ASSUMPTIONS TO THE FINANCIAL PROJECTIONS]
[1. Production Cycle]
[One day]
[2. No. of Production Cycles Per Month:]
[Four (once a week)]
[3. Production Volume]
[Per Cycle:]
[900 Bottles]
[Per Month:]
[3,600 Bottles]
[4. Paw Materials and Ingredients (Variable Costs ) Per Cycle]
[Kind]
[Unit]
[Qty.]
[Unit Cost]
[Total Cost]
[kg.]
[P 15.00]
[P 1,500]
[Corn Oil]
[liter]
[Pickles]
[kg.]
[Cloves]
[gal.]
[Oil]
[gal.]
[Bay Leaves]
[gram]
[Black Pepper]
[kg.]
[Hot Pepper (Sili)]
[pc.]
[Salt]
[kg.]
[TOTAL]
[P5.323]
[Total Cost of Raw Mat'ls./Ingredients Per Month:]
[P21,292]
[5. Bottles]
[Per Cycle (900 bottles x P5.00/bottle):]
[P 4,500]
[Per Month (900 bottles x 4 cycles x P5.00/bottle):]
[6. Operating-Costs-Per Cycle (Variable Costs)]
[Item]
[Amount]
[Fuel/water]
[P 100.00]
[Transportation Cost]
[Labor Cost (3 man-days x P100/day)]
[Miscellaneous Expenses]
[TOTAL COST]
[- Per Cycle]
[P1,400.00]
[- Per Month]
[P5,600.00]
[7. Computation of Depreciation Cost]
[Item]
[Qty.]
[Unit Cost]
[Total Cost]
[Est.Life Span (Yrs.)]
[Annual Dep'n.]
[Pressure Cooker]
[P 5,000]
[P 5,000]
[P 500]
[Gas Stove]
[Working Table]
[Weighing Scale]
[Cooking Kettle]
[Misc. Kitchen Tools]
[1 set]
[TOTAL -]
[P8,400]
[P992.50]
[Total Depreciation Cost Per Month:]
[P 82.71]
[8. Pricing Scheme]
[Cost Per Bottle]
[Variable Costs:]
[Raw Materials/Ingredients]
[P. 5.914]
[Bottle]
[Operating Costs]
[SUB-TOTAL]
[P12.470]
[Fixed Costs:]
[Depreciation Cost]
[P 1.103]
[Interest Expense]
[SUB-TOTAL]
[P 1.242]
[TOTAL COST PER BOTTLE]
[P13.712]
[MARK-UP (2.1% of Total Cost)]
[SELLING PRICE PER BOTTLE]
[P14.000]
[* Based-on average monthly interest.]
[9. Sales Revenues]
[Per Cycle (900 battles x P14/bottle):]
[P 12,600.00]
[Per Month (900 bottles x 4 cycles x P14/bottle):]
[10. The loan is payable in six months at 14X interest per annum.]
[Schedule 5-A]
[PROJECTED INCOME STATEMENT]
[GROSS SALES]
[Less: Cost of Sales]
[Raw Material/Ingredients]
[Packaging Materials]
[TOTAL]
[GROSS PROFIT ON SALES]
[Less: Operating Costs]
[Depreciation Cost]
[TOTAL]
[Operating Profit]
[Less: Interest Expense]
[NET PROFIT]
[Computation of:]
[1. Return On Investment]
[2. Payback Period]
[3. Profit Margin]
[4. Break-Even Analysis]
[4.1 Break-Even Sales Volume Per Month]
[4.2 Break-Even S.P. Per Unit]
[Schedule 5-B]
[PROJECTED CASH FLOW STATEMENT]
[CASH BALANCE, BEG.]
[SOURCES OF FUNDS:]
[Loan Proceeds]
[Equity]
[Sales]
[TOTAL CASH AVAILABLE]
[APPLICATION OF FUNDS:]
[Facilities & Equipment]
[Raw Materials & Ingredients]
[Packaging Mat'ls.]
[Operating Exp. *]
[Loan Amortization]
[TOTAL CASH OUTFLOW]
[* Net Depreciation Cost]
[Schedule 5-C]
[LOAN AMORTIZATION SCHEDULE]
[MONTH]
[TOTAL AMORTIZATION]
[PRINCIPAL]
[INTEREST]
[BALANCE]
[TOTAL]
[* May not add up to totals due to rounding.]
<title>Consultancy report. Improving the Status of Disadvantaged Women in Small-Scale Fishing Communities </title>
<section>1</section>
[List of references]
[List of references]
[1. Asian Development Bank. "Project Performance Audit Report Laguna de Bay Fishpen Development Project in Philippines". 1987.]
[2. LLDA. Industry Profiles. 1990.]
[3. LLDA. Integrated Livelihood Project. 1991.]
[4. Punzalan, T. G. and Uriarte, G. G. Statistics A Simplified Approach. Rex Book Store: 1989.]
[5. Technical Board for Agricultural Credit. Evaluation of Integrated Rural Financing (IRF) Program (Consolidated Report. 1956.]
[6. UNFPA/FAO. Tripartite Review, PHI/89/P16. 1993.]
[7. UPLB Dept. of Agricultural Processing. Fish Drying Using UPLB Fish Drier. 1981.]
[9. Villareal, Lolita V. Monitoring Tools, PHI/59/P16. UNFAO: 1993.]
[10. various Brochures from FDSSD) Bureau of Fisheries & Aquatic Resources), Phil. Fishery Development Authority, Cooperative Development Authority, Dept. of Agriculture, Dept. of Trade and Industry.]
<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
This report consolidates the outputs of the IGP Consultant pursuant to her Contract of Services (SC) 94/014. This Consultancy Report is complemented by other reports, namely:
Annex 1 - New IGPs for Development
Annex 2 - Financial Feasibility Study For Various Fishery Products in Capiz and Pangasinan
Focus has been made on the problems, issues and concerns relevant to the Consultant's scope of work as defined in the Terms of Reference. It is not the intention of this report to comment/recommend on the impacts of the project as an integrated community-based approach to family planning.
Completion of her work was made possible with the full cooperation of the Project Management Staff in Lingayen, Pangasinan and the UN-FAO office in Manila. Special thanks go to the Area Supervisors and their respective Area Coordinators, most especially to Mr. Willy Carino and Mr. Marc Dahlen for their assistance in the project identification workshops, Mesdames Jessie Cerezo, Melody dela Rosa and Claire Morales for providing the Consultant the warmth and hospitality of their homes during the field work.
Finally, a depth of gratitude to Mrs. Medina N. Delmendo, National Project Coordinator, PHI/89/P16, for providing this rare opportunity, the guidance and inspiration to serve the UN-FAO and the project beneficiaries.
