<title>Economic role of women in fishing communities: A case study of Koko, Nigeria</title>
<section>1</section>
List of abbreviation
List of abbreviation
AAWORT:
Association of African Women for Research on Development
CIRDAP:
Center on Integrated Rural Development for Asia and Pacific
CARDER-OUEME:
Le Centre d'Action Régional Pour le Développement de l'Ouémé
DANIDA:
Danish International Development Agency
FAO:
Food and Agriculture Organisation
FSP:
Family Support Programme
ICLARM:
International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management
IDAF:
Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa
ILO:
International Labour Organisation
LGA:
Local Government Area
SIDA:
Swedish International Development Agency
UNDP:
United Nations Development Programme
WHO:
World Health Organisation
<section>2</section>
Preface
Preface
The mission on economic role of women in fishing communities in West Africa was proposed by the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries (IDAF) in West Africa in the framework of FAO. The Programme commissioned Dr. Stella Williams of Nigeria to collect field information on the economic role of women in fishing communities of Koko, Nigeria. The purpose of the mission and this report is to:
· describe all the sources of employment for the women in the communities,
· investigate how the women spend their time in the household and in their place of work,
· describe how labour is distributed among the women during the day;
· evaluate the daily activities of the women in cash and in kind,
· determine the daily real income of the women and the various sources of such incomes,
· make recommendation on areas (technical, economic, and institutional) of assistance for the improvement of the socio-economic position of the women.
The study was initiated by Dr. B.P Satia, IDAF Programme Coordinator He (was facilitated instrumental) in the creation of a working group of ten professional women who met for the first time in Cotonou in August 1995. The field study was conducted in Nigeria during a period of tense economic and political transition (01 - 29 March 1996). The collection of field data became more and more difficult as the study progressed, due to an increasing scarcity of, petrol and kerosene as well as the communities' anxiety over the zero party local government area, council and chairmanship elections ( 16 to 26 March). The economic environment in the fishing communities was so depressed that members were more interested in the survival of their families and business ventures. In spite of all the constraints, the field study was carried out from 01 - 29 March 1996. Data interim, report writing and documentation was done from 30 March to 14 April 1996 Report submission was on 15 April 1996.
<section>3</section>
Acknowledgement
Acknowledgement
I wish to express my deep appreciation to Dr. B. P Satia, IDAF Programme Coordinator, who initiated the mission and Mr. A.L. Cruz, FAO Representative ad interim and Staff of the FAO Office in Lagos.
The hospitality extended to the group by Chief Kofi Katey, Chairman, Warri North Local Government (LGA), resident in Koko, his dedication and commitment to the welfare of the fishing communities are very commendable. Thanks are extended to officials of the Warri North Local Government, especially the Deputy Chairman and Principal Officers, for their immense contribution to the success of the study. Special appreciation is also extended to Mrs A.N Egere, Community Development Officer based in Koko who devoted so much of her precious time and efforts assisting in the scheduling of interview and the interpretation of the questions to the respondents. Her exemplary dedication to duty contributed greatly to the cooperation of the women in the study area. Special thanks go to everyone of the women interviewed, whose names are listed in Appendix 1, who watched with amusement as the study group consumed not only their words, but the food and hospitalities of the people of Koko
Fishing Communities. Particular reference is made here of the President and members of the Ogben Cooperative (Farmers Multipurpose FSP) for their enthusiasm and tenacity in accomplishing the goals of the study.
Finally, I wish to thank the members of the study team: Mrs Lami Fadiora and Miss Remi Ajayi for their assistance in data collection, as interviewers and facilitators of focus group discussions. Additionally, the cooperation and the patience of the numerous grassroots economic units who actively participated in the Participatory Action Research for Development (PARD) survey, focus group discussions and other questionnaires are worthy of being mentioned. Last but not the least, Mr. Femi Ogungbamila should be mentioned for the documentation of the report.
<section>4</section>
Executive summary
Executive summary
Koko fishing community is one of the major fishing communities in Nigeria. Activities within this sector are mainly controlled and affected by women. Because of the prevailing economic situation in Nigeria, many of these fishing communities face numerous problems, such as inadequacy of fish catches, spoilage, loss of income and others
In this context, this study was aimed mainly at an enumeration of sources of employment for women in the communities, a description of labour and time utilisation by women, a determination of women's daily real income and their daily activities in cash and kind and recommendations for improvement of the women's socio-economic conditions.
The study was carried out through the use of individual interviews, focus group discussions and use of secondary data between March and April, 1996.
The results indicated that:
· women in Koko fishing communities were engaged in various income-generating activities including fishing, fishing-related activities, farming, petty trading, fashion designing, hairdressing, making of soap, powder, and other toiletries, selling of empty drums from the oil industry, mat weaving, oil palm extraction, sale of fire wood, pepper grinding sale of locally made alcoholic drinks, kerosene, ice cream and government service,
· the women divide their time between household chores and income-generating activities, sometimes spending up to 16 hours between both functions It is also revealed that women, children and other relatives participate in the daily household chores,
· fish marketing and the marketing of other products is the most lucrative activity in the communities while production earns very small returns,
· the daily real income of women is made up of income from various sources including primary and secondary activities. Also, activities in kind, though these do not directly attract income, are indirect income-generating activities for these women For most of them, especially the full-time house-wives, activities in kind are the only income-generating activities;
· fisherfolk are aware of their dwindling fortunes due to inadequate capital to expand their businesses, low volume of catches and loss of income due to spoilage These inadequacies have also negatively affected other sources of employment in the area.
The study highlighted some of the problems confronting the fisherfolk as well as other categories of the working population.
Some of these problems and suggested solutions include:
· Loss of income from fish spoilage.
Technical assistance in the form of training workshops in the areas of fish handling. Preservation and processing will go a long way to arrest the situation to the extent that fish spoilage due to poor handling and inadequate processing would be considerably reduced. This improvement will increase fisherfolk's income, resulting from their sales of better quality fish products.
· Low volume of fish production due to the lack of good working relationship and capital. This is why only 20% of the fisherfolks belong to co-operative societies. Many of the respondents claim ignorance of the roles and functions of cooperative societies, yet it is one of the surest strategies for receiving help (financial, technical and training).
Training in conflict mediation exercise would help to remove distrust and other conflict factors responsible for their lack of good working relationship. Once the conflict situation is remedied, they can come together to solve financial problems which must be undertaken through group credit and savings scheme.
Training workshops on the benefits of co-operative membership is long overdue. It would assist the fisherfolk in their education vis-a-vis advantage in raising required capital and managing the funds for the purchasing of fishing nets, traps, canoes/boats and outboard engines.
· Transport and storage problems can be solved when people are organised into groups that can be trained to build canoes/boats and storage boxes.
Establishing trades co-operative groups according to what they do is essential. Using the laid down rules of co-operative societies, these trade co-operative groups will therefore use their official mandate to raise capital through their co-operatives to build and sell canoes/boats for transportation purposes.
Carpenters and woodworkers trained and resident in the communities would be employed in constructing transportation canoes/boats for the use of the fisherfolk.
· Following closely with issues of transport and storage problems is the issue of lack of employment opportunities.
Currently there are very few carpenters and woodworkers (only two men) in the fishing communities of Koko. Demand for transport canoes/boats as well as insulated ice boxes for the storage of fish products is a great opportunity for job creation for the unemployed members of the communities. Repairs and maintenance of transport canoes/boats and insulated boxes would be an essential section of the training programme to complement the life span of these activities. Therefore, more people would acquire the skills and be available to carry out orders resulting from the demand for canoes/boats and insulated boxes by the fisherfolks.
Those interested in acquiring this trade need no special skills except that they need minimum education. Their training programme will entail constructing items according to specified measurements. Thus, they need to learn how to carry out measurements, calculations, recording of information and reading instructions given to them.
Service areas with low market demand for small scale enterprises (not fishing-related) such as manual mat-weaving and so on can be improved with decorative designs for local and export markets These mats, in various sizes, will meet demands for gift items, curios, home floor and wall decor.
<section>5</section>
Maps of the survey area
Maps of the survey area
Fig. 1: Map of fishing communities of Benin river estuary.
<section>6</section>
1. Introduction
1. 1 General background of Nigerian fisheries
1.2. The role of fisheries in the national economy
1.3. The artisanal sector
1.4. Fisheries catch disposal
1. Introduction
1. 1 General background of Nigerian fisheries
Nigeria, with a population of about 88 million (1993 census), is multi-ethnic. It is the largest single consumer of fish and fish products in the African Region. It lies within the tropics between latitudes 4 ° and 14 ° north of the equator and longitudes 3 ° and 14 ° east of the Greenwich Meridian. It is bounded on the west by the Republic of Benin, on the north by Niger Republic, on the east by the Republic of Cameroun and washed on the south by the Atlantic Ocean. Sandy beaches stretch along most of the country's 800 kilometre coastline which is intersected by the Niger Delta noted for its intricate network of creeks and rivers.
The country which has an area of 913,072.64 square kilometres is well watered by the rivers Niger and Benue and their tributaries. Its climate varies from tropical at the coast to sub-tropical further inland. Two well-marked seasons are: dry season. from November - March, rainy season from April to October. Temperature at the coast hardly rises above 32°C, but humidity may be as high as 95%. The climate is drier further north and extreme temperatures are reputed, sometimes ranging from 36°C to 12°C.
In Nigeria, like all coastal West African countries. fish is the cheapest form of animal protein in the diet of the people for many decades before the economic woes of the 1990s. Therefore, the importance of the fisheries products in satisfying the nutritional needs of the people as well as providing employment cannot be overstated. Entire family units - men, ``omen and children in the fishing communities are engaged in the sector. Most of the coastal fishing is carried out by local fisherfolks from canoes operating from surf-beaten beaches and riverine areas. In Nigeria. women play a crucial role in fish production, processing. distribution and marketing. In addition. some of the women are crucial in financing fish production units Therefore, the economic role of women in fishing communities is significant and timely.
1.2. The role of fisheries in the national economy
Since the 1960s, the fisheries sector has contributed between 1.11 to 2.4 percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) or 3.0 and 6.0 percent of the Agricultural GDP This is because fish is a major source of animal protein and has continued to grow in importance over the years, particularly, as a substitute to beef Recent studies confirm the increasing shift from meat to fish consumption among households in Nigeria (CBN/NISER, 1992). The artisanal fisheries sub-sector constitutes a major source of employment, especially in the southern coastal maritime/riverine areas. The estimated revenue is over five hundred million naira^1. Fish in Nigeria is caught from the sea, inland and more recently from ponds and other artificial culture systems. Artisanal fish catches from all the states in Nigeria rose steadily from about 465,569 metric tonnes in 1980 to 506,790 metric tonnes in 1983. Thereafter began a steady decline, starting with about 326,963 metric tonnes in 1984 to just
184,412 metric tonnes in 1993 (Table 1). Little wonder then that the self-sufficiency ratio in fish production based on a 3.5% population growth rate is given as 2X% for 1996 and projected to just 35% in the year 2010 (Table 1).
^1 US $ 1 = 80 naira (October 1996)
A downturn in the economy of the country naturally affected all sectors. Consequently, the fishing sector is also being affected by the impact of the worsening economic situation. The artisanal catches which have therefore started dwindling since 1983 got worse with the introduction of Structural Adjustment and has continued unabated as Table 2.1 clearly shows, thus resulting in demand being far below supply (Table 2).
Table 1: Nigeria Fish Production (Artisanal by States, 1980-1993)
YEARS
COASTAL
Akwa Ibom State
Edo/Delta State
Ctoss River State
Lagos State
Ogun State
Ondo State
Rivers State
SUB TOTAL
INLAND STATES
Anambra/Enugu St.
Bauchi State
Benue State
Borno/Yobe State
Adamawa/Taraba St.
Imo/Abia State
Kaduna State
Kano/Jigawa State
Katsina State
Kwara/Kogi State
Niger State
Oyo/Osun State
Plateau State
Sokoto/Kebbi State
SUB TOTAL
GRAND TOTAL
Source: Federal Fisheries, Abuja, 1995.
Table 2: Supply-Demand Projections and self-sufficiency Ratios in Fish Under 3.2 and 3.5 percent Growth Rate: 1996-2010 (' 000 Tonnes).
1. 3.2% Population
a. Supply
b. Demand
2. 3.5% Population
a. Supply
b. Demand
c. self-sufficiency Ratio
Source: NISER: Economic Background to NARSP.
* This is the proportion (percentage) of overall demand that is met by the available supply of fish.
1.3. The artisanal sector
In harvesting fish, shrimps and molluscs in the coastal regions marine, brackish and fresh water artisanal fishermen and women use gill nets, set nets, hook and line, traps, and other types of gears traditionally used in most fishing communities. They carry out their fishing activities using fishing crafts ranging from small unmotorised paddled dugout canoes to the motorised large Ghana-type boats. In general, fishing activities in the Niger Delta are characterised by low unit productivity, intensive labour, relatively low capital, low operational costs and limited gear coverage. Post harvest losses are high while profits are relatively low.
Unfortunately, there are limited research studies that have published quantitative information on the contribution of the fisheries sector to the Gross Domestic Product for Nigeria. However, it has been established that the inshore and offshore waters of the West African coast have rich fish resources available in quantities that can support commercial exploitation to meet at least 45 - 55 percent of domestic fish demand while in Nigeria, domestic fish production is responsible for 90 percent of fish consumed locally (Tobor, 1991). For over two decades now, the nation's population depended on the artisanal fish production as the main source of animal protein. This is due to the production problems in the livestock sector. These problems range from Sahelian drought to desert encroachment, rinderpest outbreaks and animal feed scarcity (Ajayi and Talabi, 1984).
In 1969, FAO published the result of a comprehensive survey on the coastal and estuarine fisheries of the then Western Region, now made up of Lagos, Ogun, Ondo, Osun and Oyo States as well as the then Mid-Western Region, presently composed of Edo and Delta States The survey results compiled data on 300-600 fishing communities visited including the study area. A total of 91,203 fishermen were identified of which 54.32 percent were engaged in full-time fishing operations (FAO, 1969). Researches by Scott (1966) and Ndaguba (1983), Ssentongo et al (1983) indicated that fishing communities and fishermen estimated for Rivers and Cross River States (now Akwa Ibom and Cross River States) more than double the estimated population recorded for the Western and Mid-Western Regions.
Ajayi and Talabi (1984) estimated artisanal fishery potential for Nigeria to fall within the range of 128,000 to 170,000 out of which about 25,000 metric tonnes is Nemato palaemon hastatus, the rest being fish (Marioghae 1981). More recently, Okpanefe et al. (1991) carried out a survey of 62 fishing communities including the study area. The study highlighted the fact that fishing took place in every village surveyed, but on quite different levels. For example, in villages located in small creeks, fishing appears to be but one of two or three economic activities.
Bolaji et al. (1994) carried out a population growth and development study of two fishing communities in Delta State. Their study, like the previous studies, concluded that fishing is a primary viable profession of the fishing communities in the study area, hence, the need to manage the fishery resources in a way that it will continue to provide employment, adequate income and food to the increasing population of these fishing communities. Although figures on the growth rate were not given, the authors suggested sensitizing the fisherfolk on the interrelationships between population growth and the fishery resources, with emphasis on the limited nature of resources and its consequent need for conservation.
1.4. Fisheries catch disposal
FAO (1969), Talabi (1982), Ajayi and Talabi (1984) indicated that generally, fisherfolk (men and women) market large-sized fishes in the fresh form while fish landed alive are sold alive, for example the catfishes. Fisherfolk only preserve their fish products if there is no possibility of marketing the fish in the fresh form. It is therefore an accepted socio-cultural practice that over 90 percent of the artisanal catches are processed. They are smoke-dried or sun-dried, salted, or fried. Often, the rest of the products is marketed fresh with heavy loss of quality. Major difficulties affecting fish preservation are the design of fishing canoes which make chilling of products on board difficult and, the lack of ice and other preservation facilities at the landing sites since the artisanal fisherfolk hold on to traditional practices. These difficulties are responsible for the poor quality and high losses inherent to fish disposal with regard to fresh form.
<section>7</section>
2. Methodology
2. Methodology
A participatory action research approach was employed in addition to the use of primary and secondary data. Data from the author's previous studies were used to supplement secondary data from published and unpublished sources in addition to data compiled from participatory group discussions Information gathered is based on individual life histories or through open-ended questions from women of different generations in order to determine the way in which women's productive and reproductive labour, changes in relation to traditional, social and economic factors.
A sample of 88 women was selected. Purposive sampling method was used in order to cover various aspects of women's economic roles in the fishing communities. Special effort was made to include all economic ventures, attention was given to the scale of operation and method of fishing activities by men and women who supply the primary products. In-depth interviews, formal and informal and group discussions were carried out for the qualitative method.
For the analysis, simple counts, tables of frequencies were used. With respect to estimates of income, where applicable, figures were solicited for. In some cases, quantities were converted to the cash equivalent by using existing market prices for such products (e.g. fish, beef and farm products consumed in the home). Tables were used to bring out salient points.
<section>8</section>
3. Koko, the study area
3.1. Demographic characteristics of the respondents
3 1.1 . Age of respondents
3.1.2. Marital status
3.1.3. Educational level
3. Koko, the study area
Koko, a town in the Niger Delta, lies about 60-70 kilometres west of Sapele and Warri. It serves as a port on the Benin River Estuary in the same manner as Sapele and Warri for the Mid-Western Region. The relief is flat and low-lying with a coastal mangrove and rain forest vegetation. The population is about 10,000. The people belong to the mid-western multi-ethnic riverine group. Four ethnic groups identified in the area are: Itsekiri (the most prominent), Ilaje (migrant from Ondo State of the south-western region), Ijaw and Urhobo.
Koko is the administrative headquarters of Warri North Local Government Area. It is well-known for some important features. Historically, it was one of the European settlements in Nigeria because it serves as a gateway to the 62 villages scattered on both the left and right banks of the Benin River Estuary. Access is through the mouth of the Escavos River As a port for commercial boats and sea vessels, it has a historical past with trade relationship with Europeans. Finally, it is well located in relation to villages downstream because it has a good road link to Benin City, capital of Edo State and the rest of Nigeria. It is heavily patronised by villages around it, primarily for its hospital.
The importance of the fishing industry in Koko and surrounding villages cannot be overstated. It will remain one of the major fishing towns in coastal Nigeria, especially because it is well-situated along the Benin River Estuary (Fig. 2).
3.1. Demographic characteristics of the respondents
3 1.1 . Age of respondents
The age of respondents ranged from 17 to 75 years. Out of a total of 88 women, 67 (76%) fall within the active age bracket of 20-59 years (Table 3).
3.1.2. Marital status
Majority of the respondents (65%) were married. One of them was abandoned by her husband, while four (5%) were separated, six (7%) were divorced, five (6%) were widowed and the rest (17%) were still single. The natural thing expected of women in fishing communities is to bear children. Six of the unmarried respondents have one or two dependents (Table 4). l he social status of the women are enhanced by observing the traditional expectation of bearing as many children as possible, thus, ensuring the provision of an adequate labour force for the family chores. Also, the children are expected to take care of their parents in old age. Thus, about 49% of the respondents had between 5 and 11 children, followed by 40% that had between I and 4 children while 11% had no children yet (Table 5).
Table 3: Age Group of Respondents
AGE GROUP
FREQUENCY
PERCENTAGE
N/S^3
TOTAL
3 N/S = Not Stated
Table 4: Marital Status of Respondents
MARITAL STATUS
FREQUENCY
PERCENTAGE
Married
Separated
Divorced
Widowed
Single
Abandoned
TOTAL
Number of Children
Frequency
Percentage
TOTAL
3.1.3. Educational level
Thirty-one (35%) respondents had no formal education, but thirty-two (36%) completed primary school education. Three (3%) had vocational training after primary school, while two (2%) had professional training after secondary school and another two (2%) had university education This is a unique situation. Lack of formal education is common among fisherfolks because of a lack of the infrastructure.
<section>9</section>
4. Sources of employment for women in Koko
4.1 . Economic activities
4.2. Secondary activities
4 3. Aspects of fisheries undertaken
4. Sources of employment for women in Koko
Women's economic activities are closely related to the socio-economic condition and tradition of the people. In general, fisherfolk are a special breed of people. They devote all their attention to fishing activities, repairing and maintaining their fishing equipment and making great efforts in solving problems connected with the industry. The fishermen migrate when there is a scarcity of fish to search for more fertile fishing grounds The women, especially the Itsekiris and jaws harvest fish and fish products from the main channels of rivers and maze of creeks.
The women are significant participants in the artisanal fishing industry. They are also considered specialists in post harvest activities even though traditional socio-economic expectations place special demands on the role of the women. They change their economic activities in line with the economic environment of the community. Trading for example is a versatile activity in which they naturally participate. They easily move from one commodity to another and entry into the market is open. The activities range from fish processing to street food vending and financial management in the fishing industry. Their activities vary according to the seasons. These are survival strategies which they employ as a show of concern for the welfare of their families.
Vending of cooked food is very popular with women as well as the selling of processed agricultural products. These include cassava and cereal based foods such as gari, starch, rice and corn dishes such as eba, foofoo, rice and beans as well as eko and moinmoin. Famous stews for cooked foods are locally prepared from oil palm fruits called "banga soup", served with starch foofoo or gari from cassava. Others are fried yam, cocoyam sweet potatoes and plantain. Palm oil extraction is popularly carried out. Making of traditional alcoholic drink from sugar cane is also an important economic activity.
Mat-weaving from papyrus reed and palm fronds also contributes to the economic activities of the women in addition to farming vegetables, pepper, cassava and yams. Some of them raise chicken, sheep, goats and pigs. Harvesting of periwinkles (molluscs) is gaining importance as the empty shells of the small snails are used in construction. These are mixed with concrete and gravel to strengthen foundations in construction.
Children are not left out in the economic activities. The women involve their children in trading. They are sent to hawk ice water and a variety of products. Vending of street foods take different forms from the port to the residential area or special market stalls and shops. Koko has three market locations from which goods from inland and neighbouring villages are taken and sold.
An important role women play as part of their economic activities is that of hostesses for migrant fishermen and visitors to the port town. They provide accommodation and cooked food for their migrants as well as finance their fishing activities by providing money for the purchase of needed items, repair of fishing equipment in return for acting as "middlemen" for the migrants. This role allows them to purchase and sell all the output of the migrants, thereby, profiting from the relationship.
Women also work as seamstresses, hairdressers, cosmetologists, soap makers and butchers. Professionally, there are women nurses, teachers, and civil servants. There are traditional mid-wives and healers. A survey of a sample of six women provides information on the daily activities of women engaged in the main economic activities in the study area.
4.1 . Economic activities
The people of Koko are primarily fisherfolks. Men, women and children are actively engaged in fishing activities. Other economic activities include: farming, trading, boat carving carpentry, driving and masonry. The men go to the sea throughout the week except Sundays (an accepted day of rest). Fishing is with small unmotorised dug-out canoes. The main gear used for fishing in the area are cast nets, gill nets, traps, hooks and lines. Associated with the industry is the promotion of other income-generating activities such as firewood selling, sale of fuel and water and road transportation of people and goods Therefore, the industry in Koko attracts men and women from other parts of the country. Throughout the year, on a weekly routine, traders from other towns such as Warri, Sapele, Benin City and so on, come to Koko to purchase goods which include all forms of fish products. The Ilajes from Ondo State are migrants who have become permanent settlers. Petroleum companies,
especially Total, Shell and Mobil, have set up offices in Koko.
Fish handling forms the primary economic activity for the majority of respondents. Sixty (68%) acquired the trade by legacy from their parents, especially their mothers. Ten (11%) stated that their engagement in fish production (artisanal fishing) was based on vocation.
4.2. Secondary activities
Some of the respondents disclosed that they now depend on other sources of income as primary activities while fish production and other fish related activities have become secondary for them (Table 6). The reasons given include the current economic depression which has made fishing an expensive venture.
Seventeen ( 19%) of the women are engaged in buying and selling of a variety of products from petty trading, provisions, clothing, firewood, plastics and so on. Ten (11%) are engaged in farming as a secondary activity, cultivating crops such as okra, cassava, yam, pepper and vegetables. They also grow plantain and oil palm Part of the harvested products are sold, while the remaining are consumed by the family. Some (6%) are engaged in street vending of cooked food items such as foofoo (made from processed cassava), pounded yam, fried yam and plantain, rice and beans.
The list of activities which women undertake in Koko is inexhaustible. They include fashion designing (dress making), hairdressing, making of soap, powder and other toiletries, selling of empty drums from the oil industry, mat-weaving, oil palm extraction, sale of firewood, pepper grinding, sale of locally made alcoholic drink, kerosene, ice cream and the government service. These activities can be grouped into five main categories namely: Fishing and Fishing related activities, Trade and Commerce, Service Industries, Agriculture and the Civil Service (Table 6).
4 3. Aspects of fisheries undertaken
The various stages in which respondents are engaged is reflected in Table 7.
Marketing of fresh fish is done by 22 (27%) of the respondents. Since electricity is unreliable, access to cold storage is hardly affordable, hence, most of the women sell their fish fresh to the middle men who take the fish to larger markets in Benin City, Sapele and Warri. As an alternative to preserving the fish products, fresh fish are processed. Processing and Marketing of fish is done by 15 (18%) of the respondents. Therefore processing and marketing of fish products rank second in position to the various aspects engaged in by Koko fish dealers. Of the women interviewed, only ten ( 12%) are engaged in fish production, although the cost of fishing nets is reducing women being fully active in the job. The remaining combine their various activities as the economic situation dictates.
Unlike previous interviews where some of the women consider themselves as fish producers because they finance the fishermen's activities, the economic situation forced many women to withdraw from fish production as a means of employment.
Table 6: Sources of Employment for Women in Koko
Employment
Primary Activity
Secondary^4 Activity
Frequency
Percentage^5
Fishing and Fishing Related
1. Fish Production
2. Fish Processing
3. Fish Marketing
4. Production, Processing
5. Processing and
6. Production and
Trade and Commerce
7. Street Food Vending
8. Petty Trading
l I
9. Ice Cream. 2
10. Drinks
11. Provisions
12. Clothing
13. Plastics
14. Baker
15. Kerosene Vending
16. Hair Cream and Pomade
17. Grinding Machine
Service Industries
18 Fashion Designing
19. Hair Dressing
20. Hotelier/Restaurateur
Agriculture
21. Farming
22. Mat Weaving
23. Butchering and sale of
24. Rubber tapping
25. Oil Palm Extraction
26. Firewood
Civil Service
TOTAL
^4 Figures include women with more than one secondary activity
^5 This is the Percentage of women engaged in each activity
Table 7: Aspect of Fisheries Undertaken
ASPECT
FREQUENCY
PERCENTAGE
Production
Processing
Marketing
Production, Processing and
Processing and Marketing
Production and Marketing
TOTAL
<title>Economic role of women in fishing communities: A case study of Koko, Nigeria</title>
5. Distribution of time between the household, place of work and the labour force in Koko
5.1. Domestic and reproductive labour women as mothers and wives
5 2 Time spent on household chores
5. Distribution of time between the household, place of work and the labour force in Koko
Information gathered from all respondents indicate that the women work for as long as 15-16 hours daily doing household chores like cleaning, washing, cooking, Etching water as well as raising children. They also engage in economic activities either as paid family labour or as waged workers employed in other income-generating or income-substituting activities
5.1. Domestic and reproductive labour women as mothers and wives
All the respondents gave information enumerating their household responsibilities. This is because the care of children, tidying and sweeping the house and surrounding premises, washing clothes, fetching drinking water and cooking, are fundamental responsibilities considered inherent to women and children. These are contributions in kind.
All the women, with the exception of the fisherwomen, indicated that they start domestic work early in the morning between 4 30 and 6.00 a.m This is when 90% of the respondents carry out basic household chores. The fisherwomen return from fishing expeditions between 5.30 and 6.00 a.m. They too carry out their share of household chores in the mornings between 7.00 and 10.00 a.m before sleeping briefly in order to recover from their sleepless night spent catching fish.
All the 6 respondents (7%) of the sample working for the government leave home for their place of work by 8.00 a.m. The rest of the women leave home for their respective places of work either at market or the pier or in front of their homes as the case may be between 8.00 and 10.00 a.m. Forty percent of the respondents indicated that they enjoy the support of relatives (especially female relatives) and older children (especially daughters) in carrying out household chores. The contributions of relatives and children to the household labour is a welcome relief which the respondents would not like to forfeit since these activities would normally have been carried out by the women.
5 2 Time spent on household chores
Table 8 summarises the distribution of time among the various chores that are carried out on a daily basis Women who earn a living cannot afford to spend much time on chores, thus, 79% of the respondents could afford to cook breakfast (Table 8) After meals is often taken care of by relatives and children However, full - time housewives generally spend an average of sixteen (16) hours daily on various household chores, while the women who earn a living spend about 8 hours a day doing chores as indicated in the profile on Table 10 An important role played by relatives/children is that of fetching drinking water (77%).
Table 8: Time Spent on Household Chores
Household chores
Time spent
Frequency by respondents
Percent
Frequency by relatives
/children
Percent
1 Cleaning/Sweeping
1-2 hours
2 Fetching drinking water
1-2 hours
3 Washing clothes
2-3 hours
4 Cooking food especially
2 hours
5 Caring for children
· bathing them
1 hour
· feeding them
1-2 hours
· dressing them
1-2 hours
6 Miscellaneous
· catering for visitors
1-2 hours
Table 9: Time Spent at Place of Work and the Labour Force
Activity
Time Spent
1. Benin River Estuary Fishing
10-12 hours
2. Koko Pier purchasing fish products
3-4 hours
3. Home smoking fish products
5-6 hours
4. Market place
· selling processed fish products
4-5 hours
· agricultural products
6-7 hours
· cooked food
3-4 hours
· others
5-6 hours
5. Purchase of items in preparation for market
3-4 hours
6. Preparation of items such as vending of street food
2-3 hours
7. Shops opening and closing periods for:
· Fashion designers
8-9 hours
· Hairdressers and
· provision sellers
8. Butcher
6-7 hours
9. Rubber - tapper
6-7 hours
10. Farming
4-6 hours
11. Mat-weaving
8-9 hours
12. Firewood sales
8-9 hours
13. Preparation and cooking of meals for family consumption
· marketing
2-3 hours
· preparation
2-3 hours
· serving and cleaning up after consumption
1-3 hours
14. Civil Servants and other Professionals
7-8 hours
<title>Economic role of women in fishing communities: A case study of Koko, Nigeria</title>
<section>1</section>
6. Description of labour distribution amongst women during the day
6. Description of labour distribution amongst women during the day
In Koko, like most fishing communities in West Africa, gender is a factor in the allocation of labour, traditionally and otherwise. Hence, mother-child (especially daughters) bond was often left intact in terms of labour distribution during the day. This was because in every household women's economic role as workers and providers was not seen as incompatible with their reproductive role as mothers, wives and daughters. Even after the universal emancipation, women in rural communities (fishing communities for example) continued to be engaged in many activities which they are expected to carry on inside and outside of the household which are critical for the survival of its members.
More recently, women's labour force participation rates continue to show rapid increase. The shift from agriculture, including fisheries, has forced women to move from the traditional activities in agriculture to manufacturing and service related jobs, as well as office jobs.
The increase in professional jobs is an evidence of the improvement in educational levels in recent years in Nigeria as a whole. Without the traditional support of the extended family, it has become more difficult to combine income-generating activities and household maintenance activities especially with limited resources available to many of the households in fishing communities.
However, due to the growing need for cash as a result of the current shift in the region toward a consumer economy, paid employment has become even more critical for women. Table 8 and 9 summarise the labour distribution amongst women in Koko during the day. Labour for household chores are distributed between the women, relatives and children.
Children and relatives were more involved with fetching drinking water (77%) followed by feeding and dressing of the young ones (66%) and washing clothes, cleaning and sweeping. They were least involved with cooking food (21%) and were not involved at all with catering for visitors. The women were involved in all aspects of household chores moving from one to another including even fetching drinking water.
Those who were engaged in only one major occupation (e g. hairdressers, fashion designers and the fisherfolks) spent all day at their jobs, staying for between 8 and 12 hours daily Those who had secondary activities divided their time among the various activities reported in Table 9.
A detailed analysis of a sample of the women engaged in each of the major activities is presented here to illustrate how each of the women distribute their time among their various responsibilities at home and at work.
Full-time Housewife
Mrs A. She is 30 years old, married with 2 dependents, trained as a fashion designer after her school certificate (WASC) education. She is not practicing because she lacks the take-off capital required to start business.
She wakes Up every day between 4.30 and 5.30 a.m. She does her household chores and sends the children to school She continues with her chores once the children are out of the house. All these, between 5 30 a m and 9.00 a. m. After this, she goes to the market to buy foodstuffs for the family or she may wash clothes until around 12.00 noon.
At noon she starts preparing lunch, which she does up to 2pm. She may finish her afternoon chores at 5pm and then starts preparing dinner. Dinner is served between 7pm and 8pm She cleans up after dinner and makes sure the materials for breakast are ready before she goes to sleep around 10pm. Overall, she would have spent about 16 hours on the job at home before retiring for the day.
Fisher Woman
Mrs O. She is 45 years old, married with 8 dependents. She has no formal education. She inherited the fishing profession from her parents. Apart from fishing as a major occupation, she is involved in selling provisions and backyard farming.
She does her household chores between 7 am and 10 am every morning during which she also tends her crops in her backyard farm. She has a small kiosk in front of her house which she cannot open until she comes back from the river.
She goes to sleep waking up around 3 pm. She continues her household chores until 7 pm. By then. she sets out for the river to fish. Out on the estuary, she sets up her fishing gear and nets and waits for the catch She tries to catch some sleep waking up intermittently to check her nets and hooks.
Between 5.30 am and 7 am, she gathers her equipments and sets out for the pier and heads back home to sell her catch to processors and other marketers. After 3 pm, she opens her kiosk and sells her provisions until she is ready to go fishing in the evening.
Her major constraint is the lack of an outboard engine to allow her to fish further afield in deeper waters.
Fish Processor
Mrs S. She is 45 years old, married with 7 dependents. She has no formal education. Like Mrs O . she inherited the profession.
She buys fresh fish and crayfish which she processes and preserves through smoke-drying for subsequent sale to fish marketers. She wakes up between 4.30 and 5.30 am daily when she starts her household chores At about 7 am she goes to the pier to buy fish from the fishers.
Between 9 am and 5 pm she processes her fish. She continues her household chores while the fish is on the fire, constantly checking to ensure even smoking. She starts the sale of fish to marketers from 5 pm until late in the night. She completes her chores and goes to bed around 10 pm.
Her major constraint is the lack of capital to purchase large quantities of fish products for sale.
Fish Marketer
Mrs E.A. She is 50 years old. Married with 10 dependents. Completed modern school. She buys both fresh and dried fish for sale. In addition, she sells plates as a secondary occupation.
She wakes up daily as early as 5 am to do her household chores until around 6 am. She goes out to buy fresh fish for sale between 6 am and 10 am. She continues her secondary occupation and household chores from 10 am until around 4 pm. By 4 pm, she goes out to buy processed fish. She sells processed fish at anytime of the day.
She travels sometimes for days to other distant markets to sell her fish. She also visits nearby markets on a regular basis. Her major constraint is lack of capital to purchase fish products for sale.
Table 10 summarises the major occupations of women as well as the accompanying minor activities.
Table 10 Major Occupations and the Accompanying Secondary Activities
Major Occupations
Accompanying Minor Activities
Fishing
Backyard Farming, Petty Trading, Civil Service
Fish Processing
Backyard Livestock Raising, Food Vending, Pepper Grinding, Petty Trading
Fish Marketing
Backyard Farming, Petty Trading (most fish marketers have sole occupations)
Full-time Housewife
Backyard Farming and Livestock Raising
Petty Trading
Civil Service, Backyard Livestock Raising
Fashion Designing and Hairdressing
Petty Trading
<section>2</section>
7. Evaluation of daily activities of women in cash and in kind
7.1. Activities in cash
7.2. Activities in kind
7. Evaluation of daily activities of women in cash and in kind
Everyday the women wake up to the realities of a new day. They are engaged in various forms of activities ranging from the simple household chores to the more complex functions like going on the river to fish. While some of these activities can be classified as cash generating activities, various others are only in kind.
7.1. Activities in cash
These are activities that directly add to income. They include fish production, processing and marketing, marketing of other products and goods (food, meat, wares etc.); provision of services (hairdressing, fashion designing), manufacturing products e.g. soap, mats and liquor as well as paid employment.
Some of these activities are primary activities while some are taken as secondary activities. In most cases, women depend on these activities for income which is used for a variety of purposes such as supplementing household up-keeping, paying rent and children's school fees, training dependents in vocations, and self maintenance.
In West Africa, women, including those in the study area, are expected to contribute to the upkeeping of the family both in cash and in kind Thus, all the respondents were engaged in several profit-generating enterprises either sequentially or at the same time. This is because the economic predicament of the country is reflected in the economy of the rural areas such as the fishing communities. Also these women who must support their husbands who had no jobs at the time of the survey could not afford to pass up any opportunities of making a little money on the side.
In Koko at the time of the survey, 40 percent of the respondents reported that they had no access to land for farming and as such most purchase all their food items including fish products. These women must look for avenues to generate money for all that the family members need, including food stuffs. Due to the depressed economy, even the small seasonal business they and some of their children participate in to increase their income is not encouraging.
During the survey only three (3%) women were actively engaged in capture fisheries on the Benin River Estuary (Table 9). These women spend 10-12 hours, 4-5 days a week. They leave home daily for the fishing grounds in the evenings as from 6.00 p.m. except when the weather is bad. The weather is presumed bad when there is overcast and the atmosphere appears gloomy and/or stormy. According to the women, the water would be rough and dangerous and it would, therefore, not be safe to go fishing in such weather. These women return from their fishing expedition at dawn between 4.30 and 5.30 am.
At the fishing grounds they reported that they normally set up their fishing nets (gill nets) as well as their traps, then would be on the look-out for other users of the waterways so that their fishing nets, traps etc. are not carried away or destroyed. They check their nets and traps intermittently until 2.00 a.m. They start collection of gear as from 3.00 a.m. It takes them 2-3 hours to remove their nets and traps from the water into their canoes folding them in such a way that there would not be snags that may destroy their equipment. If it is the peak season it takes longer to get the equipment and products out of the water into the canoes.
At such times they do not spend too much time removing the gilled fish from the nets or hooks. They just pile everything into the canoes and wait until they get home in the morning before sorting the products with the help of their children and/or relatives. On the other hand, during the lean season all the sorting is done at the fishing ground as fewer fish products are caught anyway.
On the average, therefore, they spend between 10 and 12 hours out of their home, fishing. According to the women, the best fish products are reserved for home consumption since these are small quantities anyway while the rest are sold in exchange for money. All these women were born and raised in fishing families and took up this activity through legacy as well as vocation.
Apart from fishing and its related activities, several other cash-generating activities such as trading, fashion designing, farming, hairdressing and others were listed in Table 9. These are activities that earned some income for the women. In estimating the real incomes in section 9.0 all the sources summarised in Table 11, have been considered.
7.2. Activities in kind
Averately, women spend 8 hours a day (the minimum being 2 hours and the maximum being about 16 hours of the day) doing their household chores either before they go out to work or later in the day or both.
The 10 women who are engaged in agriculture (farming and livestock rearing) as a secondary activity do it for subsistence. They only sell in case of surplus, which is seldom. Only 3 women were engaged in farming as a primary occupation.
Farming by the women therefore is an activity in kind, just like household chores. However, it is in a special class because its end-product can be quantified and converted into cash, which was done in the study to arrive at real income.
Other activities in kind are the rearing of children and participation in group activities, e.g. cooperative societies. In order to completely account for every hour the women spend daily, especially at home, it will be necessary to calculate some cost for the number of hours spent at home and hence arrive at an estimation? of women's income.
Table 11 summarises the different activities carried out by the women on a daily basis. The first column is a list of all activities that directly add to income (cash activities). The second column is a list of activities carried out but do not directly produce income. Backyard poultry and farming could produce income directly if the products are sold. However, all the respondents said they produced for the family only.
In estimating daily real income, these two activities (2 and 3) have been used because households would normally have purchased the products in cash from the market if they did not produce them. However, items 1, 4 and 5 have not been used because they were not seen as income generating activities even in the remotest sense by the respondents.
In our evaluation here, we have proxied items 1 and 4 by inputting costs to the number of hours spent by the women. The average wage paid in the study area to house-helps (N5.00/hour) was used as proxy Although this may be lower than the opportunity cost of some of the women's labour, this uniform measure makes computation easier. Table 12 presentes a picture of the income generating nature of household chores.
A full time house-wife who spends 16 hours of each day working at home would earn a wage of N80 while the average daily wage for all home-work in the study area was N39.30. Of the 70 women who were engaged in household chores, 16 (23%) claimed to be full-time housewives. While an 8-hour working day in a paid employment would attract a wage of about N50/day, the same number of hours at home attracts much less.
Table 11 Women's Activities in Cash and Kind
Activities in Cash
Activities in kind
1. Fish production, processing and marketing
1. Household chores
2. Marketing of other goods (food, meat, wares etc.).
2. Backyard Poultry
3. Provision of Services (hairdressing, Fashion designing)
3. Backyard Farming
4. Manufacture of products (soap making)
4. Rearing of children
5. Paid Employment
5. Participation in group activities
Table 12 Household Chores as Income-generating Activity in Kind
Hours of Chore
Naira^6 Equivalent
Frequency of respondents
Percentage
Average Daily Wage: N39.30
^6An average wage rate of N5/hour paid to househelps was used as the conversion factor.
<section>3</section>
8. Daily real income and sources
8.1. Estimation of daily real income
8.2. Real daily income from all sources
8. Daily real income and sources
8.1. Estimation of daily real income
Income is a significant variable in determining the standard of living of people. It is also an important parameter in determining savings behaviour as well as the ability to re-invest in one's business. When incomes are low or irregular the individual thinks more about family survival and less about savings and eventual re-investment. Consequently, the business begins to suffer and the vicious cycle of poverty becomes difficult to break.
The field study took place at a time when the national economy was at its worst due to various domestic crisis as a result of the socio-political environment in the country. The situation created a number of uncertainties mirrored in the general attitude of the people and the food security of the nation. It was supposed to be the peak season for fishing, but most of the fishing canoes were lying idle.
Factors listed as responsible for this hull in activities include: scarcity and high price of fuel, destruction of fishing nets by the speed boats used by the staff of the petroleum industry in the area, lack of loans to purchase needed fishing inputs. The situation has worsened to what obtained in October 1995 when an earlier survey was carried out in the study area. The respondents do not keep financial records of their activities Therefore accurate information about their financial situation was not available. Table 11 tabulates the information provided by the respondents from which the daily activities of the women were evaluated in cash and in kind. In addition, determination of the daily real income of the women from the various sources of incomes were made.
In the study area, especially among the respondents, most incomes were realised on a daily basis. Only those who were civil servants collected their salaries monthly although they still engaged in other secondary activities which brought in money on a regular basis.
The women earned incomes from a range of activities, from the sale of firewood and drums to mat-weaving, sale of liquor, fashion designing, and all forms of fishing activities. Table 6 listed most income-yielding activities as provided by the respondents.
In estimating daily real income, the purpose was to imply all income that accrued to a woman covering all daily activities from the moment she wakes up until she goes to bed. Care was therefore taken to carefully estimate or proxy incomes from all economic activities including those which are in kind, which are normally not converted to cash in the market place.
Therefore, incomes from backyard farming and gardening (foods consumed in the home) and portions of fish catch apportioned to the household for consumption and other such gains in kind were quantified. For example, if a fisherwoman responds that her family does not buy fish but relies on her catch, we estimated how much such a family size would consume and converted it to cash using the market price. A similar thing was done for backyard farming and butchering.
8.2. Real daily income from all sources
Out of a total of 88 respondents, 78 (89%) had incomes either from primary or from secondary activities. The average daily income from all sources was N140 with a standard deviation of N100 which was a reflection of the divergence in income levels. The data highlighted one other significant information which is the fact that, marketing rather than production or processing brought the highest income, while fish production took the rear out of all the fishing-related activities (Table 14).
Petty traders even did better than the fisherwomen and the processors It is not surprising then that we have more women in fish marketing and other types of petty trading. The women who wait on shore (the pier) to buy the product and resell earn more. The return for those who buy the processed (smoked) fish was even much higher than for those who sold fresh fish products. This difference in returns is due mainly to the loss of quality and quantity through spoilage which is usually experienced by those who sell fresh fish.
As shown in Table 13, the majority of the respondents (60%) had daily income of N200 and below while 34% had incomes ranging from N201 to N1000. Only 2 (2%) realised daily incomes of N800 and above.
The divergence in income is a reflection of the types of activities and the volume and magnitude of trade and production embarked upon. For example, the least income which was from a mat-weaver who had no other source of income was N24/day while the highest was N2,500 from a super market operator.
The highest daily income from a fishing-related occupation was N1875 from a fish marketer who also had no other secondary activity. In between these two extremes were incomes from various other occupations and combinations of occupations. As shown in Table 6, the most common occupation was fish marketing which engaged about 25% of the respondents.
As reflected in Table 14, fish marketers had the highest average daily income of N232 followed by petty traders whose average daily income was N159. The least income among the respondents was N33 which was from farming.
Fish capture attracted an average daily income of N129 in Koko. A a CBN/NISER (1992) national study on the impact of SAP on Nigerian Agriculture had put the average daily income amongst fishing households at about N65.
National studies of the type reported here tend to reflect divergences in sample locations, interviewer expertise, and the willingness of respondents across the study area to respond truthfully to questions on income because of tax implications and other fears. This is especially true only when the enumerators are not familiar to the respondents (Okpanafe et.al, 1991). This may be the reason why the national figure reported here was on the low side when compared with the Koko case study.
Table 13 Daily Income Amongst the Respondents
Income (N)^7
Frequency
Percentage
TOTAL
Table 14: Average Daily Income from each of the Major Occupations
Major Occupations
Average Daily Income (N)
Fishing
Fish Marketing
Fish Processing
Trading
Farming
Civil Service
Fashion Designing
Others
Average Income
^7 Since most of the figures were calculated from weekly and monthly estimates, a 2()-day month on the average was used. This was based on input from the respondents to effect that the maximum number of full days for fishing (production' processing and marketing) was not more than 2().
<section>4</section>
9. Conclusions and recommendations on areas (technical, economic, and institutional) of assistance
9.1 Conclusions
9.2 Recommendations
9. Conclusions and recommendations on areas (technical, economic, and institutional) of assistance
9.1 Conclusions
This study has clearly demonstrated that Koko fishing communities provide different types of employment for different women. However, the driving force behind the economy of the community is fishing and its related activities. Because women are more involved in the marketing and processing of fish, their role cannot be over-emphasized.
A downturn in the fishing industry at Koko means a downturn in the economy of the entire Koko community. Given the prevailing economic situation in the country, the women fisherfolk are going through hard times. Volumes of catches are dwindling, spoilage is increasing, while other sources of employment are fast disappearing. Inspite of all these, the women still have to divide their valuable time between income-generating activities and household chores that do not attract any cash benefits.
Therefore, steps must be taken to improve the economic well-being of the fisherfolks in this area, who are quite willing and ready to utilise such assistance judiciously.
9.2 Recommendations
This study has highlighted some of the problems confronting the fisherfolks in Koko fishing communities, as well as other categories of the working population.
Some of the problems are:
· Loss of income from fish spoilage (fish spoilage occurs from poor handling, inadequate transportation, lack of storage facilities and poor processing technology).
· Low volume of production due to inadequate capital (fishing equipment and inputs).
· Lack of understanding of the roles, functions and advantages of cooperative societies
· Absence of employment opportunities.
· Transport and storage problems.
To improve the situation, it is recommended that the following steps be taken:
1. Provision of capital for the purchase of outboard engine through a cooperative revolving loan fund. This would enable fisherfolks to reduce the time needed to move the freshly caught fish from the fishing ground to the point of sale and thus reducing spoilage.
As an alternative or in addition, training in the building and using of insulated ice boxes to transport and store fish products from the fishing ground to the point of sale should be introduced to the fisherfolks. They should also be taught better fish handling techniques to prevent bruising which eases bacteria infection and spoilage.
2. Most of the fisherfolks are concerned about their low production volumes and are eager to increase it, especially during the high seasons. Unfortunately, they lack the required capital to effect their desires. Consequently, it is suggested that capital could be provided, through a revolving loan to enable fisherfolks purchase bigger fishing equipment such as fishing nets, outboard engines, traps etc.
3. Only a handful of the fisherfolks (20%) belong to cooperative societies. Others claim ignorance of their existence or of their roles and functions. Others yet are not educated about their advantages and are thus scared of becoming members. Since one of the easiest channels for receiving help (financial, technical and training) is through the cooperative organisations, training workshops on the benefits of cooperative membership should be organized for the fisherfolks.
4. Income is an important parameter in determining savings and re-investment. Most of the respondents lack the banking culture. It is impossible to use banks as a means of extending loans (especially short term loans) to intending borrowers without a banking culture. The respondents should be trained in the act of banking and credit management. A workshop in this respect would be appropriate whereby the participants can be taught the rudiments of the savings culture and its advantage in making borrowing easier from banks. Complete dependence on external loan sources without input from the respondents might be far fetched. If respondents learn and are taught to save, they could improve their lots through bank borrowings.
Koko, being a fishing community, depends solely on economic activities revolving around fishing. The remaining income-generating activities all depend on what the stakes are at the fishing grounds If the volume of fishing is increased through the injection of capital, through training and other support programmes, the entire community including non-fisherfolk would all benefit. Increased fishing activity means increased marketing volume. These would mean more money and a wider distribution of income since more people would now be employed by the different fishing activities. Increased "fishing income" implies increased activity for transporters, petty traders, hairdressers, fashion designers and other professions.
<section>5</section>
Bibliography
Bibliography
1 Ajayi, T.O. and Talabi, S.O., (1984), The Potential and Strategies for optimum utilization of the Fisheries Resources of Nigeria. NIOMR Technical Paper NO. 18 ISBN 978-2345 -00-17.
2 Association of African Women for Research on Development, (AAWORD), (1983) Seminar on Research on African Women: What Type of Methodology, Dakar, December 5 - 9, 1983. AAWORD. Dakar, Senegal.
3. --------- Rural Development in Africa, Proceeding of the Seminar, AAWORD Dakar, Senegal 170 pp.
4 Bendel State Agricultural And Rural Development Project, (1985). Annual Report. Benin City, 20 pp.
5 Bolaji, Janet, Ute Heinbuch, and Katlijn Demuynck, (1994). Interrelationships Between Population Growth and Development in two Fishing Communities in Delta State, Nigeria. FAO/DANIDA/IDAF. April, 1994
6 Central Bank of Nigeria, (1992), The Impact of SAP on Nigerian Agriculture and Rural Life CBN/NISER National Study Volume I: The National Report 130pp.
7 Centre on Integrated Rural Development for Asia and Pacific, (1989). Rural Women in Fishing Communities. ICLARM Quarterly, Manila, Philippines. Pp. 10 - 13.
8 Centre d'Action Regional pour le Developpement Rural du Département de l'Oumé, (1994). Project BEN/88/CO3. BEN/88/014. Rapport de la Mission d'identification des Activités Generatrice de Revenus et Besoins en Organisations Socio-Professionnelles de la Femme dans la Sous-Prefecture Lacustre des Aguégués, Benin Republic, October, 1994.
9 Cutrufelli, Maria Rosa, (1983). Women of Africa: Roots of Oppression. Zed Press, London, U.K. 186 pp.
10 Davis, Dona Lee, (1991), Gender, Culture and the Sea: Contemporary Theoretical Approaches. Society and Natural Resources, U.K. Volume 5, pp 135 - 147.
11 Dennis, Carolyne, (1990), The Limits to Women's Independent Careers: Gender in the Formal and Informal Sectors in Nigeria, in: Diane Elson e.a. Male Bias in Development Planning, Manchester University Press, U.K.
12 Food and Agriculture Organization, (1969), Fisheries Survey of the Western and Midwestern Regions, Nigeria FAO SF: 74/NIR 6: 142pp.
13 Food and Agriculture Organization, (FAO), (1981), La Participation des Femmes Rurales a l'Economies du Sahel, April 1987, Italy. 133 pp.
14. Food and Agriculture Organization, (1988), Women in Fishing Communities: Guidelines. Rome, Italy, 63 pp.
15. Food and Agriculture Organization, (1990), Gender issues in Fisheries and Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme, Victoria Falls, Zimbabwe 4 - 7 December, 1990. FAO/SIDA Sponsorship, Rome, Italy.
16. Food and Agriculture Organization, (1991). The Fishing Communities of the Benin River Estuary Area: Results from a village survey in Bendel State Nigeria FAO/IDAF/WP/32 January 1991. FAO/DANIDA/IDAF.
17. Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa, (1988), Women in Artisanal Fisheries, IDAF Newsletter, June/1988 FAO/IDAF, Cotonou, Benin, 82 pp.
18. Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa, (1995), Strengthening Institutions, IDAF, Newsletter, June 1995, FAO/IDAF, Contonou, Benin 31 pp.
19. International Labour Organisation, (1981), Women in Rural Development: Critical Issues, ILO, Geneva, 51 pp.
20. Marioghae, I. E., (1981), The Ecology and Commercial Fishery of Palaemon Hastatus M. Sc. Thesis Univ. of P. Harcourt, Nigeria
21. Ndaguba, D.C., (1983), Utilisation of Remote Sensing Data for Mapping Aquatic Ecosystems of the Nigerian castal area FAD/ROME Fl: DP/NR/77/001 24pp.
22. Mc Conney, Kay S. (1994), From Sea to Shore: Summary Report on Improvement of Post-Harvest Utilisation of Artisanal Fish Catches in West Africa. Project 100 6605. 36. 94/440 CEASM, Brussels. March 1994.
23. Okpanefe, M.O, A. Abiodun and J.M. Haakonsen, (1991), The Fishing Communities of Benin River Estuary Area: Results from a Village Survey in Bendel State, Nigeria. IDAF Project GCP/RAF/192/DEN/123
24. Seralgeldin, Ismail and June Taboraff, (1992), Culture and Development in Africa. Proceeding of an International Conference held at the World Bank, Washington DC USA, April 2 - 3, 1992. Environmentally Sustainable Development Proceedings Series N° 1.
25. Scott, J.S , (1966), Report on the Fisheries of the Niger Delta Special Area. Niger Delta Dev. Board Port. Harcourt. 109pp.
26. Ssentogo, G.W., Ajayi, T.O. and Ukpe, E.T., (1983), Report on a Resource Appraisal of the Artisanal and Inshore Fisheries of Nigeria. FAO/UNDP. FNDP/NIR/77/007 43pp.
27. Supris, Marie Jose (1994), Le Rôle des Femmes dans le Secteur de la Pêche Artisanale en République du Cap-Vert. Rapport de Mission. Project GCP/CVI/028/NET-FAO. Rome, Italy, Mars 1994.
28. Tobor, J G., (1991), Marine Fish Resources of Western Africa: Potentials, Management, Development, and Constraints to their Utilisation to satisfy increasing Demand NIOMR Technical Paper NO 70 ISBN 978-2345-073
29. Tungpalan Ma-Theresa V, Maria F Manghas and MA PAZ E Palis, Women in Fishing Villages: Roles and Potential of Coastal Resources Management, p 237 - 242.
30. Vega, Marcos Jose M, (1989), Who's working on Women in Fisheries. ICLARM Quarterly, Manila, Philippines, P 16.
31. World Bank (1990), Women Development: a progress Report on the World Bank Initiative. The World Bank, Washington DC, USA, 32 pp.
<section>6</section>
Appendix: List of people interviewed
Appendix: List of people interviewed
1. Mrs. Helen Abioritsegbemi
2. Mrs. Ejime Adamu
3. Mr. Aseph Adeyemi
4. Mrs. Helen Adeyemi
5. Miss Gloria Ajiyen
6. Mrs. Queen Akatakpo
7. Mrs. Sheila Akonu
8. Mrs. Vivian Akonu
9. Mrs. Felicia Akpan
10. Mrs. Helen Akuku
11. Mrs. Elizabeth Amaye
12. Mrs. Belief Amunugo
13. Mrs. Esther Aronkonu
14. Mrs. Alice Atsenuwa
15. Mrs. Remi Atsenuwa
16. Mrs. Clemetina Brassey
17. Mrs Mercy Buwa
18. Mrs Patience Buwa
19. Mrs. Helen Daibo
20. Mrs. Rose Eayetitor
21. Mrs. Comfort Edu
22. Mrs. Comfort Egbe
23. Mrs. Joy Egbede
24. Mrs. Queen Egbede
25. Mrs. Aritetsoma Nelly Egere
26. Mrs. Beatrice Enaite
27. Mrs. Florence England
28. Mrs. Comfort Ero
29. Mrs. Comfort Etan
30. Mrs. Felicia Etchie
31. Mrs. Nayon Etchie
32. Mrs. Victoria Etchie
33. Mrs. Rose Etete
34. Mrs. Ofe Etuwewe
35. Mrs. Queen Etuwewe
36. Miss Omuli Ewatan
37. Mrs. Lucy Fashaya
38. Mrs. Mabel Hammond
39. Mrs. Mene Igbebishe
40 Mrs. Evelyn Ijirigho
41. Mrs. Aishatu Isa
42. Mrs. Queen Iyarefe
43. Mrs. Florence Jakpa
44. Mrs. Janet Jalowo
45. Mrs. Philomena Japhet
46 Mrs. Alice Jiringho
47. Mrs. Koma Jiringho
48. Mrs. Victoria Jiringho
49. Mrs. Anna Jones
50. Mrs. Maria Kpenosen
51. Mrs. Stella Lily
52. Mrs. Nwuye Lion
53. Mrs. Margaret Mamman
54. Mrs. Mercy Mato
55. Mrs. Mabel Mikie
56. Mrs. Christiana Moghia
57. Mrs. Esther Odonome
58. Mrs. Alice Odudu
59. Mrs. Biodun Odudu
60. Mrs. Janet Ofonodo
61. Mrs. Omowumi Ogedem
62. Mr. John Ogilogi
63. Mrs. Veronica Okoh
64. Mrs. Felicia Okotie
65. Mrs. Patience Okufusa
66. Mrs. Alice Olowho
67. Mrs. Omowumi Olowho
68. Mrs. Queen Omadeli
69. Mrs. Ama Omagbe
70. Mrs. Grace Omagbe
71. Mrs. Lady Omasheye
72. Mrs. Favour Onobokhua
73. Mrs. Roseline Osikhena
74. Mrs. Betty Oritsadere
75. Mrs. Folake Oritsenuogho
76. Mrs. Roseline Osikhena
77. Mrs. Mary Proso
78. Mrs. Emmanuella Ugwu
79. Mrs. Comfort Ukuti
80. Mrs. Mercy Ulori
81. Mrs.Helen Rabo
82. Mrs. Christiana Salihu
83. Mrs. Victoria Shodi
84. Mrs. Happy Sunday
85. Mrs. Felicia Tiemo
86. Mr. Oritsematosan Tonwe
87. Mrs Christiana Tuoyo
LISTE DES RAPPORTS DIPA - LIST OF IDAF REPORT
I. Documents techniques / Technical documents
1985 De Graauw, M.A., Etude de préfactibilité technique de l'aménagement d'abris pour la pêche maritime artisanale au Bénin. Cotonou, Projet DIPA. 55p., DIPA/WP/1.
1985 Black Michaud, M.J., Mission d'identification des communautés littorales de pêcheurs artisans au Benin. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 24p., DlPA/WP/2.
1985 Gulbrandsen, O.A., Preliminary account of attempts to introduce alternative types of small craft into West Africa. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 51p., IDAF/WP/3.
1985 Gulbrandsen, O.A., Un compte-rendu préliminaire sur les tentatives d'introduire des types alternatifs de petites embarcations en Afrique de l'Ouest. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 53p., DIPA/WP/3.
1985 Jorion, P.J.M., The influence of soeio-economic and cultural structures on small-scale coastal fisheries development in Benin. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 59p., IDAF/WP/4.
1985 Jorion, P.J.M., L'influence des structures soeio-économiques sur le développement des pêches artisanales sur les côtes du Benin. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 59p., DIPA/WP/4.
1986 Tandberg, A., Preliminary assessment of the nutritional situation of subsistence fishermen's families. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 31 p., IDAF/WP/5.
1986 Wijkstrom, O. Recyclage des personnels pêche en gestion et comptabilité. Cotonou Projet DIPA. 25p. DIPA/WP/6.
1986 Collart, A., Development planning for small-scale fisheries in West Africa, practical and soeioeconomic aspects of fish production and processing. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 34p., IDAF/WP/7.
1986 Collart, A., Planification du développement des pêches artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest, production et traitement du poisson, ses aspects materiels,teehniques et soeio-économiques. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 67p., DIPA/WP/7.
1986 Van der Meeren, A.J.L., Socio-economic aspects of integrated fisheries development in rural fishing villages. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 29p., IDAF/WP/8.
1986 Haling, L.J., et O. Wijkstrom, Les disponibilités en materiel pour la pêche artisanale. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 47p., DIPA/WP/9.
1986 Akester, S.J., Design and trial of sailing rigs for artisanal fisheries of Sierra Leone. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 31p., IDAF/WP/10.
1986 Vétillart, R., Rapport détude préliminaries sur l'aménagement d'un abri pour la pêche maritime artisanale a Cotonou. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 31 p., DIPA/WP/11.
1986 Van Hoof, L., Small-scale fish production and marketing in Shenge, Sierra Leone. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 36p., IDAF/WP/ 12.
1996 Everett, G.V., An outline of West African small-scale fisheries. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 32p., IDAF/ WP/ 13.
1987 Anon., Report of the second IDAF liaison officers meeting, Freetown, Sierra Leone (11 - 14 November 1986). Cotonou, IDAF Project, 66p., IDAF/WP/15.
1987 Anon., Compte-rendu de la deuxiéme reunion des officiers de liaison du DIPA. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 27p., DIPA/WP/16.
1987 Campbell, R.J., Report of the preparatory technical meeting on propulsion in fishing canoes in West Africa (Freetown, 15-18 November 1986). Cotonou, IDAF Project, 88 p., IDAF/WP/17.
1987Davy,. D.B. Seamanship, Sailing and Motorisation. Cotonou. IDAF Project, 85p. IDAF/WP/18.
1988 Anum-Doyi, B., and J. Wood, Observations on fishing methods in West Africa. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 53p., IDAFIWP/19
1988 Anon., Report of the third IDAF liaison officers meeting (Cotonou, 2 - 4 December 1987). Cotonou, IDAF Project, 88p., IDAF/WP/20.
1988 Anon., Compte-rendu de la troisiéme reunion des officiers de liaison du DIPA (2-4 Décembre 1987). Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 85p., DIPA/WP/20.
1988 Haakonsen, J.M. (Ed.) Recent developments of the artisanal fisheries in Ghana. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 69p., IDAF/WP/21.
1988Everett, G.V., West African marine artisanal fisheries. Cotonou, IDAF Project 41p. IDAF/WP/22.
1988 Everett, G.V. Les pêches maritimes artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 44p. DIPA/WP/22.
1989 Coackley, A.D.R., Observations on small fishing craft development in West Africa. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 22p., IDAF/WP/23.
1989 Zinsou, J. et W. Wentholt, Guide pratique pour la construction et l'introduction du fumoir "chorkor". Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 33p., DIPAIWP/24.
1989 Zinsou, J. and W. Wentholt, A practical guide to the construction and introduction of the chorkor smoker. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 29p., IDAF/WP/24.
1989 Chauveau, J. P. , F. Verdeaux, E. Charles-Dominique et J. M. Haakonsen, Bibliographie sur les communautés de pêcheurs d'Afrique de l'Ouest - Bibliography on the fishing communities in WestAfrica. Cotonou, Projet DIPA - IDAF Project, 220p., DIPA-IDAF/WP/25
1989 Everett, G.V. Small-scale fisheries development issues in West Africa. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 47p., IDAF/WP/26.
1989 Everett, G.V. Problèmes de développement de la pêche artisanale en Afrique de l'Ouest. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 49p., DIPA/WP/26.
1989Haskonsen, J.M., et W. Wentholt, La pêche lacustre au Gabon. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 36p., DIPA/WP/27.
1990 Anon. Report of the ad hoc technical meeting on artisanal fisheries craft, propulsion, gear and security in the IDAF region; Cotonou, 25 - 26 September 1989. Cotonou. IDAF Project, I l 1p, IDAF/WP/28.
1990 Anon, Report of the fourth IDAF liaison officers meeting (Dakar, 21 - 23 November 1989). Cotonou, IDAF Project, 135p., IDAF/WP/29.
1990 Anon. Compte-rendu de la quatrième reunion des officiers de liaison du DIPA. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 121p., DIPA/WP/29.
1990 Houndékon, B.R., D.E. Tempelman and A.M. IJff, Report of round table meeting on women's activities and community development in artisanal fisheries (projects) in West Africa. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 12p.+ annexes, IDAF/WP/30.
1990 Houndékon, B.R., D.E. Tempelman et A.M. IJff, Rapport du séminaire sur les activités féminines et le développement communautaire dans les projets de pêches artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 14p. + annexes, DIPA/WP/30.
1990 Ilff, A.M., Socio-economic conditions in Nigerian fishing communities. Based on studies along the Benin and Imo river estuaries. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 113p., IDAF/WP/31.
1991 Okpanefe, M.O., A. Abiodun and J.M. Haakonsen, The fishing communities of the Benin River estuary area: Results from a village survey in Bendel State. Nigeria. Cotonou. IDAF Project, 75p., IDAF/WP/32.
1991 Anon., Compte-rendu du cours "Analyse Quantitative des Aspects Sélectionnés de Développement" Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 6 + xlvi p., DIPA/WP/33.
1991 Anon., Report of the course on "Quantitative Analysis of Selected Aspects of Fisheries Development". Cotonou, IDAF Project, 6 + xlv p., IDAF/WP/33.
1991 Callerholm Cassel, E., Cost and Earnings and Credit Studies on Ghanaian Canoe Fisheries. Cotonou IDAF Project, 38p., IDAF/WP/34.
1991 Sheves, G.T., The Ghanaian dug-out canoe and the canoe carving industry in Ghana. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 109p., IDAF/WP/35.
1991 Haakonsen, J. M. and Chimère Diaw, Fishermen's Migrations in West Africa. Cotonou. IDAF Projecl, 293p., IDAF/WP/36.
1991 Haakonsen, J.M. et Chimère Diaw, Migration des Pêcheurs en Afrique de l'Ouest. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 332p., DIPA/WP/36.
1991Gulbrandsen, O.A., Canoes in Ghana. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 82p., IDAF/WP/37
1991 Anon., Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa, Report of the Fifth IDAF Liaison Officers Meeting. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 140p., IDAF/WP/38.
1991 Anon., Les pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest, Compte-rendu de la Cinquième reunion des Officiers de Liaison du DIPA. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 122p., DIPA/WP/38
1991 Beare, R J and P Tanimomo, Purse seine and encircling net fishing operations in Senegal, Guinea. Sierra Leone, Ghana and Benin. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 92p., IDAF/WP/39.
1991 Everett, G.V. and G.T. Sheves, Recent trends in artisanal fisheries and report on alternatives to canoes Cotonou, IDAF project, 33p., IDAF/WP/40.
1991 Callerholm Cassel, E. and A.M. Jallow. Report of a socio-economic survey of the artisanal fisheries along the atlantic coast in The Gambia. Cotonou, IDAF project, 97p., IDAF/WP/41.
1992 Chimère Diaw, M. et Jan M. Haakonsen, Rapport du séminaire sur les migrations de pêcheurs artisans en Afrique de l'Ouest. Cotonou, projet DIPA, 36p., DIPA/WP142.
1992 Chimère Diaw, M. and Jan M. Haakonsen, Report on the regional seminar on artisanal fishermen's migrations in West Africa. Cotonou, IDAF project, 35p., IDAF/WP/42
1993 Houndékon, B. et L. Affoyon, Rapport du séminaire-atelier de sensibilisation sur la méthode accélérée de recherche participative tenu a Libreville Gabon en Novembre 1992. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 56p., DIPAIWP/43.
1993 Anon., Rapport de la sixième reunion des fonctionnaires de liaison Banjul, Gambie I - 5 février 1993. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 57p., DIPA/WP/44.
1993 Anon., Report of the sixth IDAF liaison officers meeting Banjul, Gambia I - 5 February 1993. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 60p., IDAF/WP/44.
1993 Horemans, B. and Satia B.P., (eds), Report of the Workshop on Fisherfolk Organisations in West Africa. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 93p., IDAFIWP/45.
1993 Horemans, B. et Satia B.P., (éds), Rapport de l'atelier sur les organisations de pêcheurs en Afrique de l'Ouest. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 102p., DIPA/WP/45.
1993 Kébé, M., Gallène J. et Thiam D.- Revue sectorielle de la pêche artisanale en Guinée Bissau.
Programme de Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA), 32p. + annexes, DIPA/WP/46
1993 Kébé, M., Gallène J. et Thiam D.- Revista sectorial da pesca artesanal na Guiné-Bissau Programa de Desenvolvimento Integrado das Pescas Artesanais na Africa Ocidental. Cotonou DIPA, 32p. + anexos DIPA/WP/46
1993 Horemans B., - La situation de la pêche artisanale en Afrique de l'Ouest en 1992. Cotonou. Programme de Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest, 36p., DIPA/WP/47.
1993 Kébé, M., Njock J.C. et Gallène J.- Revue sectorielle de la pêche maritime au Cameroun. Programme de Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA), 30p. + annexes, DIPA/WP/48.
1993 Kébé, M., Njock, J.C. and Galléne, J. R., Sectoral review of marine artisanal fishery in Cameroon. Cotonou, IDAF Project 33p., IDAF/WP/48
1993 Anon., Report of the Working Group on Artisanal Fisheries Statistics for the Western Gulf of Guinea Nigeria and Cameroon. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 126p., IDAF/WP/49
1993 Satia, B.P., Ten years of Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa (Origin,évolution and Lessons Learned). Cotonou, IDAF Project, 37p., IDAF/WP/50
1993 Satia, B. P., Dix ens de développement intégré des Pêches artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (Origine evolution et leçons apprises). Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 4 1p., DIPA/WP/50.
1993 Stokholm, H. and Isebor C., The fishery of Ilisha africana in the coastal waters of Republic of Benin and Lagos State, Nigeria. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 81p., IDAF/WP/51.
1993 Anon. - Report of the Seventh IDAF Liaison Officers Meeting Cotonou. Benin. 22-24 November 1993. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 72p., IDAF/WP/52
1993 Anon., - Rapport de la Septième Reunion des Fonctionnaires de Liaison, Cotonou, Benin, 22-24 novembre 1993. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 77p., DIPA/WP/52.
1993 Satia B.P., and B. Horemans editors, Workshop on Conflicts in Coastal Fisheries in west Africa Cotonou, Benin, 24-26 November 1993. Cotonou, IDAF Project 64p., IDAF/WP/53.
1993 Satia B.P., et B. Horemans (éds), Atelier sur les Conflits dans les Pêcheries Côtières en Afrique de l'Ouest, Cotonou, Benin, 24-26 novembre 1993. Cotonou, Projet DIPA 68p., DIPA/WP/53.
1993 Horemans, B., The situation of artisanal fisheries in West Africa in 1993. Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa, Cotonou, Benin 39p., IDAF/WP/54.
1994 Horemans B., La situation de la pêche artisanale en Afrique de l'Ouest en 1993. Cotonou Programme de Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA), 40p. + annexes, DIPA/WP/54.
1994 Horemans, B., J - Gallène et J.C. Njock, - Revue sectorielle de la pêche artisanale à Sao Tome et Principe. Programme de Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA), 31p. + annexes, DIPA/WP/55.
1994 Horemans, B., J. Gallène e J.-C. Njock, - Revista sectorial da pesca artesanal a São Tome e Principe Programa de Desenvolvimento Integrado das Pescas Artesanais na África Ocidental (DIPA). 32p. + anexos, DIPA/WP/55.
1994 Jul-Larsen, E., Migrant Fishermen in Pointe-Noire (Congo): Continuity and Continuous Change. Cotonou, Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa, 51p., IDAF/WP/56.
1994 Jul-Larsen, E., Pêcheurs migrants a Pointe-Noire (Congo): Continuité et Changement Perpétuel. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 59p., DIPA/WP/56.
1994 Satia, B.P. and Hansen, L.S, Sustainability of Development and Management Actions in Two Community Fisheries Centres in The Gambia. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 48p.,., IDAF/WP/57.
1994 Satia, B P . et Hansen L S., La durabilité des actions de Développement et de gestion dans deux centres communautaires en Gambie. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 50p DIPA/WP/57
1994 Heinbuch, U., Animal Protein Sources for Rural and Urban Populations in Ghana. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 25p. + annex, IDAF/WP/58
1994 Johnson J.P. and Joachim Alpha Touré, Accidental Death and Destruction in Artisanal Canoes: A retrospective study of the years 1989-1991 along the coast of Guinea (Conakry) West Africa. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 21p., IDAF/WP/59
1994 Johnson J. P. et Joachim Alpha Touré, Mort Accidentelle et Destruction des Pirogues Artisanales : Une etude retrospective des années 1989-1991 sur le littoral guinéen (Conakry) - Afrique de l'Ouest. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 21p., DIPA/WP/59
1994 Demuynck, K., and DETMAC Associates, The Participatory Rapid Appraisal on perceptions and pratices of ftsherfolk on fishery resource management in an artisanal fishing community in Cameroon. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 32p., IDAF/WP/60
1995 Demuynck, K., et les associés de DETMAC, Méthode Accélérée de Recherche Participative sur les perceptions et pratiques des pêcheurs en matière de gestion des ressources halieutiques dans une communauté de pêche au Cameroun. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 33p., DIPA/WP/60
1994 Satia, B.P., J.P. Gallène, and F. Houéhou, Sub-regional Workshop on Artisanal Safety at Sea. Banjul, The Gambia 26-28 September 1994. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 57p., IDAF/WP/61
1994 Satia, B. P. , J.P. Gallène, et F. Houéhou, Rapport de l'atelier soul-regional sur la Sécurité en Mer de la pêche artisanale Banjul, Gambie 26-28 septembre 1994. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 61p., DIPA/WP/61
1994 Kamphorst. B., A socio-economic study on the distribution and marketing pattern of marine ftsh products in the Ndian division, South West Province, Republic of Cameroon. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 41 p., IDAF/WP/62
1994 Kamphorst, B., Etude socio-économique du mode de distribution et de commercialisation des produits halieutiques du départment de Ndian, Province du Sud-Ouest, Républlllique du Cameroun. Cotonou, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA), 42p., DIPA/WP/62
1994 Heinbuch, U., Population and Development in Fishing Communities: The challenge ahead. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 51p., IDAF/WP/63
1994 Anon., Report of the Eighth IDAF Liaison Officers Meeting. Pointe-Noire, Congo, 03-04 November 1994. Cotonou, Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa, 97p., IDAF/WP/64
1994 Anon., Rapport de la Huitième Reunion des Fonctionnaires de Liaison, du DIPA. Pointe-Noire, Congo, 03-04 novembre 1994. Cotonou, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest, 102p., DIPA/WP/64
1994 Horemans, B., Kébé, M., and W. Odoi-Akersie, Working Group on capital needs and availability in artisanal fisheries methodology and lessons learned from case studies. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 62p., IDAF/WP/65
1994 Horemans, B., Kébé, M., et W. Odoi-Akersie, Groupe de travail sur les besoins et la disponibilité en capital en pêche artisanale: méthodologie et leçons apprises des etudes de cast Cotonou, Benin, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA), 62p., DIPA/WP/65
1995 Teutscher F., Tall A., and Jallow A.M., Workshop on Seeking Improvements in Fish Technology in West Africa. Pointe-Noire, Congo, 7-9 November 1994. Cotonou, Benin, Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa,(lDAF) 75p., IDAF/WP/66.
1995 Teutscher F., Tall A., et Jallow A.M., Rapport de l'Atelier sur le theme "A la Recherche des Ameliorations en Technologie du Poisson en Afrique de l'Ouest". Pointe-Noire, Congo, 7-9 novembre 1994. Cotonou, Benin, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest, (DIPA) 82p. DIPA/WP/66.
1995 Kamphorst, B., A cost and earnings study at Cotonou harbour, Benin, for 1994. Cotonou, Benin Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa (IDAF) 42p., IDAF/WP/67
1995 Kamphorst, B., Etude de Coûts et Revenus au port de pêche de Cotonou, Benin, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest, (DIPA) 45p., DIPA/WP/67..
1995 Kamphorst, B., et Teixeira, M. Caractéristiques socio-économiques de la pêche à Sao Tomé et Principe. Progamrne pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest, (DIPA) Cotonou, Benin 31p. DIPA/WP/68.
1995 Kamphorst, B., e Teixeira, M., Caracteristicas socio-económicas da pesca artesanal maritime em São Tome e Principe Programa de Desenvolvimento Integrado das Pescas Artesanais na Africa Ocidental. (DIPA) Cotonou Benin, 28p., IDAF/WP/68
1995 Horemans, B., The situation of artisanal fisheries in West Africa in 1994. Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa, Cotonou, Benin 40p., IDAF/WP/69.
1995 Horemans, B., La situation de la pêche artisanale en Afrique de l'Ouest en 1994. Cotonou, Benin Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA), 38p. DIPA/WP/69.
1995 Kébé, M., J-C. Njock, et J. Galléne, Revue sectorielle de la pêche artisanale maritime du Congo. Cotonou, Benin, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA) 37p., DIPA/WP/70.
1995 Galléne, J P . Data Compendium on Safety at Sea for Seven West African Countries. Mauritania, Senegal, The Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, Sierra-Leone and Cape Verde 1991 - 1994. Cotonou Programme for Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa, 13p.,
IDAF/WP/71
1995 Gallène, J.P., Compendium des Données sur la Sécurité en Mer dans Sept Pays d'Afrique de l'Ouest: Mauritanie, Senegal, Gambie, Guineé-Bissau, Guinée, Sierra-Leone et Cap Vert 1991
1994. Cotonou, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest, 15p., DIPA/WP/71.
1995 Jallow A. M., Report of the First Meeting of the IDAF Working Group on Costs and Earnings in Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa, (Dakar, Senegal, 12 - 13 June 1995). Cotonou, Benin, Programme for Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa, 81 p. IDAF/WP/72.
1995 Jallow A.M, Rapport de la Premiere Reunion du Groupe de Travail du DIPA sur Coûts et Revenus en Pêche Artisanale en Afrique de l'Ouest, (Dakar, Senegal, 12 - 13 juin 1995). Cotonou, Benin Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest, 82p., DIPAIWP/72.
1995 Anon., Report of the Ninth IDAF Liaison Officers Meeting, Conakry, Guinea, 9-10 November 1995. Cotonou, Programme for Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa 102p., IDAF/WP/73
1995 Anon., Rapport de la Neuvième Reunion des Fonctionnaires de Liaison, Conakry, Guinée, 9 - 10 novembre 1995. Cotonou, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest, 112p. DIPA/WP/73.
1995 Satia, B.P and B.W. Horemans, Report of the Workshop on Participatory Approaches and Traditional Fishery Management Pratices in West Africa. Conakry, Guinea~ 13-15 November 1995. Cotonou, Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa. 95p., IDAF/WP/74.
1995 Satia, B. P. et B.W. Horemans, Rapport de l'Atelier sur les Approches Participatives et l'Aménagement Traditionnel des Pêches en Afrique de l'Ouest. Conakry, Guinée, 13 - 15 novembre 1995. Cotonou, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest. 98p., DIPA/WP/74.
1996 Njifonjou O., J. Folack, M. Bondja, J-C Njock et D. Njamen, Enquête-cadre et Etude Socioéconomique de la Pêche Artisanale Maritime au Cameroun. Cotonou, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest, 80p., DIPA/WP/75
1996 Houndékon M. B. , Rapport des ateliers de formation sur la méthode accélérée de recherche participative a Kaback et Kamsar (Guinée) du 24 juillet au 03 septembre 1995 Cotonou, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest. 20p., + annexes DIPA/WP/76.
1996 Houédanou M.-C., et D. Nyamusenge, Guide de redaction des rapports. Cotonou, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest 44p, DIPA/WP/77
1996 Kuyateh M., Rapport de Synthèses sur l'Atelier de Formation Pratique (théorie et application sur le terrain) sur la MARP à l'intention des Cadres et des Techniciens de la Pêche Artisanale du Senégal Septembre 1995 - Dakar, Senegal. Cotonou, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest 75p., DIPA/WP/78
1996 Satia B.P. et C.Z. Wétohossou, (eds) Report of the working group on women's key role and issues related to gender in fishing communities. Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa (IDAF) Cotonou, Benin, 32p., IDAF/WP/79
1996 Satia B.P., et C.Z. Wétohossou, (eds) Rapport du groupe de travail sur la position centrale des femmes et les questions liées au genre dans les communautés de pêche. Cotonou, Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA) 34p., DIPA/WP/79.
1996 Horemans B., T Ajayi and J Gallène - Sector Review of the Artisanal Marine Fisheries in The Gambia Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa (IDAF). Cotonou, Benin. 40p., IDAF/WP/80
1996 Kébé M., J.C Njock et J. Gallène, - Revue sectorielle de la pêche artisanale maritime au Gabon. Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA), Cotonou, Benin. 39p. + annexes, DIPA/WP/81
1996 Stamatopoulos C., Rapport de l'Atelier sur l'Utilisation du Logiciel de Statistiques des Pêches (ARTFISH). Cotonou, Benin, 6-9 mai 1996. Programme de Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA). Cotonou, Benin 59p., DIPA/WP/82
1996 Stamatopoulos C. Report of the Workshop on the use of a fisheries statistical software (ARTFISH), Cotonou, Benin 6-9 May 1996. Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa (IDAF). Cotonou, Benin 61p., IDAF/WP/83
1996 Horemans, B., The state of artisanal fisheries in West Africa in 1995 Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa, Cotonou, Benin 43p., IDAFIWP/84.
1996 Horemans, B., L'état de la pêche artisanale en Afrique de l'Ouest en 1995. Cotonou, Benin Programme pour le Développement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA), 45p. DIPA/WP/84
1996 Beauvallet-Le Coq, C. A Study of Community Participation in the Aguégués Project BEN/88/CO3 - BEN/88/014 (Improving the living conditions of the Populations in the District of Aguégués) Programme for Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa Cotonou, Benin. 28p., IDAF/WP/85
1996 Beauvallet-Le Coq, C., Etude de la Participation des Populations des Aguégués au Projet BEN/88/CO3 BEN/88/014. (Amelioration des Conditions de Vie des Populations de la Sous-Préfecture Lacustre des Aguégués). Programme pour le Dévelopoernent Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest. Cotonou, Benin. 32p., DIPA/WP/85.
1996 Sow, A., Curso de formação sobre a organização de uma biblioteca. Programa pare o Desenvolvimento lntegrado das Pescas Artesanais na Africa Ocidental (DIPA). Cotonou, Benin. 35p. + anexos DIPA/WP/86
1996 Sow, A., Cours de formation sur l'organisation d'une bibliothèque. Programme pour le Développcment Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA) Cotonou, Benin. 32p., + annexes, DIPA/WP/86
1996 Sy, M Situation nutritionnelle, sécunté alimentaire, hygiene et salubrité dans la communauté de péche de Joal, Senegal. Programme pour le Dêveloppement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA). Cotonou, Benin, 19p., + annexes. DIPA/WP/87
1996 Touray, I., Study on Women's Organizations in Brufut and Gunjur Communities and the Factors that Favour or Impede their Sustainability in the Gambia. Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa. Cotonou, Benin, 41p., IDAF/WP/88
1996 Ngo Som, J., Situation nutritionnelle, sécurité alimentaire, hygiene et salubrité dans la communauté de pêche de Limbe, Cameroun. Programme pour le Dêveloppement lntégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA). Cotonou, Benin 92p. DIPA/WP/89
1996 Afful, K., et Kébé, M., Fiscal Policy and the Artisanal Fisheries Sector in Ghana and Senegal. Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa (IDAF). Cotonou Benin, 37p., IDAF/WP/90.
1996 Afful, K., et Kébé, M., La politique fiscale et le secteur de la pêche artisanale au Ghana et au Senegal. Programme pour le Dêveloppement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA). Cotonou, Benin. 42p., DIPA/WP/90
1996 Horemans, B. Theoretical Considerations and Practical Implications of Subsidies to the Artisanal Fisheries Sector in West Africa. Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa. Cotonou, Benin 20p., IDAF/WP/91
1996 Horemans. B., Considerations théoriques et implications pratiques des subventions au secteur de la péche artisanale en Afrique de l'Ouest. Programme pour le Dêveloppement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA). Cotonou, Benin, 21 p., DIPA/WP/91
1996 Ndiaye, Y.D., Use of Capital Income in Artisanal Fisheries: the Case of Boat-Owners in Hann, Senegal. Programme for the Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa. Cotonou, Benin. 16p., IDAF/WP/92.
1996 Ndiaye, Y. D., Utilisation des revenue du capital en pêche artisanale: le cas des armateurs de Hann au Senegal. Programme pour le Dêveloppement Intégré des Pêches Artisanales en Afrique de l'Ouest (DIPA). Cotonou, Benin 21p., DIPA/WP/92
II. Manuels de terrain I Field Manuals
1988 Johnson. I. P. et M.P. Wilkie, Pour un Dêveloppement Intégré des Pêches artisanales; du bon usage de participation et de la planification. Cotonou, Projet DIPA, 157p. + annexes, Manuel de Terrain No I.
1988 Meynall, P.J., J.P. lohnson, and M.P. Wilkie, Guide for planning monitoring and evaluation in fisheries development units. Cotonou, IDAF Project, 116 p. IDAF Field Manual N° 2.
III. IDAF Newsletter / La Lettre du DIPA
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 1, October/Octobre 1985, 4 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 2, January/Janvier 1986, 14 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 3, June/luin 1986, 40 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 4/5, Sept./Dec. 1986, 76 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 6, September 1987, 58 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 7, June/Juin 1988, 84 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 8, June/Juin 1989, 74 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 9, October/Octobre 1989, 84 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 10, August/Août 1990, 84 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA. 11 January/Janvier 1991 6 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 12, April/Avril 1991, 8 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 13, July/Juillet 1991, 6 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 14, October/January 1992, 12 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 15, September/Septembre 1992, 85p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 16, December/Decembre 1992, 31 p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 17, March/Mars 1993, 39p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettredu DIPA, 18,JunelJuin 1993,38p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 19, September/Septembre 1993, 32p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 20, December/Decembre 1993, 28p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 21, March/Mars 1994, 32p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 22, June/Juin 1994, 32p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 23, September/Septembre 1994, 52p
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 24, December/Décembre 1994, 36p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 25, March/Mars 1995, 32p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 26, June/Juin 1995, 32p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 27, September/Septembre 1995, 40p.
IDAF Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 28, December/Decembre 1995, 32p.
IDAF/Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 29, March/Mars 1996,
IDAF/Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 30, June/Juin 1996
IDAF/Newsletter/Lettre du DIPA, 31, September/Septembre 1996,
IV. Documents de travail du Projet Modèle, Benin /Working papers of the Model Project,
Benin
1988 Coackley, A.D.R., Report on installation of a diesel inboard motor in a Ghana canoe. Cotonou, Model Project. 7 p + annexes, PMB/WP/1 (En)
1988 Coackley, A. D. R. Installation d'un moteur diesel "inboard" dans une pirogue ghanéenne. Cotonou, Projet Modèle, 9 p. + annexe, PMB/WP/I (Fr).
1988 Zannou, L. H. Etudes technico-économiques des fours améliorées pour le fumage de poisson en République Populaire du Benin. Cotonou, Projet Modèle, 8 p. + 6 tableaux, PMB/WP/2.
1988 Atti-Mama, C, et M. Rais, Etude démographique des communautés cibles du projet Modèle Benin. Cotonou, Projet Modèle, 20 p. + 10 annexes, PMB/WP/3.
1988 Jorion, P., Non-monetary distribution of fish as food in Beninois small-scale fishing villages and its importance for auto-consumption. Cotonou, Model Project, 26p., PMB/WP/4.
1989 Tanimomo, P.F., Catalogue des engine de pêche maritime artisanale du Benin. Cotonou. Projet Modèle, 46 p. + 3 annexes, PMB/WP/4, PMB/WP/5.
1989 Tanimomo, P. F. , Rapport de consultation sur la formation des jeunes pêcheurs de l'UNICOOPEMA a Lomé. Cotonou, Projet Modèle, 17 p. + 6 annexes, PMB/WP/6.
1989 Atti Mama, C., Impact socio-économique de la piste Pahou-Kpota. Cotonou, Projet Modèle 10 p. + 3 annexes, PMB/WP/7.
1989 Ahouanmènou, C., C. Atti-Mama, B. Houndékon, D. Tempelman et D. Turcotte, Animation, gestion et planification, seance de travail avec les agents de terrain. Cotonou, Projet Modèle, 142 p. + annexes, PMB/WP/8.
1989 Atti-Mama, C., D. Turcotte, et W. Wentholt, Evaluation interne des activités du projet Modèle Benin dans le secteur de Ouidah. Cotonou, Projet Modèle, 36 p. + 7 annexes, PMB/WP/9.
1989 Tempelman. D, The participatory approach in an integrated artisanal fisheries project; structuring community development - womens activities. Cotonou, Model Project, 43 p., PMB/WP/10.
1989 Landry, J., Cours d'alphabétisation fonctionnelle en calcul. Cotonou, Projet Modèle, 59 p. + 3 annexes PMB/WP/ 11.
1989 Landry, J. and D. Tempelman, Functional literacy, Training Guide for a numeracy course. Cotonou, Model Project, 55 p. + 3 annexes, PMB/WP/I I.
1990 Atti-Mama, C, Systèmes traditionnels et modernes d'épargne et de credit en milieu pêcheur au Benin. Cotonou, Projet Modèle, 41 p. + annexes, PMB/WP/ 12.
1990 Sènouvo, P., Statistiques de pêches des villages du Projet Modèle Année 1987 Cotonou, Projet Modèle, 33p., PMB/WP/13.
1990 Sheves, G. T. , P.T. Holler and P.F. Tanimomo Report on demonstration with echo-sounders compas ses and multimono gillnets in Ghana. Cotonou, Model Project, 22 p., PMB/WP /14.
1990 Coackley, A.D.R., and G.T. Sheves, A review of the experimental introduction of diesel inboard motors to Ghana canoes. Cotonou, Model Project, 41p., PMB/WP/15.
1990 IJff, A.M. et D.E. Tempelman, Etude sur les relations entre les captures de poisson et l'état nutri tionnel des communautés de pêcheurs dans la province du Mono, au Benin. Cotonou, Projet Modèle, 27 p., PMB/WP/16.
1990 Sènouvo, A.P. et A.A. Gbaguidi, Recueil des données statistiques des pêches maritimes au Benin. Période de 1984 a 1989. Cotonou, Projet Modèle, 134p., PMB/WP/17.
1990 Houndékon, B.R., Initiative locale et développement: Expérience des communautés de pêcheurs marine du Benin. Cotonou, Projet Modèle, 17 p., PMB/WP/ 18.
1991 Le Gurun, J.F., La section de technique des pêches. Cotonou, Projet Modèle, 43 p., PMB/WP/19.
1991 FAO/Government Cooperative Programme, Integrated Development of Small-Scale Fisheries in West Africa, Model Project Benin, Project findings and recommendations. FAO Rome. FI:GCP/RAF/ 198/DEN Terminal Report, 34p.
1991 Programme de Cooperation FAO/Gouvernements, Développement Intégré de la pêche artisanale en Afrique de l'Ouest, Projet Modèle Benin, Conclusions et recommendations du Projet. FAO Rome, Fl:GCP/RAF/198/DEN Rapport terminal, 40 p.
<section>e</section>
The vision for idaf phase III
The vision for idaf phase III
INTRODUCTION
Development strategy during the 1960 and 1970s was based on the philosophy that developing countries lacked improved technology and capital for speeding up their development.' Industrialization was promoted in order to capitalize on the abundant fish resources. However, the anticipated expansion of the economy did not happen and the development approach shifted towards an integrated rural strategy where emphasis is put on the community as a whole to upgrade incomes and the quality of life through technical assistance and the active participation of fisherfolk and the community.
In this context, emphasis was initially placed on the Community Fishery Centre (CFC) concept as a means of promoting artisanal fishery development. But it became apparent that the presence of a complex of facilities and services tailored to meet local needs was no guarantee that the structures/facilities would be used or that development would occur. The active participation of fisherfolk and the mobilisation of local and community resources was imperative in order to assure sustainability of initiatives undertaken by development projects and/or the community.
So far and in general terms, the IDAF Programme has worked under the context of abundant or seemingly adequate fishery resources with moderate population pressure. The scenario is however changing (and very fast for that matter) and we would soon face the triple constraints of reduced or depleting fish stocks, degrading environment and increasing population pressure. Like in other sectors, it must be anticipated that just to survive, parts of the population surplus in the fishing communities will enter the artisanal fisheries, which will increase the competition for the resources among the small scale fisherfolk in addition to the prevailing competition between the artisanal and industrial fisheries, with their attendant effect on the environment.
This scenario calls for a continuation of the integrated participatory strategy which remains relevant to the development of artisanal fisheries in West Africa. However, the emphasis needs to be placed on the elements and mechanisms that favour the sustainability of initiatives: responsible fishing, the empowerment processes that ensure the devolution of major resource management and development decisions to the local community, the strengthening of national human and institutional capacities at all levels for a sustainable and equitable fisheries resources management and development, as well as in the follow-up and consolidation of past achievements.
DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE
Thus the development objective of the Programme in the present phase II! which started on I July 1994 is to ensure twenty coastal West African countries a sustainable development and management of their artisanal fisheries for maximum social and economic benefit of their fishing communities in terms of employment, proteins and earnings. This will be done through an integrated and participatory approach in which emphasis will be laid on equity, gender issues, the transfer of technology for development, environment protection, as well as the strengthening of human and institutional capacities.
The immediate objectives are:
1. To identify, assess and disseminate strategies and mechanisms for sustainable management and development of the artisanal fisheries in fishing communities;
2. To improve the competence of national Fisheries Departments staff in development and management planning of artisanal fisheries;
3. To enhance regional technical competence in the fisheries disciplines, particularly in. fishing and fish technology;
4. To improve information and experience exchange related to artisanal fisheries within the region;
5. To promote regional and sub-regional collaboration for the development and management of artisanal fisheries
In this context, IDAF will among other things tackle the following mayor aspects in it's work:
· assisting in the elaboration and implementation of a clear and coherent national development policy for the artisanal fishery sector,
· providing advice on management and allocation of resources between artisanal and industrial fishing fleets, both national and foreign,
· involving users in the design and management of on shore infrastructures;
· monitoring the sector's evolution by the setting up of an economic indicator system for the sector adapted to the financial and human availabilities;
· improving fishing technologies in accordance with the available resources;
· increasing the final product's value by improvement in processing and marketing,
· promoting community development in accordance with the lessons learned from Phase I and II and oriented towards the sustainability of actions undertaken,
· reinforce the Programme's information/communication system.
It is anticipated that by the end of the third phase of the Project, the region will have a nucleus of field oriented experts capable to respond to the challenges of the artisanal fisheries sector and to spur development in their individual countries in keeping with the aspirations and needs of fisherfolk.
