<section>e</section>
Summary
Summary
The growing participation of women in the Brazilian labour market is one of the most remarkable social changes in the country since the 70s. Despite the economic crises that have affected the country since the 80s, causing enormous socio-economic instability, the participation of women in the labour market is more and more intense and diversified, and shows no signs of decline.
Women working in the field, in the family productive units and in the salaried system are normally considered "husband helpers". As women enter the labour market and see themselves as workers, they no longer accept to be considered as someone who ''helps". Data from 1985 show that the family production is the largest female activity in agriculture.
The situation of women in rural areas is very precarious, and should be studied within the changes which have occurred in the past decades in Brazil: expansion of the salaried system, rapid modernization of agriculture and landownership concentration, factors which have brought about a widespread impoverishment of rural families. An increasing number of members from the same family are hence obliged to enter the labour market in order to guarantee the family's survival. Women's work in the rural areas is characterised by noncontinuity, since the absence of social services leads them to keep a balance between their productive and reproductive roles.
There is an overall tendency towards lesser engagement in activities related to agriculture, as a consequence of modernisation. Urban areas are not able to provide employment to the rural labour force which has migrated to the cities and not even to all the available urban labour force. Under such fierce poverty conditions, the informal market seems to be the solution for family survival. Squares, commercial streets, and major cross-roads have been the stage for this survival. A number of "Persian markets'' proliferate in the cities. As long as the government does not commit itself to reduce the concentration of wealth in the hands of a few, the present situation will be maintained, with a great part of the population making a living out of odd-jobs in the cities and/or in agriculture.
<title>Women, migration, environment and rural development policy in Brazil</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
Introduction
To better understand the complex issues related to women, migration and environment in Brazil, it is necessary to consider briefly the country's situation and, more specifically, the situation of the Brazilian women.
o Brazil is a country of continental dimensions, with its 8,5 million sq. km (3,3 million sq. mi) and almost 160 million inhabitants, unequally spread over its five macroregions: Southeast, South, Northeast, Central West and North. (Annexes I and II) Some economic and social indicators show the complexity and diversity that coexist in our country: relative distribution of the population according to the regions: North 5.9%; Southeast 43.5%; Northeast 28.5%; Central West 6.8%; South 15.05%;
o GDP regional contribution: Southeast 59.4%; South 17%; Northeast 13.8%; Central West 5.3%; North 4.3%;
o the age profile of the population shows clearly a tendency to ageing as well as a decline in birth and death rates. There has been an evident tendency of decrease in the fertility of Brazilian women in the past decades. In the 60-70 decade the average was 6 children per woman; during the 70-80 decade it was reduced to 4.5 and in the 80-90 period fell to less than 3 children per woman (IBGE data Demographic Census);
o One also notes an increase of the aged population (60 years old or more), from 6.4% in 1981 to 7.7% in 1990. The aged represented 6.7% of the female population in 1981 and 8.2% in 1990; whilst the population of aged males grew from 6.2% in 81 to 7.2% in 1990 (FIBGE data, 1993);
o the average life expectancy was 65.5 years in 1990. (Annex III) However, actual data show major differences when we base the calculation on income groups: for the group earning up to one minimum wage, life expectancy decreases to 57.5 years while for the group earning more than 5 minimum wages it increases up to 73.4 years (Annex IV) (IBGE data, 1990);
o as regards infant and child mortality, in an indicator showing the close relation between living conditions and the health of the population, the same disparities are present. For the overall population, in 1990, the mortality rate was 51.6 per thousand live births. The regional distribution, however, reveals a great variation: Southeast, 30 per thousand; Central West, 33 per thousand; North, 53.2 per thousand and Northeast, 88.2 per thousand. Correlating mortality rate to income, the figures are: 75.2 per thousand in families earning up to 1 minimum wage and 33.3 per thousand in families earning more than 1 minimum wage; (Annex V)
o as for basic sanitation services, in 1990: 63.5% of the population had access to treated water in their households; 37.2% had sewage systems connected to the public disposal system, and garbage collection services were available to 61 % of the population. However, this distribution is very uneven if we compare urban and rural areas. There were 81.6% households with treated water supply in urban areas and 12% in rural areas; sewerage was available to 48.5% of the urban population and only to 5% of the rural population, and the garbage collection services were available to 78.5% in the urban areas (IBGE and PNAD data, 1990);
o with regard to education, there are 20 million illiterates over 10 years old, distributed unevenly among the regions, according to income levels. In the South, the illiteracy rate for the population over 10 years old is 11%, while in the North this rate rises to 36%. The inequality in income levels is even greater: among young people aged from 10 to 14 with a per capita family income of more than 2 minimum wages the rate is 2.6%, while for youths with a per capita family income up to half a minimum wage this rate is 14 times higher (IBGE and PNAD rates, 1 990);
o more than half of the population (55%) declares itself white, 5% black, 39% mulatto and 0.5% oriental. Illiteracy affects 12% of the white population, 30% of the black and 29% of the mulatto (IBGE and PNAD data, 1990);
o the poverty dimension (the conditions of those whose income does not allow them to meet basic needs such as food, shelter, clothing, etc.) and indigence (the conditions of those whose income does not allow them to meet even the basic food needs) is as follows: there are more than 8.6 million of poor urban households and 2.8 million at the indigence level. About 45% of the indigents are to be found in rural areas, 40% are in non-metropolitan urban areas and 15% are found in metropolitan areas, with a concentration of indigent homes in the Northeast; (Annexes VI and VII)
o two indicators related to labour conditions and which point to the phenomenon of the social differences in the country refer to the percentage of children at work and the income generated by work. 6.9% of children aged 10-14 work. In 1990, there were 7.5 million people aged 10-17 working in various activities, corresponding to 11.6% of the EAP - Economically Active Population (Annex VII)-more than 5% of the EAP consists of people aged 60-plus; (FIBGE data, 1993);
o in the Northeast region there is the highest number of people working 40 or more hours per week and earning less than 1 minimum wage: 25% of the Economically Engaged Population (EEP). The Central West has 10.8% of the EEP, the South, 8.8%, the North, 8.6% and the Southeast, 8.2% (FIBGE data, 1993);
o more than half of the population works in small enterprises, i.e., those employing 1 to 10 people, both in rural and urban areas (FIBGE data, 1993).
The data presented here outline a short panorama of the social and regional inequalities of Brazil.
<section>2</section>
The current situation of Brazilian women
The current situation of Brazilian women
The growing participation of women in the Brazilian labour market is one of the most remarkable social changes in the country since the 70s. Despite the economic crises that have affected the country since the 80s and which have caused enormous socio-economic instability, the participation of women in the labour market is more and more intense and diversified, and shows no signs of decline.
The entry of women into the labour market was triggered by a number of different factors: the deterioration of the buying power of wage-earners, compelling women to look for a complement to the family income; new female behaviour resulting in an increase in the expectations of consumption; the proliferation of new products; and, especially women's desire to work outside the home, thus achieving economic independence and contributing to the family budget.
During the 70s, the expansion of the economy, increasing urbanisation, and the accelerated rhythm of industrialisation resulted in a favourable atmosphere for the incorporation of male and female workers in the nation's labour force. The Brazilian society underwent great social, economic and demographic transformations. Levels of employment registered an increase and the country became more and more urban.
Profound transformations in the patterns of behaviour and in the values related to the social role of women, intensified by the impact of the women's movement in the public sphere, have facilitated and still facilitate the entry of women into the labour market. The decrease in fertility rate, the increase in schooling and access to universities have contributed even more to this process.
During the 80s, the country registered a sharp economic crisis which resulted in high inflation and unemployment rates, and in the deterioration of the overall quality of life, therefore modifying the growth scenario of the previous decade.
The expansion of the third sector, from 46% in 1981 to 54.5% in 1990, had a significant impact on the Brazilian labour market. Studies show that women are concentrated in this sector, mainly in the various service industries, commerce and management areas.
On the whole, the informal labour market provides little information about the male and female market share. However, the National Research of Home Samples (Pesquisa Nacional de Amostra Domiciliar - PNAD) reveals that the informal economy corresponds to more than 40% of the labour force engaged in nonagricultural activities. The remunerated domestic services engage 7.8% of this work force and 34.5% are employed in family or independent small productive units. The importance of the informal sector is more significant among women, due to the domestic services rendered by them. (IBGE, PNAD data, 1990).
The ''domestic responsibilities" factor subjects the access to jobs by women to certain conditions, which is revealed by the frequency with which they carry out remunerated activities in the home. In fact, women correspond to 82% of the labour force in this sector. Men hold 70% of the jobs in stores, garages, etc., and are more numerous in the public service. In rural areas, it is not unusual to find women doing sewing jobs for companies at home-this practice is indeed on the increase. They work during their "time off", using foot-operated or electric sewing machines that are bought with great difficulty. The women are paid for by the piece-work, are not registered and therefore receive no social benefits. A large number of women working in their own homes are heads of household (20.3%), a situation which reinforces the commercial activities developed within the household.
As to rural work, the family-based mode of exploitation accounts for 80% to 90% of the bean, rice, corn and cassava crops, and is responsible for the occupation of 84% of the labour force in this sector. Women working in the field, in the family productive units, and in the salaried system are normally considered "husband helpers". Besides that, women are considered "inactive" when there is no clear distinction between the domestic chores and the economic activities. However, when women enter the labour market and see themselves as a worker, they no longer accept to be considered as someone who "helps".
IBGE data from 1985 show that family production is the largest female activity source in agriculture. The units employing only family members correspond to 56.3% of the total female work force engaged in agriculture and to 39.2% of all male workers of the family production. Women working as temporary salaried work force often travel great distances to work, which means worse conditions when compared to the work done within their own productive units.
The incorporation of female workers in the different economic sectors is affected by marital status. While industry employs primarily young and single women, other branches of the economy, such as services, social activities and public administration, tend to employ married and probably older women.
1990 PNAD data reveals a new profile of the Brazilian female worker, with a larger participation of married and older women: 20% of them were active in the 1980s, while 37.6% are active in the 1990s. Therefore, the participation of wives in economic activities is Increasing.
Children are a factor of interference in the performance of the female work force in the labour market. The lack of infrastructures, e.g. day nurseries, obliges the mothers to leave children aged 0-6 with relatives or to pay a babysitter. When the children are 7 years old, they can go to the compulsory public school, and the mothers feel more comfortable to work outside the home. In rural districts, many women have no option but to take their children with them to work, subjecting them to harsh conditions.
The 1980 census showed that 70% of the female work force is employed in so-called "women jobs": secretaries, shop assistants, teachers, nurses, maids, peasants and factory labourers.
When analysing single female-headed households, one finds that they are subject to a lower income level, due to the lower female salaries, compared to the male ones. Children from these households have more difficulty to attend school and they are over-represented among the poor, as a consequence of the gender imbalance in wage-earnings.
Based on these general data, it is possible to affirm that the overall female labour force in Brazil today involves 23 million women, which represents 40% of the urban labourers and 36% of the rural ones. According to the Hunger Map drawn up by the Applied Economical Research Institute (Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada), among the 160 million inhabitants of Brazil, 32 million are under the absolute poverty level, and 16 million of them live in rural areas
<section>3</section>
The situation of women in rural areas
The situation of women in rural areas
The situation of women in rural areas is very precarious, and should be studied taking into account the changes that have occurred over the past decades in Brazil: expansion of the salaried system, rapid modernisation of agriculture, and landownership concentration, factors which have brought about a widespread impoverishment of rural families. An increasing number of members from a same family are hence obliged to enter the labour market in order to guarantee the survival of the family.
Men normally migrate from one rural area to another during the harvest period, with the result that a growing number of rural households remain under the control of female rural workers. This situation is aggravated by the violence generated by land conflicts.
Women's work in rural areas is characterised by noncontinuity, since the absence of social services leads them to keep a balance between their productive and reproductive roles. In 1989, 33% of rural families had monthly per capita incomes of up to ¼. of the minimum wage, which means absolute poverty. (Annex IX)
From the 60s, with the enforcement of labour legislation for the rural worker and technological modernisation, migration from rural areas to cities reached a rate of half a million people a year. A great part of this "expelled" contingent of men, women and children was thrown out to the outskirts and continued to carry out rural activities as itinerant farm labourers, at a much lower salary.
The female rural labourer does not use the new agricultural technologies, which represent savings of the labour force. Besides, work on the land is given to men. Biotechnology has brought about a longer harvest period as well as an increase in production of some agricultural products such as oranges, sugar cane, coffee, and corn. As long as the harvest is not completely mechanised the work done by women can be carried out over a longer period of time, and thus the women can benefit from this situation by increasing the duration of their remunerated engagement.
The modernisation of agriculture has brought about significant changes in labour relations, with new dynamics in the labour market. In the nation as a whole, as already mentioned, the economic policies adopted resulted in a gradual increase in the size of property, in land concentration, and in an expansion of the salaried jobs.
The smallholder units continue to be swallowed up by the larger ones and, during the process, acquire a more mercantile nature. Simultaneously, rural hands are either overworked or, alternatively, part of the family acquires the status of temporary wage-earner, and the migration of some members of the family is rendered almost compulsory. As an alternative for survival, smallholders will either sell their land and attempt to purchase another property in the agricultural border areas or will in the end be absorbed by the salaried system.
Tenants, minor partners, sharecroppers and landholders gradually lose territory, and the salaried system acquires a steadily increasing significant role.
The implementation of free work in Brazilian agriculture in the mid-1 9th century resulted in the predominance of the family unit. Women began to participate in general activities, mainly in the coffee harvest, along with children who from 5-6 years of age were already taking active part in the work. The unitary costs of the work force were sharply reduced by subsistence agriculture (Antuniassi, 1983).
The preference of the small-scale farmers for family work fed to a reinforcement of the family organisation: the head of household mobilised, allocated and co-ordinated the work force, leading to a specific gender division of the work and reproductive behaviour (Stolcke, 1986).
In the tenant system the labour force was employed in family units which reinforced the co-operation, whereas in the wage system the workers sell their work force, and families are no longer a labour unit as such, but are defined as the sum of each member's income.
In the tenant farmer system, the family contract was signed by the male head of household who also received the family wages. He had the authority to coordinate the activities: children would take care of the small animals and help in the harvest; women would do the domestic work, cultivate the subsistence plantation and cooperate in the harvest.; Payment was determined by the number of "hoes" - representing the adult workers -, which should be at least three. The productive behaviour of the families was to a large extent guided by the thought that the more numerous the offspring, the greater the possibility of future gains, because the higher the number of people involved in the family work force (lanni, 1976; Stolcke, 1986). Woman, family and housework, which includes child-care and education, appear as essential elements for the daily and generational reproduction of the rural work force (Barroso, 1982).
The current interest to acquire a better understanding of the issue of female work must necessarily take into consideration the work-family relations.
The family earnings begin to stem both from rural work as such and urban activities. In almost all cities, the new migrants live in the outskirts. Consumption grows in many aspects: electricity, water, rent or purchase of housing, firewood or gas, food (no longer generated by subsistence farming), etc. The family wages must be much higher in order to guarantee a certain standard of living which, as a rule, has decreased considerably (Rossini, 1988, 1990).
The rural proletarianization process progressed slowly while the coffee crop was predominant in São Paulo state. It then advanced rapidly with the expansion of the sugar cane crop and more recently with the development of soybean and wheat crops, which allowed significant changes in the structure of the capital, and finally created the rural proletariat (Oliveira, 1977; Graziano Silva, 1981; Cano, 1986).
Land concentration, the intensification of mechanisation and use of fertilisers and pesticides, the quasi-extinction of the rural resident, and the temporary salaried labour force contract typify this new production system based on agroindustry.
The unification of the rural and urban labour market has led workers to alternate their rural and urban activities. The family organisation has changed very little, however. What has changed to a certain degree refers to the authority issue, since the activity to be developed by the family members is no longer decided by the "head of household"; each individual organises his/her life according to the individual opportunities.
The subordination of women to men still exists, but it has been clearly reduced, since women's share in the labour market has increased.
There has also been an increase in the responsibilities of women within the family: she has a job to "complement" the family wages, but still does the housework. Her responsibilities regarding her children have increased, since she has to leave them with someone else or lock them inside the house while she is at work. The family is now smaller, for children are no longer a family investment, on the contrary, they represent an increase in expenses. The number of single mothers and female heads of households has also increased. As to men, loss of authority, followed by the loss of the job or of the wage that can guarantee the family survival, has led to the breakdown of marriages, alcoholism, violence, etc.
These contradictions are a consequence of the economic pressures and of the change of values, thus weakening the family ties. Children often consider their family home a boarding house, as they contribute to its maintenance and also demand things that they never used to. Many of them leave their parents' home to constitute a new family, and they are able to migrate more easily (Mièle, 1987).
Due to salaried work, women have become part of the work force and are not merely an available and remanageable labour force within the domestic unit. The relation between labour reproduction and the work force are dependent on the wages and lead the family group to organise itself as a unit of consumers (Guimarães, 1990).
These preceding considerations regarding the new work relations enable us to emphasise that the labour market dynamics will reflect this new stage of Brazilian agriculture, especially where women are concerned.
On the one hand, it is true that some crops offer less labour opportunities due to the mechanisation of agriculture, on the other hand genetic and scientific engineering permit that some crops which were otherwise harvested only in one period of the year can be now harvested practically throughout the year. As a consequence, problems related to the quality of life and of the environment are intensified.
The remaining smallholders, tenants, partners and landless labourers will also engage in temporary wage-earning activities at "peak" moments. In these cases, there is little demand for women as a labour force.
It should also be noted that temporary migration which basically involves men plays an important role in avoiding an increase in salaries during "peak" moments: (Graziano da Silva, 1981).
The fragmentation of small property implies the reduction of the capacity of retaining the labour force. Children normally leave home when they are aged 14. But it is not only the children who leave; the male heads of households themselves also migrate; and the girls leave at even earlier ages to enter the wage system, working as urban domestic staff (Targino et al., 1990; Martine and Garcia, 1987).
The remittance of part of the salaries by the migrants permits the survival of small property for a little longer. The work on the land, through the cultivation of subsistence crops, is a precarious complement to the basic needs of the family, which are guaranteed by those who remain on the land, especially the women, the children and the aged.
Land concentration eliminates a considerable part of the small family units and brings about a reduction of the labour force, especially the female work force. For this reason, subsistence agriculture tends to become an activity in extinction.
Finally, there is an overall tendency towards less engagement in activities related to agriculture, as a consequence of modernisation. The urban sector is not able to employ the rural labour force which has migrated to the cities and not even all the available urban labour force. The informal market seems to be the solution for the survival of the family in severe poverty conditions. Squares, commercial streets, and major cross-roads have been the stage for this survival. A number of "Persian markets" proliferate in the cities. While the government does not commit itself to reduce the concentration of wealth in the hands of a few, the present situation will be maintained, with great part of the population making a living out of odd-jobs in the cities and/or in the fields.
The rural women and migration
<section>4</section>
A case study: women in cane straw at São Paulo estate
A case study: women in cane straw at São Paulo estate
The increase of the participation of women in the work force was observed from research carried out in 1977 and 1986 in Ribeirão Preto, the most important sugar cane area of the state of São Paulo.
Over this 10-year-period, the changes were meaningful: an increase in the number of workers in the family, a decrease in the number of residents in the household, a growing participation of women in the work force, a drop in fertility rate, a rise in the relative number of female heads of households, a fall in the standards of nutrition, etc.
The transfer of the female work from rural to urban, as a wage-earning worker, modifies the nature of the job performed by her. From the condition of an "assistant" to the family work, she enters the highly capitalised production process that characterises the sugar cane plantation. The woman begins to be engaged as a salaried employee, with immediate consequences to the family organisation.
As a rural worker, as a family worker in the small property, or as an assistant to her husband as the main wage-earner and family head, women used to take their children to the field, even new-born babies. In the sugar cane plantation, this is no longer possible. Contractors and supervisors do not permit this practice. In the truck or bus that transports them to work there is no room for children under 10-12 who are not involved in the activity.
Women were then obliged to adopt other strategies, and therefore leave the children with other mothers, mothers-in-law and daughters. Private and paid day nurseries, in charge of one woman who took care of several small children, became a widespread institution.
In almost all towns covered by the survey day nurseries for children from 2 years old were found. They provide services from 7 AM to 5 PM, which represented a great inconvenience for the mothers since they should be working during this period. The alternative was to find someone to take and pick up the children, since the mothers could not be there. The same thing happened with the children's playground as children could only go there during one period of the day --morning or afternoon.
In some places where there was a great number of salaried women, the city administration established working hours for day nurseries and playgrounds that would meet the needs of these workers. In Serra Azul and Serrana, for example, the trucks and buses would stop at the day nurseries or the playground where the mothers had left their children.
In many cases, though, due to insufficient vacancies at the public institutions or due to the high fees of the private ones --about US$ 40/month -, which they could not afford, the mothers would leave their small children alone at home. Accidental deaths caused by fire were not uncommon. The average number of children per family decreased: this fact was confirmed by the field survey (1977 - 5.5 children; 1986 - 2.6 children) and by the study carried out by Wong at São Paulo state.
A growth in the tendency of women taking over as family heads was observed. In 1977, women were the head of 11.6% families. If one considered all households constituted by mother and children, even if the mothers were jobless, the percentage rose to 18.6%. In 1986 there was a substantial change and the figures rose to: 23.7% and 31.6%, respectively. Women not only took care of the house and children, but were also responsible for providing economically for each member of the family unit.
Labourers were transported to work in closed trucks, with just a small entrance and two small windows for lighting and ventilation. The trucks normally had precarious lighting and wooden seats distributed as in a collective bus. Women would take the front seats, whilst men would sit in the rear. As prescribed by law, a ladder was provided to get into the vehicle, and the farming tools were stored under the truck so as to avoid accidents.
When transportation was by bus --an option which has since become a legal (but not always complied with) requirement --, the gender distribution also prevailed. Workers felt more respected, despite the often precarious state of maintenance of the vehicles. In fact, whether owned by labour contractors or by urban transportation companies, the vehicles were usually in a pitiful state, resulting in frequent accidents due to lack of brakes and lights, not to mention the inability of the drivers.
<section>5</section>
The double work burden: work at home and in the field
The double work burden: work at home and in the field
In 1963, the Rural Worker Statute came into force. It prescribed the registration of the labour contract in the workers labour card. Although this practice was not always brought into effect, it assured holidays and the Xmas bonus, a remunerated weekly day off, retirement after years of service, retirement for disability, 90-day-payment of pregnancy allowance etc. This Statute also established maternity leave for women: six weeks before and six weeks after giving birth (84 days in all), on full pay. The present Constitution guarantees 120 days maternity leave. This provision, though, has resulted in the increase of informal labour agreements, without a written contract of employment (Rossini, 1975,1978; Sigaud, 1979; Barros Junior, 1972, 1980; Gonzales and Bastos, 1977). Informal work, without any link to a property or a group, has caused great difficulties for the organisation of women as a professional category (Paulilo, 1976).
In 1977, 74.1 % of workers declared they had labour cards, while in 1986 almost all of them had it, except 4.4% of women. There was, however, a big gap between having the labour card and being registered, but the actual figures representing such a gap are difficult to estimate.
Another factor that encouraged the modernisation. of agriculture and intensified the employment of the salaried and temporary work force in the sugar cane plantation was the government incentives, especially after the implementation, in 1975, of the "Proálcool" (a government-sponsored program for fuel alcohol). This government support accelerated the incorporation of new lands, thus increasing the sugar cane area but caused a decrease of areas of subsistence agriculture as well as of areas traditionally dedicated to food production. This does not mean, though, that all spaces were occupied. In fact, there were vast uncultivated areas, spaces occupied by cattle, and residual forest areas, resulting in increased environmental pollution.
A large number of women became permanent/temporary salaried workers in the sugar cane jobs --reaping, tillage, weeding, fertilising -, and the contract, either with the sugar mill or with the contractor, was generally renewed each semester.
The number of female workers varied throughout the year, as mentioned earlier. According to data provided by the Institute for Agricultural Economy (Instituto de Economia Agrícola), the number increased in the months of April and June. This period corresponded to the beginning of the activities of the sugar cane harvest when a larger number were recruited.
Women usually represented 15% to 20% of the workers employed in all activities. During the time between harvests, this percentage would rise to 35% to 40%. In the course of the harvest, however, due to the male migration, there was a clear imbalance. There was also an increase in the number of women engaged in reaping activities: maids, washerwomen, cleaners, and "house wives" disappeared from the cities, as they all went to work for the harvest.
Comparing the number of workers during the harvest and during the time between harvests, it will be noted that although the number of women was higher throughout the harvest, the percentage was much lower as a consequence of the massive recruitment of men, who came from several regions of the country, predominantly from the Northeast and the Jequitinhona Valley, in the state of Minas Gerais.
The relative participation of the family members engaged in the rural labour force was 80.5% in 1977 and 92.8% in 1986. Regarding the activity with which people had initiated their life as labourers, in 1977 it was sugar cane for more than 58% of the men and 38% of the women and in 1986 the percentage was 60% for men and 82.2% for women.
In 1977, 56.6% of the men and 61.8% of the women were already working at the age of 14, and this percentage remained relatively stable in 1986: 52.6% and 62.3%, respectively.
It was difficult to obtain information about the incomes gained from the work: the people interviewed either would volunteer no information whatsoever or would raise or lower the actual amount and rarely answered the questions properly. This is a very natural human inhibition, rendered more intense by the fact that they felt their conditions to be absolutely precarious. Even so, it was possible to verify that although there was no sign of discrimination between the work of women and that of men, female workers normally received less when engaged as wage-earners, and that when engaged to earn by productivity, their yield was generally lower and, therefore, they received less than the male workers.
A study of the average annual income was carried out, considering the minimum wage (MW) of that period. The results are the following: in 1977, men received 1.3 MW and women, 0.85 MW; in 1986 there was a significant "improvement" - 1.8 MW for men and 1.4 MW for women. (The monthly minimum wage was approximately US$ 110).
In the sugar cane plantation, tillage was considered a female task, since, in the smaller farmholds, women had traditionally undertaken this task. Tillage activities involved the transplanting of the sugar cane tholepin to the furrows --sometimes whole sugar cane seeds were used and women had to tear them into pieces inside the furrows, cover with earth, and do the first fertilising. In these activities, women were sometimes helped by children. This job was seldom paid by production if done by women, as it was for men. Nowadays, fertilisation is to a great extent carried out by man-driven tractors. There is no record of female tractor drivers in commercial agriculture.
The reaping of sugar cane for milling for which both men and women were hired was paid by production. With the increase in mechanisation manual reaping was carried out only in places where the sugar cane had already fallen down or in places where access was difficult. During the survey, no women contractors nor women holding positions were found and only two references were found in the literature to this. However, it is possible to affirm that women were engaged in all other activities.
As for the double work burden, it was observed that women, after a long working-day at the sugar cane plantation, continued to work back home where they had to face the so called "non-productive activities''.
<section>6</section>
Women, environment and quality of life in Brazil: current technical-scientific stage
Women, environment and quality of life in Brazil: current technical-scientific stage
Poverty, inequality and social exclusion, not to mention the circumstances arising from foreign debt, drug trafficking and geopolitical restrictions are the issues of the moment in Brazil and in the world.
Serious problems of water supply for human consumption and for agriculture exist. Particularly, the salinization of water, mainly in Northeast Brazil, is a matter of grave concern, for consumption and production of food. The destruction of flora and fauna is alarming. Besides the environmental issue, Brazil's major challenge is to resume the path of economic and social development, along with a strengthening of the democratic structures. It is "necessary to stabilise the economy and to incorporate it in the chains of the world technological exchange, to implement more strict patterns of consumption, and to improve the distribution of income". (CIMA, 1991, p3)
Any development alternative which intends to provide a more permanent solution will have to ascribe high priority both to environmental and socially sustainable factors.
Until the end of the 19th century, high birth and death rates characterised the Brazilian population, when a significant population growth was registered with the arrival of immigrants. Great discoveries in curative and preventive medicine decreased the number of deaths and along with immigration favoured the quick increase of the population.
The birth rate began to decrease in the early 20th century, and most significantly from the 40s, when the flow of immigrants decreased markedly. The fertility rate decreased from 5.8 per woman in the 60s to 3.2 in the 80s, causing on overall drop in the population growth rate.
As from the early 80s, Brazil "misses the step" in the rhythm of growth that had hitherto been its hallmark. The 1980-91 period showed a lower population growth rate since the official surveys of population data began in the country (Rossini, 1992). The annual population growth at the turn of the century is estimated to be 1.6%. If this tendency continues, an annual growth of 0.6% for the 2000-2075 period is estimated by FIBGE. This shows that the environmental problem in Brazil is more related to spatial use than to population growth.
In the past 60 years, three main migratory movements related to the expansion of the agricultural border have been registered: in the direction of Paraná State; to Central Brazil; and, more recently, to the Amazon region.
During the past decades both rural and urban migration toward the cities has had an important impact. In 1940 Brazil had 51 cities with more than 20 thousand inhabitants, in 1990 this number rose to 500, and today 75% of the Brazilian population lives in cities --about 30% of those cities are concentrated in 10 national metropolitan regions São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Belo Horizonte, Porto Alegre, Recife, Salvador, Fortaleza, Curitiba, Belém and the Federal District).
Over the last 20 years, clear signs of industrial deconcentration have been noted, caused by an increase in industrial facilities located further and further away from the metropolitan area of São Paulo, still the most important of the country. In fact, this trend represents an expansion of the sphere of influence exerted by the dominant complex and cannot be considered a mere deconcentration, but, rather, a "concentrated deconcentration, which enlarges the national power of the São Paulo metropolis.
Although certain branches of industry have shown a tendency to migrate from the metropolis over the last two decades, concurrently with a relative decrease of the demographic growth, caused by the relative decrease in the migratory flow, São Paulo has not lost its hegemonic position as core area of the country. Its importance resides in the concentration of financial capital and in its control of technology, science and computerware, i.e., information.
Considering the high population concentration of Brazil, the equation population/environment depends mainly on the changes in the use of resources. In the scenario of industrial/urban concentration, social and environmental questions will become more relevant in the cities.
The problems that affect directly the rural population and indirectly the urban population are the following: deforestation and its negative impact on available water sources; occupation of water source areas, which cause pollution and also compromise the continuity of the water supply; gold field mining problems and the use of mercury, with serious consequences to people and to fauna, and, finally, the reappearance of endemic diseases which were practically under control, such as malaria, dengue, cholera.
"A huge conceptual and structural change is necessary --something like a change of paradigm. And the groups interested in development, environment and policy research that work in co-operation with development agencies, have much to contribute for a new vision which balances the values of natural environment with social and economic developing aims." (Campbell, 1992, pp 207).
The current Brazilian Constitution has definitely incorporated the notion of environmental conservation as fundamental to the development process. But the gap between intent and reality is very large indeed. In the face of the needs identified at the different management levels of the environmental policies, the Brazilian government set up the National Environment Project (Projeto Nacional do Meio-Ambiente - PNMA).
The return to a democratic regime, as from the 80s, gave voice to the communities' demands within the framework of environmental issues allowing a greater participation of the population in influencing the political decisions.
The major contributions to the growing awareness of the population with respect to the environmental issue came from non-governmental organisations (NGOs), from the media and from political and cultural movements. The development will be sustainable if waste is eliminated and poverty overcome.
"The environmental situation in most Brazilian cities is dramatic, if not tragic. The most diverse kinds of ecological imbalance, the social misery, the degradation of the man-made environment and the waste of natural and human resources proliferate in these cities, directly affecting the quality of life of millions of Brazilians. Even the wealthy social segments that apparently benefit from the present situation live in permanent fear, due to urban tension, social violence, anxiety, and discomfort". (CIMA, 1991, pp 31)
<section>7</section>
Women at work in agriculture and responsibilities related to the environment
Women at work in agriculture and responsibilities related to the environment
The modernisation. agriculture in Brazil brought with it ecological and environmental problems. The increasing use of fertiliser and pesticides, intense and concentrated mechanisation and the large export-crop exploitation caused such an impact on soil, forests, inland water, and biological balance of pests and diseases that they cannot but trigger the country's awareness.
The sustainability of the present intensive agricultural model can be questioned since: a) the high rate of soil compaction with the loss of its infiltration capacity has given rise to unacceptable soil erosion rates as well as to an increase in the vulnerability of crops to the hydric "stress"; b) the intensive and incorrect use of chemical materials such as pesticides and fertilisers compromises the ecological balance, causing pollution of the waters and damaging its potentialities; c) the incorrect use of irrigation on the plateau and the drainage of the lowlands along with the destruction of riverside vegetation and the increase of the surface flow is damaging the hydric balance, the river perenniality and the water supply to cities and to hydroelectric power stations; d) the excessive deforestation, in clear infringement of forest preservation laws, combined with the abusive use of pesticides and the establishment of extensive monocultures eliminate the natural and
pollinating agents of agricultural areas and increase the outbreak of diseases and pests; e) the increase of cave-ins caused by heavy rains has led to a desertification process; Al the intensification of forest burning, causes pollution and increases the possibilities of desertification (C I MA, 1 991).
The preservation of vegetation and forests and the recovery of devastated areas are a legal obligation, besides the protection of water sources and the reintroduction of species that can reduce the pollution of rivers and streams.
In the production areas, planning has to be capable of assuring the productivity at a commercial level, making proper use of the natural resources and considering the improvement of the quality of life of the local population as well as preservation of the environment.
Within this framework of planning, women must be acknowledged as political subjects, capable of contributing to the economy in such a way that sustainable development can be reached (Delgado e Lopes, 1992).
Women are bearers of a powerful impulse for change and, therefore, they are capable of contributing to the creation of a style of development which will favour social justice as well as respect for the environment. In this way, both a reduction of social disparities and the improvement of the quality of life will be attained and thus enhance human dignity.
The rural women and the environment
<section>8</section>
Rural development policies
Rural development policies
"To deal with the subject of social development requires one to face, first and foremost, the issue of social iniquities of all kinds - gender, race, income, employment, universal access to collective consumer goods, and the like - which typify our society, and not limit such considerations to the single dimension of poverty. " (Brazilian National Report to the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 1995, p.14)
The search for an articulation between social and economic policies will generate an effective distribution of income. Another issue is how such social and economic policies should be put into practice: by exercising the right of citizenship, i.e., the rights of all citizens, not to be limited to mere compensation mechanisms in view of the forced exclusion of workers from the labour market.
"The Brazilian experience in recent years redefines citizenship and social participation as active factors of transformation in the development process, and no longer merely as compensations for the effects of the forces which have destructured the market..."
"a clear distinction should be made between social development in terms of relief from utter poverty and in terms of overcoming poverty. In the first case, policies of more immediate effect, of an assistential nature, shall apply, which, in the majority of cases, will focus on the more vulnerable groups of the population. In other words, there are policies which tend to take the form of emergency programmes. In the second case - the process of overcoming poverty we have to deal with policies of a medium and long-term reach, based on the erection of a new model of sustained development, in which priority is given to economic growth coupled with social equity, and in which economic policies also contain the dimension of social policies"... "the process of changing an excluding development pattern for another which includes and integrates all citizens, in the sense of providing for their basic needs and human aspirations, is necessarily slow, difficult and prone to generate
conflicts, specially in a context in which inequalities prevail and with a long-standing tradition of the State exercising a centralising and authoritarian role." (Brazilian National Report, op. cit, pp 16-17).
Beyond striving for gender equality in the shortest period of time, the strategies and perspectives for rural women should reflect the priorities of the country, taking into consideration the development of the institutions and the persistence of serious economic and social problems, leading to the intensification of overall poverty and shortage of resources and basic services to the population.
The brief diagnosis we have presented of rural women in Brazil shows that the inequalities in access to productive resources such as land, credit, technology and qualification are persistent. The full participation of women in rural development is hampered by the impossibility of easy access to land. Another obstacle to this participation is of a legal nature, regarding the following aspects: constitutional (equality, civil and political rights), economic (credit, right to property and inheritance), labour(wages in keeping with her activities, work opportunities) and family (marriage, divorce, reproduction, family planning).
Women will only benefit from rural development after the following questions are solved: their participation in laws related to land reform, their right to land access, credit and qualification. The difficulty in obtaining access to property hinders women from presenting guarantees for credit. Therefore, easy access to credit, to transport and to commercial services would be a great help to enable women to contribute to rural development.
Brazil must promote a social development policy to lift 32 million people up from poverty and 16 million people from indigence. As we have seen, the causes of this situation are a low educational level, which leads to jobs with low productivity and low or non-existent qualifications; families headed by women and subjected to poverty, etc. In fact, if you are a Brazilian woman, are black, have a low educational level, are the head of the household, and have many children, you stand a 95% chance of being classified as poor.
There is no clear development policy for women. For instance: since 1988, the Constitution has guaranteed women the right to receive land; before, this was legally difficult or even impossible. However, whenever the government has the possibility of granting land, it does so to men. Female heads of households rarely receive plots in the colonisation programs, as in the National Integration Program (Programa de Integração Nacional - PIN) and in the Pro-Land Program (Pro-Terra), in the 70s.
The 1988 Constitution established that rural women could receive pensions from the age of 60, even if their husbands already had this benefit. Until then, the rural pension was half the minimum wage for men and was not granted to women, since each family could receive only one pension. The consequences have been extremely positive for women, since the pension gave them more autonomy and more economic freedom within the poverty levels and has contributed even towards their achievement of citizenship.
As a way of pressuring the government to implement programs that benefit the landless rural workers, organised families will often knock down fences of nonproductive large estates to occupy the land. From 1974 to 1994, more than 100,000 land registrations were made, where today more than 140,000 inhabitants live. But the battle for work does not stop with the conquest of the land. It is necessary to ''continue the war" in order to implement an agricultural policy directed to the interests of agriculture.
The government has shown great neglect of smallholders producers. When they receive a government loan they face great difficulties in paying it back and, if they fail, they have to give up the land and return to their former status of landless wage-labourers.
The vaccination programs against measles, chickenpox, and polio also reach the rural population, wherever they live -Amazon Valley, Northeastern backlands, Southern pampas, etc. This fact has enormously contributed to the drop in child mortality, which does not mean, however, that the quality of life of the population has improved.
Besides an agricultural policy which protects the survival of the family and the maintenance of property, it is necessary to promote some basic human rights, such as health services for women and family and, more importantly, education for all children and youth.
In Brazil, as in other countries, the technological model implemented both in urban and rural areas, is ecologically unsound. People, animals, land, soils are highly affected. It is not possible to imagine an easy and painless solution to the problems which affect the population as well as the environment. And normally, it is the weaker sectors of the society that are most affected.
Women and rural development policies
<section>9</section>
Conclusions
Conclusions
Poverty, inequality and social exclusion are factors to which the population, and women in particular, are subjected. Also problems arising from foreign debt, drug trafficking geopolitical restrictions are the issues of the moment in Brazil and in the world.
It is important to discuss the degree of destruction affecting the various natural resources, but it is even more important to put a stop to the process of degradation, thus ensuring that survival will be guaranteed under a minimum of decent conditions.
Deforestation and its negative impact on available water sources; occupation of water source areas, which cause pollution and also compromise the continuity of the water supply; gold field mining problems and the use of mercury, with serious consequences to mankind and to the fauna, and, finally, the reappearance of endemic diseases which were practically under control, such as malaria, dengue, cholera, are problems that affect directly the rural population and indirectly the urban population.
The modernisation. of agriculture in Brazil brought about a worsening of the social crisis as well as ecological and environmental problems that until then had not been fully understood. The increasing use of fertilisers and pesticides, the intense and concentrated mechanisation and the large export-crop exploitation caused such an impact on soils, forests, inland water, and biological balance of pests and diseases that they cannot but trigger the country's awareness.
This awareness can be brought about through environmental education that is carried out not only in schools, but by the media and in community activities, where the intervention of women is fundamental.
It is undeniable that technical progress has occurred at the expense of environmental destruction. The negative aspect does not lie in the technology itself but in the ways and means of using it.
It is necessary to be aware of the difficulties and problems in order to influence the Government in the implementation of public policies, which will ensure a better quality of life for all. Only the references and limits defined by ethics, democracy and human rights will provide an adequate balance between the environmental and development requirements.
Human dignity, which is expressed through the achievement of citizenship, implies a growth in general awareness and in active participation in labour unions and women's movements, etc.
<title>Women, migration, environment and rural development policy in Brazil</title>
References
References
ANTUNIASSI, M. Helena Rocha. O trabalho familiar na agriculture paulista. Botucatu, 1983. Dissertaçåo (Livre-Docência) FCA/UNESP.
ANTUNIASSI, M. Helena Rocha. Trabalhador infantil e escolarizaçåo no meio rural. Rio de Janeiro, Zahar, 1983.
BARROSO, Carmen. Mulher, Sociedade e Estado no Brasil. São Paulo, UNICEF/Brasiliense, 1982.
BLAY, Eva Alterman. Trabalho domesticado: a mulher na indústria paulista. São Paulo, Ática, 1978.
BRANT, Vinicius Caldeira. Do colono ao bóia-fria: transformações na agriculture e constituiçåo do mercado de trabalho na alta sorocabana de Assis. Estudos CEBRAP, São Paulo, (19): 37-91, jan./mar. 1977.
BRAY, Silvio Carlos. As political do Instituto do Açúcar e do Álcool e do Programa Nacional do Álcool e sues influências na area açucareira-alcooleira de Catanduva. Geografia Teorética, Rio Claro, 10 (20): 99-123, out. 1985.
BRUSCHINI, M. A. e ROSEMBERG, F. Trabalhadoras do Brasil. São Paulo, Carlos Chagas/Brasiliense, 1982.
CANO, Wilson. Transformaçåo da economia e repercussões no mercado de trabalho: roteiro pare uma investigaçåo histórica - 1920-1986. Anais do V Encontro Nacional de Estudos Populacionais, Águas de Såo Pedro, São, Paulo, 1986.
CAMPBELL, T. Desenvolvimento Urbano no Terceiro Mundo: Dilemas Ambientais e Pobres Urbanos in LEONARD, H.J. (organizador) Meio Ambiente e Pobreza. Estratégias de desenvolvimento pare uma agenda comum. Ed. Jorge Zahar Rio de Janeiro, 1992.
Cavalheiro, F. - Urbanização e Alteraçoes Ambientais in TAUK, SM (Organizadora) Análise Ambiental: uma visão multidisciplinar. UNEP. FAPESP, São Paulo, 1991.
CIMA - Comissão Interministerial pare a Preparação da Conferência das Nações Unidas Sobre o Meio Ambiente e Desenvolvimento - Subsídios Técnicos pare a Elaboração do Relatório Nacional do Brasil pare a CNUMAD (Conferência das Nações Unidas sobre Meio Ambiente e Desenvolvimento), Brasília, julho, 1991.
DURHAN, Eunice R. A caminho da cidade: a vida rural e a migraçåo pare Såo Paulo. Såo Paulo, Perspectiva, 1973.
FERREIRA, Enéas R. e BRAY, Silvio C. As influências do Próalcool e do Pró-Oeste nas transformações das áreas canavieiras do estado de Såo Paulo. Geografia, Rio Claro, São Paulo, 1984.
FLEURY, Maria Tereza Leme e FISCHER, R. M. (coord) Processo e relaçåo do trabalho no Brasil. Såo Paulo, Atlas, 1985.
GONZALES, Elbio N. e BASTOS, M. Ines. O trabalho volante na agricultura brasileira. Capital e Trabalho no campo, Såo Paulo, HUCITEC, 1977.
GRAZIANO DA SILVA, J. F. Progresso, técnica e relações de trabalho na agriculture. Såo Paulo, HUCITEC, 1981.
GRIMBERG, Elisabeth (organizadora) Ambiente Urbano e Qualidade de Vida Edição Especial ECO - 92. Såo Paulo, Pólis, n° 3, 1991.
GUIMARÅES, L. Sérgio Pires e BRITO, S. Rodrigues. De camponesa à bóia-fria: Seminário Mulher Rural: Identidades na Pesquisa e na Luta Polítical Friburgo, IPPUR/UFRJ, 1987. (mimeo)
IANNI, Octávio. A classe operária vai ao campo. Cadernos CEBRAP, Såo Paulo, (24), 1976.
LUZARDI, A. Elizabeth. O projeto de vida da mulher camponesa. Seminário Mulher Rural: Identidade na Pesquisa e na Luta Political Friburgo, IPPUR/URRJ, 1987. (mimeo)
MARTINE, George e GARCIA, Ronaldo C. Os impactos socials da modernizaçåo agrícola. Såo Paulo, Caetés, 1987.
MASSAMBANI, O. e CAMPIGLIA, S.S. (organizadores). Meio Ambiente e Desenvolvimento, Forum USP, São Paulo, 1992.
MIELI, Neide. A mulher na palha da cane. Såo Paulo, 1985. Dissertaçåo (Mestrado) DS/UFPB.
MIELI, Neide. Da pequena à grande produçåo: o trabalho da mulher canavieira. Seminário Mulher Rural: Identidade na Pesquisa e na Luta Política, Friburgo, IPPUR/UFRJ, 1987. (mimeo)
OLIVEIRA, Francisco de. Elegia pare uma re(li)giåo: SUDENE, Nordeste. Planejamento e conflito de classes. Rio de Janeiro, Paz e Terra, 1977.
PAULILO, M. l. S. O trabalho da mulher no meio rural. Piracicaba, 1976. Dissertaçåo (Mestrado) Escola Superior de Agricultura Luiz de Queiróz/USP.
RATTNER, H. Desenvolvimento Sustentável, in MENEZES, L.C. e outros, Terra Gasta. A Questão do Meio Ambiente. EDUC/PUC, S.Paulo, 1992.
Relatório Nacional Brasileiro pare a Cúpula Mundial pare o Desenvovivimento Social, Copenhague. Ministério das Relações Exteriores, Brasília, 1995.
Relatório do Brasil pare a Conferéncia Internacional sobre População e Desenvolvimento, Cairo, Egito. Ministério das Relações Exteriores, Brasília,1994.
Revista Ecologia e Desenvolvimento (Edição Especial) Curitiba 300 anos de luz. Ano 2, n° 30, Edit. Terceiro Mundo. Rio de Janeiro, 1993.
ROSSINI, Rosa Ester. A População Brasileira: Trabalhar e Sobreviver. Texto n° Laboratório de Geografia Política e Planejamento Territorial e Ambiental, Depto. Geografia, USP, São Paulo, 1992.
ROSSINI, Rosa Ester. Geografia e Gênero: A mulher na lavoura canavieira paulista. Tese de Livre-Docência apresentada na FFLCH/USP, 1992, (mimeo).
ROSSINI, Rosa Ester. Mulher, Família e Meio Ambiente: o trabalho da mulher na agriculture canavieira do Estado de São Paulo, Brasil in BARROS LIMA, N. R. L de (organizadora) Mulher e Meio Ambiente, Edufal, Maceió, 1994.
SANTOS, Luiz A. de Castro. Trabalho rural e família no Brasil: uma revisåo critica. Novos Estudos CEBRAP, Såo Paulo, 1 (3), jul. 1982.
SANTOS, Milton. Modernidade, Meio Técnico Científico e Urbanização no Brasil. Texto 1, Laboratório de Geografia Política e Planejamento Territorial e Ambiental, Depto. de Geografia, USP, São Paulo, 1992.
STOLCKE, Verena. Cafeicultura: homers, mulheres e capital (1850-1980). Såo Paulo, Brasiliense, 1986.
TARGINO. I. e outros. Processo de Trabalho Agrícola e Mortalidade Infantil. In Anais do VII Encontro Nacional de Estudos Populacionais da ABEP. v. 3, 1990.
WONG, Laura Rodriguez. Tendência e Perspectiva da Fecundidade no Estado de São Paulo, in Informe Demográfico, São Paulo, FSEADE, n.19, 1986.
Translation by Regina Thompson under the supervision of Francis Henrik Aubert Interdepartmental Centre for Translation and Terminology (ClTRAT) of the University of São Paulo.
<title>Women, migration, environment and rural development policy in Brazil</title>
<section>1</section>
Annex I. Table 1 - Urban and rural population and rate of urbanisation 1991
Annex I. Table 1 - Urban and rural population and rate of urbanisation 1991
POPULATION TOTAL
URBAN
RURAL
RATE OF URBANISATION 1991
BRAZIL
NORTH
NORTHEAST
SOUTHEAST
SOUTH
CENTER- WEST
Source: IBGE, Population Department.
<section>2</section>
Annex II. Table 2 - Population by sex 1991
Annex II. Table 2 - Population by sex 1991
REGIONS
TOTAL
MEN
WOMEN
BRAZIL
NORTH
NORTHEAST
SOUTHEAST
SOUTH
10.g73.632
CENTER-WEST
Source: IBGE, Population Department
<section>3</section>
Annex III. Table 3 - Life expectancy at birth, by sex, according to region 1980-1990
Annex III. Table 3 - Life expectancy at birth, by sex, according to region 1980-1990
LIFE EXPECTANCY AT BIRTH
TOTAL
1980 MEN
WOMEN
TOTAL
1990 MEN
WOMEN
Brazil
North
Northeast
Southeast
South
Center-West
Source: IBGE, Population Department.
<section>4</section>
Annex IV. Table 4 - Life expectancy at birth, according monthly family income 1984
Annex IV. Table 4 - Life expectancy at birth, according monthly family income 1984
LIFE EXPECTANCY AT BIRTH (YEARS)
MONTHLY FAMILY INCOME
BRAZIL
NORTHEAST REGION
SOUTHEAST REGION
TOTAL
URBAN
RURAL
TOTAL
URBAN
RURAL
TOTAL
URBAN
RURAL
Up to 1 minimum salary
More than 1 up to 2
More than 2 up to 3
More than 3 up to 5
More than 5
Source: IBGE, PNAD, 1984.
<section>5</section>
Annex V. Table 5 - Rate of infant mortality, by sex, according to regions 1980 - 1990
Annex V. Table 5 - Rate of infant mortality, by sex, according to regions 1980 - 1990
INFANT MORTALITY RATE (%0)
TOTAL
MEN
WOMEN
TOTAL
MEN
WOMEN
Brazil
North
Northeast
Southeast
South
Center-West
Source: IBGE, Population Department.
<section>6</section>
Annex VI. Table 6 - Number of poor incidence of absolute poverty 1980 - 1990
Annex VI. Table 6 - Number of poor incidence of absolute poverty 1980 - 1990
AREA
NUMBER OF PEOPLE(1 000 people)
PROPORTION OF POOR
TOTAL
URBAN
RURAL
Source: Tolosa and Rocha, Politicas de Combate a Pobreza: experiências e equívocos, São Paulo, DNAE, Fórum Nacional, 1993.
<section>7</section>
Annex VII. Table 7 - Poor and indigent population, according to region and strata 1990
Annex VII. Table 7 - Poor and indigent population, according to region and strata 1990
POOR
INDIGENT
REGIONS AND STRATA
numbers (1)
proportion
repartition(%)
numbers (1)
proportion
repartition (%)
metropolitan (2)
urban
rural (3)
total (3)
Source: IBGE/PNAD - 90
(1) Results of PNAD - 90 by the author, based on compatibility with the result of the size of the population of the Preliminary Synopses of the Demographic Census.
(2) Including Brasilia.
(3) Exclusive to the rural area of the North Region, not the PNAD study.
<section>8</section>
Annex VIII. Table 8 - Brazil and regions indicators of economic participation by sex and family situation 1981/ 1990
Annex VIII. Table 8 - Brazil and regions indicators of economic participation by sex and family situation 1981/ 1990
SEX, REGIONS and FAMILY SITUATION
EAP(*) 1981
EAP(*)1990
RELATIVE GROWTH
RATES OF ACTIVITY
PER CENT WOMEN
OF IN EAP(*) 1990
BRAZIL
URBAN
Men
Women
RURAL
Men
Women
NORTH-EAST
URBAN
Men
Women
RURAL
Men
Women
SOUTHEAST
URBAN
Men
Women
RURAL
Men
Women
(*) Economically Active Population.
Source: FIBGE, PNADs 1981 and 1990.
<section>9</section>
Annex IX. Table 9 - Feminine and masculine activity rates according to position in the family - 1980/1990
Annex IX. Table 9 - Feminine and masculine activity rates according to position in the family - 1980/1990
POSITION IN THE FAMILY
MEN
WOMEN
HEAD
SPOUSE
CHILDREN
OTHERS
UNRELATED
8O,0
TOTAL
Source: FIBGE, Census 1980; PNAD, 1990.
