<section>e</section>
Foreword
Foreword
Historically, central government forest policies have failed to adequately recognize or value the contributions that forests make to subsistence economies and to income generation in rural communities. In the past two decades, however, awareness of these benefits has increased significantly, stimulating healthy debate over new forest policies that could potentially devolve more forest management responsibilities to forest-dependent people. The debate has been accompanied by policy experiments and institutional changes and, where indigenous and traditional forest management systems are recognized, control of forests is slowly being handed over to local people.
The shift from state controlled or conventional forest management to participatory forest management is still considered radical in many places, however. Consequently, progress toward state-community partnerships in protecting, managing and sharing the benefits of local forest resources is slow in most countries as stakeholders adjust to new arrangements and situations. The new approaches sometimes have had unexpected and profound implications for rural people. Women, in particular, have been affected in significant ways-sometimes positively, sometimes negatively.
This publication explores the consequences of Joint Forest Management for women in tribal communities in the Indian State of Andhra Pradesh. It reveals that women spend a greater proportion of their time collecting and processing non-wood forest products than men. Because of their greater contribution to the welfare of the household, women in tribal households have more decision-making power than those in many other Indian households. New forest management approaches must therefore recognize these distinct roles of women in household activities and decision making.
This publication's most significant contribution is in reminding us that even well-intentioned community management strategies may have significant negative impacts on women when gender dimensions of forest use and management are overlooked or downplayed. In contrast, gender sensitive development strategies benefit not only women, but the general household welfare. If developed appropriately, such strategies also can help prevent further forest degradation and deforestation. The experiences of Andhra Pradesh highlighted in this publication hopefully will provide valuable insights for development initiatives in other areas.
Soetatwo Hadiwigeno
Assistant Director-General and
Regional Representative of FAO
<title>Forest dependent survival strategies of tribal women: Implications for joint forest management in Andhra Pradesh, India</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments
My thanks to the staff of SAMATA, an NGO, who tirelessly work for the development of tribals in Vishakapatnam and East Godavari districts of Andhra Pradesh. My special thanks to Ravi R. Pragada and Bhanu for hosting me in December 1995. Ravi's style of work, resolving land and forest conflicts till the early morning hours, is truly an inspiration and gives new meaning to the phrase "working day and night." I was able to collect the necessary information in a matter of few weeks because of P. Devullu. I also want to thank the following staff for assisting me in the forests of Vishakapatnam: P. Chakradhar Rao, P. Jagga Rao, "Makireddy" V. Ramana, M. Ramana, V. Bhimeshwar, Y. Rambabu, C. Nookaraju, and Ranga Rao. Thanks to Patrick Durst and Alexandra Stephens, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, for making the field study possible.
Gautam N. Yadama
<section>2</section>
The authors
The authors
Gautam N. Yadama, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor, Washington University, Campus Box 1 196, One Brookings Drive, St. Louis, Missouri 63130, USA.
Bhanu R. Pragada and Ravi R. Pragada are both working in SAMATA, Talarasingi, Chintalaveedi Post, Paderu 531024 Vishakapatnam District, Andhra Pradesh, India. v
<section>3</section>
Glossary
Glossary
Adda Leaf
Bauhinia vahalii, adda leaves are used in plate making
Bidi leaves
Diospyros melanoxylon, leaves are used to role an indigenous cigarette known as bidi
Custard
Annona squamosa, also known as Sitaphalamu or Indian custard apple
Gum karaya
Sterculia urens, also known as Kovila Chettu
Induga or Cleaning nut
Strychnos potatorum
Jack fruit
Artocarpus heterophyllus, commonly known as Panasa
Kanuga
Pongamia glabra, or Derris indica
Karaka
Myrobalanus chebula
Lemon
Citrus limon, or generally known as Dabba
Mahua flowers (Ippa)
Madbuca indica, flowers are used to distill a liquor served in tribal households
Mango
Mangifera indica
Nalla jeedi or Marking nut
Semecarpus anacardium
Niger seed
Guizotia abyssinica
Podu
A form of shifting cultivation practiced among the hill tribes
Rosewood (Indian)
Dalbergia latifolia
Sal
Shorea robusta
Shandy
Weekly tribal market where all varieties of products including non-timber forest products are sold
Soap nuts
Sapindus emarginatus, commonly known as Kunkudu
Tamarind
Tamarindus indica
Tendu leaves
Diospyros melanoxylon
Usiri or Amla fruits
Emblica officinalis
Wild broom
Thysanoloena maxima, also know as Knoda-Cheepuru-Gaddi
<section>4</section>
Introduction
Introduction
It is estimated that there are 66.5 million tribals in India (Maheshwari, 1990). With few exceptions, the majority of the tribals are forest dwellers. In spite of many competing demands and pressures on forests, tribals continue to depend on forests for their livelihood. Historically, in India, tribal perspectives on forests and government policies affecting forests have followed very different trajectories. State policies driven by industrial demands were in direct conflict with the customary use of forests by forest populations. Colonial state policies since 1894 and post-independence forest policies have characterized tribals as indiscriminate users of forests and therefore sought to protect forests from the tribals. "Despite the policy thrusts and legislative instruments to curtail the use of forests by the local people, forest dwellers continued to find access to forests. This was due to the overwhelming dependence of the forest dwellers which make it difficult to fully
administer the laws" (Pathak, 1994, pp. 27-28). In the last five years, under the joint forest management policy of the Indian government, various state governments have experimented with devolving authority for forest management to local communities. This new approach to control, protection and management of forests - joint forest management (JFM) - has profound implications for forest dwelling tribals.
JFM policies, when viewed from a gender perspective, have significant consequences for women in tribal communities. Women are the linchpin that connects the livelihood strategies of tribal households with forest wealth. Tribal women are largely responsible for collecting and processing many of the forest products. Therefore, for JFM policies to be successful in promoting sustainable forest management by tribal communities, it must involve tribal women in deliberate and significant ways.
This publication focuses on the dependence of tribal households on forests in the Eastern Ghats of Andhra Pradesh, India, and the implications for state and community partnerships in managing these forests. Particular attention is given to the gender dimensions of forest use in tribal villages and the implications for the implementation of Joint Forest Management Program being undertaken in Andhra Pradesh. The publication addresses several inter-related issues:
1. the role of forests and non-wood forest products (NWFPs) in the survival strategies of tribal households in Vishakapatnam district of Andhra Pradesh;
2. the important role women play in the daily survival strategies of tribals; and
3. the ensuing lessons and implications for planning and implementing JFM initiated forest protection committees in tribal villages.
The following discussion is multi-dimensional. The goal is to explore the critical role that tribal women play in sustaining tribal households and the resulting implications for crafting and implementing forest co-management programs that are sensitive to the pivotal role played by women in extracting forest products. This publication is based on primary and secondary data - qualitative as well as quantitative - from the high altitude region of Andhra Pradesh.
<section>5</section>
Joint forest management: State-community partnership in forest management
Joint forest management: State-community partnership in forest management
Historically, Indian forest policies have alienated people from the forests, thereby, exacerbating the rates of deforestation. Post-independence forest policies contributed to an expansion in agricultural production, met industrial demand for raw materials, and tightened control of forest lands through restricted access to forests and forest products (Haeuber, 1993). Protection policies increased the hardships of vulnerable social groups by denying them access to forests (Barraclough and Ghimire, 1995). While the state took responsibility for managing forest resources, it did not have the commensurate resources to effectively manage and police the forests from traditional users. Before state intervention, forests were managed as communal property; the crucial role of forests in the economic subsistence of individuals, families and community was the basis for managing them as communal resources (Chopra et al., 1990). A failure to recognize community control of forests led to
a collapse in institutional norms that were instrumental in protecting and managing forest resources for local use. A shift in property rights to the state steadily undermined the rights of tribals to use and extract forest resources.
Beginning with the National Forest Policy of 1988 to the current JFM policy, the thrust of Indian forest policy has been to forge management partnerships with local communities. In re-discovering a legitimate role for local communities in self-governance of forests, the state has begun to devolve control over forests. The 1988 National Forestry Policy outlined four basic objectives (Society for Promotion of Wastelands Development, 1 993):
o environmental stability;
o biodiversity conservation;
o meet basic needs of people; and
o protect the customary rights of tribals and other people living in and around forests.
The limited success of social forestry in providing forest resources to local communities, the continued rate of deforestation and the perpetual conflicts between people and forest departments prompted the Indian government to consider a set of policy proposals that is a radical departure from existing forest policies.
Moreover, the success of joint state and community forest management experiments in Arabari, West Bengal and Sukhomajri in Haryana, provided a framework for decentralizing forest management. It was evident from these experiments that local populations have to be given a stake in the forests. By making them viable stake holders, it might be possible to regenerate, protect, and manage forest resources for the joint benefit of the people and the state. The 1988 National Forest Policy together with a circular issued by the Indian government in 1990 legitimize local communities' access to forests, encourage communities to form forest management committees, and guarantee a portion of the produce from the forests (Singh and Khare, 1993). JFM, as the new policy proposal, promotes a partnership between the state and local communities to manage forests for the benefit of the people and the state. Co-management links forest protection and the livelihood strategies of the people.
The Indian government and fifteen state governments, between 1988 and 1994, have sought to increase the participation of people in forests through the JFM Program. Essentially, JFM initiatives provide, "participating villagers free access to most NTFPs and a 25 to 50 percent share of poles and timber at final harvesting. In return, the villagers are expected to protect the forests after forming an organization conforming to the membership and structure specified by the forest department" (Sarin, 1995a). JFM, through such partnerships, attempts to change existing conditions of forest resources and the nature of community and individual activities as they relate to forest resource extraction, particularly to:
o affect patterns of forest use at the local level;
o improve the condition of forests at the local level;
o bolster collective action around forest resources at the community level; and
o improve the management of forest resources for the social and economic development of local populations and for biodiversity conservation.
According to some estimates, 15,000 forest protection committees (FPCs) are currently operating in India, stretching across southern Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa and the northern tribal regions of Andhra Pradesh (Poffenberger, 1995). Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) have also been playing an important role in facilitating this new partnership between forest departments and local communities by instrumentally articulating the needs of forest dependent people to the state.
Under JFM, households in a village or a cluster of villages have the right to become members of a forest protection group. A management committee representing this group is then constituted to implement the JFM plan. The managing committee has a two-year term. The committee is composed of 10 to 15 elected representatives of its members with 30 percent of its posts to be filled by women. The committee also consists of a forest guard, representatives from NGOs, village officials, representative of the tribal development authority in cases involving a tribal area, and a deputy range officer.
Responsibilities of the forest protection committee or the Vana Samrakshana Samithi (VSS) include protection against grazing, fires and thefts of forest produce; development of forests in accordance with the management plan; and assisting forest officers in the development of forests (Society for Promotion of Wastelands Development, 1993). The VSS has usufruct rights to non-reserved items such as leaf and grass fodder, thatch grass, broom grass, thorny fencing materials from specified species, fallen lops, tops, and twigs used for fuel, but has no automatic right to products classified as reserved items like the tendu leaves that have been previously leased. The committee, after 3 years of its formation, is entitled to 25 percent of timber and poles harvested. Unused portion of the 25 percent will be sold by the forest department and the revenue will be given back to the committee. The VSS is also entitled to one third of the revenue from the 75 percent share of the forest
department.
In essence, the stakes are high, and the need to ensure the involvement of those who are primary users of forests is imperative. In order for JFM to be successful in Andhra Pradesh, it is critical that any policy must first and foremost positively affect the lives of tribals whose livelihood strategies are closely inter-linked with the forests. Equally important, forest management strategies must be cognizant of the gender dimensions of forest use in the tribal regions of Andhra Pradesh.
A view of Vankachinta village forest. Note the white boundary line that marks the periphery of the forest that is being protected by the village protection committee.
<section>6</section>
Tribal household economy, forests, and the role of women
Tribal household economy, forests, and the role of women
Forests and forest resources, primarily minor forest products (MFP) or NWFPs, play an important role in the viability and survival of tribal households in Andhra Pradesh and elsewhere in India, because of the importance of forests in their social, cultural and economic survival (Tewari, 1989). Estimates of the revenue contributions of NWFPs in India vary considerably. Some estimate that NWFPs contribute US$ 208 million to the Indian economy while another calculation places the revenues from NWFPs at US$ 645 million (Lele et al., 1994). Yet another figure offered by Poffenberger estimates that the total annual value of NWFPs from the central Indian tribal belt alone exceeds US$ 500 million (Poffenberger, 1990a). All of the estimates, despite their variations, lead to the conclusion that collecting and processing of NWFPs are economically significant activities for forest dependent tribals. Studies conducted in the tribal regions of north-east India also indicate high rates of
dependence on forests to meet fuelwood needs (Maikhuri, 1991).
Recent studies conducted in the tribal regions of Bihar, West Bengal and Karnataka offer further empirical evidence for the extent of dependence of tribal households on NWFP collection. For example, in two southern districts of Bihar, 41 percent of the families collect mahua flowers (Madhuca indica); 31 percent collect tendu leaves (Diospyros melanoxylon) used in making indigenous cigarettes (or bid)); 23 percent of the families collect mushrooms and mahua seeds; 55 percent of the families collect tamarind (Tamarindus indica); and 31 percent of the families depend on the collection of wild brooms (Rao and Singh, 1996). Even higher rates, ranging between 5673 percent, have been recorded in Midnapore district of West Bengal (Rao and Singh, 1996, p. 338). Hegde et al.(1996), in a study of Soliga households, found that the income contribution from the collection of NWFPs is disproportionately greater than the time spent in collecting the products. Their study indicated that
households living on the periphery of the forest spend 39.25 percent of their time in collection and realize 47.63 percent of their income from NWFPs; for tribals living closer to the forest, the figures are 54.46 percent and 60.44 percent respectively. Moreover, "...variance in income from the extraction of NTFPs is much less than that of income from other vocations, indicating that the collection of NTFPs constitutes the most reliable source of income" (Hedge et al., 1996, pp. 248, 249-250). The critical role that NWFPs play in the livelihood strategies of tribal households is highlighted by the very favorable income returns to the time spent in collection, and the stability of income from NWFPs.
Recognizing this importance of NWFPs is critical to crafting tribal sensitive forest policies. Others have noted the important role of NWFPs not only in meeting the subsistence needs but also in poverty alleviation of tribals (FAO, 1995). More importantly, however, any community-based strategy to use and manage forests must consider the gender issue in order to have a lasting impact.
The primary players in the collection, processing, and marketing of NWFPs are women who gather the bulk of forest produce, including food and fuel-related forest products. Women also gather NWFPs that are primarily sold in the market. Men are mainly responsible for construction timber, poles and some collection of medicinal plants which are also gathered by women. The importance of women in collection of forest produce is borne by data from almost every country in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. For instance, a study in the North-West Frontier Province of Pakistan showed that 78 percent of morel mushrooms are collected by women and children (Iqbal, 1991). The same study also showed that while women and children are the dominant players in collecting and drying, men (53 percent) play a much more active role in selling the morels. Similarly, women and children collect 90 percent of the medicinal herbs and 100 percent of the drying is done by women. About 71 percent of
medicinal herbs are sold by women and children, and 29 percent by men.
Similarly, in West Bengal, tribal women gather sal (Shorea robusta) leaves for six months of the year and make about Rs. 72 (US$ 2.16)^1 per month under the best circumstances (Rajan, 1995 Poffenberger, 1990b). Throughout India, collection of tendu leaf (Diospyros melanoxylon) generates part time employment for 7.5 million people - a majority of them tribal women (Arnold, 1995). Women, according to studies in Uttar Pradesh, derive a greater proportion of their income from forests and common lands; poor women derive 45 percent of their income from forests and common lands as opposed to 13 percent for men (FAO and SIDA, 1991). Fernandes and Menon (1987), based on a study done in Orissa, reported that women generally walk 3 to 4 hours into the forests and work 15 hours per day, whereas men work 11 hours a day. The studies all indicated that women spend more time and labor in forest-related activities, and depend on forests not only to meet subsistence needs but also for income.
Interestingly, the considerable role played by women in ensuring food security, and in the provision of cash income from the sale of NWFPs gives women a higher status in tribal societies (Sarkar, 1994). The differential roles and responsibilities of men and women vis-à-vis forests and the concomitant social and economic consequences for tribal households at large, and women in particular, are considerable.
^1 1 Rs. = US$ 0.03
FOREST DEPENDENCE OF TRIBALS IN ANDHRA PRADESH
Tribals in Andhra Pradesh collect a large variety of NWFPs including tamarind (Tamarindus indica), adda leaf (Bauhinia vahlii), gum karaya (Sterculia urens), myrobalans, mahua flowers and seeds (Madhuca indica), wild brooms and soap nuts (Sapindus emarginatus). One study estimated that income from the sale of NWFP in Andhra Pradesh constitutes anywhere from 10 to 55 percent of total household income. In comparison to Orissa, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh, all with large tribal populations, tribal households from Andhra Pradesh accrue a very high proportion of their income from the sale of NWFPs (Burman, 1990). From an economic perspective, NWFPs play a central role in the livelihood strategies of tribal households in Vishakapatnam district as well as in the entire Eastern Ghats region. Tewari (1989) estimated that in Andhra Pradesh, 10 to 55 percent of income of tribal households comes directly from the sale of NWFPs and this dependence increases markedly as a tribal household
becomes more marginalized.
Dependence on forests and common property resources increases as a household becomes economically marginalized. Ramamani (1988), in a study of tribal economy in Srikakulam District in the Eastern Ghats of Andhra Pradesh, disaggregated tribal dependence on forests. The more marginal a tribal household, the greater is the proportion of its income from forests. Data indicated that sub-marginal and marginal tribal households accrue 35 to 36 percent of their income from forest produce. As poverty increases, women become more prominent in ensuring the survival of households by assuming greater responsibility to provide resources from forests and common lands. The importance of NWFPs for the very poor tribal households has been well documented by other studies as well (Hedge et al., 1996; Godoy et al., 1995). In Andhra Pradesh, the poor obtain 84 percent of their fuel supplies from common property resources, and are employed for 139 days to collect products from common property
resources (Jodha, 1992). "....The inextricable link between land resources and rural livelihoods, along with increasing role of women as household providers in declining rural economies, stresses the need to consider the gendered terms of access and control of the resource base, particularly in ecologically vulnerable regions" (Thomas-Slayter and Rocheleau, 1995).
The economic significance of the time and energy spent by women in collecting and processing NWFPs is enormous considering their substantial contributions to the income of tribal households in Andhra Pradesh. The next section gives a detailed account of forest-based activities in four tribal panchayats of Vishakapatnam district and illustrates the forest dependence of tribals. Qualitative data on the nature of forest-based activities will be provided and then quantitative data from two preliminary studies of tribal household income flows are presented.
<section>7</section>
Study area and methods
Study area and methods
A field study of tribal households was conducted in the high altitude area zone of the Eastern Ghats region of Andhra Pradesh, the fifth largest state in India. The state has a population of 66.5 million, 73 percent of which lives in rural areas. The high altitude area zone lies between 17°.13' - 19°.09' N and 80°.22' - 84°.33' E, accounting for 6.56 percent of the total area of Andhra Pradesh (National Agricultural Research Project, 1994). Villages included in the study are located at altitudes ranging from 150 to 900 m. Moist deciduous and dry deciduous forest types are predominant.
Data were acquired in two phases. Household data from the two hamlets of Nimmalapadu were collected during surveys conducted between April and October, 1995. Information was obtained on land holding of each family, investments in land development, annual income per acre of land, type of trees on owned land and income from the trees, NWFPs collected by each household, and annual income from NWFPs.
Study Area - Tribal Area Zone within Visakhapatnam District, Andhra Pradesh State, India*
* The high altitude tribal area zone lies between 17.13 - 19°.09 N and 80 22 - 84°.33 E. The area spans Srikakularn, Vizianagaram, Visakhapatnam, and East Godavari districts.
Qualitative data on forest-based activities in the four panchayats of Vishakapatnam district were collected from December 1995 to January 1996. Data on ten additional tribal households were also gathered from eight villages during this same period through long interviews with family members. In these interviews, household members were asked to disaggregate their sources of income and expenditures, and then estimate the relative contribution of NWFPs to household income. All of the interviews were conducted in Telugu, the local language.
<section>8</section>
Forest-based activities in four Panchayats of Vishakapatnam district
Description of the Panchayats
Forest-based activities in four Panchayats of Vishakapatnam district
Description of the Panchayats
Sovva Panchayat is an interior panchayat bordering Orissa state and is 21 km away from the nearest road. The 21 villages in the panchayat are all tribal with a total population of 4,193. Some of the tribal groups are Bagatas, Valmikis, Nookadoras, Malis, and Kutias. Elevation in this region varies from 750 to 900 m. There is neither electricity nor drinking water facilities and the valley has no paved roads. The reserved forest here is completely degraded. Tribals depend on agriculture and vegetable cultivation. Shifting cultivation (podu) is extensively practiced on hill slopes.
Hills that were once forested in Sovva Panchayat
In contrast to other tribal areas, the people of Sovva have very few forest-based activities due to the absence of forest cover. They face extreme shortages of fodder, fuelwood and timber. Women walk a distance of 10-12 km twice a week for firewood. A frequent source of fuel in this region is the dung cakes prepared by the women. The practice of using dung cakes for fuel is unusual in the tribal regions of the Eastern Ghats. Livestock is taken to neighboring regions in search of fodder. Women and children are primarily responsible for grazing the cattle. To obtain construction timber, the tribals travel anywhere from 30 to 120 km. To procure grass for thatching, they travel to the neighboring state of Orissa which is a day's walk For medicinal plants and herbs that are widely used in the villages, medicine men travel for at least two months in the forests more than 100 km away. Approximately 70 percent of all the work is done by women and female children. This includes work
related to agriculture, forest produce collection and domestic chores. Men are primarily responsible for plowing the fields and carrying vegetables to the shandy (weekly market).
About 95 percent of the population in Borra Panchayat are identified as tribal people. The elevation of this area is 750 m. The panchayat comprises fourteen villages with 200 families and a total population of 1,900 people. The tribals in this area belong to Bagata, Kutia, Nookadora and Valmiki tribes. The demarcation of reserve forest falls close to the inhabited villages and is a source of conflict between the tribals and the forest department. Tribals use the forests as sources of NWFPs, fuelwood, housing materials, medicinal herbs, water and irrigation, and for grazing their cattle, hunting and charcoal making.
Weekly market (shandy) in a tribal village, Vishakapatnam district in Andhra Pradesh
Several different NWFPs in Borra Panchayat are collected by tribal women such as adda leaves (Bauhinia vahlii) used for sowing plates, karaka (Myrobalanus chebula), usiri or amla fruits (Emblica officinalis), tamarind (Tamarindus indica), nalla jeedi or marking nuts (Semecarpus anacardium), kanuga (Pongamia glabra), jack (Artocarpus heterophyllus), and mango (Mangifera indica). It is very labor intensive to collect many of these forest products. In the case of adda leaves and tamarind, women play a major role in collecting, drying, packing them into baskets and carrying the processed products to the shandy. Stall feeding of cattle is not practiced in this area. Men take the cattle out for grazing and travel anywhere between 4 to 10 km from their villages. For firewood, both men and women travel 2 to 3 km once every two days. Women, however, spend more time collecting dry twigs and logs whereas men fell trees and take them back to the village. It is women, however, who go for
firewood collection, especially during the agricultural season when men are busy plowing the fields. It is not uncommon for women to gather wild tubers and roots while collecting firewood.
Salugu Panchayat is an interior pocket of the Paderu Mandal. The altitude in this region ranges from 600 to 900 m. The panchayat consists of 24 villages and hamlets belonging to different tribal groups like the Bagatas, Valmikis, Nookadoras, Kondadoras, Konda Kammaras and Khonds. The total population of the panchayat is 2,500. Apart from paddy, agriculture is primarily on dry land. Minor cereals, millets, pulses, redgram, and oilseeds like niger and castor, are the main cash crops. Shifting cultivation is widely practiced in this panchayat.
Collection of NWFPs is widespread in the villages of Salugu Panchayat. The area has rich natural forests consisting of mango, tamarind, jack, custard (Annona squamosa), lemon, cleaning nut or induga (Strychnos potatorum), karaka, kanuga, gum karaya (Sterculia urens), adda leaves for plate making, rosewood (Dalbergia latifolia) and bamboo. Tamarind is collected by men and women. On average a family earns Rs. 200 to 600 (US$ 6 to 18) per tamarind tree. In this area, tribals collect NWFPs nine months out of the year. Women collect adda leaves and may spend 7 hours a day collecting the leaves when they are in season. These leaves are dried for 2 days, packed into 50 kg shoulder loads for men and 30 kg for women to be carried to the weekly market. A shoulder load of leaves fetches anywhere between Rs. 50 (US$ 1.50) and Rs. 120 (US$ 3.60) depending on the season and quality of the leaves. Each tribal household requires 20 to 25 headloads of firewood for cooking and keeping
themselves warm in the winter. While women gather fallen branches and twigs, men cut trees for firewood. Cattle are taken up to 5 to 6 km into the forest for grazing. Children and women graze the cattle 20 days per month and the men take the cattle out the remaining 10 days. It is not uncommon for women and children to collect NWFPs while they are out with the cattle in the forest.
Sarugudu Panchayat is closer to the plains but is one of the better forested areas. The panchayat has 16 villages with a population of 600 families. Tribal groups include Bagatas, Kondakapus, Konda Kammaras, Konda Doras and Valmikis. The elevation in this region varies between 150 and 450 m.
The forest-based economy is vibrant in and around Sarugudu Panchayat. NWFPs gathered include tamarind, gum karaya, marking nuts, honey, kanuga, cleaning nuts and soap nuts (Sapindus emarginatus). Households depend on NWFP collection for 6 months in a year. Gum karaya is very lucrative as it fetches a good price (US$ 4.00 per kg) at the government sponsored cooperative. While women are primarily responsible for collecting most of the forest produce, it is men and boys who are responsible for cattle grazing. Collecting forest products for construction and maintenance of houses is the responsibility of both men and women, whereas women collect all of the firewood.
It is evident from the description of forest dependence in these four panchayats that tribal household survival is inextricably bound to forests. This is so even in areas where forests have receded. Moreover, it is the women and children who transform the forests to meet both subsistence and income needs of a tribal household. Women and children in all of these panchayats engage in NWFP and fuelwood collection to a greater extent than men. Men, on the other hand, are primarily responsible for house construction and agriculture. Much of the collection of NWFPs, fuelwood and fodder is undertaken in forests and common lands adjoining the villages. When forests and commons are highly degraded, as in Sovva Panchayat, women and men travel long distances to obtain the necessary fuel, fodder, food, and medicinal plants.
Where forests and commons are degraded, enormous additional burdens are placed on women and children. From comparisons of the different panchayats, there is a positive relationship between the level of forest degradation and the amount of time and labor expended by women and children in collecting forest produce. Exploratory data also indicate that women and children engage in NWFP collection for a greater portion of the year in these degraded areas. The duration of NWFP collection ranges between 6 and 9 months out of the year. NWFP collection is seasonal and contingent on the availability of the product, but the data from this region indicate that the wide array of NWFPs provide some form of subsistence or cash for a greater part of the year (Table 1).
Pressure on the forests in this region is increasing, but left with few alternatives for sustaining their livelihoods, tribals expend ever greater energy and resources in collecting increasingly precious NWFPs. The rapid decline in forests and village commons in semi-arid regions has eroded sources of supplementary income for women. In the face of these pressures, it is critical to give women greater say in the control and use of village forests and commons because they tend to fare better under common property resource regimes, where the rights are more egalitarian between genders, than in privatized property regimes where men have more control (Agarwal, 1994a). Forest co-management strategies that fail to engage women in the use, control and management of village forests place women in a precarious situation vis-à-vis forest resources. In spite of all the pressures, women will still continue to rely on forest resources, but the absence of their rights and responsibilities
to control and use these resources will make them vulnerable and leave them without options against competing claims.
Table 1. Seasonal Calendar of Activities in the High Altitude Tribal Areas of Vishakapatnam District, Andhra Pradesh, India
Month
Agriculture Activities
Forest-related Activities
April
NWFP collection (flower of Madhuca indica, fruit of Tamarindus indica)
May
Maize and Millet cultivation
NWFP collection (adda leaf- Bauhinia vahlii)
June
Maize and Millet cultivation, Rice cultivation
NWFP collection (adda leaf- Bauhinia vahlii)
July
Maize and Millet cultivation, Rice cultivation
NWFP collection (adda leaf- Bauhinia vahlii)
August
Maize and Millet cultivation, Rice cultivation
NWFP collection (adda leaf- Bauhinia vahlii)
September
Rice cultivation Niger oil seed cultivation
NWFP collection (adda leaf- Bauhinia vahlii)
October
Rice harvesting Niger oil seed cultivation
NWFP collection (fruit of Strychnos potatorum, fruit of Emblica officinalis)
November
Chilly cultivation Niger oil seed cultivation
NWFP collection (fruit of Strychnos potatorum, fruit of Emblica officinalis)
December
Niger oil seed cultivation
NWFP collection (fruit of Strychnos potatorum, fruit of Emblica officinalis, fruit of Semecarpus anacardium)
January
Niger oil seed cultivation
NWFP collection (fruit of anacardium) Myrobalanus chebula, fruit of Strychnos potatorum, fruit of Emblica officinalis, fruit of Semecarpus
February
NWFP collection (fruit of Myrobalanus chebula, flower of Madhuca indica, fruit of Strychnos potatorum, fruit of Emblica officinalis, fruit of Semecarpus anacardium)
March
NWFP collection (fruit of Myrobalanus chebula, flower of Madhuca indica, fruit of Tamarindus indica, fruit of Strychnos potatorum, fruit of Semecarpus anacardium)
<section>9</section>
Survey of household income and relative contribution of forests
Results from in-depth interviews of tribal households
Results from the household survey of Nimmalapadu
Survey of household income and relative contribution of forests
Results from in-depth interviews of tribal households
Two surveys were carried out to examine, in more detail, the extent of dependence on forests. A smaller in-depth survey of 10 households in 8 tribal villages (Daddugula, Achampeta, Malivalasa, Vankachinta, Gannela, Malakapalem, Dingriput, and Nandigaruvu) was conducted to examme the various sources of income and the relative importance of income from NWFPs. A larger survey of all the 40 households in the 2 hamlets of Nimmalapadu village was also conducted by the staff of Samata, a local NGO working on tribal development issues.
A summary of the relative contribution of agriculture and forests to tribal household income is given in Table 2. For each household, data on total income as well as the total expenditure were obtained. Wages earned from agriculture and forest-related activities are included in the total income earned from agriculture and forests. Even in Malivalasa, Sovva Panchayat, where forests are virtually absent, 13.29 percent of income of one household was directly derived from forest products. In 6 of the 10 households, income from forests comprised more than 50 percent of the total household income. The proportion of income from forests ranged from a low of 13.29 percent to a high of 77.X2 percent (Figure 1). In spite of income from forests, some households could not meet their annual expenditures and had to take loans from other tribals or money lenders.
Mother and children engaged in daily chores.
Table 2. Income Source of Tribal Households: Agricultural Income versus Income from Forests (in Indian Rupees)
Village
Agri. Income
NWFP Income
Total Income
% NWFP Income
% Agri. Income
Total Expenses
% Loan / Surplus
Daddugula
Achampeta
Malivalasa
Malivalasa
Vankachinta
Gannela
Malakapalm
Dingriput
Dingriput
Nandigaruvu
Figure 1. Relative Contributions to Tribal Household Income from Forests and Agriculture
Results from the household survey of Nimmalapadu
Nimmalapadu village is located in a relatively prosperous tribal area. Tribals of Nimmalapadu are settled agriculturists who grow paddy on wetlands. On dry land, they grow ragi, same, jowar, bajra, maize, dry paddy, niger, redgram, tobacco, ginger, turmeric, horsegram, and vegetables. Two other sources of income are fruit trees and NWFPs. Households are involved in seasonal collection of NWFPs like adda leaves, hill-brooms, tamarind, pongam seeds, gum, honey, myrobalans, medicinal plants and barks, thatching grass, cleaning nuts, and marking nuts. Their income is quite substantial and keeps them well above the poverty line.
A regression analysis was done to determine the factors that most impact the net income of a household.^2 The regression analysis indicated that the number of hectares in wet land was an important determinant of net income (b = .4501, t = 3.125, p<.01). This is expected as wet land is critical for growing good paddy and for an extended growing season. The second most important factor affecting net income was the number of trees owned by a tribal household (b =.3305, t = 2.435, p<.05). The number of trees owned has a direct bearing on the net income of a tribal household. During the dry season, it is the products from the trees that ensure the economic survival of a tribal household. The regression results clearly showed the significance of trees in the economic viability of a tribal household. It is also important to note that the number of trees was more significant than the extent of dry hectarage or the number of acres cultivated under podu, i.e. shifting cultivation. The
number of hectares in dry and podu land were not statistically significant factors in impacting net income.
^2 A regression analysis using 40 households is justified on several grounds: a) we surveyed the entire population in the 2 hamlets of Nimmalapadu village; b) it is acceptable, as per convention, to conduct a regression analysis if a ratio of 10 cases per variable is maintained; in our analysis we never exceed four variables per analysis; c) finally, in our analysis, the it-Square and Adjusted it-Square are very similar indicating that our sample size is adequate for the type of analysis we conducted. For an extensive discussion, see Cohen, Jacob and Patricia Cohen. 1983. Applied Multiple Regression/Correlation Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. London
In a separate regression analysis, an effort was made to disaggregate net income into income from dry land, wet land, podu land, and from NWFPs and trees owned. Income from wet land constituted the greatest proportion of net income and was statistically significant (b=.6863, t = 13.898, p<.01). The next largest component of net income was from NWFPs and trees owned (b =.5231, t = 11.300, p<.01). The regression results indicated it was a statistically significant contributor. Income from shifting cultivation (b = .4286, t = 8.131, p<.01), and income from dry land (b = .3733, t = 7.604, p<.01) ranked third and fourth respectively in their contributions to net income. The overall regression results once again emphasized the importance of forests and NWFPs for tribal households.
The results are also significant for another reason. A high rate of dependence on forests in a relatively well off tribal region, as the data show, points to an even greater dependence on forests in impoverished tribal areas. These results can therefore be generalized to other tribal villages in Vishakapatnam district. The results are also consistent with studies that showed income from NWFP, making up 50 percent of the income of 30 percent of the people in India (Lele et al., 1994; Ramamani, 1988). Qualitative and quantitative data show that women play a very vital role in the collection and processing of NWFPs. In some tribal villages, a staggering 70 percent of forest-related activities in a household are performed by women and girl children alone.
The overwhelming conclusion is that women not only bear a greater proportion of the burden in NWFP collection and processing, but their efforts are critical in contributing up to 50 percent of the household income. Women in tribal households often have a greater say because of their enormous contribution to the welfare of the household. Once the sale of the forest produce is made in the weekly market or at the forest cooperative, women generally purchase food and other basic necessities for the household. Any surplus cash is then given to the man in the house. As mentioned previously, women collect NWFPs for almost 9 months of the year. This steady extraction of forest products, either for subsistence or for income, further bolsters women's standing in the households. Village commons and forests, Agarwal (1994a, p. 63) noted, boost the status of women:
"In South Asia, village commons (VCs) and State forests acquire importance especially for two reasons: (a) the high overall dependence on them of rural households, and especially of the poor and tribal populations, for a wide variety of items essential for daily use, a dependence which becomes critical during drought and famine; (b) the fact that products from VCs and forests, which are primarily gathered by women and children, provide women with an independent source of subsistence unmediated by dependency relationships on men."
It is good forest policy to recognize the considerable subsistence and economic impact or women on tribal households and address the concerns of women in the protection and management of forests.
<title>Forest dependent survival strategies of tribal women: Implications for joint forest management in Andhra Pradesh, India</title>
Implications for joint forest management programs
Implications for joint forest management programs
Since NWFPs are essential for tribal households' well-being, it follows that any program or policy to encourage community involvement in forest management will have to consider the role of women. A gender sensitive co-management strategy accounts for gender differentiated activities, property rights, negotiation and forest resource claims, and places them within the context of a web of social relations. In a compelling case for gender analysis, Leach (1994, p. 28) argued that "women's access to and control over natural resources is often treated in terms of static and predetermined 'female domains'. The impression is that women operate within a fixed framework, their resource-management activities isolated from their relations with men and each other. But questions of rights and control, above all others, implicate the social relationships within which resources are managed and used. Furthermore, focusing exclusively on women obscures their relations with men, implying that
women's and men's resource-management activities proceed along isolated, parallel tracks."
Thinking of JFM purely at the household level also neglects the gender disparities. Such a perspective assumes that households constitute a set of congruent interests and preferences and that control of resources is equitable irrespective of gender (Agarwal, 1994b). A gender perspective^3 can uncover patterns of resource control with implications for refining JFM policy. For example, in a study of women and forests in Jharkhand, Kelkar and Nathan (1991, p. 118) observed that women play an important role in gathering forest produce. They concluded that "within the family the income from sale of forest produce tends to be counted as the income of the individual who gathers and sells the produce. Increasing the income from forestry will thus also help strengthen the position of women within the family." Here is an instance where women have the same rights as men vis-à-vis control of income from the sale of forest products. JFM policy initiatives, to begin with, should
capitalize on such gender equal opportunities, wherever they are present, to improve the social, and economic standing of women.
^3 Throughout this publication, gender analysis is contrasted with analysis of women that is conducted in isolation without relating it to the roles and responsibilities of men or in isolation of household and community context.
When JFM centers on eventual provision of timber for house construction or agriculture implements, the differential impact of such a strategy on men and women comes into sharper focus. According to Sarin (1995a, p. 35), the amount of time spent by women in collecting firewood increased dramatically as they are forced to go to more distant and unprotected forests, and "...there is an invisible transfer of unsustainable pressure to more distant areas in order to permit regeneration of those that are nearer. With little short- or long-term planning of alternatives for household cooking fuel needs owing to the focus on timber in both Joint Forest Management and community forestry protection, the policing role of the forest department has shifted to the men in the community, thus further undermining women's rights because of the social unacceptability of challenging male authority within the home."
This phenomenon of women going farther to protect forests adjacent to their village is widely observed in Sovva Panchayat. Here women travel to neighboring Orissa to collect firewood and NWFPs. Focusing just on protection and not on management places additional burdens on women and is detrimental to the sustainability of forests adjacent to a protected forest. Sarin (1995b) observed that "in the traditional forest-centered tribal economies, women's important role as gatherers of forest foods and subsistence goods made them economically strong and valued members of the community. This is also reflected in the tradition of bride price instead of dowry prevalent among most tribal communities."
Women returning from a day's collection of fuelwood in Sovva Panchayat.
A forest protection committee, without the input of women, in completely closing the commons will invariably push women into becoming trespassers on their own commons and worse, trespassers in adjacent forests used by other communities. Very quickly, women are transformed from being economically valued and respected members of a tribal community to transgressors. Besides, emphasis on protection alone without any management component eventually reduces a community and the forest protection committee into an extension of the forest department.
For JFM programs to be effective in the tribal areas of Andhra Pradesh, they must empower all members of a community. Forest protection committees must pay close attention to the needs of tribal women who use the forest for collection of NWFPs. Usufruct rights, however, to NWFPs under the current JFM orders are severely curtailed. Many of the NWFPs are classified as reserved items. JFM orders of Andhra Pradesh state that reserved items cannot be appropriated by forest management committees as the right to them would have been vested in third parties (SPWD, 1993). As women are the primary collectors of NWFPs, an effective measure of empowerment is to give them rights to collect, sell and retain the revenues from the sale. In tandem with giving rights to collection of NWFPs from a community managed forest, the government should allow women to sell them in the open market instead of restricting sale to government agencies such as the Girijan Cooperative Corporation. The state
of Madhya Pradesh has moved in this direction by recently granting ownership rights of NWFPs to tribals. In addition, species that yield locally preferred NWFPs should be promoted instead of fast-growing varieties. In the long-term this will ease &e burden on women to meet both the subsistence and income needs of their households. Women's multiple use of forests is sustainable only with species that yield NWFPs. Fast-growing species that yield timber and construction poles might generate revenues for a forest management group but will not alleviate the burdens of women
Andhra Pradesh already requires that one of the two adult members who represent a household in the forest protection committee must be a woman. In giving rights to NWFP collection, and in promoting tree species that yield NWFPs, the JFM program will ensure that women are empowered and greatly contribute to the proper protection and management of community forests. Women will greatly benefit if existing leases to NWFPs are incorporated into the ownership rights of any newly formed forest management committees. At present, JFM programs do not even envision a phasing in of existing leases for NWFPs under the control of tribal communities engaged in forest protection.
Tribals in Kavurai village identifying traditional patterns of forest use and boundaries of their village forest to provide information to a joint forest protection committee.
For community and state partnerships in forest management to be successful, it is imperative that tribal women are involved in decision making in the forest protection committees. In addition, JFM cannot be viewed as another new scheme or project. Co-management strategies, such as JFM, constitute a paradigmatic shift in state, people and forest relations. JFM should truly devolve authority to forest dwellers and make them empowered stakeholders in protection, management, and use of forests. JFM should strengthen community-based institutions, and that requires innovative ways of making women and other vulnerable segments of a community heard in the process of crafting rules and regulations for community forest management. In this regard, rigid guidelines and policies which impose uniform structures and management prescriptions seldom motivate and energize local communities. It is also important not to impose numerical targets as they lead to hastily formed forest committees
by forest department officials, without any consideration for local traditions and forest use patterns (Poffenberger, 1995). Such targets shift the focus of JFM away from their real intent: to form representative community institutions that are capable of protecting and managing forests for the long-term benefit of its members. As mentioned before, JFM is about ensuring the long-term viability of forests through a set of community-based institutions that regulate the behavior of its members vis-à-vis forests.
<title>Forest dependent survival strategies of tribal women: Implications for joint forest management in Andhra Pradesh, India</title>
<section>1</section>
Conclusions
Conclusions
Forest protection and management policies, including co-management strategies that promote local governance, may inadvertently increase the hardships of women by depriving them of access to forests. JFM strategies must be cognizant of the specific ways women use forests and how those uses may differ from those of men. For JFM to be sustainable, it is vital to recognize that women's multiple use of forests is an important means of ensuring the survival of tribal households as well as conservation of biodiversity (Wickramasinghe, 1994). If the gender dimensions of forest use are overlooked, even well-intentioned community management strategies may have negative impact on the lives of tribal women. Research results show that income from forests comprises more than 50 percent of the household income and women are largely responsible for its provision. When rights to control and use of village commons and forests are severely curtailed it undermines the ability of women to deal
with forest degradation and limits their ability to take action against unsustainable use of their village forests.
Giving women a greater role in co-management of forests increases their collective bargaining power. Collective bargaining is critical for women in rural India to assert a greater say in the way resources are managed, to negotiate rules and conditions for use of community controlled forests, and to dictate norms of behavior vis-à-vis the forest (Agarwal, 1994a). In establishing norms of behavior governing community forests, women avoid a situation where they are subjected to norms of forest use and extraction that are untenable; norms which can turn women into offenders and undermine their ability to secure much needed forest resources. The state has a very important role to play in this regard. Simply devolving responsibility for village forests to the community will not ensure that the interests of women are protected. Someshwar (1993, p. 204) highlighted the importance of the state:
"In an unequal society, decentralization of decision making does not necessarily result in decision making by all sections of the population. More than likely, the disempowered groups would continue to be outside any such process. In such a situation, social institutions that give voice to the disempowered must be actively promoted. Although such institutions need to function independently from the state, the state has to play an active role in facilitating their formation. Contrary to current perceptions regarding the role of the state, management of natural resources cannot and should not be completely divorced from the state."
In the final analysis, gender sensitive forest and JFM policies should ask:
o Is the relationship of women with the forests distinct from that of men'? Distinction may be in the way forests are used, the time spent in collecting resources, income derived from forests, management, conservation, and protection of forests.
o What should be the role of women in the management, protection of forests and biodiversity conservation in general once these distinctions are determined?
In discussing the social dynamics of deforestation, Barraclough and Ghimire (1995, p. 206) observed that, "effective strategies to protect forests and livelihoods imply negotiating some kind of social consensus about criteria concerning land use in forest regions and the values to the society that can be derived from forests. They also imply a broad social consensus about the basic rights and opportunities that should be enjoyed, and the responsibilities taken, by different individuals and social groups."
<section>2</section>
References
References
Agarwal, Bina. 1994a. A field of one's own: gender and land rights in South Asia. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
Agarwal, Bina. 1994b. Gender and command over property: a critical gap in economic analysis and policy in South Asia. World Development 22(10): 1455-1478.
Arnold, J.E.M. 1995. Socio-economic benefits and issues in non-wood forest product use. In Report of the International Expert Consultation of Non-Wood Forest Products. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome. pp. 89-123.
Barraclough, Solon L., and Krishna B. Ghimire. 1995. Forests and livelihoods: the social dynamics of deforestation in developing countries. MacMillan Press. New York.
Burman, J.J. Roy. 1990. A need for reappraisal of minor forest produce policies. The Indian Journal of Social Work 51(4): 649-658.
Chopra, K., G. K. Kadekodi, and M. N. Murty. 1990. Participatory development: people and common property resources. Sage Publications. New Delhi.
FAO and SIDA. 1991. Restoring the balance. women and forest resources. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome.
FAO. 1995. Report of the International Expert Consultation on Non- Wood Forest Products. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome.
Fernandes, Walter, and Geeta Menon. 1987. Tribal women and forest economy: deforestation exploitation and status change. Indian Social Institute. New Delhi.
Godoy, Ricardo, Nicholas Brokaw, and David Wilkie. 1995. The effect of income on the extraction of non-timber tropical forest products: model, hypotheses, and preliminary findings from the Sumu Indians of Nicaragua. Human Ecology 23(1): 29-52.
Haeuber, Richard. 1993. Development and deforestation: Indian forestry in perspective. The Journal of Developing Areas 27: 485-514.
Hegde, R., S. Suryaprakash, L. Achoth, and K. S. Bawa. 1996. Extraction of non-timber forest products in the forests of Biligiri Rangan Hills, India: contribution to rural income. Economic Botany 50(3): 243-251.
Iqbal, Mohammad. 1991. Non-timber forest products: a study of their income generation potential for rural women in North West Frontier Province (Pakistan). Planning and Development Department and International Labour Organization. Peshawar.
Jodha, N.S. 1992. Common property resources. a missing dimension of development strategies. World Bank Discussion Papers 169. Washington, D.C.
Kelkar, G. and D. Nathan. 1991. Gender and tribe. women land and forests in Jharkhand. Kali for Women. New Delhi.
Leach, M. 1994. Rainforest relations: gender and resource use among the Mende of Cola Sierra Leone. Edinburgh University Press. Edinburgh.
Lele, Uma, Kinsuk Mitra, and O. N. Kaul. 1994. Environment, development, and poverty: a report of the International Workshop on India's Forest Management and Ecological Revival. CIFOR Occasional Paper No. 3. Center for International Forestry Research. Bogor, Indonesia.
Maheshwari, J. K. 1990. Interaction of tribals with the forests. In Tropical forest ecosystem conservation and development in South and South-East Asia: Proceedings MAB Regional Training Workshop. Kerala Forest Research Institute. Peechi, Kerala. pp. 115-126.
Maikhuri, R. K. 1991. Fuelwood consumption pattern of different tribal communities living in Arunachal Pradesh in North East India. Bioresource Technology 35: 291-296.
Maikhuri, R. K., and A. K. Gangwar. 1991. Fuelwood use by different tribal and non-tribal communities in north-east India. Natural Resources Forum, May: 162- 165.
National Agricultural Research Project. 1994. High altitude and tribal area zone. Chinthapalli, Vishakapatnam District: Andhra Pradesh Agricultural University, Regional Agricultural Research Station.
Pathak, Akhileshwar. 1994. Contested domains: the State, peasants and forests in contemporary India. Sage Publications. New Delhi.
Poffenberger, M. 1990a. Joint management for public forests: experiences from South Asia. In Research policy for community forestry, Asia Pacific Region. Regional Community Forestry Training Center. Bangkok. pp. 158-182.
Poffenberger, Mark. 1990b. Joint management of forest lands: experiences from South Asia. Ford Foundation. New Delhi.
Poffenberger, Mark. 1995. Public lands reform. India's experience with joint forest management. Unpublished mimeo. Asia Forest Network. Center for Southeast Asia Studies. Berkeley.
Rajan, Rashmi Pachauri. 1995. Sal leaf plate processing and marketing in West Bengal. In Jefferson Fox (ed.) Society and non-timber forest products in Tropical Asia. Occasional Paper No. 19, Environment Series. East-West Center. Honolulu, Hawaii. pp. 27-36.
Ramamani, V. S. 1988. Tribal economy: Problems and prospects. Chugh Publications. Allahabad, India.
Rao, A. Ratna, and B. P. Singh. 1996. Non-wood forest products contribution in tribal economy. Indian Forester 122(4): 337-341.
Sarin, Madhu. 1995a. Joint forest management in India: achievements and unaddressed challenges. Unasylva 180, 46: 30-36.
Sarin, Madhu. 1995b. Regenerating India's forests: reconciling gender equity with joint forest management. IDA Bulletin 26(1): 83-91.
Sarkar, Sampa. 1994. Status of tribal women in three socio-cultural dimensions. Man in India 74(1): 49-57.
Singh, Samar, and Arvind Khare. 1993. Peoples' participation in forest management. Wastelands News 3(4): 34-38.
Society for Promotion of Wastelands Development. 1993. Joint forest management update. 1993. New Delhi.
Someshwar, Shivsharan. 1993. People versus the state? Social forestry in Kolar, India. In. John Friedmann and Haripriya Rangan (eds.) In defense of livelihood: comparative studies on environmental action. Kumarian Press. West Hartford. pp. 182-208.
Tewari, D. N. 1989. Dependence of tribals on forests Gujarat Vidyapith. Ahmedabad.
Thomas-Slayter, Barbara and Dianne Rocheleau. 1995. Gender environment and development in Kenya a. a grassroots perspective. Lynne Rienner Publishers. London.
Wickramasinghe, Anoja. 1994. Deforestation women and forestry: the case of Sri Lanka. Institute for Development Research Amsterdam. Amsterdam.
