<title>Preparation and use of food-based dietary guidelines</title>
<section>1</section>
Executive summary
Executive summary
The overall purpose of the consultation was to establish the scientific basis for developing and using food-based dietary guidelines (FBDG) to improve the food consumption patterns and nutritional wellbeing of individuals and populations. Such guidelines are needed in virtually all countries given the role that food consumption and dietary practices play in nutrition-related disorders, whether of deficiency or excess. Formerly, most national dietary guidelines were nutrient-based and their use met with only moderate success. This report demonstrates how national authorities can change the traditional focus from nutrients to locally available foods.
The specific purposes of the consultation were to:
o review the scientific evidence and epidemiology of diet-related health problems, including noncommunicable diseases and other forms of malnutrition;
o consider recommended nutrient intakes, and dietary assessment methodologies relative to the development of food-based dietary guidelines;
o develop recommendations for national dietary guidelines and their application.
Food-based dietary guidelines were among the priority considerations at the International Conference on Nutrition, which was convened by FAO and WHO in Rome in 1992. The World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition adopted at the Conference included goals for the elimination or substantial reduction of famine and famine-related deaths, chronic malnutrition, micronutrient malnutrition, and diet-related communicable and noncommunicable disease. Where this last category is concerned promoting appropriate diets and healthy lifestyles was highlighted as an appropriate strategy.
The Consultation recommended that dietary guidelines be based on, and aim to improve, current dietary practices and prevailing diet-related public health problems, rather than be based on nutrient requirements and recommended intake levels. Selected recommendations for nutrient intakes were also reviewed. It was proposed that desirable nutrient intakes generally be expressed in terms of nutrient density per 1000 kcal in the diet, since all family members tend to consume similar diets and nutrient intakes of individuals are thus proportional to the energy each consumes. A summary of selected reference intakes is provided in Annex 3.
The development and implementation of food-based dietary guidelines should be undertaken by an interdisciplinary and intersectoral working group or technical committee. Culturally appropriate modes of presentation of the main messages should be sought, pre-tested and disseminated. Food-based guidelines should be developed in each country; guidelines suitable for one country cannot be expected to be wholly appropriate for others. Different guidelines may also be required for different geographic or socioeconomic groups within the same country. The main steps in their development might include:
o Forming a working group or committee
o Reviewing food consumption patterns
o Drawing conclusions as to the diet/health linkages and main problem areas
o Identifying relevant key national policies (health, agriculture, education, environment, social welfare, women, population)
o Determining the critical health, food or nutrition issues to be targeted by FBDG
o Defining the content and target groups for FBDG
o Ensuring the socioeconomic feasibility and cultural appropriateness of FBDG
o Defining the purpose, goals and targets of the FBDG
o Translating the FBDG into main messages
o Assessing appropriateness/credibility of FBDG and how they are perceived by a test group
o Monitoring changes in people's diet and nutritional status and any concurrent socioeconomic changes.
The report includes a summary of dietary assessment methodologies-- national food supply data, household food consumption data, and individual consumption data--which are appropriate for drawing up, and monitoring the use and impact of dietary guidelines. For the last, five methods are presented: food records, 24-hour dietary recall, food frequency questionnaires, diet histories, and food-habit questionnaires. Methods of analysis and computation of nutrient intakes including computer software are described, as is the method of presentation of data on consumption of particular foods and food groups.
The scientific basis for food-based dietary guidelines and the requirements for energy, nutrients (macronutrients and micronutrients), and related non-nutrient food components are presented in greater detail in technical annexes. Examples of the food groups and dietary guidelines used in different countries, and some comments on their respective advantages and disadvantages, are also given.
The consultation recommended that FAO and WHO should collaborate with governments in developing, implementing and monitoring food-based dietary guidelines; identified areas requiring further research, together with an overall review and updating of existing international documentation on recommended dietary allowances and nutrient intakes; and stressed the need for more adequate information on food consumption patterns.
<section>2</section>
Preface
Preface
The International Conference on Nutrition, convened by FAO/WHO in Rome, 1992, aimed basically at identifying and encouraging the adoption of strategies and actions to improve nutritional wellbeing and food consumption throughout the world. It adopted the World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition which includes among its goals (para. 19 of the Declaration):
To make all efforts to eliminate before the end of this decade:
o famine and famine-related deaths;
o starvation and nutritional deficiency diseases in communities affected by natural and man-made disasters;
o iodine and vitamin A deficiencies;
and to reduce substantially within this decade:
o starvation and widespread chronic hunger;
o undernutrition, especially among children, women and the aged;
o other important micronutrient deficiencies, including iron;
o diet-related communicable and noncommunicable diseases;
o social and other impediments to optimal breast-feeding;
o inadequate sanitation and poor hygiene, including unsafe drinking-water.
The Plan of Action includes among its strategies "promoting appropriate diets and healthy lifestyles", and calls upon governments "on the basis of energy and nutrient recommendations, to provide advice to the public by disseminating, through use of mass media and other appropriate means, qualitative and/or quantitative dietary guidelines relevant for different age groups and lifestyles and appropriate for the country's population" (para. 45 d).
In pursuance of these goals and strategies, WHO and FAO jointly convened in Nicosia, Cyprus, from 2 to 7 March 1995, an Expert Consultation on "preparation and use of food-based dietary guidelines." Participants in the consultation (Annex 1) included 22 experts from countries in all regions of the world. The consultation was hosted by the Government of Cyprus and the WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean.
Purpose and procedure of the consultation
The specific objectives of the consultation were to review the scientific evidence and epidemiology of diet-related health problems, including noncommunicable diseases (NCD) and other forms of malnutrition; to review existing literature on recommended nutrient intakes (RNI) and develop a synthesis of current nutrient recommendations, applicable to food-based guidelines"; to review relevant dietary assessment methodologies; to review existing national dietary guidelines and their use in countries; and to make recommendations for the development and implementation of FBDG.
The consultation was opened by H.E. Mr Manolis Christophides, Minister of Health of the Government of Cyprus. The elected office-bearers were:
Chairman, Dr M.J. Gibney; Vice-Chairman, Dr R. Uauy; Rapporteurs - Dr S. Dagher, Dr B.O. Schneeman. The programme of work of the consultation is given in Annex 2. The initial two days were spent in plenary session, with presentations and discussions on each of the foregoing themes. Thereafter most of the work was done in four working and drafting groups, which also met together each day to share progress and ensure appropriate interaction between the various groups. The consultation was marked by intensive cooperative efforts among all participants, the work being done in delightful surroundings with the warm and generous hospitality of the Cyprus authorities.
References
1 FAO/WHO International Conference on Nutrition. World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition, FAO Rome 1992.
<section>3</section>
Chapter one - Introduction
Chapter one - Introduction
The World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition, which was adopted by 159 governments at the International Conference on Nutrition in Rome in December 1992, committed the international and national communities to the nutrition goals stated in the preface.
The Declaration and Plan of Action recognized that the attainment of these goals required plans of action at the national level appropriate to the cultural context of each nation. That is, it recognized the need for each nation to identify public health issues related to local dietary patterns and to adopt local strategies for their resolution. The World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition is notable for the absence of numerical targets for food and nutrient intakes, and it marks a move in the thinking of nutritionists away from policies dictated by numbers and towards policies dictated by prevailing public health issues. The Declaration and Plan of Action also call for the dissemination of nutrition information through "sustainable food-based approaches that encourage dietary diversification through the production and consumption of micronutrient-rich foods, including appropriate traditional foods".
The concept of disseminating information through food-based dietary guidelines (FBDG) is inherently sensible since consumers think in terms of foods rather than of nutrients. Equally, the concept of FBDG can take account of considerable epidemiological data linking specific food consumption patterns with low incidence of certain diseases while not requiring a complete understanding of the biological mechanisms responsible for such a protective property. For example, Sir James Lind, the Surgeon-General in charge of health policy for the British Navy in 1700, knew that sailors on long sea voyages did not develop an affliction known as scurvy if sufficient limes were kept aboard the fleet and the sailors were encouraged to eat them regularly. This food-based dietary guideline successfully addressed a specific health issue in the complete absence of any biochemical understanding. In the modern era, we observe a low incidence of certain diseases in specific communities with
particular eating habits and, while we rightfully search for an explanation of biochemical mechanisms, dietary recommendations based on these food patterns are warranted. An example is the association of high fruit and vegetable consumption with reduced risk of certain NCD and the emerging awareness that several components of these foods and the diets containing them contribute to lower risk.
There is no doubt that, as our knowledge of mechanisms improves, opportunities in food technology will allow for alterations to be made to nutrient and non-nutrient intake within prevailing food consumption patterns. We already recognize direct associations between single nutrients and single conditions (e.g. iron and anaemia, folic acid and neural tube defects, and certain saturated fatty acids and risk of cardiovascular disease) which make it possible for the nutritional properties of existing food supplies to be enhanced. Advances in food technology permit the production of both nutrient-fortified foods and products with reduced salt and saturated fat content. Progress in biotechnology and genetic engineering will play an increasing role in this area in the future. Nonetheless, FBDG remain a valid strategy for public health nutrition.
The purpose of this document is to establish the scientific basis and recommended process for the development and evaluation of FBDG in various regions of the world. Dietary guidelines differ from dietary goals and from recommended dietary intakes or recommended dietary allowances (see box for explanation).
o Recommended nutrient intakes (RNI) are also called recommended dietary allowances (RDA), recommended dietary intakes (RDI), dietary reference values (DRY) or population reference intakes in different countries. They are authoritative, quantitative estimates of human requirements for essential nutrients, usually set out with different amounts (in weight/day) considered to be adequate to meet the known nutrient needs of practically all healthy persons.
o Dietary guidelines are sets of advisory statements that give dietary advice for the population to promote overall nutritional wellbeing and relate to all diet-related conditions. They have usually been expressed in technical nutritional terms, but some guidelines have been expressed as food groups. Dietary guidelines differ from RNI in that the advice is more provisional' being based on a variety of information, including indirect evidence about the complex relationship of food components with health and with diseases--some of which have long incubation periods. Dietary guidelines are broad targets for which people can aim while RNI indicate what should be consumed on the average every day.
o Dietary goals are intended to emphasize the future-looking character of dietary guidelines. Dietary goals can be used for planning at the national level rather than as advice for individuals and are expressed in terms of national average intakes.
o Dietary or nutritional targets are the nutritional expression of a set of feasible national health targets fore country. They should be expressed in terms which make monitoring possible.
Development of dietary goals reflects analysis of the health status of the population and determination of goals that will improve the overall health of the population and reduce the risk of disease. Dietary goals may vary among sub-populations of a region due to the prevalence of over- or undernutrition.
The term "food based dietary guidelines" is used in this report to mean the expression of the principles of nutrition education mostly as foods. They are intended for use by individual members of the general public. Where they cannot be expressed entirely as foods they are written in ordinary language. They avoid as far as possible the technical terms of nutritional science.
In addition to FBDG in any country, a set of dietary guidelines expressed in scientific terms may also exist, with quantitative recommendations of nutrients and food components, available for use and reference by policy-makers and health care professionals.
Adopting RNI and dietary goals for a population may form part of the process for development of dietary guidelines, which are the recommended strategies for the population to achieve nutritional well-being. If guidelines are derived from nutrient targets or dietary goals, they should be translated into "food-based guidelines" in order to be adopted by the population. Dietary guidelines represent the practical way to reach the nutritional goals for a population. They take into account the customary dietary pattern and indicate what aspects should be modified. They consider the ecological setting, socioeconomic and cultural factors, and the biological and physical environment in which the population lives.
FBDG will vary among population groups. Hence it is important for each region or country to recognize that more than one dietary pattern is consistent with health and to develop food-based strategies that are appropriate for the local region. Food and diet are not the only components of a healthy lifestyle. Although this document focuses on diet, bodies responsible for developing dietary guidelines are encouraged to integrate these messages with other policies related to health (e.g. smoking, physical activity, alcohol consumption).
Governments and affiliated organizations should find this document helpful for initiating or improving their process of developing FBDG appropriate to their region. The consultation recommends that this document be reviewed periodically (initially in 5 years' time) in the light of the experience of agencies who use the document.
Some of the key points underlying the thinking behind this document are that:
o Public health issues should determine the direction and relevance of dietary guidelines.
o FBDG are developed in a specific sociocultural context, and need to reflect relevant social, economic, agricultural and environmental factors affecting food availability and eating patterns.
o Dietary guidelines need to reflect food patterns rather than numerical goals.
o Dietary guidelines need to be positive and encourage enjoyment of appropriate dietary intakes.
o A wide range of dietary patterns can be consistent with good health.
<section>4</section>
Chapter two - Scientific considerations in the development of food-based dietary guidelines (FBDG)
2.1 Rationale
2.2 Scientific areas relevant to the development of food-based dietary guidelines
2.2.1 Nutrition science: physiology and pathophysiology related to food components.
2.2.2 Food science and technology
2.2.3 Educational, behavioural and social sciences
2.2.4 Agricultural and environmental sciences
2.3 Scientific evidence for the relationship between food, nutrients and health
2.4 Nutritional quality of dietary patterns
2.4.1 Food patterns
2.4.2 Food variety indices
2.4.3 Nutrient requirements and recommendations
2.4.4 Use of nutrient densities in establishing and evaluating dietary guidelines
2.5 Reorientation from nutrients to foods in setting food-based dietary guidelines
References
Chapter two - Scientific considerations in the development of food-based dietary guidelines (FBDG)
2.1 Rationale
There is good scientific evidence that dietary patterns, i.e. a daily combination of foods and beverages, have specific health or disease outcomes. For example, a diet may be apparently adequate in all other ways but still be deficient in vitamin A or iron, and this may lead to xerophthalmia or anaemia. Conversely a diet high in saturated fat and energy is known, on a population basis, to lead to an increased likelihood of coronary heart disease.
The reasons for developing and using FBDG are many, and often surprisingly self-evident.
1. Foods make up diets; foods are more than just a collection of nutrients.
2. Nutrients interact differently when presented as foods.
3. Methods of food processing, preparation and cooking influence the nutritional value of foods.
4. There is already good evidence from studies (animal, clinical and epidemiological) that specific dietary patterns are associated with a reduced risk of specific diseases. Diets rich in fruits and vegetables are associated with various positive outcomes such as reduced incidence of lung cancer (1). Science has not been able to identify completely the specific nutrients involved. The protective effect could be due to a single nutrient, a combination of nutrients or non-nutrients, or the replacement of some other food in the diet when fruits and vegetables are consumed in large amounts (2).
5. Scientific evidence has not yet identified the potential health outcomes of some non-nutrient food components, hence the increasing attention being paid to flavonoids, phyto-oestrogens etc. If the focus is on a single nutrient, people may not appreciate the benefits of the ingestion of these compounds in foods.
6. Some food components may have biological functions that science has not yet identified.
7. Foods and diets have cultural, ethnic, social and family aspects that individual nutrients themselves do not have.
8. For certain micronutrients, evidence suggests that intake higher than present nutritional recommendations may help to lower the risk of noncommunicable diseases. FBDG can encourage dietary patterns that include these nutrients.
FBDG need to take into account: food/health patterns; the relative comprehensiveness of the foodbased versus the nutrient-based approach; the practicality of suggested goals; nutrition labelling directing the consumer to an over-simplified view of foods; and shifting paradigms of the nutritional basis of disease and health (the biological effects of food and food patterns can be greater than the sum of its parts).
2.2 Scientific areas relevant to the development of food-based dietary guidelines
FBDG need to be based on sound scientific principles and knowledge of local conditions. A summary of the four main areas of science relevant to the development of FBDG is provided below, with a more detailed description in Annex 3.
2.2.1 Nutrition science: physiology and pathophysiology related to food components.
The study of energy balance and metabolism, and of macro- and micronutrient physiology, is well-established and has now evolved to take account of non-nutrient components of food of biological significance.
As far as energy is concerned, the next generation of FBDG can take account of both the lower limits of energy intake and the ways that energy balance can be achieved without recourse to food restriction, but with the emphasis placed on strategies to achieve energy balance either by decreasing the energy density of the diet or increasing energy expenditure. With this approach, concerns about both chronic energy deficit and excess body fat can be addressed through FBDG by encouraging the use of foods of appropriate energy density.
Micronutrients are now recognized as important in communicable disease (improving host defences), classical deficiency disorders and NCD. Therefore, the formulation of FBDG in all food cultures with varying health patterns merits consideration of non-energy nutrients.
Food chemistry is extraordinarily complex, and it is becoming clearer that health states previously not regarded as nutrition-related may actually be determined by the intake of non-nutrient substances contained in foods, for example, certain flavonoids from plants and phyto-oestrogens from certain legumes. Therefore, it is essential that dietary guidelines be based on foods and not simply on nutrients, taking into account that sound scientific evidence about foods should be the foundation of recommendations.
2.2.2 Food science and technology
Food science and technology is creating a new framework for FBDG. This is principally in the areas of:
o Food physico-chemistry
o Methods of food storage and preservation
o Changes in food preparation
o Opportunities for use of formula foods where energy intake is low or regular food cannot be eaten
o Nutrient restoration and fortification of foods
o The development of health-focused designer and functional foods.
2.2.3 Educational, behavioural and social sciences
Both the practicality of FBDG and their consequences require analysis through these sciences. However, even though a substantial knowledge base exists in these areas, it is not commonly utilized by nutrition and food policy-makers. For example, FBDG that neglect basic methods of promoting behaviour change may be scientifically sound but totally ineffective for improving dietary intakes. Some of the major areas of concern are set out in Annex 3.
2.2.4 Agricultural and environmental sciences
The scientific basis of FBDG is inclusive of these disciplines. There is evidence that even existing dietary guidelines in developed countries, such as Australia and the USA, cannot be easily achieved in the short term without increased fruit and vegetable production. Even more difficult may be the pressure on world fish supply because of increasing appreciation of the importance of long chain omega-3 fatty acids from fish in the human diet. The need for sustainable food production using existing natural resources is becoming more and more apparent.
2.3 Scientific evidence for the relationship between food, nutrients and health
No single food other than breast milk for infants provides all the required nutrients. A range of nutrients is needed in amounts that change throughout life for optimal growth, health and avoidance of disease. The varied diets that people eat made up of many different foods have proved over the ages to be able to provide adequate nutrients in a variety of national patterns and combinations.
Many countries have adopted RDI, which are customarily defined as the intake of energy and specific nutrients necessary to satisfy the basic requirements of a group of healthy individuals. While the criteria to estimate requirements have changed over time, the three main methods of investigation still involve a clinical approach, studying the typical consumption of healthy populations, and looking at functional indicators of nutritional status. A detailed analysis of the relative merits of each is beyond the scope of this document, but additional information may be found in the references (3,4).
More recently the concept of "optimal nutrient intake" has evolved and is influencing both scientists and the public alike. The question of ''optimal for what?" is usually answered by the suggestion that diet or specific nutrients can lay the basis for improved physical and mental performance or for longer and healthier life. This concept is too broad. The preferred approach is to define clearly the function that is of interest in relation to the intake of a specific nutrient or a given food. The selected function should be of relevance to health or disease prevention.
A growing body of scientific evidence supports the relationships between food patterns and health. These relationships are derived from several types of studies:
o Epidemiological which examine population-based data to associate disease patterns or health outcomes with food patterns. These studies can be prospective or retrospective. Several factors determine the strength of the associations concluded from epidemiology, including the consistency, strength, specificity and biological plausibility of the association. Epidemiological observations are, in principle, not sufficient to confirm cause and effect relationships between individual nutrients and health outcomes; however, they do provide valuable information about the food patterns to be considered in FBDG.
o Clinical research which is designed to determine whether dietary modification or supplementation with selected nutrients can intervene in the disease process or modify one or more risk factors for disease. These studies confirm that the foods or nutrients in question do contribute to the health or disease outcomes of interest. The research is typically conducted in individuals who are known to be at risk for disease and, although the findings may be relevant to the general population, it is important to keep the limitations in mind when extrapolating from these studies to the general population (for example, trying to draw general conclusions from very low-fat diets in atherosclerotic regression studies).
o Experimental studies which are designed to determine the effect of foods and food components on cell metabolism or physiology, and to understand the basic mechanism by which specific nutrients modify disease. These studies are essential to establish the plausibility of the diet-health relationship; however, they are often conducted in animal models and it can be difficult to extrapolate from one species to another.
An example of the need for integrating epidemiological, clinical and experimental data is the recent evidence associating a lower relative risk of age-related blindness due to macular degeneration with the consumption of dark-green leafy vegetables, particularly spinach and collard (5). While it may be that zeaxanthin and lutein components in these foods are protective against macular degeneration, establishing this relationship will require extensive experimental and clinical research. In the meantime an increased intake of dark-green leafy vegetables is a justifiable food-based dietary guideline, especially in view of other support for this recommendation.
2.4 Nutritional quality of dietary patterns
Dietary patterns vary in different geographical areas and socioeconomic groups, and also over time. Such variation depends on agricultural practices, climatic, ecological, cultural and socioeconomic factors which determine the foods that people demand or expect and that are generally available.
Given the variety of food combinations that can provide a healthful diet, it is impossible to define the ranges of intake for all foods that could be combined to provide a nutritionally adequate diet. Although a large set of food combinations that are compatible with nutritional adequacy could be identified, they could hardly be extrapolated to cover every different ecological and social setting. An alternate approach to defining the nutritional adequacy of diets has therefore evolved, based on a scientific understanding of the biochemical and physiological basis of human nutritional requirements in health and disease. This approach has permitted the definition of essential nutrients and the establishment of RNI.
FBDG as an instrument and expression of food and nutrition policy should be based directly upon diet and disease relationships of particular relevance to the individual country. The priorities in addressing the dietary guidelines will depend on whether the relevant public health concerns are related to dietary insufficiency or excess.
Four possible approaches are useful in assessing the nutritional quality of diets for the development and evaluation of FBDG:
2.4.1 Food patterns
Assessing adherence to a particular food pattern usually associated with a favourable health outcome is one way of evaluating the nutritional soundness of an envisaged dietary guidelines approach. This reference is most likely to concern a traditional food pattern of people with longevity, low morbidity and low perinatal and infant mortality rates (e.g. Scandinavian, Japanese, Mediterranean) through tradition or through cultural adaptation. In most of these populations, other factors such as health care, educational system, safe water and socioeconomic development also play important roles in the favourable health outcomes. Negative effects following changes in dietary patterns might also indicate food patterns to be avoided.
Tracking health indices in populations in accordance with food intake patterns has, so far, been the most available evidence on which to base FBDG. Some of the examples are given in Annex 3.
2.4.2 Food variety indices
While the value of increased food variety in either ensuring essential nutrient adequacy or decreasing the risk of food toxicity (health-adverse factors in food are generally diluted where the foods eaten are varied) has been understood for some time (6), using food variety as a predictor of health outcome is a relatively recent approach (7,8). However, enough evidence is available to justify promoting food variety through FBDG as a technique to reduce morbidity and mortality while awaiting further scientific studies on how exactly it operates.
In deriving indices of food variety, decisions are required about both the categories of foods and the time over which variety in food choices is achieved.
2.4.3 Nutrient requirements and recommendations
These have been the subject of both FAO/WHO technical reports (1, 9-16) which are currently being updated, and many countries have established their own recommended requirements. The numbers vary somewhat for the different nutrients although the implications of these differences for the establishment of dietary guidelines are small. Countries that have the technical capacity may develop their own RN I, otherwise the review of existing recommendations can be used to define which are most suited to the given national reality. FBDG should be structured to enable the population to meet RNI that are critical for diet-related public health problems.
The meeting recommended that FAO/WHO undertake the review of existing reports for all relevant nutrients (since the last time this task was completed was in 1974).
2.4.4 Use of nutrient densities in establishing and evaluating dietary guidelines
Using nutrient densities to evaluate dietary quality involves expressing existing RNI values per unit of energy (usually 1000 kcal) provided by the diet. The conditions for this model are that if a diet provides for the energy needs of individuals, it will also satisfy the RNI for all essential nutrients. This approach permits the simplification of age- and sex-related RNI figures since the values differ minimally when these figures are expressed per 1000 kcal. Therefore, for the purpose of establishing dietary guidelines for the general population, precise sex- and age-specific RNI are not needed. The figures presented should provide a way to assess dietary quality.
Individuals within a family group usually form the basic unit for food consumption. Thus, if there is enough food at the family or household level, all members can consume a diet with the recommended nutrient densities and meet their specific RNI. The problem of intrafamily distribution needs to be considered, since children and women may not receive an adequate proportion of foods with higher nutrient density. This should be considered in establishing both general dietary guidelines and those specifically addressing the needs of vulnerable groups in the community.
Relevant non-energy nutrients that represent public health concerns globally are included in Annex 3, where their need is not expressed as an absolute requirement but as nutrient density per 1000 kcal. This should not be interpreted as a physiological relationship between the specific nutrients and energy requirements but as a way of defining the adequacy of a given diet to meet the needs for specific nutrients if sufficient energy is consumed.
If intake for adolescents or adults is less than 2000 kcal per day, it will be difficult to meet their vitamin and mineral needs. Thus, adequate energy intake is a prerequisite for maintaining nutrient status, and a sedentary lifestyle should be discouraged. Children below 2 years of age need a different diet and require specific dietary guidelines.
In using nutrient densities to establish dietary goals and guidelines, the quantitative and qualitative aspects of the food supply should be considered. The quantitative aspects include the estimation of the amount of nutrients and the relative proportion of nutrient in the food sources that will meet nutritional needs in practice. The qualitative aspects relate to the biological quality of the nutrients in the food source and the potential for interaction of nutrients and non-nutrient components which may enhance or inhibit the biological quality of a given source if both are ingested simultaneously. The recommended nutrient densities should refer to the total diet available and not to individual foods.
Energy RNI should be treated separately, since age-and-sex as well as activity-specific RNI are necessary to define adequacy of energy intake and to validate proposed dietary guidelines.
2.5 Reorientation from nutrients to foods in setting food-based dietary guidelines
The starting point to devising FBDG is the relevance to a public health issue and not a gap which may exist between prevailing nutrient intake and a numerical recommended intake for a nutrient. This can be illustrated by comparing calcium intakes in the USA and China. In the USA, calcium intakes are about 600 mg/d, while in China calcium intakes are about 400 mg/d. The international range for calcium RDA is from 500 mg per day to 1200 mg per day. On that basis China has a bigger calcium nutrient intake gap than the USA. In reality, whereas osteoporosis in the elderly is a major public health issue in the USA, apparently it is not a current public health problem in China (17). Therefore, the starting point for devising FBDG should be the relevant public health issue. Even when a public health issue exists (for example, high rates of cardiovascular mortality) and a difference also exists between the numerical dietary goal (for example, 10% energy from saturated fatty acids)
and prevailing intake of the target nutrient (for example, 16-18% energy from saturates as in Northern Europe), the FBDG should be based on what can be realistically achieved in the socioeconomic context rather than trying to eliminate in one step the whole difference between the desired and actual intakes.
Once the public health issue is identified, the first step should be to ascertain the extent to which it may be attributable to non-nutritional factors. Those non-nutritional factors then have to be addressed in tandem with, or even in advance of, any nutritional intervention. Specifically infection, safe food and water, physical activity or smoking may have to be addressed in order for nutrition strategies to be fully successful.
Since all FBDG are issued in a specific context, it is essential next to consider the likelihood of an intervention's success based on food-specific guidelines within the social, economic, agricultural, supply and cultural context. For example, the traditional Cretan diet contains about 50 g of olive oil per day, and some 8 million tonnes of olive oil would be needed to allow all citizens of the EU to enjoy this amount. The agricultural capacity of the EU to produce the required quantity of olive oil and the attendant impact on other aspects of agriculture production suggest that this is not feasible.
If the public health information indicates that nutrients are relevant to addressing a public health issue, a transition is needed from a nutrient orientation to focusing on food-based strategies likely to be successful. The following steps are useful in this transition. (See Figure 1 for a summary).
Step one: Consideration of associated nutrients prior to intervention
Having identified the nutrient relevant to the public health issue in question, try to determine whether any other nutrient or non-nutrient might be confounding the targeted nutrient. For example, if the objective is to increase carotenoid intake, one needs to know if the level of fat in the diet is adequate to ensure carotenoid absorption; and even though the intake of fat appears adequate for the purpose of absorbing carotenoids, are the fat and carotene usually consumed at the same time?
Step two: Identifying the foods to be included in the food-based dietary guideline to modify the intake of a specified nutrient
Several approaches should be used here, depending on available data.
o Determine which foods have high levels of the target nutrient. This information may be sufficient to formulate FBDG, but one should be cautious about assuming that a food rich in a nutrient is one that is likely to make a significant contribution to the dietary intake of a given population group.
o Determine the main dietary sources of the target nutrient. In some instances it will be found that the nutrient has a very wide distribution across food groups, in which case altering intake of the nutrient might be difficult. In such cases one might decide which of these equally important food groups, in terms of their supply of the targeted nutrient, should be selected to define a FBDG. The basis for such selection should include price, likely consumer acceptability, coincident benefit for other FBDG, or other factors critical to implementation. In other instances, it may be found that the nutrient is provided largely by one food source, in which case one should consider whether the intakes of non-targeted nutrients might be detrimentally effected were that food to be strongly promoted.
o Where food and nutrient intake data are available, it is possible to develop FBDG based on the food consumption patterns of population subgroups that achieve a particular nutritional goal. This allows one to discriminate between subgroups with high and low intakes of a target food or nutrient. Such foods or nutrients are often not those which would be predicted on the basis of their contribution to actual average intake of the target nutrient. Thus, it is important to determine patterns of food intake not only on the basis of the population average but also for subgroups, or even individual consumers. It is possible for two sub-populations to have equal average intakes but to differ in terms of the proportion of consumers and their different intake levels.
In effect, any or all of these, and still other approaches, may be used to ensure that the foods and derived ingredients are likely to be effective and will not create confounding adverse effects.
Step three: Consideration of possible sociocultural and economic factors
Whereas steps 1 and 2 above may help us to identify, in nutritional terms, the ideal set of FBDG, many other factors may work against their being heeded and may mitigate their impact. These are considered in Chapter 4.
Step four: Possible nutritional consequences of implementing a food-based dietary guideline
If, for some public health issue, a given dietary guideline were to advise an increased intake of pulses, one should ask what the possible consequences might be. One consequence might be that pulses replace meat, with subsequent nutritional implications. Another consequence might be that pulses do not replace meat but replaced vegetables, again with subsequent nutritional consequences. Consideration of a variety of possible scenarios may help to tailor the food-based dietary guideline so as to minimize adverse effects or, more importantly, may help those charged with delivering messages about FBDG to provide a clearer message.
FBDG offer signal opportunities to alter the dietary habits of populations in a direction which reduces the risk of NCD or prevents nutritional deficiencies. The above steps and other pertinent considerations should ensure that the right foods are targeted and that no adverse effects arise.
Figure 1 - Reorienting from nutrients to foods
References
1. Diet, nutrition, and the prevention of chronic diseases. Report of a WHO Study Group. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1990 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 797).
2. Ziegler RG, Subar AF, Craft NE, Ursin G, Patterson BH, Graubard Bl. Does b-Carotene explain why reduced cancer risk is associated with vegetable and fruit intake? Cancer Research 1992, 52:(Suppl):2060S-2066S.
3. Truswell AS, Irwin T, Beaton GH, Suzue R, Haenel H, Hejda S, Hou X-C, Leveille G, Morava E, Pedersen J, Stephen JML. Recommended Dietary Intakes Around the World: a report by Committee 1/5 of the International Union of Nutritional Sciences, Nutrition Abstracts and Reviews, 1983,53:939-1015.
4. Truswell AS, Irwin T, Beaton GH, Suzue R, Haenel H, Hejda S, Hou X-C, Leveille G, Morava E, Pedersen J, Stephen JML. Recommended Dietary Intakes Around the World: a report by Committee 1/5 of the International Union of Nutritional Sciences, Nutrition Abstracts and Reviews, 1983, 53: 1175-1119.
5. Seddon JM, Ajani UA, Sperduto RD, Hiller R, Blair N, Burton TC, Farber MD, Gragoudas ES, Haller J,
Miller DT, Yannuzzi LA, Willett W. Dietary Carotenoids, Vitamins A, C, and E, and Advanced Age-Related Macular Degeneration. Journal of the American Medical Association, 1994,272:1423-1420.
6. Smiciklas-Wright H, Krebs-Smith SM, Krebs-Smith J. Variety in foods. What is America eating?
Proceedings of a Symposium. Washington DC: National Academy Press, 1986.
7. Kant AK, Schatzkin A, Harris TB, Ziegler RG, Block G. Dietary diversity and subsequent mortality in the First National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey: Epidemiologic Follow-up Study. American journal of clinical nutrition, 1993, 57:434-440.
8. Hodgson JM, Hsu-Hage BH-H, Wahlquist ML. Food variety as a quantitative descriptor of food intake. Ecology of food and nutrition, 1994,32: 137148.
9. Energy and protein requirements. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation. Geneva,
World Health Organization, 1985 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 724).
10. Requirements of Vitamin A, Iron, Folate and Vitamin B[12]. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation. FAO Rome 1988.
11. Calcium Requirements Report of a FAO/WHO Expert Committee. Geneva, World Health Organization (WHO Technical Report Series, No 230).
12. Passmore R. Nicol BM, Narayana Rao M et al. Handbook on Human Nutrition Requirements. WHO Monograph Series, No 61. WHO, Geneva, 1974.
13. Requirements of Ascorbic Acid, Vitamin D, Vitamin B[12], Folate, and Iron. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Group. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1970 (WHO Technical Report Series, No 452).
14. Requirements of Vitamin A, Thiamine, Riboflavine and Niacin. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Group. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1967 (WHO Technical Report Series, No 362).
15. Trace Elements in Human Nutrition and Health. World Health Organization, Geneva 1996.
16. Fats and oils in human nutrition. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO Food and Nutrition paper No. 57).
17. Avioli LV. Calcium metabolism and osteoporosis in China, Japan and Pacific Rim communities. Calcified Tissues International, 1991,48:149150.
<section>5</section>
Chapter three - Methods of monitoring food and nutrient intake
3.1 Introduction
3.2 Methods of assessing dietary intake
3.2.1 National food supply data
3.2.2 Household data
3.2.3 Individual data
3.3 Selecting the most appropriate dietary data collection method
3.4 Rapid methods for collection of dietary data
3.5 Conversion of food intakes to nutrients
3.6 Analysis of food intake data by individual foods, food groups, meal patterns and eating practices
3.6.1 Analysis by individual foods
3.6.2 Analysis by food groups
3.6.3 Analysis by meal patterns
3.7 Approaches to monitoring the effectiveness of established guidelines
References
Chapter three - Methods of monitoring food and nutrient intake
3.1 Introduction
The purposes of this chapter are to:
o provide an overview of methods of assessing food consumption;
o give examples of rapid methods for collecting additional dietary data;
o address issues involved in converting food intake to nutrients;
o discuss analysis of food intake data by foods, food groups and eating practices;
o elaborate on approaches to monitoring the effectiveness of established dietary guidelines.
3.2 Methods of assessing dietary intake
Food consumption data may be collected at the national, household or the individual level. Although data collected at the level of the individual are the most useful for assessing dietary adequacy and adherence to FBDG, food supply and household data provide information that is useful for many other purposes.
3.2.1 National food supply data
Food supply data at the national level, such as food balance sheets or food disappearance data (1), provide gross estimates of the national availability of food commodities. These data may also be used to calculate the average per capita availability of energy and the macronutrients. A major limitation of national supply data is that they reflect food availability rather than food consumption. Other uses, such as animal feed and industrial applications, as well as losses due to cooking or processing, spoilage and other sources of waste are not easily accounted for. Despite these limitations, national food supply data are useful for tracking trends in the food supply and for determining availability of foods that are potentially good sources of nutrients or of food groups targeted for dietary guidance. Food supply data are not useful for evaluating individual adherence to dietary reference values (DRY) nor for identifying subgroups of the population at risk of inadequate
nutrient intakes.
3.2.2 Household data
Information regarding food availability at the household level may be collected by a variety of methods (2). Such data are useful for comparing food availability among different communities, geographic areas and socioeconomic groups, and for tracking dietary changes in the total population and within population subgroups. However, these data do not provide information on the distribution of foods among individual members of the household.
3.2.3 Individual data
The five general methods for assessing dietary intake for individuals are described below, along with the major strengths and limitations of each (these methods are described in greater detail in 3.6):
o Food records. Food records, also called food diaries, require that the subject (or observer) report all foods and beverages consumed for a specified period (usually one to seven days). Amounts of each food item may or may not be recorded, depending on the study objectives. If nutrient intakes are to be calculated, the amounts consumed should be estimated as accurately as possible. Amounts may be determined by weighing or by estimating volumes. in some situations, only those foods of particular interest are recorded. For example, to estimate intake of a food component found only in animal products, food records might be limited to foods containing meat, poultry, fish, eggs or dairy products. However, if total energy intake is required, the food record should include all foods consumed.
o 24-hour dietary recalls. The 24-hour dietary recall consists of a listing of foods and beverages consumed the previous day or the 24 hours prior to the recall interview. Foods and amounts are recalled from memory with the aid of an interviewer who has been trained in methods for soliciting dietary information. The interview is usually conducted face to face, but may also be conducted by telephone. In some situations, the recall is self-administered by the subject, but this approach may not yield sufficiently reliable data. A brief activity history may be incorporated into the interview to facilitate probing for foods and beverages consumed.
o Food frequency questionnaires. A food frequency questionnaire (FFQ), sometimes referred to as a "list-based diet history", consists of a structured listing of individual foods or food groupings. For each item on the food list, the respondent is asked to estimate the frequency of consumption based on specified frequency categories which indicate the number of times the food is usually consumed per day, week, month or year. FFQs are generally self-administered but may also be interviewer-administered. The number or types of food items may vary, as well as the number and types of frequency categories. FFQs may be unquantified, semi-quantified or completely quantified. The unquantified questionnaire does not specify serving sizes, whereas the semi-quantified tool provides a typical serving size as a reference amount for each food item. A quantified FFQ allows the respondent to indicate any amount of food typically consumed. Some FFQs include questions regarding usual food
preparation methods, trimming of meats, use of dietary supplements, and identification of the most common brand of certain types of foods such as margarines or ready-to-eat cereals. The answers to these questions are then incorporated into the calculation of nutrient intakes. FFQs are commonly used to rank individuals by intake of selected nutrients. Although FFQs are not designed for estimating absolute nutrient intakes, the method may be more accurate than other methods for estimating average intake of those nutrients having large day-to-day variability and for which there are relatively few significant food sources (e.g. alcohol, vitamin A and vitamin C). Brief FFQs may focus on one or several specific nutrients. Comprehensive FFQs designed to estimate a large number of nutrients generally include between 50 and 150 food items.
o Diet histories. The meal-based diet history is designed to assess usual individual intake. It consists of a detailed listing of the types of foods and beverages commonly consumed at each eating occasion over a defined time period which is often a "typical" week. A trained interviewer probes for the respondent's customary pattern of food intake on each day of the typical week. The reference time frame is often the past month or the past several months, or may reflect seasonal differences if the time frame is the past year.
o Food habit questionnaires. May be designed to collect either general or specific types of information, such as food perceptions and beliefs, food likes and dislikes, methods of preparing foods, use of dietary supplements, social settings surrounding eating occasions. This type of information is frequently included along with the other four methods, but it may also be used as the sole data collection method. These approaches are commonly used in rapid assessment procedures (RAP). The questionnaires may be either open-ended or structured, self- or interviewer-administered, and may include any number of questions depending on the information required. Use of food habit questionnaires is further discussed in the section on rapid assessment methods.
o Combined methods Different types of dietary assessment methods may be combined to improve accuracy and facilitate interpretation of the dietary data. Methods may also be combined for practical reasons. For example, food records have been combined with 24-hour recalls to make the best use of resources in past surveys of the US Department of Agriculture. An FFQ focused on selected nutrients was used in addition to the 24-hour recall in the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III). A 24-hour recall is frequently used to help establish the typical meal plan for conducting a diet history (7), and a FFQ may be used as a cross-check for the other three types of methods. (See Table 1, Summary of dietary assessment methods).
It is becoming increasingly common to use another more valid (and often more costly) method of dietary assessment on a random sub-sample of the study population. Comparison of the results from the two methods permits adjustment of mean intake values obtained from the primary method. For example, if an FFQ is the primary method used, a more detailed method, such as multiple recalls or food records, is also used in a subset of survey participants. The more detailed method along with the FFQ is expected to provide more accurate estimates of intake distributions. Results from the sub-sample are then used to adjust the mean estimates from the FFQ for the total population.
Table 1. Summary dietary assessment methods
Type of method
Major strengths
Major limitations type
Food record
- does not rely on memory
- high participation burden
- easy to quantify amounts
- requires literacy
- open-ended
- may alter intake behaviour
24-h dietary recall
- little respondent burden
- relies on memory
- no literacy requirement
- requires skilled interviewer
- does not alter intake behaviour
- difficulty to estimate amounts
Food frequency questionnaire
- relatively inexpensive
- relies on memory
- preferable method for nutrients with very high day variability
- requires complex calculations
- to day to estimate frequencies
- requires literacy
- does not alter intake behaviour
- limited flexibility for describing foods
Diet history (meal-based)
- no literacy requirement
- relies on memory
- does not alter intake behaviour
- requires highly trained interviewer
- open-ended
- difficulty to estimate amounts
Food habit
- rapid and low cost
- may rely on memory questionnaires
- does not alter intake behaviour
- may require a trained interviewer
- open-ended
3.3 Selecting the most appropriate dietary data collection method
The following considerations will aid in selecting the method that will best meet survey objectives: the foods or nutrients of primary interest; the need for group versus individual data; the need for absolute intakes versus relative intake estimates; population characteristics (age, sex, motivation, education/literacy, cultural diversity); the time frame of interest; the level of specificity needed for describing foods; and available resources including food composition data if nutrients are to be calculated. It is important that statistical expertise be included in designing the survey and that the questions to be answered are clearly stated and analysable. Statistical resources are available in most countries and should be utilized both for survey design and data analysis.
When absolute versus relative estimates of nutrient intakes are required, the food record and 2 hour dietary recall are clearly the methods of choice for estimating mean intakes. These are the only methods that provide data on foods actually eaten, since both the food frequency questionnaire and the diet history are based on long-term subjective perception of a participant's typical eating habits. A single day of intake per study participant is adequate for estimating group means, and a representative balance of all of the days of the week should be included in the data collection, if possible. If the distribution of usual individual intakes within the groups is also needed, at least two non-consecutive days of intake per individual are required to permit estimation of within-person day-to-day variability. The combination of days of the week for each individual should be randomly assigned.
If usual intakes of each individual are required for meeting the survey objectives, the number of days of intake depends on the within-person variability for the foods or nutrients of interest and the level of precision required. A minimum of three to four days of intake is generally required for characterizing usual individual intake of energy and the macronutrients. If seasonal variability is a concern, collection of several days of intake in each season of the year is recommended.
For food components with very high within-person day-to-day variability, such as cholesterol, vitamins A and C, and alcohol, estimation of usual individual intake may require from 20 to more than 50 days of intake, which becomes impracticably long. For those highly variable nutrients contributed by relatively few food sources, a food frequency questionnaire focused on the selected nutrients is likely to be the most accurate method of assessment.
3.4 Rapid methods for collection of dietary data
As a basis for documenting and understanding the food intake for developing FBDG, rapid methods of dietary assessment can be very helpful (8). A rapid assessment procedure survey (RAP) usually involves focus-group interviews with community leaders and for selected target groups, to gather information on food beliefs, behaviours and intakes without preconceived ideas. The trained interviewer works with the informant to create a knowledge base with minimal bias. A particular advantage of RAP methods is that they allow a more relevant food usage list to be developed for a community, which may then be used along with other more quantitative methodologies, such as for cross-checking food records or recalls or for developing FFQs. Thus, RAP methods, which are low-cost, may be used as the primary method for collecting data on which to base dietary guidelines or may be used to enhance the validity of more quantitative methods.
The management of RAP databases has been greatly facilitated by the development of computer software. Of particular note here is NUDIST, developed by social scientists at La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia, which is used widely for the organization of sociological and anthropological data sets and which can be applied to food beliefs and habits.
Another approach to rapid assessment of food intake involves the use of a qualitative 24-hour recall to identify family and individual intakes. This method has been used in many countries, particularly in Africa for assessing infant and family feeding practices, and can be implemented by personnel with minimal training. The foods consumed the preceding day by the infant, young child and mother or family are analysed according to the age of the young child (e.g. 0-2, 3-5, 6-8, 9-11, 12-17, 18-23 and 24-35 months). The services of a statistician to plan the study are recommended. The number of times each major food and food-group are consumed per day is calculated. From this one can deduce what are the main staples and other components in the common family diet, and whether all such components (e.g. foods of animal origin, legumes, dark-green leafy vegetables, etc.) are consumed by the young children as well, or only by older children and adults. The age of introduction of
various foods can also be derived.
By linking the food intake data collection with weighing/measuring of children and the mother (to derive her BMI from a standard table) and with questions on the occurrence of illnesses in the past two weeks, one can gain an overall picture of the nutritional status of the children and of adults in the community, and whether the basic problems may be related more to feeding practices, to illnesses or to general food shortage. If there are marked seasonal changes the studies should be repeated during other seasons.
This method also provides much valuable information quite easily and rapidly for workers in low-resource situations. Culturally based dietary restrictions are identified without requiring direct questions; but it is useful to follow up (e.g. through focus groups) to identify the reasons for such restrictions and how they could be circumvented. The survey thus provides a basis for drawing up locally adapted dietary guidelines, especially for young children (9).
Another use of rapid assessment methods involves assessing common practices in a population, for example, high intake of tea in a country in which iron intake is low. The tea which is regularly consumed by everyone, including children, is taken immediately after meals and thus interferes with iron absorption. To address this issue as a "food-based guidelines", it would be helpful to explore whether the general population would be willing to postpone tea-drinking for two to three hours after eating. Such information might be easily obtained from a number of short focus-group interviews conducted among the major cultural subgroups of the population.
There is often a tendency to collect more information than is needed to answer a specific question. Collecting additional data may initially appear advantageous, but experience indicates that such data are often not analysed and are therefore of little or no use. An attempt should be made to collect no more data than required to answer carefully formulated questions based on well-defined needs for the information.
3.5 Conversion of food intakes to nutrients
Converting food consumption data to nutrient intakes requires both a food composition database and ideally computer programmes for nutrient calculation. Developing a food composition database is very expensive due to costs of chemical analysis for many foods and many nutrients. Available regional food composition data should be carefully evaluated for relevance of foods and food descriptions, as well as for accuracy and completeness of the food and nutrient data. Professionals using the compositional data need to make separate judgements for each of the values to ensure appropriate interpretation and use. Any missing foods consumed by the population or missing nutrient values for the nutrients of interest should be added to the database. If the missing values are for foods that are frequently consumed by the target population, those foods should be chemically analysed. Nutrient values for foods eaten after cooking should reflect the cooked nutrient values. If only the raw
nutrient values are included in the database, the calculation software should be programmed to account for raw-to-cooked differences in yield, as well as nutrient losses due to cooking.
Computer software should be used for nutrient calculations which are tedious and prone to error if done manually. Quality control procedures for data entry should be carefully adhered to. Such software programmes already exist in many countries, and some of the programmes may be linked to other nutrient databases. Developing and testing software is time-consuming and expensive. Thus it is worth the effort required to locate and evaluate existing software for nutrient calculation. Software should be carefully evaluated, both for programme features, such as the ease of data entry, reporting capabilities and hardware requirements, as well as for the quality of the nutrient database. Recipes and other methods of food preparation should be adequately accounted for in the nutrient calculations.
Computer software for international use in food-to-nutrient conversion is limited for the purpose of calculating population estimates of intake or exposure. The very large number of nutrient analysis programmes worldwide commonly have limited database management or substitution functions. Most programmes are designed for the local dietetics market, which make them difficult to adapt to large-scale food-intake surveys and planning government interventions. Professionals can select from the half-dozen systems which do offer these functions, and choice will depend on the specific functions required by local objectives.
If FFQ data are often to be converted to nutrients, customized software may need to be developed to meet special calculation requirements where the answers to certain questions require modification of the nutrient content. For example, the answer to a question about trimming meats will require modification of the nutrient profiles for meat items.
Examples of sources that may be used for regional purposes are listed below. The publications may not be in print at the present time and may be available only through reference services.
1. Standard Reference Database (Handbook No.8); United States Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC, USA (the source most often used by national database developers to complement local food composition tables).
2. World Food Mini-List; University of California, Berkeley, USA.
3. NDS (Nutrient Data System); Nutrition Coordinating Centre, Minneapolis, USA (imported food section).
4. Food Composition and Nutrition Tables, Souci, Fachmann & Kraut; Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry, Bonn, Germany.
5. McCance & Widdowson Composition of Foods; Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, London, UK.
6. Food Tables for Malaysia; Institute for Medical Research, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
7. Chinese Food Composition Tables; Chinese Academy of Preventive Medicine, Beijing, China.
8. Ethiopian Food Composition Tables; Ethiopian Nutrition Institute, Ministry of Health, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
9. CTA-ECSA Database for East Africa; Tanzanian Food and Nutrition Institute, Dares-Salaam, Tanzania.
10. Chilean Food tables; INTA Santiago, Chile.
11. FAO Regional Food Tables for: Latin America, Africa, Near East, East Asia; FAO, Rome.
12. Australian Food Composition Tables; National Food Authority, Australian Government, Canberra, Australia.
13. South African Food Composition Tables; Medical Research Council, Tygersberg, South Africa.
14. Food Composition Tables for Slovakia; Food Research Institute, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.
15. Food Composition Data for West Africa; CIQUAL, Paris, France.
16. Food Composition Tables for Use in the English-speaking Caribbean; Caribbean Food and Nutrition Institute, Kingston, Jamaica.
3.6 Analysis of food intake data by individual foods, food groups, meal patterns and eating practices
Food intake data may be analysed in many ways other than by conversion to nutrients. The possibilities for analyses by individual foods, food groups, meal patterns, and various eating practices are unlimited. The kind of analyses selected will depend on the questions of interest and the data available. In this section examples are provided of various types of analyses based on foods, food groups and eating habits that might be considered in developing or monitoring dietary guidelines.
3.6.1 Analysis by individual foods
In developing guidelines, it is often helpful to know which foods are most commonly eaten (i.e. consumed by the most people), as well as the foods eaten most frequently in a population. Information regarding the proportion of the population consuming the foods may be obtained from any one of the four general types of individual dietary data collection methods as well as from RAP methods. Household food consumption data may also be used to provide data on foods most commonly consumed, although the results will relate to frequency of consumption by the entire household rather than by individuals. Knowledge of the proportion of the population consuming specific foods is useful in developing FBDG aimed at increasing or decreasing the intake of those foods.
It is important to recognize that, with the exception of staple foods, food intake data tend to be heavily skewed. For example, in some circumstances a large proportion of the population may consume a small amount of a food, while a small proportion of the population may consume a large amount. Unless population subgroups are identified, the range of intakes will be hidden by an "average consumption figure", which in turn may erroneously be assumed to represent the intake of every individual. This is illustrated in Table 2, where the differences in yoghurt consumption in the UK by adult males of different social classes (range 90-31 g/week) are due to both the differing percentage of males in each social class consuming yoghurt, and the different mean intake of yoghurt of each group of consumers (10).
Table 2. Intakes of yogurt (g/week) in UK yoghurt consuming male subjects by social class (n=1127).
Social class
Mean population intake (g/week)
% who consumed the food
Intake among consumers (g/week)
I&II
III-a
III-b
IV&V
It is important to keep in mind that an estimate of usual individual intake is needed for determining the proportion of individuals consuming a given food with a given frequency. If food records or 24-h dietary recalls are used for this purpose, multiple days of intake per individual are required due to day-to-day variability in food intake among individuals. Food frequency questionnaires may provide a more accurate picture of the proportion of consumers of a given food.
3.6.2 Analysis by food groups
Foods are often classified according to a limited number of groupings to facilitate dietary guidance and education of the population. Dietary recommendations may then be made based on proportional quantities of each food group. Individual or household food intake data may be analysed by food group to evaluate the overall quality of the diet. Examples of food groupings used for dietary guidance and evaluation in several countries are given in Annex 5.
A food-grouping scheme should be based on the typical eating patterns of each country and the common ways of describing foods in that population. To facilitate education and intervention, the grouping should also correspond to nutrition-related of the particular country. Food-grouping schemes also facilitate analysis of food intake data both with and without conversion of foods into nutrients. If nutrient data are available, it is useful to know which food groups are the major contributors to nutrients of particular concern. In the absence of nutrient data, food intakes may be analysed by distribution of intake among the food groups.
3.6.3 Analysis by meal patterns
In some countries, analysis of food intake patterns through meals is possible because of the regularity of meal-eating occasions and the relatively narrow range of foods which constitute the meals. In the urban environment of developed countries, meal-eating patterns are generally quite varied in time as well as in the foods which constitute the meal. In such countries the term "eating occasion" may be preferable to the term "meal" or "snack" since the definition of each of these latter terms is highly subjective. Eating occasions can be so closely linked in time that it becomes difficult to say whether one is dealing with one or two separate occasions. Notwithstanding these difficulties, characterizing meal patterns or eating-occasion patterns may provide useful data for developing and evaluating dietary guidelines.
Meal-based analyses provide data on which foods are often eaten together. Such information should be taken into account in developing guidelines to ensure that targeting an increase in one food or food group does not result in a change in intake of other foods that may have a negative impact on the total diet.
3.7 Approaches to monitoring the effectiveness of established guidelines
A number of different methods may be used to monitor the effectiveness of an established dietary guideline. Agreement among several different types of data increases confidence in the results of the evaluation. For example, consider a guideline designed to increase calcium intake based on the results of a national survey of individual food intakes indicating that mean calcium intake was less than 50% of the recommended level, coupled with observations of a high incidence of hip fractures and osteoporosis. The "food-based guidelines" might stipulate, for example, that all healthy persons consume at least three servings of dairy products daily and three servings weekly of dark-green leafy vegetables. Subsequent monitoring of this guideline might involve comparison of the baseline calcium intake with mean calcium intake, using data from a recent national survey of individual intakes. However, due to the high cost and time involved in conducting a national survey, it is unlikely
that such data would be available at the time they are needed. Therefore, another approach might be to look at national food disappearance or household food consumption data with respect to changes in the availability of the targeted foods. Similar changes might also be noted in production trends and in market research data. Finally, changes in health outcomes, such as reduced hip fractures and osteoporosis incidence, would be monitored.
In other circumstances, appropriate biomarkers can be used as indirect, but objective, measures of dietary intakes for both monitoring and assessment purposes, for instance urinary sodium and iodine concentrations.
Evaluation of the effectiveness of a specific guideline should also include an assessment of possible negative on other dietary factors. In the case of the calcium example above, one would also look at the impact of increasing intake of dairy products on fat intake if that is also a concern in the population. Common food preparation practices should also be taken into consideration in evaluating the effectiveness of a particular guideline. For example, increasing rice consumption might also increase fat intake if rice is commonly prepared or eaten with a substantial amount of added fat.
Another aspect of evaluating a dietary guideline is the proportion of the population meeting the guideline. Such data can be obtained only from dietary surveys of individuals. Collecting at least two days of intake per individual will permit estimation of the distribution of usual individual intakes within the population. Identification of characteristics of those furthest from meeting the guideline may be helpful in targeting future efforts to promote the message.
References
1. Food balance sheets. Agrostat PC, Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome, 1993.
2. Flores M, Nelson M. Methods for data collection at household or institutional level. In: Manual on methodology for food consumption studies. Cameron ME and van Staveren, eds, Oxford University Press,
1988. pp 33-52.
3. gingham SA et al. Methods for data collection at an individual level. In: Manual on methodology for food consumption studies. Cameron ME and van Staveren, eds, Oxford University Press, 1988, pp 53-106.
4. Block G. A review of validations of dietary assessment methods. American Journal of Epidemiology, 1982, 115:492-505.
5. Thompson FE, Byers T. Dietary Assessment Resource Manual. Journal of Nutrition, 1994, 124: 2245S-2317S.
6. Hankin JH. Dietary intake methodology. In: Monsen ER, ed. Research: Successful Approaches. Chicago: The American Dietetic Association. 1992. pp 173-194.
7. Briefel RR. Assessment of US diet in national nutrition surveys: national collaborative efforts and NHANES. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 1994, 59(suppl):164S-167S.
8. Scrimshaw SCM, Hurtado H. Rapid Assessment Procedures for Nutrition and Primary Health Care. UN University/UNICEF. Published by University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA, 1988.
9. Rapid Village Nutrition Survey Technique. WHO/Brazzaville, document AFR/NUT 84, 1977.
10. Gregory), Foster K, Tyler H. Wiseman M. The Dietary and Nutritional Survey of British Adults: A survey of the Dietary Behaviour, Nutritional Status and Blood Pressure of Adults Aged 16-64 Living in Great Britain. HMSO Publication Centre, London 1990.
<section>6</section>
Chapter four - Development and implementation of food-based dietary guidelines
4.1 Introduction
4.2 Working group or committee formation
4.3 Development
4.3.1 Information review stage
4.3.2 Drafting stage
4.4 Implementation
4.4.1 Introduction
4.4.2 Issues to be considered in implementing dietary guidelines
4.5 Monitoring and evaluation
4.5.1 Process evaluation
4.5.2 Outcome evaluation
4.6 Sample interview protocol
4.7 Recommendations
References
Chapter four - Development and implementation of food-based dietary guidelines
4.1 Introduction
This chapter provides guidance on how a country can develop and implement FBDG. This guidance is provided in two major parts; the first part concerns development of the guidelines, and the second part gives advice on how the guidelines can be used to improve dietary practices.
In preparing FBDG, countries should keep in mind that guidelines are always subject to change, and that many factors have to be taken into account in preparing them. Many different sources of information should be reviewed and considered before FBDG can be developed, and countries should base their review on the available local, regional or international information. As additional scientific information on the effects of the guidelines becomes available, further consideration might be needed for changes or adjustments to FBDG. Also, in the review process leading to these guidelines, a wealth of food, nutrient and health information should be reviewed and synthesized, and this may lead to additional recommendations to policy-makers and technical experts which will supplement the FBDG.
In developing guidelines, countries may wish to set high goals such as a greatly improved food supply, and a healthy and well-nourished total population. FBDG are an important part of achieving these goals, but the guidelines should be practical, dynamic, flexible, and based on the existing situation and what can be achieved in the short-to-medium-term towards reaching long-term goals. The guidelines will be an important part of a country's overall plans to reach these goals, especially national plans of action to improve nutrition which countries have or are preparing in response to the World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition, and other major agriculture, health and education policies and plans.
4.2 Working group or committee formation
The consultation recommended that to prepare FBDG an interdisciplinary working group would be needed. In order to begin the process, policy-makers such as the ministers of agriculture and health should be made aware of the beneficial uses of dietary advice with regard to food supply planning, better health status, reduced health care costs, and improved work, growth and learning capacity for different population groups.
Groups of concerned individuals, and others working in the areas of health, agriculture, education and communication, need to take actions to increase awareness of the importance of developing and implementing FBDG so that government policy-makers will appreciate the value of this work as a part of overall nutrition improvement activities. Appropriate briefing papers, seminars and information to the public using various communication channels may all be helpful in encouraging the formation of a national working group to prepare FBDG.
In countries with agencies concerned with policies affecting food and nutrition, there may already be dietary guidelines, largely expressed in the technical terms of nutritional science. Such recommendations, e.g. "no more than 10% of energy as saturated fatty acids (12:0 to 16:0)" tend to be meaningless or confusing to the majority of people who have not made a special study of nutritional biochemistry and who do not have their own set of food tables. In order to make dietary guidelines more practical and better understood and increase their impact on food habits, they need to be translated from nutrient-based dietary guidelines into FBDG.
The process may be initiated due to criticisms that current nutrient-based dietary guidelines are impractical and ineffective. Such concerns may be expressed by consumer groups, journalists, sociologists or any people concerned with nutrition education, who may persuade the most concerned government ministries (e.g. health, education and agriculture) to set up a working group to develop FBDG. Realization of the need for dietary guidelines may originate in the health sector (e.g. ministry of health) because of the drain on resources of increasing morbidity from NCD, some of which are diet-related.
Countries with limited resources, and where there are few professional nutritionists, may not yet have dietary guidelines. In such cases the guidelines that would be particularly helpful will take into account both traditional food habits and changing practices where imported and newly produced foods have become common.
Some guidelines may already be part of national policies, aimed at improving nutrition, some of which are supported by outside funding from FAO, UNICEF and/or WHO, e.g. national plans of action for nutrition, iodine deficiency disorders (IDD) control and breast-feeding programmes. Governments in general have looked kindly on dietary guidelines because they are not costly to prepare, do not require imported machinery or expensive staff, and aim to reduce expenditure on NCD.
Someone, inside or outside government agencies, has to start the process, generate some enthusiasm among a few other key players and press the appropriate ministry to set up a working group. The food sector has usually accepted and even welcomed dietary guidelines because they reduce confusion about nutritional goals and help with forward planning.
Some countries may seek technical help to develop guidelines by asking FAO or WHO to provide a temporary advisor with appropriate experience to assist in the work. When neighbouring or similar countries have already produced dietary guidelines, these can be utilized and adapted to form part of the basis of the new guidelines. However, in using guidelines from other countries it is important that they be modified for suitability, acceptability, compatibility and to fit the disease problems, and food preferences and availability of each country.
In all countries, developed or developing, when the decision is taken to form a national working group it is important to ensure representation of all major groups, including senior representatives from the ministries of agriculture, health and education and from the nutritional science and food science sectors of academia, consumer groups and other pertinent nongovernmental organizations, and the food industry. Having broad representation on the working group is important to ensure that all points of view will be considered, and to provide communications with, and feedback from, all concerned sectors. FBDG should be based on the realities in each country and on what can be achieved over time. Obtaining the information needed, whether scientific, sociological, technical or trade-related, can only be done using a broad approach.
When the working group is formed it will have to organize and carry out a wide variety of work which will lead to FBDG. The box below illustrates the tasks to be performed, and the following sections of this chapter give more detail about this work.
SUGGESTED STEPS FOR DEVELOPING FBDG
1. Working group should be formed including representatives of agriculture, health, food science, nutritional science, consumers, food industry, communications and anthropology.
2. Appropriate technical focal points provide material on nutrition-related diseases and on food availability and food intake patterns in the country. Members of the working group are invited to suggest nutritional objectives.
3. Working group identifies, through full discussion, a set of major nutrition-related health problems for which dietary guidelines could tee useful. Working group also evaluates the general food production and supply situation by considering current practices, subsidies and other governmental policies and problems, to see if FBDG can be implemented under the present situation.
4. Set of draft "food-based guidelines" formulated.
5. Background/back-up statements for each "food-based guidelines" are prepared, and each statement is circulated to all working group members.
6. Working group or committee meets again and each background statement is critically reviewed and revised. Wording of guideline statements is pilot-tested with consumer groups) revised as needed and carefully checked.
7. Background statements are finalized, synthesized and sent to interest groups in the country for comment (possibly also to international advisers for comment).
8. Working group meets again to consider changes in view of the comments received.
9. Working group secretary puts together draft of final report; working group concludes draft, adopts, publishes and disseminates final report and implementation begins.
4.3 Development
The issues which should be considered in the process of developing FBDG are presented in this section. The steps and actions presented are not itemized in order of priority, thereby allowing flexibility for adaptation by individual countries. Some activities described in each step could run simultaneously. The guideline development working group should coordinate all the following steps. The working group should consult as extensively as possible in order to ensure a successful outcome.
4.3.1 Information review stage
1. Review diet-related health patterns/diseases/mortality
Information needed:
o Which conditions are causing concern!
o Are these conditions related to diet and nutrition! (see Annex 3 for details)
1.1 Identify the nutrition problems of public health significance, e.g. overnutrition, undernutrition.
o Use information on anthropometry and biochemical indicators, where available.
1.2 Estimate the magnitude and severity of these problems. Look at morbidity and mortality rates as well as costs and trends.
1.3 Distinguish age-groups and specific population groups which are affected by the different problems.
1.4 Try to conclude likelihood, magnitude, severity, order of priority, cost-benefits of diet-related diseases in order to initiate priority listing.
Descriptions of most of the health indicators, their use and cut-off points as well as their global distribution can be found in the following WHO documents and publications:
o Reports of the Health for All Monitoring and Evaluation system (1)
o Physical Status: the Use and Interpretation of Anthropometry (2)
o Maternal Anthropometry and Pregnancy Outcomes (3)
o The Global Database on Child Growth (4)
o The Worldwide Magnitude of Protein-Energy Malnutrition: an Overview from the WHO Global Database on Child Growth (5)
o Treatment of Severe Protein-Energy Malnutrition (6)
o Protein-Energy Malnutrition: WHO/UNICEF Policy Paper (7)
o Management of Nutrition Emergencies in Large Populations (8)
o Physical Status: the Use and interpretation of Anthropometry in Adolescence (9)
o Issues in the Assessment of Nutritional Status Using Anthropometry (10)
o An Evaluation of Infant Growth (11)
o A Field Guide for Rapid Assessment of Nutritional Status in Emergencies (12)
o Global data base on breast-feeding (13)
o Indicators for assessing IDD and their control through salt iodization (14)
o Indicators and strategies for iron deficiency and anaemia programmes (15)
o Indicators for assessing vitamin A deficiency and their application in monitoring and evaluating intervention programmes (16)
o MONICA - manual (17)
o Prevention of Diabetes Mellitus (18)
o National Cancer Control Programmes - Policies and Managerial Guidelines (1 9)
Other sources of diet-related health data include:
o Local health statistics data (mortality and morbidity), Nutrition surveillance data.
o National Plan of Action on Child Development, National Plan of Action for Nutrition.
o Special studies by universities, research organizations, government agencies, food manufacturers, etc.
2. Review food consumption patterns
2.1 Examine food intake patterns including changes or trends over time. If information on food consumption patterns is not available:
o Is there need for a food/nutrition data collection or survey?
o If so, what method should be used (see Chapter 3 for details on methodology).
o Other information that might be used would be food balance sheets, household expenditure surveys, etc. (see Chapter 3 for details on methods of data collection and use of such information).
2.2 Distinguish food intake patterns for population subgroups, e.g. infants, young children, pregnant/lactating women, the elderly, ethnic groups, etc.
2.3 Identify food preferences and other factors influencing food consumption patterns, e.g. culture, tradition, religious prohibitions, taboos, etc.
2.4 Identify desirable traditional or other current food patterns and practices that could be reinforced
2.5 Assess food availability throughout the country, taking into account:
o seasonality
o market prices/availability
o household food production
o import/export
o processing
o overall production/availability - how much is used for people (versus animals)
o food fortification.
Sources of local food data include the following:
o Agricultural surveys
o FAO national food balance sheet
o FAO Nutrition country profiles (104 countries)
o National Household Expenditure surveys.
Additional sources of useful data include the country reports from the International Conference on Nutrition (ICN) and various multi-country risk factor studies, such as INTERHEALTH (20), INTERSALT (21) etc.
3. Draw conclusions on likely magnitude of linkages between diet and health/disease; verify the degree to which the problem is diet-related.
3.1 Evaluate nutrient and/or food intakes in comparison to available reference values (see Annex 3).
3.2 Note dietary deficits, excesses, imbalances and interactions, etc. in defined groups.
3.3 Evaluate nutrient and/or food intakes in comparison to established food-nutrientdisease relationships (see Annex 3).
3.4 Identify priority diet-related diseases to be addressed, taking into account internal and/or external concerns, e.g. hypertension might be a priority concern in the country (internal concern), while donor funds might be available for IDD programmes (external concern).
3.5 Determine desirable and attainable nutrient intake levels.
3.6 Decide on methodology for converting nutrient guidelines to "food-based guidelines. (see Chapter 2).
4. Take account of national and population frameworks which affect the occurrence and prevention of problems.
FBDG should be consistent with relevant national policies for improved food supplies and nutrition.
4.1 Health policies and priorities.
Health policies affect nutrition through their influence on the sociocultural and physical environment and the demographic situation. An important aspect of health policy is the need to reduce the disparities in health and nutritional status and the inequities in access to health and nutrition services. The vulnerable population groups, such as urban slum dwellers, childbearing women, refugees, displaced persons, etc., are particularly at risk of malnutrition, and directing health policies and programmes to meet their needs could significantly protect and promote their nutritional well-being.
4.2 Agriculture policies and sustainable production.
Agricultural policies have an impact on nutrition, the level and stability of food production, and frequently the income of nutritionally at-risk households, food prices, women's labour demands and time allocation, and the nutrient content of foods. Increasing the production of traditional food crops, such as roots and tubers, pulses and legumes by small producers would directly improve food supplies for nutritionally vulnerable groups.
4.3 Environmental realities and food safety concerns.
Nutritional well-being ultimately depends on society's capacity to manage the interaction between human activities and the physical and biological environment in ways that safeguard and promote health and do not threaten the integrity of natural systems. The physical environment has a major influence on human health not only through soil, water, air and climate, but also through its interaction with the biological environment.
4.4 Education and social policies including welfare.
Education policies play a key role in promoting healthy diets and lifestyles. While the content and emphasis of educational messages vary according to lifestyle, culture and access to natural or processed foods, the goal of nutrition education is the same: to preserve health-enhancing dietary behaviours contributing to good health. In addition, social policies such as housing have an effect on health and nutrition where inadequate shelter, poor ventilation, lack of facilities for solid-waste disposal, air and noise pollution and over-crowding have negative consequences for any health and nutrition situation.
4.5 Development, women's development and population policies.
The implications of population policies on nutrition are significant, particularly in food-deficit countries where rapid population growth and urbanization continue. As with environmental issues, addressing population concerns is fundamental to improving nutrition. In addition, considering the relatively poor state of maternal health and the important role women play in family welfare and often in food production, strong policies in favour of maternal health services, including family planning, are important.
4.6 Other policies related to food supplies and nutrition.
Macroeconomic policies, for example relating to exchange rates, wages, prices and foreign trade, are an interesting example of how the nutritional status of different population groups may be affected. Macroeconomic policies can adversely affect nutrition if they discriminate against the food and agriculture sector and rural areas, and against the poor and vulnerable groups, or if they curtail social services, such as health, education, targeted food subsidies, etc., for example in developing countries undergoing structural adjustment.
4.7 Adverse effects (consider how the change in food pattern being advocated will affect the total diet).
5. Determine which health condition (good or bad), disease pattern, nutrient deficiency or excess or imbalance, dietary practice, food supply and marketing practice, etc. warrants the necessity of FBDG to change food consumption behaviour, and determine which food groups are of primary interest (see Chapter 3 for details on-how to convert from nutrients to food).
5.1 Consultation with all interested parties on priority list developed after steps 1-4 above and modify as needed.
6. Define content and target groups for the FBDG
QUESTIONS TO BE CONSIDERED IN DEVELOPING FBDG
1. Is a single set of dietary guidelines needed or are multiple sets required, e.g. for urban and rural populations?
2. Are these guidelines to include children, infants and other vulnerable groups?
3. Are the guidelines compatible with the potential for the food supply (agricultural production, fisheries potential, minimizing imports) ?
4. Are the guidelines environmentally sustainable?
5. Should the guidelines be written in different languages used in the country?
6. How many food groups are needed. How will they be named?
7. Should branded, packaged foods be included in our food groups?
8. How should different cuisines and religious food laws be accommodated?
9. How should the wide range of nutrients between individual foods in food groups be accommodated?
10. How can we allow for the wide range of energy requirements between different subgroups and individuals?
11. How can we express recommendations on specific food components e.g. protein, fats, fibres, salt and sugars in the food groups?
12. Should we include water and other drinks in the dietary guidelines?
13. Should dietary guidelines address issues of food and water safety and sanitation, including safety of complementary foods for young children?
14. Should the dietary guidelines address weight, exercise and other lifestyle factors?
7. Define the purpose/goals/targets of guidelines
When drawing up guidelines, consider the following:
7.1 The target groups selected and the broad strategy adopted may have a major influence on the form and content of the guidelines as well as the mode of dissemination.
7.2 The context in which the dietary guidelines are going to be used. They are part of general advice about health which include statements that relate to other lifestyle factors, such as exercise, smoking, etc.
7.3 Include a statement such as: "These guidelines provide advice to the general healthy population about food choices, so that their usual diet contributes to a healthy lifestyle, and is consistent with reduced risk for development of diet-related diseases".
7.4 Guidelines should address the total diet and not just individual foods or the foundation, or core diet, only.
7.5 Identify to which groups the guidelines apply (usually adults, but specific guidelines may be targeted to other special groups, such as infants and young children).
7.6 Emphasize that the guidelines are to be used as a complete set and no one guideline is to be used in isolation.
7.7 It is optional how guidelines are ordered, but be sure that the order is clear and country-specific. Priority may differ between different subgroups and may change with time.
7.8 See that FBDG are consistent with nutritional reference values (see Annex 3).
4.3.2 Drafting stage
1. Draft guidelines
1.1 Select drafting group (see above concerning working group or committee formation).
1.2 Allocate responsibility for preparing a statement on the rationale and justification for each guideline.
1.3 Circulate draft to relevant groups including:
o consumer groups
o health sector professionals
o agriculture sector professionals
o industry
o nutritionists.
1.4 Review guidelines, taking into account feedback from all interested parties. This review process can include seminars, meetings, etc.
2. Formative evaluation of the guideline
Formative evaluation for wording of dietary guideline statements, etc. to ensure that the wording, content, etc. are appropriate for the general public. Ideally this requires the services of a nutrition educator and/or communication expert (see Section 4.4 Implementation).
3. Publishing and implementation of the guideline (see section 4.4 Implementation).
4.4 Implementation
4.4.1 Introduction
Dietary guidelines have become an almost universal tool in food and nutrition policy development and nutrition education. Merely having a set of dietary guidelines, however, will not guarantee an effective nutrition policy or that the population will follow their advice. Attention should be given to communicating dietary guideline information effectively to the public. In fact, a suggestion might be to produce two dietary guideline documents, one of a more quantitative nature for policy-makers and health professionals and another more qualitative in nature for the general public. It is difficult for one dietary guideline document to serve two independent purposes well, i.e. public policy and nutrition education.
The purpose of this section is to describe the important factors to consider in the process of implementing a dietary guideline for the general public. Some of the major issues in this process are summarized in the accompanying box.
4.4.2 Issues to be considered in implementing dietary guidelines
As emphasized throughout/his report, the FBDG should be scientifically sound. However, there are a number of other factors that should be considered as well. To make the dietary guidelines meaningful to the general public, they should be short, simple, clear, memorable, culturally appropriate and communicated well in a variety of media. Ideally, they should be multimedia and multisectoral, address all relevant community groups and ages, and complement existing community programmes. Important content issues are listed below.
o Practicality
The dietary guidelines should be practical for the general public to implement or else they will not be used. That is, the recommended foods or food groups should be affordable, widely available, and accessible to most people in the country taking into account geographical variation. In addition, the guidelines should be flexible, that is suitable for people of different ages (youth to old age), energy requirements (sedentary to active), and in some cases physiological states (e.g. pregnancy and lactation).
POINTS TO BE CONSIDERED IN IMPLEMENTING FBDG
1. How to classify and express mixed dishes.
2. How to list and show branded and packaged food products.
3. Which foods to give as examples in pictures.
4. Should the advice be expressed as change from the present consumption or in some absolute way?
5. Should amount be expressed in servings? grams? cups? or "eat most, eat moderately, eat least"?
6. Be sure to have backup definitions for professionals of the words used to express amounts and ratios of food groups.
7. How should food groups be named, e.g. "cereals", "fibre foods", "starchy foods"? It is recommended that generic food names be used and not components/nutrients found in the group.
8. Make sure the artistic expression for any visual material is culturally acceptable.
9. Make sure materials are appropriate for different educational levels (e.g. primary school, educated adults).
10. Decide where to put all foods that are available in the country. Avoid confusion about which group a particular food belongs to.
11. Encourage broad funding support for implementing the official guidelines.
o Comprehensibility
Dietary guidelines will fail if they are not understood by the general public. Reading level of the document and advice should be kept to a 5th or 6th grade level (or 4-5 years of primary education) whenever possible, in industrialized countries. In many other countries, much lower levels of literacy should be assumed or even non-literacy. In addition, the terminology should represent both everyday usage and scientific meaning, which can be problematic. For example, the public may misinterpret words such as "fat" (thinking it is only visible fats in foods or not including oil), or "too much", or "moderation", or "avoid too much" and "eat less of" (22). If the public does not understand the dietary guidelines, they will either dismiss them or misapply the advice due to misconceptions (see table).
Percentage of women and men who held misconception themes in common at interview I
Misconception theme
Women
Men
Fat-related misconceptions:
Change amount by switching to oil or margarine
Fat clogs arteries
Saturated fat has more fat and/or calories than unsaturated
Fat is not a nutrient
Saturated fat has more cholesterol than unsaturated
Saturated fat is less efficiently used than unsaturated
Cholesterol-related misconceptions:
Cholesterol is found in fatty foods
Cholesterol is needed in diet
Cholesterol is found in plant foods
Cholesterol is fat or a component of fat
Decrease dietary fat to decrease dietary cholesterol
Fish and chicken are low in cholesterol
Adapted from: Misconceptions about Fats and Cholesterol: Implications for Dietary Guidelines by GW Auld, CL Achterberg, VM Getty and JG Durrwachter. Ecology of Food and Nutrition 33, pp. 15-25, 1994.
If food groups are incorporated into the dietary guidelines, the groupings should make sense to the general public. Many food groups in the past have been organized according to nutritionists' schemes, e.g. energy foods, bodybuilding foods and protective foods (2 3), but the public may not think that some of the foods grouped together "belong" together, such as seaweed and mango or rice and sugar. Therefore, food groupings in dietary guidelines or accompanying educational materials should complement the food classification systems used by the target population.
Similarly, visuals that illustrate the dietary guidelines should be readily understood. Concrete illustrations are preferable to abstract visuals (24). For example, the interlocking hexagons used in the US in several versions of their dietary guideline brochures were not understood or remembered by consumers (25-28). Recently the Food Guide Pyramid (29) has become a popular teaching tool and is better understood by the public.
In summary, comprehension of the guidelines by the public is critical to dietary guideline success. Field-testing of this factor should be a requirement before dietary guideline release.
o Cultural acceptability
Dietary guidelines will fail if the public finds them culturally unacceptable. The most important factors influencing acceptability are the current food habits and specific food recommendations or examples incorporated into a set of guidelines (30). For example, guidelines or food group illustrations that promote meat among vegetarian populations will be rejected. Food recommendations that violate religious prohibitions or propose radical changes in current practices will be rejected. Recommendations for small changes and familiar foods will be better accepted. Portion sizes, number of recommended servings, and traditional food preparation techniques should also be considered. In terms of presentation, dialect or language, illustrations (e.g. race or ethnicity of illustrated models) and colour choice (e.g. colours that represent certain political parties or other associations) can also affect the acceptability of a set of recommendations.
The communication channel may also be more culturally acceptable, or less so. Therefore, the choice of who conveys the message (are they credible?) and how they deliver the message (is it readily accessible and accepted?) should also be considered in a cultural context. Variations in educational level and rural versus urban needs may need to be addressed as well. Again, evaluation and revision of dietary guidelines among the intended users are essential to meet cultural acceptability.
o Who should be involved in the implementation process?
The food-based dietary guideline working group should recognize the multifactoral nature of the implementation process and should adopt a cooperative partnership with several experts involved in the promotion of better nutrition and health. Communications experts can be called upon to produce the message in an appropriate and appealing form and to devise effective means of conveying it to the general population. Nutritionists should verify the content of the messages to ensure their correctness and validity.
Priority in disseminating the information should be directed to ongoing food distribution, food service and nutritional programmes. Such programmes may be sponsored or supervised by nongovernmental organizations, by the public sector or by private enterprises. Nevertheless, such programmes should be encouraged to incorporate the proposed guidelines and to spearhead their immediate and practical application.
The working group should also seek the participation of educators, health professionals, social workers, extension agents, nurses and others in disseminating the information to the masses of the people. Nutrition or health oriented associations may also be requested to participate.
Key persons and trainers concerned with the dissemination process should be encouraged to acquire the background information necessary for interpreting the messages. Workshops and seminars can be designed to sensitize and educate those key persons to fully comprehend the broad concepts and specific messages presented by the guidelines.
o Process of translating dietary guidelines into messages/slogans
This section describes how to translate the draft of dietary guidelines into a list that is functional for the public. Brochures, posters and 10-, 30-, and 60-second "sound-bites" for radio and television can also be produced. It should be understood that this process involves many revisions of the dietary guideline statements.
o Are multiple versions needed?
In general, countries are encouraged to limit the number of dietary guideline sets to one or as few as possible. Multiple sets may increase public confusion and communication efforts will be more complicated and costly. However, in some countries, there may be distinct populations with such different food beliefs, food patterns and health outcomes that multiple sets are needed. Other countries might consider separate guides for infants and young children or for pregnant and lactating women. If a country does not have any guidelines, it is suggested that only one set be developed at first. Any additional sets that are needed can be added a later time.
o Testing dietary guidelines
Taking careful account of the scientific content, practicality, simplicity and cultural acceptability, food-based dietary guidelines can then be drafted. It has been suggested that the working memory deals successfully with no more than 7(2) concepts (31). Therefore, a maximum of seven messages should be given in a single dietary guideline for practical learning and implementation purposes.
Then pilot test this draft. First, validity or credibility should be checked with nutritionists as well as representative users, for example, school teachers, community leaders and the general public. They can be merely asked to read the set and use a checklist to rate credibility, meaning, affordability, acceptability, etc. The guideline set can be revised accordingly. The mock-ups of the set can be made for proposed distribution to the public (for example in the form of a brochure or poster). Artists and communication experts need to work in concert with nutrition experts to ensure this version is accurate es well as appealing. In other words, the goal for this set is to draw the public's attention to the guidelines and effectively communicate their content.
These can then be tested with members of the general public, using focus groups to determine the appropriateness and cultural acceptability of the content and the visual presentation. Focus groups should be conducted with 815 people per group and enough groups conducted to yield a fair representation of the variability of the population by region, religion and/ or education. This procedure does not require scientific sampling. Rather, three focus groups per region may be sufficient. See Andrien for further "how-to" information (32,33).
Finally, content validity should be rechecked by context experts to ensure that the final statements are still consistent with the science behind their development.
These materials, products and messages may then be promoted and broadcast throughout the country in a variety of settings including the educational system, private organizations, health care systems, etc. These products can also be given to school educators to develop programmatic materials and curricula based on the dietary guidelines.
o Translation of guidelines into educational materials
Educational materials and programmes can be developed to support the dietary guidelines and documents published in each country. The purpose of these materials is to further explain and elaborate the content, application and implications of the guidelines in people's everyday lives. For example, instructional materials can address, in detail, issues such as serving size, traditional foods, and packaged and branded versus home-produced foods. Food fortification, designer and functional foods; hard-to-place foods including mixed dishes; imported foods; and different cuisines, languages and dialects, as well as how to adapt the advice to different ages, physiological needs and special audiences, can be addressed as well (see Annex 5). For example, a single set of dietary guidelines could be translated into a variety of languages, and food lists and illustrations made to match each cuisine to each language. Relevant discussion about food preparation techniques could also
included.
In translating FBDG messages into educational materials, all concerned stakeholders should be involved. Industry representatives, religious and community leaders, dietitians, health care workers, consumer representatives, teachers, extension workers and other educators should be encouraged to develop and/or implement educational materials and programmes. Partnerships among these groups should be promoted to maximize the reach of the programmes and quality of the materials.
o Media strategies
A multi-media approach to education is encouraged. When the same message is communicated and reinforced by a variety of media, and by spokespersons in a variety of settings, the impact is likely to be greater. Therefore, the educational packages should ideally include poster and print materials, other visuals and hands-on activities that individuals can either perform alone (e.g. a shelf inventory of home food supplies) or in a group setting. In either case, people will learn best if they have the opportunity to practice the application, preferably with supervision and feedback on their performance. Lesson plans should be included for group settings. If a regional or national mass media campaign is being conducted, the educational materials and media should of course be coordinated with it. For example, a dietary guideline curriculum and learning activities should already be in place and taught in local schools when a national radio campaign begins.
o Time
The more time given to nutrition education, the more people will learn. Dramatic increases in learning and application can be noted when cumulative instruction increases from 15 minutes to 2 hours to 15 hours per year. However, learning will be maximized in any one session in 20 minutes, especially with youngsters. Educational sessions should not last beyond 60 minutes for any audience, because attention will be lost and learning efficiency and effectiveness will decline. It is worth noting too that many secondary teachers are reluctant to add nutrition to the curriculum because of time constraints, which may be overcome with better curricula (see below).
o Curriculum development
A curriculum is a planned, sequential set of lessons, where each lesson ideally builds on the knowledge given in the previous lesson. Nutrition education in the past has often erred because it is repetitive. For example, in the USA children are often taught the basic food groups in the first, third, fifth, eighth and twelfth years of school (aged about 6, 8, 10, 13 and 17 years). By their exposure, they are bored by the instruction and pay no attention. Rather, the approach should be to order all the relevant concepts from simple to complex and teach them sequentially, matching the level taught to the students' understanding (whatever their age). For example, third-year students may be able to learn only a set of food group names and some of the foods in each. Fifth-year students may learn the number of recommended servings and serving size. Older students may be able to learn something about the nutrients in each food group and thereby learn the rationale for the groups,
but only if they have already mastered the simpler information.
o Training
Most educational programmes require teacher training or "train-the-trainer" preparatory programmes to ensure proper implementation and instruction. These should be planned for in the material development phase as well.
4.5 Monitoring and evaluation
The effectiveness of mass media and message campaigns as well as educational programmes needs to be evaluated to determine reach, frequency and impact. Two major types of evaluation are discussed.
4.5.1 Process evaluation
The purpose of process evaluation is to assess how a message or programme was disseminated or implemented in the field. This information puts the results of outcome evaluation into context and informs project managers and policy-makers why a programme does or does not work. These results can then be used to modify or adjust the campaign to improve outcomes. It poses questions such as how many messages were broadcast, how often, at what time, to whom and by whom. It may also assess message acceptability and credibility to the target audience. For educational programmes, process evaluations typically ask how many lessons were taught, in what order, to whom, who taught the lessons and how much time was spent on each. The most important question in any process evaluation is "whether the communication campaign or educational programme was implemented as it was designed and intended".
Process evaluations are generally conducted by survey (personal interview, telephone or mail survey) at one or more points during the implementation phase. Focus groups can also be used. Sample sizes are relatively small but it is important to try to sample a full range of responses, e.g. in each participating region. If conducted early in the campaign or programme the results can be used to make adjustments. If conducted late in a campaign or programme, the results can be used in designing the next effort.
4.5.2 Outcome evaluation
The purpose of an outcome evaluation is to assess the results or impact of the campaign or programme at its completion. In terms of communications campaigns it is usual to measure awareness, knowledge change, attitude change and, if appropriate, behaviour or practice. Sample sizes should be enough to detect statistical changes. Behaviour should not be the only outcome measure, especially if the change in behaviour sought is large relative to the effort made in the campaign. For example, it may be unrealistic to expect women to change breast-feeding practices on the basis of one radio message per day, but realistic for one message per day to increase awareness and discussion of the issue within a community.
Evaluation methodologies rely primarily on surveys. Open-ended questions have the advantage of capturing answers in the respondent's own vocabulary, but the data may be more difficult to analyse. Close-ended questions (e.g. multiple-choice, yes/no, questions) are easier to analyse, but their validity may be questioned. It is beyond the scope of this report to describe how to construct such surveys, but some expertise is required to produce quality results. Therefore, training or consultation in this area is highly recommended if the expertise is not already available.
Other methodologies should not be overlooked. Focus groups as described earlier may also be used. In addition, changes in household food production, commercial production, consumption trends, and dietary intake can also be monitored and evaluated to determine programme impact (see Chapter 4 for more elaborate description of these methodologies).
Health outcomes including biochemical indicators may be appropriate to assess some dietary guideline programmes in some circumstances (see section 1.4 in this chapter).
Overall, the final results should be interpreted in context. That is, the dietary guidelines are but a piece of the puzzle in achieving more positive diet, health and production practices.
4.6 Sample interview protocol
Part 1: General nutrition/health: overall reaction to guidelines
1.1 Do you consider yourself healthy now!
o What does it mean to you to be healthy?
o What do you do to keep yourself healthy?
o Does what you eat have anything to do with being healthy? In what ways?
o Probe for: excess/deficiency; preventive/therapeutic; short/long-term effects.
Part II: Responses to individual guidelines
2.1 How do you define variety?
2.2 How do you know if there is variety in your diet?
2.3 Are there any negative consequences if you don't?
o If yes, what are they?
Now I want to ask for your reaction to four different terms related to weight.
3.1 First, what is meant by desirable weight?
o How is that different from ideal weight?
o What about reasonable weight?
o And finally, what about healthy weight?
o Which term do you find most meaningful? Why!
3.2 If people do not maintain their desirable/ideal/reasonable/healthy weight, what might happen in terms of their health!
NOTE: For 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4, use the term the respondent identified above as the most meaningful.
3.3 How do you know what you should weigh?
4.1 What does the statement "Avoid too much fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol" mean to you?
4.2 Are there any differences in your mind between fat, saturated fat and cholesterol?
o If yes, what are the differences?
o In what ways are they the same?
4.3 How much fat (dietary) is too much?
o What about saturated fat?
o What about cholesterol?
If respondent has no answer, ask for an opinion, or what he/she thinks.
[NOTE: From questions 4.3 on, separate these questions if the respondent made a distinction between the three. If not, leave them "lumped" together.]
4.4 How would you know if you were consuming too much fat/saturated fat/ cholesterol?
4.5 How would you decrease the amount of fat/saturated fat/cholesterol in your diet?
4.6 What could happen to a person's health if too much fat/saturated fat/ cholesterol were not avoided?
Now we will talk about the guidance concerning starch and fibre.
Let's begin with fibre.
5.1 What do you consider fibre to be?
o What are some foods that contain fibre?
5.2 What do you consider an adequate amount of fibre?
o How would you know if you were getting an adequate amount?
5.3 Are there any health benefits to eating an adequate amount of fibre? If yes, what are they?
o Are there negative consequencies if a person does not consume an adequate amount of fibre? If yes, what are they?
5.4 What do you consider starch to be?
o What are some foods that contain starch?
5.5 What do you consider an adequate amount of starch?
o How would you know if you were getting an adequate amount?
5.6 Are there any hearth benefits to eating an adequate amount of starch? If yes, what are they?
o Are there negative consequences if a person does not consume an adequate amount of starch? If yes, what are they?
5.7 Why do you think these two items were paired together in one recommendation?
6.1 When I say the word "sugar", what comes to mind!
o If you were reading a food label, how would you identify sugar?
6.2 How do you know if you are eating too much?
o How much is too much?
Adapted from: Evaluation of 'Nutrition and Your Health: Dietary Guidelines for Americans" Part II: A Men's Sample, FNS Contract No. 53-3198-8-024 by CL Achterberg, MA Pugh Ozgun, J McCoy, VM Getty, April, 1991.
4.7 Recommendations
1. Review the document Development and Implementation of FBDG on a periodic basis in the light of the experience of agencies who use the document to guide their activities.
2. FAO and WHO should, to the extent possible, assist governments in developing, implementing and monitoring FBDG.
3. FAO and WHO should continue to encourage relevant research and disseminate information on the development and implementation of FBDG to promote cost-effective approaches for improving nutrition and health status.
4. The 1974 FAO/WHO recommended intakes need to be revised and updated. A number of other FAO, WHO or FAO/WHO documents, which provide nutrition recommendations, should also be updated to reflect current scientific evidence. A list of these documents is provided in Chapter 2.
5. FAO is encouraged to assist in further developing, updating and disseminating food composition data for countries and regions.
References
1. Implementation of the Global Strategy for Hearth for All by the Year 2000, Second Evaluation. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1993.
2. Physical status: the use and interpretation of anthropometry. Report of a WHO Expert Committee. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1995. (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 854).
3. Maternal Anthropometry and Pregnancy outcomes - A WHO Collaborative Study. WHO Bulletin 1995; Supplement vol 73:1-175.
4. WHO Global Data Base on Child Growth. Nutrition Unit. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1996 (to be disseminated as a WHO offset document in 1996).
5. de Onis M, Monteiro C, Akr J, Clugston GA. The worldwide magnitude of protein-energy malnutrition: an overview from the WHO Global Database on Child Growth. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 1993, 71:703-71 2.
6. A Manual for the Treatment and Management of Severe Protein-Energy Malnutrition. 2nd ed. Geneva, World Health Organization (in press).
7. The Reduction of Protein-Energy Malnutrition (PEM): UNICEF-WHO Joint Committee on Health Policy, Geneva, World Health Organization, 1994. Document JCHPSS/94/2.10.
8. The Management of Nutritional in Major Emergencies. Geneva, World Health Organization (in press).
9. Physical status: the use and interpretation of anthropometry in adolescence. Hormone Research, 1993,39 (suppl 3):7-70.
10. Gorstein J, Sullivan K, Yip R. de Onis M, Trowbridge F, Fajans P, Clugston GA. Issues in the assessment of nutritional status using anthropometry. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 1994, 72: 273283.
11. WHO Working Group on Infant Growth. An evaluation of infant growth. Document WHO/NUT/94.8 Geneva: World Health Organization, 1994.
12. Field guide on rapid nutritional assessment in emergencies. WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean, Alexandria, 1995.
13. The WHO global data bank on breast-feeding. WHO Geneva, 1995.
14. Indicators for assessing Iodine Deficiency Disorders and their control through salt iodization. Document WHO/NUT/94.6. Geneva, World Health Organization 1994.
15. Indicators and Strategies for Iron Deficiency Programmes (available in 1996) WHO, Nutrition Unit.
16. Indicators for assessing vitamin A deficiency and their application in monitoring and evaluating intervention programmes (available in 1996) WHO, Nutrition Unit.
17. MONICA Manual, WHO Monica Project, WHO Geneva 1990.
18. Prevention of Diabetes Mellitus, Report of a WHO Study Group. Geneva, World Health Organization 1994 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 844).
19. National Cancer Control Programmes - Policies and Managerial Guidelines. WHO/CAN/92.1, WHO Geneva 1993.
20. INTERHEALTH. Report of the WHO Global Scientific Advisory Group Meeting for the Integrated Programme for Community Health in Noncommunicable Diseases, WHO, Geneva, 1988.
21. Co-operative Research Group. INTERSALT: an international study of effective electrolyte excretion and blood pressure. British medical journal, 1988, 297: 319-328.
22. Auld GW, Achterberg CL, Getty VM, Durrwachter JG. Misconceptions about Fats and Cholesterol: Implications for Dietary Guidelines. Ecology of Food and Nutrition, 1994, 33: 15-25.
23. Truswell AS. Dietary recommendations, goals, and guidelines. Supplement to South African medical journal, 1994, 84(suppl): 54-57.
24. von Eye A, Wills SD. Butler J. The standardization of concrete and abstract texts for testing the prose memory of persons from 20 to 60 years. Technical Report Series No.1, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 1987.
25. US Department of Agriculture, and US Department of Health and Human Services. Nutrition and your health: Dietary guidelines for Americans. 1st ed. Home and Garden Bulletin no. 232. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1980, 20 pp.
26. US Department of Agriculture, and US Department of Health and Human Services. Nutrition and your health: Dietary guidelines for Americans. 2nd ed. Home and Garden Bulletin no. 232. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1985, 20 pp.
27. US Department of Agriculture, and US Department of Health and Human Services. Nutrition and your health: Dietary guidelines for Americana. 4th ed. Home and Garden Bulletin no. 232. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1995.
28. Achterberg, C.L. Qualitative research: What do we know about teaching good nutrition. Journal of nutrition, 1994, 124: 1808S-1812S.
29. US Department of Agriculture. Human Nutrition Information Service. The Food Guide Pyramid. Home and Garden Bulletin no. 252. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1992, 29 pp.
30. Stowers SL. Development of a culturally appropriate food guide for pregnant Caribbean immigrants in the United States. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 1992, 92: 331 -336.
31. Achterberg, C.L. Factors that affect learner readiness. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 1988, 88: 1426-1428.
32. Andrien M. Les interventions dans la communication sociale en nutrition. Food, Nutrition and Agriculture, 1994,10: 9-1 7.
33. Andrien M. Social Communication in nutrition: A methodology for intervention: FAO Development Communication Unit, Information Division Nutrition Programmes Unit, Division of Food Policy and Nutrition, Rome: Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, 1994.
<section>7</section>
Annex one - List of participants
Annex one - List of participants
Dr Cheryl Achterberg
Director, Nutrition Center, 417 East Calder Way, Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16801-5663, USA
Dr Abdulaziz Al-Othaimeen
Head of Food and Nutrition, King Faisal Specialist Hospital, P.O. Box 3354 Riyadh
1211, MBC 39, KINGDOM OF SAUDI ARABIA
Dr Androula Agrotou
Principal Medical Officer, Ministry of Health, Nicosia, CYPRUS
Dr Antti Aro
National Public Health Institute, Department of Nutrition, Mannerheimintie 166,
FIN-00300 Helsinki, FINLAND
Dr Jeffrey Blumberg
USDA HNRC on Aging, Tufts University, Boston, MA, USA
Dr Marilyn Buzzard
Director, Nutrition Coordinating Center, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, 1300 South Second Street, Suite 300, Minneapolis, MN 554541015, USA
Professor Chen Chunming
Senior Advisor, Chinese Academy of Preventive, Medicine, 27 Nan Wei Road,
Beijing 100050, CHINA
Dr Shawky Dagher
Chairman, Department of Biology, American University of Beirut, Beirut, LEBANON
Dr Michael Gibney
Department of Clinical Medicine, Trinity College Medical School, St James Hospital,
Dublin 8, IRELAND
Dr Seyed Masoud Kimiagar
Director, National Nutrition and Food Technology Research Institute, Teheran,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN
Dr Benny Kodyat
Director, Directorate of Community Nutrition, Ministry of Health, L.H.R. Rasuna Said
Block X-5, Jakarta 12950, INDONESIA
Mrs Danielle Larue
Nutritionist, Ministry of Health, P.O. Box 52, Botanical Gardens, SEYCHELLES
Dr Eduardo R. Mendez
Advisor, for Ministry of Health & Ministry of Commerce, P.O. Box 60.486, Mexico
DF. 03810, MEXICO
Dr Colin F. Mills
Director, Postgraduate Studies, Rowett Research Institute, Bucksburn, Aberdeen,
Scotland, UK
Dr Wafaa Moussa
Director, Nutrition Institute, 16 Kasr Al Aini Street, Cairo, EGYPT
Dr Ruth Oniang'o
Director, Board of Postgraduate Studies, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture, and Technology, P.O. Box 62000, Nairobi, KENYA
Dr Irwin H. Rosenberg
Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging, Tufts University,
711 Washington Street, Boston, MA 0211-1525, USA
Dr Barbara O. Schneeman
Dean, College of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences, University of California-Davis, Davis, CA 95616-8571, USA
Dr. A. Stewart Truswell
Human Nutrition Unit, Biochemistry Department, University of Sydney, NSW
2006, AUSTRALIA
Dr Kraisid Tontisirin
Director, Institute of Nutrition, Mahidol University, Salaya Phutthamonthon,
Nakhon Pathom 73170, THAILAND
Dr Ricardo Uauy
Institute of Nutrition and Food Technology (INTA), University of Chile, Casilla
138-1 1 , Santiago, CHILE
Dr Mark L.Wahlqvist
Department of Medicine, Monash University, Monash Medical Centre,
Melbourne, Victoria 3168, AUSTRALIA
Observers
Despina Avraam
Res. Clinical Dietitian, 5 Hipparchos Street, Strovolos, Nicosia, CYPRUS
Akkelidou Dina
Director of State General Laboratory, Kimonos 44, Acropolis, Nicosia, CYPRUS
Mrs Eliza Markidou
Clinical Dietitian, Nicosia General Hospital, Nicosia, CYPRUS
Dr Stelios Yiannopoulos
Head of Nutrition Laboratory, State General Laboratory, Kimonos 44, Acropolis, Nicosia, CYPRUS
FAO/WHO Secretariat
Dr K.V. Bailey, Nutrition, WHO/HQ
Dr R. Buzina, STC/Nutrition, WHO/HQ
Dr G.A. Clugston, Chief, Nutrition, WHO/HQ
Mr W.D. Clay, Food and Nutrition Division, FAO/HQ
Dr I. Darnton-Hill, Regional Adviser, Nutrition, WHO/WPRO
Miss Suzan El Raey, Secretary, Nutrition, Food Security & Safety Unit, WHO/EMRO
Mr J.R. Lupien, Director, Food and Nutrition Division, FAO/HQ
Mrs C. Nishida, Nutrition, WHO/HQ
Dr A. Verster, Regional Adviser, Nutrition, Food Security & Safety, WHO/EMRO
<section>8</section>
Annex two - Agenda
Annex two - Agenda
1. Opening Session
2. Election of Officers
3. Adoption of Agenda
4. Objectives and Mechanics of the Consultation
5. Review of scientific evidence and epidemiology on diet-related health problems including NCDs and other forms of malnutrition.
The scientific evidence and epidemiology of diet-related noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) and malnutrition, particularly where they occur together, will be reviewed with respect to:
* role of energy, macronutrient and micronutrient intakes, particularly where evidence is available on the individual intakes rather than on a population basis;
* role of non-nutritional life-style factors: alcohol, exercise, stress, smoking.
6. Recommended nutrient intakes
Existing literature will be drawn upon to summarize current recommendations on nutrient intakes for preventing protein-energy malnutrition deficiency diseases and minimizing incidence of ischaemic heart disease, essential hypertension, obesity, diabetes mellitus and certain forms of cancer.
A synthesis of current nutrient recommendations will be made (in terms of a desirable range of individual nutrient intakes for prevention of these disorders). This synthesis should be expressed in such a way that the recommendations will be applicable in countries which have problems of undernutrition as well as overnutrition, especially among young children.
7. Review of use of existing dietary guidelines for promoting better dietary patterns and development of food-based dietary guidelines
Many countries have already some dietary guidelines - qualitative or quantitative, or both, for prevention of diet-related diseases. How these are used will be reviewed and common elements identified which are appropriate for incorporation in the guidelines.
The review will include the processes by which those national guidelines are developed and promoted, through schools (primary and secondary), mass media and other approaches.
An effort will be made to identify those approaches considered to be more effective, in terms of their impact on dietary habits and where possible on health, e.g. mortality or prevalence data.
8. Review of main dietary assessment methodologies
A brief overview will be presented of relevant methodologies
* limited usefulness of national food availability data;
* feasibility, advantages and disadvantages of household and individual food consumption data;
* main available methodologies: recall, direct weighing.
9. Recommendations concerning the use of dietary guidelines for individuals and population groups
The group will draw up suggestions for consideration by governments or nongovernmental organizations, on how best to use the guidelines emerging from this consultation, in reviewing existing national dietary guidelines or in the drawing up of national food-based dietary guidelines by national working groups.
10. Closing Session
<section>9</section>
Annex three - The scientific basis for diet, nutrition and health relationships
1. Introduction
2. Rationale
3. Use of nutrient densities rather than absolute RNI in the development and evaluation of dietary guidelines
4. Scientific areas relevant to the development of food-based dietary guidelines
4.1 Nutritional science
4.1.1 Energy intake, macronutrients and food-based dietary guidelines
4.1.2 Water
4.1.3 Micronutrients
4.1.4 Non-nutrient food components of biological significance
4.1.5 Dietary goals for vulnerable groups.
4.1.6 Nutritional quality of dietary patterns
4.1.7 Nutrient requirements and recommended nutrient intakes
4.2 Food science and technology
4.3 Behavioural and social sciences and education
4.4 Agricultural and environmental science
5. Conclusion and suggested research priorities
References
Annex three - The scientific basis for diet, nutrition and health relationships
1. Introduction
Dietary patterns have varied over time depending on agricultural practices and climatic, ecological, cultural and socioeconomic factors which determine the foods that are available. At present most naturally occurring dietary patterns satisfy or even exceed the nutritional needs of most individuals, except where agricultural and socioeconomic conditions limit food availability and food purchasing capacity or cultural practices restrict the choice of foods.
The quantitative definition of nutrient needs and efforts to express them as RNI have been the focus of attention by international bodies and nutrition scientists in many countries. However, this nutrient-based approach is commonly misapplied and has led to considerable confusion among policy-makers in both the food and health sectors as well as among nutrition educators and consumers.
FBDG can serve as an instrument of nutrition policies and programmes, and should be based directly upon diet and health relationships of particular relevance to the individual country. In this way, priorities in establishing dietary guidelines can address the relevant public health concerns whether they are related to dietary insufficiency or excess.
In this context, the first step in the process of setting dietary guidelines is to define the significant diet-related public health problems in a given community. Once these are defined, the diet component is evaluated, including the assessment of the adequacy of the food supply and consumption pattern. A comprehensive strategy to attack the problem should be defined including the development of dietary guidelines. In this setting, RNI can assist in assessing whether the proposed diet is likely to meet nutritional needs and provide a basis for consumer information about the nutritional quality of foods.
Dietary goals should be specific for a given ecological setting. Their purpose is to promote overall health, control specific nutritional diseases whether they are induced by deficiency or by excess of nutrient intake, and reduce the risk of multifactoral diet-related diseases. Dietary guidelines represent the practical way to reach the nutritional goals for a given population. They take into account the customary dietary pattern and indicate what aspects should be modified. They consider the ecological setting, the socioeconomic and cultural factors, and the biological and physical environment in which the population lives.
2. Rationale
No single food--except breast milk in the first 4 to 6 months of life--provides all the required nutrients. A range of nutrients are needed, in amounts that change throughout life, for optimal growth, health and avoidance of disease. There are a great variety of diets and foods consumed in various combinations. Over the ages many national and local dietary patterns have shown themselves capable of providing adequate nutrients and supporting good health.
There is good scientific evidence that dietary patterns, i.e. the daily combination of foods and beverages generally consumed, have specific health or disease outcomes. For example, a diet may be apparently adequate in all ways but still be deficient in, say, vitamin A or iron and this will lead to a specific disease outcome. Conversely, a diet high in saturated fats and energy is known, on a population basis, to lead to an increased likelihood of certain NCD.
Consequently, FBDG need to take into account food/health patterns; the relative comprehensiveness of the food- versus the nutrient based approach; the practicality of suggested goals; the limits of nutrition labelling, which may direct the consumer to an over-simplified view of foods; and shifting paradigms of the nutritional basis of disease and health (the biological effects of food and food patterns can be greater than the sum of their nutrient and non-nutrient parts). Such guidelines should also be based on some of the following generally established principles. Food availability is a first requisite for the application of dietary guidelines which direct food choice. Sufficient food diversity is required for acceptable macronutrient intakes, quite apart from optional or preferred intakes. Measures of food diversity are required in the next generation of dietary guidelines. The cultural context in which foods are produced, prepared and eaten should be taken into account
for the satisfactory structuring of dietary guidelines in relation to macronutrients and other nutrients.
Although the main document generally takes a non-traditional approach by looking at foods, the review of current scientific evidence in this annex will be addressed by nutrient: macronutrients, including water and alcohol; micronutrients, including vitamins and minerals; and non-nutrient food components, including the nutritional implications of novel or "functional" foods.
3. Use of nutrient densities rather than absolute RNI in the development and evaluation of dietary guidelines
The traditional approach to providing dietary guidance and evaluating the nutritional adequacy of diets has focused on RNI or RDA for specific nutrients. This approach is commonly misapplied and has proved inadequate for developing effective nutrition education programmes. An alternative approach to traditional RNI, and one which can better address issues of "optimal" nutrient intakes, is the use of the nutrient density concept applied to the total diet.
The concept of nutrient density was originally developed to compare the contribution of a food or diet to the intake of essential micronutrients and protein, in relation to the energy which it provides. Thus, a high nutrient density would illustrate those foods that are good sources of micronutrients or protein, because the food would make a greater contribution to the intake of an essential nutrient than to meeting total energy needs. The concept is especially useful when energy intake is low and it is essential that nutrient-dense foods be included in the diet. A low nutrient density could lead to a situation in which excess calories should be consumed to meet the needs for essential nutrients. In the original development, the concept was applied to individual foods or meals on the understanding that no single food or meal will meet all the requirements for essential nutrients.
In developing the concept of nutrient density for use in FBDG, the original nutrient density approach has been modified to include other factors. The concept is being used to express required nutrient intakes (e.g. protein), desirable nutrient intakes (e.g. folic acid) and population goals (fat, sodium) relative to energy intake. Obviously, FBDG need to integrate these various ways to express the nutritional quality of the diet, but it is useful to spell out the distinction. The required nutrients intake is based on the value set in an RDI or RDA which includes the minimum required level, plus a safety margin. The desirable range of intake refers to an amount ranging from the RDI to a higher level that may be protective (e.g. vitamin C to promote iron absorption or folic acid to lower the risk of neural tube defects). Population goals refer to the range of desirable average intakes within a population that may lower the risk of NCD.
The reference of "high" or "low" nutrient density should be considered in the context of the nutrient and the intention of the FBDG. For example, a high nutrient density for vitamin A activity or iron may be important for preventing deficiencies of these nutrients, whereas a relatively low density of fat or sodium and a high density of fibre may be desirable to lower the risk of NCD.
Because of this more comprehensive approach, the concept is most appropriately used by health professionals or policy-makers in developing dietary goals or targets which are the background for devising FBDG. Additionally, care should be taken to apply these standards to the total diet rather than to individual foods or meals.
The RNI values used to derive these nutrient densities have been obtained from the latest international RDA (1-9). The conditions for this model are that a diet which provides for the energy needs of family members will also satisfy the RNI for all essential nutrients.
Nutrients with relevant public health implications have been included in Table 3 and in the accompanying text, expressing their need not as an absolute requirement but as nutrient density per 1000 kcal. This should not be interpreted as a physiological relationship between the specific nutrients and energy requirements but as a way of defining the adequacy of a given diet to meet the needs for specific nutrients if sufficient energy is consumed. This approach permits the simplification of age and sex RNI figures since, if the figures are expressed per 1000 kcal, the values do not differ substantially among the various groups except for calcium and possibly certain trace elements. In addition, for the purpose of establishing dietary guidelines for the general population, precise age- and sex-specific RNI are not needed. The figures presented should be interpreted as a way to assess dietary quality.
The household is the basic unit for food consumption under most settings. Thus if the amount of food is adequate, individual members of the household can consume a diet with the recommended nutrient densities and meet their nutrient needs. The problem of intra-family distribution needs to be considered since children and women may not receive a proportional part of foods with higher nutrient density. This should be taken into account in establishing both general dietary guidelines and those specifically addressing the needs of vulnerable groups in the community.
If intake for adolescents or adults is <2000 kcal per day, the diet will not secure vitamin and mineral needs, so sedentary lifestyles should be discouraged. Children below 2 years of age need a different diet and require specific dietary guidelines.
In using nutrient densities to establish dietary goals and guidelines, the quantitative and qualitative aspects of the food supply should be considered. The quantitative aspects include an estimation of the amount of nutrients and the relative proportion of a nutrient in the food sources that will permit satisfaction of nutritional needs in practice. The qualitative aspects relate to the biological quality of the nutrients in the food source, and to the potential for interaction of nutrients which may enhance or inhibit biological quality of a given source if both are ingested simultaneously.
Dietary goals for some nutrients where there may be risks associated with high as well as low intakes are specifically identified by indicating maximum intake. If the upper range of safe intake is so high that in practice most diets fall well below this limit, no mention of the upper range is made. Where the data in the various available reports provide justifiable differences in figures, densities are also expressed as ranges; in this case the selection of value should be based on the user's assessment of the background information.
The recommended nutrient densities in Table 3 refer to the total diet available and not to individual foods.
4. Scientific areas relevant to the development of food-based dietary guidelines
Four broad areas of science have been utilized in taking this initial look at FBDG: (a) nutritional science (i.e. food components as nutrients and non-nutrients); (b) food science and technology; (c) educational, social and behavioural sciences; and (d) agricultural and environmental sciences. This Annex then looks at the areas, as related to foods and health, that are not clear, and areas where there may be some scientific uncertainties and limitations. Appropriate references will be cited from recent reviews, and from FAO and WHO documents.
4.1 Nutritional science
4.1.1 Energy intake, macronutrients and food-based dietary guidelines
The study of energy balance and metabolism, and of macro- and micronutrient physiology, is well-established. Nutritional science has now also evolved to take account of non-nutrient components of foods having biological significance.
Macronutrients are defined broadly as those food components which are present in quantities of one gram or more in the daily diet, and which generally provide energy. They therefore include protein, fat, carbohydrates, and most dietary fibres and alcohol. Although unable to provide energy, water is also considered a macronutrient.
Table 3. Reference nutrient densities for selected nutrients relevant to developing and evaluating dietary guidelines
(These nutrient densities refer to total diet; If intake is sufficient to meet energy needs, the diet will also meet needs of all members except possibly infants <2 years of age and pregnant lactating women).
Nutrient density per 1000 kcal
Comments
Energy
see age, sex and activity specific recommendation
Energy density 2-5 yrs of age: 0.6-0.8 kcal/ml liquid foods 2 kcal/g solid foods
Protein
20 - 25 g
8-10 % of total energy if protein quality is high 10-12% of total energy
25 - 30 g
if animal protein intake is low
Fats
16 -39 g (max)
15-35 % of energy Cholesterol: < 300 mg/d
Saturated
<11 g (see text)
Saturated up to 10 % of total energy intake
Carbohydrates
140 -190 g
55-75 # of energy
Fibre
8 -20 g
Total dietary fibre must be accounted, not only " crude fibre"
Vitamin A (retinal)
350-500 g RE
1 Retinol Equivalent (RE)=1 g retinol or 6 g b- carotene as provitamin A
b-carotene
Functions as antioxidant; no RDA/RNI for b-carotene; (see text).
Vitamin D
2.5-5.0 g
promotes bone health
Vitamin E
3.5-5.0 mg a-TE
1 mg a-TE = 1 mg a-d-tocopherol; inhibits lipoprotein oxidation
Vitamin K
20-40 g
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
2530 mg
Functions as an antioxidant. Enhances iron absorption.
Thiamine
0.5-0.8 mg
Riboflavin
0.6-0.9 mg
Niacin (or equivalent)
6-10 mg
60 mg trypto-phan equivalent to 1 mg niacin
Vitamin B[6]
0.6-1.0 mg
Vitamin B[12]
0.5-1.0 g
reduces homocysteinaemia
Folate
150-200 g
Intakes of 400 g/d associated with reduced risk of neural tube birth defects; reduces hyperhomocysteinaemia
Iron
3.5, 5.5, 11 or 20 mg
For high, intermediate, low and very low bioavailability diets (see text)
Zinc
6 or 10 mg
For high and low bioavailability diets
Calcium
250-400 mg
Ca-rich foods especially for adolescents and lactating pregnant women
Iodine
75 g
100-200 g/day in regions free of goitre. Salt fortification usually required
Fluoride
0.5-1.0 mg (max)
If water has >= 1 ppm requirement is met.
Sodium as NaCl
<2.5 g
Total sodium as NaCl < 6 g/day (population mean)
Infants under 1 year of age should be fed according to age: up to 4-6 months of age exclusively human milk; after this period breast milk should be complemented with appropriate foods to provide additional energy, protein and specific nutrients.
Macronutrients may also have various physiological functions other than the provision of energy which make them more or less essential in their own right; and they may serve to identify foods of biological importance for reasons other than their macronutrient composition, i.e. macronutrients may be "marker nutrients". It is for these reasons that they are referred to in dietary guidelines.
Compounds related to a derivative of macronutrients may also need to be considered in developing dietary guidelines, e.g. "bioactive peptides" as well as protein; "resistant starch", and oligosaccharides as well as digestible starch and di- and mono-saccharides; essential fatty acids of the omega-3 and omega-6 polyunsaturated (PUFA) kinds; etc. (1,9-14). To some extent, RNI for amino acids and essential fatty acids, rather than protein or fat, may determine how FBDG should develop (1,9).
o Energy
Energy intake cannot be allowed to fall below limits which allow for basal energy expenditure, thermic response to food, physical activity and intermittent illness. There are also limits below which food intake ceases to be sufficient to serve as a vehicle for the adequate supply of essential nutrients and other compounds of biological importance. Evidence from prospective studies in developed, as well as developing countries, is that those who eat most are those who live longer, provided they do not become obese and that they choose a diet with an emphasis on plant-derived foods and, in some cases, on fish (e.g. Zutphen study (15,1 6), Swedish Women Study (17), Boston/Ireland study (18)).
It follows that dietary guidelines should not seek to restrict food intake, but should encourage those food choices, like careful use of energy-dense, fatty foods, which enable energy balance to be achieved. Dietary guidelines which encourage energy balance cannot be constructed without reference to physical activity, and to some measure of energy stores, usually body fatness (a weight/height relationship such as body mass index, BMI) and its distribution e.g. abdominal/hip ratio as per a recent WHO recommendation (19). The corollary is to encourage physical activity so that enough food can be eaten to match the associated energy expenditure. In developing FBDG, energy balance and food energy density are more important than setting an upper limit on energy intake (20,21).
Under conditions of energy deficit or excess certain important physiological adaptations come into play which allow individuals to preserve critical functions that depend on energy adequacy. This adapted state includes adjustments in basal energy expenditure, facultative thermogenesis or changes in the efficiency of physical work. On the other hand if the changes in intake are beyond the adaptive range, the subject will accommodate to a new level of energy balance by changing body mass, or slowing growth rate in the case of energy deficit. Individuals may also accommodate by reducing physical activity; this may not be apparent since activity to render economic benefit may be saved, but at the cost of socially desirable activity.
Thus, changed social or family behaviour in adults may be the sole consequence of energy deficit. In small children, altered physical growth and mental development are the usual manifestations of energy deficit. In older children, decreased physical activity rather than altered growth is the hallmark of low energy intake.
In the presence of excess energy intake, the adaptive range is extremely small (<5%), and body energy reserve as adipose tissue increases rapidly. The metabolic and pathological consequences of obesity include hypertension, hyperlipidaemia and type II diabetes; in some studies obesity has also been found to be an independent risk factor for atherosclerosis and myocardial infarction. The prevalence of obesity in urban developing societies is on the rise and efforts should be made to prevent the related adverse consequences. Nutritional goals and guidelines should be set to prevent the social and pathological consequences of both energy deficit and excess.
Most recommendations concerning energy intake are based on the approach described in the 1985 FAO/WHO/UNU report "Energy and Protein Requirements" which defines energy needs based on energy expenditure. Estimating energy needs involves the summation of: (a) basal needs, derived from age- and sex-specific equations and actual or desirable body weight; (b) needs for growth in the case of children, based on usual energy content of tissue gain; and (c) needs for activity calculated as multiples of basal metabolic rate. Economically necessary activity and socially desirable activity should be considered, in addition to sedentary requirements. Pregnant and lactating women need additional energy to meet the requirement of tissue formation and milk secretion, respectively.
The digestibility of energy sources varies depending on the fibre content of the foods. Thus, following FAO/WHO/UNU 1985 recommendations on formulating dietary guidelines for rural populations in developing countries where fibre intake is high, energy RNI should be increased by 15%. For populations where fibre intake is moderate the correction is 5%.
Energy density for small children should be considered in developing energy dietary guidelines, since low energy density may limit total energy intake. For liquid foods, energy density should be 0.60.75 kcal/g whereas for solids it should be 1.5-2.0 kcal/g. For older children and adults, the suggested energy density of the combined diet is 1.5-2.5 kcal/g. In the case of obese subjects, lower energy densities (<1 kcal/g) are desirable since gastric repletion may help to maintain lower energy intakes.
o Protein, peptides and amino acids
Protein requirements and ways of achieving them from foods have been well-covered in previous reports (22,23,24). Increasingly, biologically active peptides like those which affect growth, gut physiology, and blood pressure control mechanisms (ACE inhibitors) and, conditionally essential amino acids, like taurine, arginine and glutamine tend to be reflected in food choices. Thus milk proteins may yield biologically active peptides, nuts are a good source of arginine, and so on (10,13,14,25).
For protein, virtually all RNI are based on the protein needed for nitrogen balance and growth. The 1985 FAO/WHO/UNU report suggested the mean requirement +25% (equivalent to 2SDs) as the RNI for age- and sex-specific groups. In general, recommendations for developing countries take into account a lower average protein quality and digestibility. Digestibility of the mixed diet is considered to be 80-85% and the amino acid score only 90%, therefore RNI are higher. As an example, the RNI of 0.75 g of reference protein (per kg body weight) becomes 1.0 g per kg after adjusting for protein quality in Latin America.
In circumstances where the mixed diet does not contain sufficient legumes and/or animal protein, corrections for amino acid score may also be needed. In the past, correction for amino acid score was emphasized since single sources of vegetable proteins may be limiting in one or more amino acids (Iysine for most cereals, methionine for most legumes). Yet mixed diets composed of cereal/legume mixes with some animal protein (10-20%) are sufficient in essential amino acids to meet RNI. Thus, except under very restrictive diets, amino acid score is not usually a problem.
New approaches to defining amino acid needs based on amino acid kinetic indices may provide a different perspective on the amino acid needs of humans and may require additional adjustments. At present, these indices suggest that existing recommendations greatly underestimate the amino acid needs to sustain optimal protein synthesis rates. The interpretation of optimal in this context is elusive at best, since the physiological consequences of higher or lower levels of protein synthesis have not been established.
In settings where environmental sanitation is inadequate and diarrhoeal disease is prevalent, an increase of protein intake by 10% is recommended. For children recovering from acute infection or malnutrition, protein intake should be increased to meet the demands imposed by rapid tissue synthesis. Depending on the degree of deficit, protein needs may be 2-3 times the normal amount. Even for children, protein needs during convalescence are elevated by 20-40%. Protein intake, especially animal protein, has been linked to a lower prevalence of stunting in developing countries. Although this may not necessarily be linked to essential amino acid supply, since micronutrients such as Zn are also growth promoters, it is suggested that 10-25% of dietary protein should be of animal origin.
At present no upper limit on protein intake has been set, yet animal and human data suggest that excessive protein intake has an adverse effect on kidney function. Glomerular filtration rates increase acutely in response to protein overload, but long-term hyperfiltration may lead to excessive loss of nephrons and thereby, with advancing age, reduced renal function. The latest US recommendation is to limit total protein intake to twice the RDA (26).
Table 4. Safe levels of protein intake: children and adults (summary)
Males
Females
Age (years)
Reference protein (g)
High biological value diet*
Low biological value diet*
Reference protein (g)
High biological value diet*
Low biological value diet*
Adults (g/kg body weight)
Pregnant
add (g)
Lactating
first 6 mo:
add (g)
next 6 mo:
thereafter:
* See Energy and Protein Requirements. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation Geneva, World Health Organization, 1985 WHO Technical Report Series, No. 724
RNI for protein by age and sex according to the 1985 FAO/WHO/UNU (23) are provided in Table 4 for two diets having different biological value. The protein densities recommended have been derived as protein-energy ratios to represent the protein quality of the mixed diet. For high quality proteins, requirements can be met by providing 8-10% of total energy as protein. For predominantly vegetable mixed diets in developing country settings, 10-12% is suggested since protein needs should be corrected for lower digestibility and increased incidence of diarrhoeal disease. Finally, in the case of the elderly where energy intake is low, protein should represent 12-14% of total energy.
o Fat
In general adults should consume at least 15% of their energy intake from dietary fats and oils, and women of childbearing age should consume at least 20%. Active individuals who are not obese may consume up to 35% fat energy as long as saturated fatty acids do not exceed 10% of energy intake. Sedentary individuals should limit fat to not more than 30% of energy intake and also limit saturated fatty acids to less than 10% of intake, while ensuring that needs for all other specific nutrients are met (9). RDI for adults include limiting cholesterol intake to 300 mg/day. infants fed human milk or formula usually receive 50-60% of their total energy intake from fat. The use of vegetable oil in food preparations for infants and children is important to maintain energy density of liquid foods >0.6 kcal/ml. Infants should receive breast milk, but if they do not the fatty acid composition of infant formulas should correspond to the range found in breast milk from omnivorous women.
During the complementary feeding period--up to 2 years of age or beyond--diet should provide 30-40% of energy from fat.
Recommendations for fat vary, depending inter alia on the prevalence of protein- energy malnutrition and diet-related NCD. For the former promoting increased consumption of fat is usually desirable, while for the latter decreasing it may be in order. The prevalence of these problems varies widely between countries and may coexist within countries. Urban slums and suburban affluence are not uncommon in many developing and newly industrialized countries, and dietary guidelines should address the problems in both. Thus, for- low socioeconomic groups in some developing countries, reaching 20% of energy from fat is a difficult goal, while among some affluent populations in the same countries there may be a need to reduce fat intake to less than 30% of total energy.
Excessive (>40 percent) intake of fat among adults may be associated with increased prevalence of obesity and associated disorders (27). It may also increase the risk of certain types of cancer (9,27,28). High fat intake reduces the nutrient density per kcal of the diet (with the exception of those nutrients occurring naturally in fats, e.g. vitamin E in vegetable fats)(29). Although it may be easier to reduce and to modify the intake of visible fat (30), hidden fat from foods like high-fat meat, cheese, baked products and some fried food also has to be considered, and included in the fat-intake calculations.
The balance between different classes of fatty acids is important, particularly with respect to the risk of coronary heart disease (9,31). Saturated fatty acids with lauric (C12:0), myristic (C14:0) and palmitic (C16:0) acids elevate serum cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol. Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) lower serum cholesterol and LDL, while monounsaturated (MUFA) are less effective in lowering cholesterol or LDL levels. However, MUFA and saturated fatty acids raise HDL cholesterol levels. MUFAs are not as easily oxidized and their effects on lipoprotein metabolism are neutral (32-34). There is no reason to set an upper limit for MUFA within accepted total fat and calorie intakes. Cholesterol intake can also increase total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol levels in the serum of susceptible individuals, but response is less than that induced by changes in the fatty acid composition of the diet (34). Compared with dietary monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA), trans fatty acids
increase serum LDL-cholesterol, and may in fact lower HDL-cholesterol (9,35,36).
Both n-6 and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) are essential fatty acids. The balance between n-6 and n-3 fatty acids is of importance in determining the biological effects of dietary PUFAs. Some studies have shown that consumption of marine foods containing long-chain n-3 fatty acids such as eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA 20:5 n-3) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA 22:6 n-3) is associated with lower cardiovascular mortality. EFA are also important for normal fetal and infant growth as well as for brain development and visual maturation. In vitro experiments indicate a higher susceptibility for oxidative modification of PUFA-containing lipoproteins. High intake of n-6 PUFA may have adverse effects on eicosanoid production (34). In animal studies, consumption of n-6 PUFA has been found to promote the growth of certain forms of carcinogen-induced cancer (28), which may indicate that growing tumours require PUFAs. There is, however, no compelling, direct evidence of harmful health
effects of PUFA in man. There are sufficient antioxidants (e.g. vitamin E) in unrefined and properly processed high-PUFA oils to protect lipoproteins. The n-3 fatty acids may have specific beneficial effects on platelet function and insulin sensitivity.
Food sources of n-6 fatty acids are abundant in most diets. Vegetable oils commonly used such as corn oil, sunflower and safflower oil are all good sources of n-6 fatty acids. N-3 fatty acids are present in green leafy vegetables and in some vegetable oils; soy oil and low erucic acid rapeseed oil (canola oil) are good sources of n-3 fatty acids. The long-chain (greater than 18 carbon chanin length) essential fatty acids (AA, and DHA) are present mainly in animal foods, while marine foods are good sources of EPA and DHA. RNI for EFA of the n-6 family are 3-12% of energy and for the n-3 family 0.5-1.0% of energy. The ratio of linoleic (18:2 n-6) to alpha linolenic (18:3 n-3) acids should be between 5:1 and 10:1. No specific recommendations for longchain EFA have been established except for infants but the epidemiological information supports the incorporation of EPA and DHA from foods in the diet. Pregnant women should receive adequate EFA to meet the demands of fetal
development.
Both the amount and the type of fats consumed by population groups along with other dietary and lifestyle factors are considered of great importance in determining the prevalence of NCD throughout the world. Dietary guidelines should include a consideration of the type and the amount of dietary fat as this is of great importance in promoting health.
Recent evidence indicates that trans fatty acids produced during hydrogenation of PUFAs may behave more like saturated fatty acids relative to their effects on cholesterol metabolism than like MUFAs. Hydrogenated vegetable fats that are high in trans fatty acids (>10%) should not be promoted as having the same health effects as fat sources containing predominatly PUFAs in the cis conformation and low in saturated fatty acids. As consumers become more informed about trans fatty acids, and as more is known of their effect, it may be useful to consider the sum of saturated and trans fatty acids in evaluating the health effects of fats and oils. Where CHD is a concern it may be appropriate to encourage the use of liquid oils and soft margarines rather than hard fats, which have a higher content of saturated and trans fatty acids.
Fats and oils also provide a vehicle for fat soluble vitamins such as vitamin A and tocopherols, and an adequate intake of dietary fat is essential for the absorption of these vitamins. Red palm oil is an excellent source of carotenoids and tocopherols; it should therefore be considered an especially good source of low-priced oil for populations where vitamin A deficiency is prevalent. Tocopherols are important natural antioxidants and will help to prevent peroxidation of PUFAs. A vitamin E to PUFA ratio of >0.6 mg per gram of PUFA is recommended.
o Carbohydrate
Carbohydrates are the main source of energy in the diet (>50%) for most people. Most dietary carbohydrates come from vegetable foods and include sugars, oligosaccharides, starch and dietary fibre.
Grain products, tubers, roots and some fruits are rich in complex CHO. They generally need cooking before they are fully digestible, especially by children. They are less soluble in water and will form gels when mixed with water, which limits the energy density of the final food product. These considerations are particularly relevant when establishing dietary guidelines for small children.
Sugars (mono- and disaccharides) found in foods or added to the diet usually increase the acceptability of the diet. Sucrose is the most common sugar in most diets and increases the palatability and energy density of diets (since it is readily soluble and well- digested). In developing dietary guidelines, when considering sugar intake it is important to consider all sources of sugars in the diet and the contribution of other nutrients from these foods.
Frequent consumption of sugar and other fermentable carbohydrates throughout the day increases the cariogenic risk potential of the diet, especially in the absence of reasonable oral hygiene practices (37,38). On the other hand, sugar intake plays a minor role in caries prevention where fluoridation and hygienic measures have been taken.
Although some foods are relatively high in fat and sugars, there is no evidence that foods high in sugar contribute significant amounts of fat to the diet (39,40). Furthermore, total sugar intake is commonly inversely related to total fat intake (40). Moderate intakes of sugar are therefore compatible with a varied and nutritious diet. No specific limit for sugar consumption is proposed, since the putative relationship of sugar consumption to obesity is offset by the inverse relationship observed between sugar and fat intake.
The glycaemic effect of starchy foods, often measured as the glycaemic index, depends on rate of digestion (41,42). This is determined to some extent by the fibre content but mainly by the availability of starch to digestion. Leavening and baking increases the glycaemic effect of starch in bread, but starch in pasta, pulses and legumes has a low and retarded glycaemic effect (41,42). The glycaemic effects of simple sugars are mainly comparable to (or less than) those of starch from cooked foods. In hypertriglyceridaemic subjects, long-term consumption of low-glycaemic index foods may reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases by improving glucose tolerance, reducing insulin secretion and lowering blood lipids (41). A part of starch is resistant to digestion because of its crystalline or other properties. It acts like dietary fibre, passes unabsorbed into the colon, promotes bowel function, increases production of short-chain fatty acids and may reduce the risk of cancer
Only small amounts of CHO are necessary in the human diet in order to prevent ketosis. Ten percent of energy or approximately 50 g per day are sufficient for this purpose. Yet, since CHOs represent on a relative basis over half of the energy intake for most populations and since the relative contribution of fat and CHO may affect the prevalence of chronic NCD, it is important to consider them when setting dietary guidelines.
Lactose is the sugar in milk and the main source of CHO in small children. It is well-digested by small children but most older children and adults in tropical countries have a limited capacity to digest and absorb a large lactose load (50 g). Nevertheless, even with laboratory-determined lactose intolerance it is possible to tolerate a glass of milk, which provides 15 g of lactose in a fat- and protein-containing solution. So this should not be a reason to limit the consumption of milk or the use of milk in food distribution programmes in developing countries. Moreover, milk represents an excellent source of high quality protein, calcium and riboflavin, and is well-tolerated by most children, even those recovering from malnutrition. Children with prolonged diarrhoea may benefit from lactase-containing fermented milk products (yoghurt) (44,45).
Dietary fibre includes non-starch polysaccharides such as cellulose, hemicellulose, gums and pectins with different solubility and viscosity characteristics (46). Fibre components have beneficial effects on glucose and cholesterol metabolism and on bowel function (47). A regular and varied intake of cereals, fruit and vegetables ensures the supply of both soluble and insoluble types of fibre.
Fibre consists primarily of the components of cell walls in vegetable foods that are non-digestible complex CHO, but also includes gums, lignins and polyphenols. An important physiological function of dietary fibre is to provide bulk for laxation and stool formation. Although most food composition tables are based on acid and alkali insoluble vegetable food components (crude fibre), this in fact includes only cellulose and lignin.
Other components of vegetable cell walls such as hemicellulose, pectins and gums have important properties which affect the intestinal micro-environment and may affect the prevalence of chronic disease. Volatile fatty acids derived from colonic fermentation of fibre component may increase metabolizable energy and also serve as fuel for intestinal cell metabolism. Fibres decrease the energy density of the diet and may be beneficial in preventing obesity (48,49). On the other hand, fibres decrease the bioavailability of specific nutrients, especially minerals, thus affecting the biological quality of foods. Most groups recommend intakes ranging from 15-20 g/day for adults (1). That is, 8-10 g per 1000 kcal are recommended; up to 20 g per 1000 kcal can be fed daily without untoward effects. If high fibre diets (>40 g per day) are customary in a given population, protein and mineral RNI should be adjusted accordingly.
o Alcohol
Alcoholic beverages are intrinsic to the dietary patterns of many human cultures. In subsistence-agriculture societies, alcoholic beverages often provided significant essential nutrients (amino acids from fermented cactus for meso-Americans, thiamin in traditional beer in Africa). However, alcoholic beverages are now generally viewed for their adverse social and health effects rather than as part of a spectrum of fermented food beverages. Evidence about the acute effects of alcohol indicates that its adverse effects (high blood alcohol-related impairment of cognitive function, or decreased cardiac output or elevated keto and lactic acids) can be partially reduced by co-ingestion with food. The effects of alcohol on increased energy density and the displacement of more healthful nutrients require particular consideration when food-based dietary goals are being developed.
There is considerable interest in the possible effects of ethanol or associated compounds (like phenols) in alcoholic beverages on the prevalence of CHD. Even though plausible pathways exist by which cardio-protection may occur (increased HDL cholesterol, decreased platelet aggregation, anti-oxidation and stress reduction), potentially adverse pathways exist as well (blood pressure-elevating and myocardial damage). A recent review of alcohol, diet and mortality data from 22 countries concluded that ethanol, particularly wine ethanol, is inversely related to coronary heart disease but not to longevity in populations (50). Light to moderate alcohol intake may improve longevity--but alcohol abuse which sharply reduces it--is correlated with average alcohol consumption in populations. Promoting the use of alcohol would appear to be unwise as a public health cardio-protective measure (50).
Much more research is required to determine both the protective effects of alcoholic beverages on CHD and how protective such a mode of alcohol ingestion may be for more chronic alcohol-related health problems, such as hepatic cirrhosis, cardiomyopathy or Korsakoff's psychosis. In some cultures where wine is regularly consumed with food, cirrhosis still remains a major health problem. Although individual differences in patterns of
Table 5. Promoters and antagonists of the uptake or utilization of inorganic elements from foods
Essential elements
Promoters
Factors reducing availability
Iron
Vitamin C; iron in the haem of animal tissues
Excessive consumption of vegetable sources of phytates,* oxalates (e.g. spinach), tannins (e.g. tea), polyphenols and calcium salts (>500 mg Ca)
Iodine
Brassicae consumed in excess; Cassava inadequately dried or fermented to destroy CN
Calcium
Lactose-containing foods
Excessive dietary fibre rich in associated phytate*; plants rich in oxalates, uronic acids. Fat malabsorption
Unidentified factors in milk
Zinc
Unidentified factors in animal protein foods
Phytate rich foods* (e.g. whole grain cereal foods) if accompanied by high calcium
Magnesium
Phytate rich foods* if dietary calcium high
Potentially Toxic elements (pollutants)
Factors promoting retention or toxicity
Cadmium
Low dietary Ca, low iron status, low copper status
Low dietary Ca, low dietary
Lead
phytate
Fluoride
Low dietary Ca.
* Includes maize, brown rice, beans, whole wheat flour, sorghum alcohol consumption could explain this relationship, many factors are still unknown.
4.1.2 Water
Fluid needs are met by a combination of food and beverages. A dependable and chemically and microbiologically safe source of water is essential.
Obtaining a safe source of water has introduced new problems for water recirculation, packaging and storage. At the same time, depending on the location, water may be an important source of such essential elements as iron, iodine, fluoride, calcium and copper (51). Assuming a water intake of 1.5 Iitres a day, 10% of total intake for iodine, cadmium and copper can come from water, 15-20% for lead and chromium, and up to 32% for fluoride (51-55). In an aging population, thirst mechanisms may be compromised (56), so that special attention to water intake in the elderly may be worth including in FBDG.
4.1.3 Micronutrients
Micronutrient deficiencies are now recognized as important in the aetiology of communicable disease, classical deficiency disorders and NCD. Therefore, the formulation of FBDG in all cultures with varying health patterns needs to take account of the fact that vitamin and mineral components of foods are essential for growth and development, for the utilization of the macronutrients, for the maintenance of adequate defences against infectious diseases and for many other metabolic and physiological functions. Stress and physical trauma such as that resulting from prolonged physical over-activity also influence micronutrient demands.
Today more than 2000 million people are at risk from micronutrient deficiencies and more than 1000 million are actually ill or disabled by them, causing, for example, nutritional anaemias, mental retardation, learning disabilities, low work capacity, and blindness (57-60). More than 13 million people suffer night blindness or total blindness due to lack of vitamin A (60,61). Low folate status is one of the earliest indicators of a vitamin-deficiency state, and represents a sensitive index of inadequate food supply in addition to its role in the prevention of birth defects (62). Risk of vitamin D deficiency in older adults, especially in those who receive little exposure to sunlight 163), and/or do not consume fortified foods, is common and is associated with increased prevalence of osteoporosis. Osteoporosis is also associated with insufficient absorbable calcium, potassium and vitamin C.
The proposed nutrient densities for the family diet depend on the consumption of adequate amounts of energy for adults and adolescents. If intake for adolescents or adults is <2000 kcal per day, it is unlikely that their vitamin and mineral needs will be met.
Interactions among the micronutrients as well as other food components are of great importance. For example, a recommendation in dietary guidelines to increase intakes of one or more micronutrients may also affect other micronutrients as well, through effects on their absorption, availability or excretion. Some foods contain inhibitors of element absorption that reduce their availability, e.g. the restriction of calcium utilization by the presence of oxalates in dietary spinach or rhubarbs. Other significant examples are the decreased availability of iron from foods rich in tannins or through excess of calcium, and the effects of dietary phytate from whole grain cereals and pulses restricting utilization of iron, zinc and possibly magnesium and calcium. On the other hand, absorption of non-haem iron is enhanced by increasing the vitamin C content of the diet- a factor that is likely to be important when plant sources of iron predominate over animal sources. Some examples are
given in Table 5.
Role of vitamins in health promotion and prevention of NCD
Vitamins were discovered early this century, and the evidence of their importance was slowly pieced together, initially from observational studies and then from balance studies that measured the levels at which signs and symptoms of deficiency of specific vitamins would appear. A classical example is thiamin deficiency resulting from diets largely consisting of polished rice. Thiamin deficiency has remained an area of concern in countries such as Thailand, and in populations in developed countries who consume large amounts of alcohol. More recently, there has been an enormous amount of interest in vitamin A which, in addition to xerophthalmia, is generally considered to have an impact of around 20-30% in reducing mortality among young children in areas where vitamin A deficiency is endemic, possibly even among those with subclinical deficiency (64).
The scientific evidence supporting an important role for vitamins in promoting health and preventing NCD, independent of other nutritional constituents, is currently receiving considerable attention (65). Much of the evidence has been derived from epidemiological studies of food intake and clinical trials with vitamin supplements as well as experimental animal studies. While all three of these research approaches have implicit limitations, the overall consistency, strength and biological plausibility of the results from the work to date are sufficient now in many cases to be translated into FBDG.
Still, in many parts of the world, efforts to ensure adequate vitamin status for the primary prevention of deficiency states continue to be of paramount importance. Thus, recommendations can be offered to ensure that attention is focused on consumption of appropriate foods (or fortified foods) that provide adequate vitamin A to promote growth, prevent night blindness and strengthen corneal structure and immune function in children; folic acid to help reduce the risk of neural-tube birth defects as well as anaemia and perinatal mortality in women of childbearing years; vitamin D to promote bone health in children and adolescents, and reduce the risk of osteoporotic fractures in the elderly, especially in older women; and so on.
While currently emerging evidence remains sometimes equivocal in identifying specific vitamins as the critically responsible element providing certain health benefits, the data are sufficiently strong now to encourage the view that all populations should ensure adequate consumption of foods rich in antioxidant nutrients (i.e. vitamin C, E and b-carotene) and B vitamins (i.e. vitamins B[6], B[12] and folate) to reduce the risk of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease; and foods rich in antioxidant nutrients (i.e. vitamins C, E and 13-carotene), vitamin A and folate to reduce the risk of some forms of cancer. Experimental evidence supports a biological plausibility for these healthpromoting effects of vitamins (66). The putative protective role of antioxidants against vascular disease appears based in part upon their ability to inhibit the oxidative modification of low density lipoprotein cholesterol, a critical early step in the atherogenic process (67). The action of
vitamins B[6], B[12] and folate may be beneficial against vascular disease, due in part to their ability to modulate homocysteine metabolism (68).
Vitamins may serve as chemo-preventive agents via their ability to prevent the formation and/ or increase the detoxification of carcinogens as well as via their regulatory role in cell differentiation processes. As the qualitative and quantitative nature of the relationship between these vitamins and the prevention of vascular disease and cancer becomes further established, this information can be more precisely incorporated into FBDG.
It is also important to recognize as part of FBDG the impact of vitamins on specific physiological function and performance, with potentially significant benefits for individual and public health: e.g. antioxidant nutrients (i.e. vitamin C, E and b-Carotene) and vitamin B[6] on improving immune function in older adults; and B complex vitamins and vitamin C on improving physical performance in children.
Provocative but preliminary data regarding the relationship between generous intakes of certain vitamins and the reduction of some other diseases are continuing to evolve, but they are premature and/or insufficient to merit consideration as part of a dietary guideline, e.g. antioxidants and reduced risk of degenerative eye diseases such as cataract and age-related macular degeneration; and B vitamins (particularly vitamins B[6], B[12] and folate) and reduced risk of age-related cognitive impairments and dementias.
What is more important is that the evidence substantiating the disease risk reduction by vitamins indicates that most, and perhaps all, of the benefits can be provided by eating a diversity of foods rich in these vitamins and related phytochemicals (69). Moreover, as noted above, the increased intake of a few vitamins from fruits and vegetables may provide a wide spectrum of benefit in respect of several physiological functions and many diseases. These intakes, while sometimes in excess of current recommended standards for dietary requirements, can nonetheless be met through appropriate food selection. However, groups at particular risk of inadequate intake of these vitamins include children, pregnant and lactating women, and the elderly because of their increased needs or low energy intake.
The elderly represent a growing percentage of the world's population and are at risk for inadequate vitamin consumption due to their decreased energy intake and increased requirement for selected micronutrients (70). Recent research has demonstrated that elderly persons, to maintain their metabolic balance, have a higher dietary requirement than younger adults for vitamins B[6], B[12], D and folate (71). The physiological and health consequences of these changes in nutrient requirements can be illustrated by the potential adverse impact in older adults of low vitamin B[6] status, such as impaired glucose tolerance, decreased immune responsiveness and altered cognitive function (70).
As noted, desirable ranges of vitamin intake for health promotion and prevention of NCD may be similar to, or above, current dietary recommendations (73,74). However, individual vitamin needs--and their relationship to individual predisposition to NCD--appear, in part, dependent upon differences in genetic inheritance and lifestyle factors. Increasing dietary intakes of one or more vitamins from a variety of sources to these desirable ranges does not appear to promote harmful imbalances affecting other nutritional or metabolic conditions in the body. More important still, vitamin-rich foods prepared in a way that maintains their vitamin content should be consumed on a regular and frequent daily basis, as the time frame for the utilization and elimination of some vitamins is relatively short.
Food-based approaches, including fortification, to improve vitamin status, are most likely to prove widely applicable, sustainable and affordable in the long term for avoiding deficiency diseases, improving health and preventing both NCD and many infectious diseases. Nonetheless, further research efforts, including controlled clinical trials with food-based interventions, are still required to fully establish the efficacy of this approach. Foods making important contributions to daily intakes of selected vitamin can be seen in Table 6.
o Vitamin A (retinol). Vitamin A can be preformed in the diet as retinol in animal products or derived from plant carotenoids. The biological vitamin A activity of the diet should be computed in retinol equivalents (RE). A dietary goal of 350 RE per 1000 kcal was recommended in order to meet the needs of all family members. The presence of diarrhoeal disease, infection and intestinal parasites increases vitamin A needs. Vitamin A supplementation in vitamin A-deficient children has been shown to decrease the risk of dying from diarrhoea and sometimes from other infections. Present RNI do not provide for the increased needs of vitamin A in acute infections such as measles, where adequate intakes of vitamin A are required to decrease both complications and mortality. Vitamin A fortification of foods has contributed to decreasing the prevalence of deficiency in some parts of the world (75). Low fat diets and diets poor in animal products decrease vitamin A bioavailability by
limiting absorption and utilization.
Table 6. Foods making important contribution to daily intakes of selected vitamins
Vitamin
Sources
Vitamin A (as retinol)
meat, fortified dairy products, liver and other organ meats, egg yolks, fish liver oils
Vitamin A (as b-carotene)
red/orange/yellow fruits and vegetable, e.g. papaya, pumpkin (winter squash), carrots, etc. dark-green leafy vegetables, e.g. spinach, kangkong, coriander, etc.
Thiamin (vitamin B[1])
whole-meal cereals (wheat germ), pork, lamb, fish, poultry, liver
Riboflavin (vitamin B[2])
soybeans, nuts, milk, cheese, yoghurt, brewer's yeast, whole grain cereals, eggs, green leafy vegetables, organ meats
Niacin (vitamin B[3])
peanuts, enriched breads and cereals, lean meats, poultry, fish, octopus, taro, bulgar, couscous
Pyridoxin (vitamin B[6])
green leafy vegetables, avocados, bananas, dried beans, potatoes
Vitamin B[12]
organ and lean muscle meats, fish, shellfish, dairy products, brewer's yeast
Folate
dark-green leafy vegetables, avocados, liver, brewer's yeast, amaranth, oranges, corn peas, chick peas
Vitamin C
citrus fruits, tomatoes, peppers, leafy green vegetables, potatoes, papaya, lychee, daikon radish
Vitamin D
fatty fish, fortified dairy products, liver, egg yolk
Vitamin E
vegetable oils, nuts, wheat-germ, whole-grain cereals, green vegetables, seeds, dried beans
Vitamin K
broccoli, cabbage, vegetable oils, seaweeds, leafy green vegetables, yoghurt, egg yolks, liver, soya beans, potatoes, dairy products
o b-Carotene. b-Carotene is a provitamin A compound but also acts in an independent fashion in several cellular functions, e.g. as an antioxidant trapping free radicals and quenching singlet oxygen. The bioavailability of carotenoids in many foods is less than that of vitamin A, 6 g b-Carotene being nutritionally equivalent to 1 g retinol. A dietary intake of 2100-3000 g b-Carotene as provitamin A per 1000 kcal appears to be a healthy goal for all family members. The absorption and utilization of b-Carotene is enhanced by dietary fat, protein and vitamin E and is depressed by the presence of peroxidized fat and other oxidizing agents in food. It is important to note that, because only a few carotenoids serve as provitamin A compounds and many other yellow/orange pigments are present in plants, the colour intensity of a fruit or vegetable is not a reliable indicator of provitamin A content. Biologically active carotenoids are found in abundance in carrots and dark-green
leafy vegetables. Additional knowledge of the carotene content and retinol bioequivalence of plant foods throughout the world is needed.
Carotene-containing foods have been implicated in a decreased risk of some forms of cancer (colon, lung and stomach) and reduced risk of cardiovascular disease in a limited number of clinical trials and several epidemiological studies.
o Ascorbic acid. This essential nutrient not only participates in intermediary and oxidative metabolism but also improves iron absorption. In addition, ascorbic acid has been shown to be necessary for a normal immune response. The proposed nutrient density of 25-30 mg per 1000 kcal may exceed true ascorbic acid needs of most individuals, but it underlines the fact that enhancement of iron absorption from plant foods is very desirable. The range in this case is derived from existing recommendations. Preventing or decreasing the prevalence of iron deficiency, a significant problem worldwide, is an important consideration in setting dietary guidelines.
Ascorbic acid in foods is affected by heat treatment in cooking and in the processing of foods. The general recommendation to avoid overcooking of vegetables and fruits is supported by the effect of heat on ascorbic acid, of which commonly about half is lost when cooking-water is discarded.
o Vitamin E. Vitamin E represents a group of dietary tocopherols and tocotrienols which serve as antioxidants, trapping oxygen free radicals to prevent the propagation of the oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids and other target molecules. Requirements of vitamin E are increased with increasing intakes of unsaturated fats. The biological vitamin E activity of the diet should be computed in milligram a -tocopherol equivalents (mg a-TE). A dietary intake of 3.5-5.0 mg a-TE per 1000 kcal appears to be a healthy goal for all family members. Frank vitamin E deficiency is usually limited to premature infants and patients with diseases characterized by fat malabsorption, but marginal intakes and subclinical deficiencies may be prevalent in many populations.
o Vitamin E has been associated with a reduced risk of a number of chronic diseases, including coronary heart disease, cataract and some forms of cancer in a limited number of clinical trials and several epidemiological studies. Vegetable oils, including those from soybean, safflower and corn, and seed oils, nuts, whole grain and wheat germ represent the principal source of vitamin E. Absorption of vitamin E is dependent upon concomitant digestion and absorption of dietary fat.
o Folate. The suggested nutrient density for the family mixed diet is 150-200 g per 1000 kcal. This level is sufficient to prevent folate deficiency in all family members including women of childbearing age. It is now well-established that diets providing higher folate intake or supplementation with 400 g of folate per day before and during pregnancy are associated with a lower prevalence of congenital neural tube defects. In addition, recent evidence on the role of folate in cysteine metabolism indicates that the suggested folate density of the diet is also adequate to lower homocysteine plasma levels and decrease cardiovascular risk. The folate recommendation is higher than that recommended by FAO/WHO but is consistent with the US RDA for pregnant women (26). It is also in line with the views expressed by the Scientific Committee for Food of the Commission of the European Community (76). The consultation felt that the new evidence was sufficiently compelling to use the
higher value.
Folates found in animal and plant foods can be easily destroyed by cooking since they are labile to moderate heat. Boiling milk or heat processing it destroys folates, leaving minimal amounts in the powdered milk product. Folate deficiency is prevalent in many developing countries, especially during pregnancy and lactation. The recommendation to avoid overcooking food is supported by the effect of heat on folate.
The potential benefit of folate on the prevention of some types of cancer (lung, stomach) remains speculative and any recommendation based on this effect should await further evidence.
o Thiamin, riboflavin and niacin. Deficiency of these B vitamins is now uncommon except under conditions of extreme social deprivation or among alcoholics. The proposed minimum nutrient densities of 0.5, 0.6 and 6 mg per 1000 kcal for thiamin, riboflavin and niacin, respectively, are sufficient for all family members. Grain products lose part of these vitamins during processing, dehulling and refining. Thiamin is particularly heat-sensitive in an alkali environment; thus it is recommended not to use bicarbonate in water when cooking. Niacin can be taken preformed from the diet or synthesized from dietary tryptophan (60 mg yields 1 mg of niacin); this should be considered in defining the potential niacin content of a food. On the other hand, if the diet is limited in tryptophan, little or no niacin will be formed. Maize is treated with alkali and heat as part of traditional food processing to prepare tortillas in Central America and Mexico, thus freeing up niacin and making
it absorbable; the tryptophan too becomes more absorbable. This may explain the low prevalence of pellagra in this region despite the people's predominantly maize diet, which is low in niacin. Fortification of wheat flours or other staple foods has been successful in eradicating B complex deficiency in various parts of the world.
o Vitamin B[6]. Comprising of pyridoxine, pyridoxal and pyridoxamine, Vitamin B[6] is converted in the body to pyridoxal phosphate and pyridoxamine phosphate, which serve primarily as coenzymes in transamination and decarboxylation reactions. The requirement for vitamin B[6] increases with increasing intake of protein because of its role in amino acid metabolism. A dietary goal of 0.6-1.0 mg vitamin B[6] per 1000 kcal appears satisfactory to meet the needs of all family members. Vitamin B[6] deficiency is generally noted only among people deficient in several B-complex vitamins.
In addition to its essential role in the metabolic transformation of amino acids and the metabolism of lipids and nucleic acids, it has been suggested that vitamin B[6] modulates immune responsiveness and glucose homeostasis. The most nutrient-dense sources of vitamin B[6] include chicken, fish, kidney, liver, pork and eggs, although unmilled rice, soy beans, whole-wheat products and peanuts are also good sources. Substantial amounts of vitamin B[6] are lost through food processing. A wide variety of therapeutic drugs have been reported to interfere with the bioavailability and/or metabolism of vitamin B[6].
Minerals and trace elements
Minerals and trace elements of public health importance that have received attention include calcium, iron, iodine, zinc, sodium and fluoride but, depending on geographical, environmental and cultural factors, copper, selenium and probably others could also be included. Physiologically the trace element nutrients have an extremely wide range of functions, many of which are still under investigation. Foods making important contributions to daily intakes of essential inorganic elements can be seen in Table 7.
Table 7. Foods making important contributions to daily intakes of essential inorganic elements
Element
Sources
Iron
Meat (ruminant, pig, pigeon), liver, blood, green vegetables, cereals, pulses, teff
Iodine
seafood, milk, cheeses, cereals, (all contents influenced greatly by regional iodine contents of soils), iodized salt, some (few) kinds of rock salt
Calcium
milk, cheeses, legumes, pulses, green leaves
Phosphorus
milk, cheeses, cereals, meat
Potassium
root vegetables, green vegetables, bananas/plantain
Zinc
red meats, cheeses, milk, pulses, legumes
Magnesium
green vegetables, cereals
Copper
Liver, green vegetables
Selenium
Cereals (reflect selenium contents of soil) fish, meat, eggs
Chromium
Red meats, whole cereal products, pulses, spices
Molybdenum
Legumes, pulses
Fluoride
Tea (content influenced strongly by fluoride in ground water or irrigation water)
Boron
Vegetables
The susceptibility of communities to the effects of heavy metal pollutants is influenced by dietary mineral balance as well as by protein status and the physical form in which pollutants enter the diet. Thus cadmium and lead absorption are potentiated by lower dietary calcium and low iron (51,52). In contrast, foods high in physic acid content are potent inhibitors of lead absorption (52,77) and of iron absorption.
Recognized geochemical variables have a profound influence on the content of some elements such as iodine, selenium, molybdenum and manganese in foods. The soil parent and agricultural conditions in various ecological zones can influence, sometimes more than tenfold, the content of these elements and of fluoride in staple crops. FAO has reported extensively upon the ways in which such regional factors influence mineral element supply (53,78,79). They will have a profound influence on the significance of iodine deficiency as a cause of delayed development in infants and children. Losses of elements during food processing should be taken into account; for example, some forms of selenium and of iodine in foods can be lost during heat treatment. Sodium, potassium and magnesium are all lost to a greater or lesser extent during boiling.
o Calcium. This element is essential as a component of the mineral matrix of bone, and as a regulator of nervous system and muscle membrane function and clotting mechanisms. Virtually all calcium in the body (99%) is deposited in bone. Mineral deposition in bone peaks by 25 years of age.
After the menopause, calcium loss in bone exceeds deposition and this leads to progressive demineralization. Osteoporosis with advancing age increases the risk of fractures. Most recommendations are based on needs for calcium balance and retention in bone, rather than on acquired peak bone mineral density. Thus present RNI may need to be re-examined.
The relatively high calcium requirements needed to confer protection on infants against depletion before weaning and to promote satisfactory bone density during adolescence are now recognized internationally (82). The debate continues about the wisdom of further increases in calcium intakes by other age groups, in an attempt to reduce the high incidence of osteoporosis and bone fracture in some geographical regions as compared to others (83,84)). Genetic variables, differences in physical activity, nutrient and dietary interactions, and ethnic factors influencing the relationships between calcium intake and skeletal density are inadequately understood.
Evidence from non-invasive measurements of bone density indicate that a range of dietary variables influence the beneficial effects of calcium-rich foods upon bone density. These include vitamin C, fruit and vegetable intake, and intakes of potassium and fibre (85). Whether these act directly or indirectly is not known. Calcium loss is promoted by even mild degrees of dietary acidosis (86) or by excessive intake of protein (particularly of animal protein sources) (87).
Sequelae of over-enthusiastic use of calcium supplements--often disregarded include--reduced absorption of iron and of zinc from diets rich in vegetable sources of the physic acid, the antagonistic effects of which are potentiated by high dietary calcium.
Metabolic synergisms involving calcium, magnesium and potassium influence the physiological and functional effectiveness of all three elements in the maintenance of healthy nervous tissue and of skeletal integrity (88). Dietary balance should be maintained between these elements even though their contents in staple foods differ markedly.
In tropical developing countries, higher sun exposure and increased activity levels may be protective for osteoporosis, so RNI are usually set at lower levels. in addition, recent evidence indicates that bone mineral density in China is adequate despite chronic lower Ca intake, suggesting that some populations may have increased absorption of calcium and can therefore have adequate bone mineralization on lower levels of intake (80).
The calcium RNI in the USA are higher than those accepted internationally and extend the increased needs of adolescents into young adults (24 yrs of age), the point at which peak bone mass is reached. The newly acquired results concerning bone density favour calcium intakes beyond the needs for Ca balance and retention for growth. Recent evidence that bone mineral mass can be influenced by calcium intake in prepuberty through early adulthood has resulted in an increase in the RNI proposed for this age grouping.
A nutrient density of 250400 mg Ca per 1000 kcal is proposed in the light of diverse point of views on this subject. The higher level is suggested for industrialized countries; it will meet the needs of all family members except pregnant women. This goal is virtually impossible to meet unless dairy products are consumed in sufficient amounts. Sea foods, sardines with bone, legumes and lime (calcium hydroxide)-treated maize products are important potential sources of calcium where dairy products are not consumed.
o Iron. This essential metal is a constituent of haem and cytochromes, and is a co-factor for redox and other key enzymatic reactions. Relatively minor decreases in iron status associated, for example, with haemoglobin concentrations within the range 120-100 g Hb/litre, are now recognized to delay development of cognitive function (89) and to induce behavioural changes in children (59). Available iron should be sufficient to reduce the current high prevalence of iron deficiency as manifested in more than 2000 million people worldwide by clinical anaemia, behavioural changes and other covert signs of deficiency (59). Voluntary work performance is adversely affected in adults (81). The absorption of heavy metal environmental pollutants, such as cadmium and lead, is enhanced by even a modest fall in iron status (51,52). Absorbed iron needs are defined by replacement of obligatory losses and requirements for growth. Milk is a relatively poor source of iron; thus infants weaned
to unfortified cow's milk are at high risk of iron deficiency. Women, because of menstrual iron losses, are at higher risk of deficiency. Pregnancy also imposes additional needs (30-60 mg/day) that can be difficult to meet by regular mixed diets. Due to the variable (1-30%) absorption of iron in the mixed diet, RNI are best defined based on iron bioavailability within the mixed diet.
Animal foods and ascorbate are important enhancers of non-haem iron absorption; phytates, polyphenols, tannins and fibres lower it. Thus, recent RNI (90) are defined in terms of very low (<5%), low (5-10%), intermediate (1118%) and high (>19%) bioavailability. The corresponding densities suggested for the mixed diet at the family level are 20,11,5.5 and 3.5 mg per 1000 kcal. Low bioavailability diets are cereal-based and have low ascorbate content. Intermediate absorption is found in diets based on plant foods with some animal protein and ascorbic acid; similarly, high bioavailability diets have intermediate absorption if consumed with coffee or tea, which contain polyphenols and tannins, respectively. High bioavailability is found in predominantly animal protein-based diets with fruits rich in ascorbic acid. It is evident that high-income groups will have lower needs and higher intake with greater bioavailability than low-income groups. Fortification of staple foods such as
wheat or maize flour, sugar, salt or soy sauce have been successfully implemented in various countries to help prevent iron deficiency.
o Iodine. Iodine deficiency disorders, manifest as goitre, cretinism and learning defects in children exposed to deficiency during fetal development, are widespread and have important public health consequences in all regions of the world (57). This element is vital for cell differentiation and thyroid hormone synthesis. Deficiency in early life can affect brain development even in the presence of normal thyroid function. Low iodine content of water is considered a valuable indicator of iodine content of foods in a given ecological setting. Low iodine in foodstuffs is a key determining factor in the prevalence of iodine deficiency goitre. A density of 75 g 1000 kcal is suggested. Consumption of marine foods is desirable, although iodine fortification of salt is in practice the most effective way of eradicating this deficit.
o Zinc. This essential mineral has gained greater significance in human nutrition since it was demonstrated to be crucial for linear growth (particularly of males) and normal immune function. Susceptibility to zinc deficiency is high at times of maximal rates of protein synthesis. Thus, the substitution of sources of highly available zinc such as milk, meat and fish by vegetable sources of protein, rich in physic acid, is frequently the cause of deficiency during rehabilitation from infection and from any nutritional insult that has restricted growth.
Zinc absorption in the mixed diet can vary from 10-30% and is dependent on interactions with other nutrients such as phytates and fibres. The Zn nutrient densities suggested for high (20%) and low (10%) bioavailability are 6 mg and 10 mg per 1000 kcal, respectively. Recent studies indicate that growth faltering of young children after weaning can sometimes be prevented if Zn supplements are provided. Although the concentration is low, zinc in human milk (but not cow's milk) is well absorbed. Animal proteins other than milk are excellent sources of bioavailable zinc, thus supporting the suggestion that 1025% of dietary protein should be of animal origin.
o Selenium. A low selenium status restricts the efficiency with which iodine is incorporated into the thyroid hormone, triiodothyronine (91) and its deficiency leads to reduced rates of tissue growth and other IDD-related symptoms.
Recently, concurrent deficiencies of selenium and vitamin E have been shown to increase susceptibility to several viral infections inducing enteritis and cardiomyopathy (92-94). Recent studies indicate that selenium has at least two major physiological roles. It is involved, like vitamins E and C, in processes protecting body tissues against the damaging effects of highly reactive oxygen-rich compounds generated after tissue injury or infection, and in the synthesis of the iodine-containing hormone, triiodothyronine. Indications are that selenium intakes exceeding about 10 g 1000 kcal afford protection against these effects. Concurrent exposure to some viral infections is now believed to potentiate expression of the effects of selenium deficiency, as for example in the cardiomyopathy of infants and young children with Keshan disease associated with selenium deficiency in China.
o Fluorine. This element, absorbed as fluoride, is necessary to strengthen hydroxyapatite crystals in dental enamel and dentin. It also affects bone growth and remodeling, and is considered an essential element. Ingested water is an important contributor to fluoride intake in many areas of the world, while in other areas foods of marine origin and tea represent the main sources. Fluoridation of water supplies where their natural content is low is the most practical way of assuring sufficient intake. The suggested dietary goal for fluoride is 0.7 mg per 1000 kcal. Fortification of salt has also been proposed (and is implemented in Switzerland). Excess fluoride intake (>2.5 mg/day) causes mottling of enamel; extremely high intakes (>8mg/day) cause deformations of the skeleton.
o Sodium. Sodium is an essential component of extracellular fluid, serving as the primary regulator of osmotic pressure in the extracellular space. It also determines trans membrane bioelectric potentials, and changes in membrane permeability trigger depolarization and conduction of electric signals. Sodium is also required for regulation of osmolarity and acid-base balance. Excess sodium is lost through the kidneys. Sodium deficiency resulting from low dietary intakes is rare; it can occur with heavy and persistent sweating or when the body is unable to retain sodium due to trauma, chronic diarrhoea or renal disease.
High sodium intake, as measured by increased urinary sodium excretion, is associated with elevated incidence of cerebrovascular stroke in some populations (95). A specific genetic susceptibility to sodium is likely to be a determining factor in the causation of essential hypertension in human populations. There are data indicating that a high sodium intake in elderly subjects may be associated with elevated blood pressure (96). Some hypertensives benefit from sodium restriction.
It is important to note the interaction between sodium, potassium and calcium with regard to blood pressure. Adequate calcium:sodium and potassium:sodium ratios help to maintain optimal blood pressure.
Dietary guidance to use salt and sodium in moderation should depend on the extent of hypertension as a public health problem and its causes. "Moderation" has been defined differently for different populations, usually depending on the level of sodium currently being consumed. The customary sodium content of natural foods is sufficient to meet requirements, therefore no lower limit for intake has been established except for growing infants. An upper limit of 6 g sodium per day or 2.5 g per 1000 kcal is commonly suggested as a population mean target value by a majority of RNI.
4.1.4 Non-nutrient food components of biological significance
Several compounds of interest have traditionally been investigated as anti-nutrients, including phytates, antitrypsin and other enzyme inhibitors, tannins, phenolic compounds and lecithins. When diets are marginal for nutritional adequacy, these anti-nutritional effects may be of significance. By contrast, in diets that are nutritionally adequate, the physiological activities associated with other compounds may provide some of the health benefits now known to be associated with plant foods, e.g. flavonoids and salicylates.
Most food salicylates (in microgram amounts) come from fruit (97), and their presence may explain, in part, some of the relationships between fruit intake and NCD. Although acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) is not always biologically equivalent to salicylate, aspirin studies provide some insight into how food salicylate might be important in the prevention of cardiovascular disease and gastrointestinal cancers (98).
There is a problem, however, for those who are salicylate- or aspirin-sensitive, although this is dose-related and less likely when salicylate is ingested as part of the food supply (99).
Non-provitamin A carotenoids. There are over 500 plant carotenoids and many of these compounds appear to have significant biological activity in humans. Lycopene is a main precursor of carotenoids in plants (100). It has no vitamin A activity but is a particularly powerful trapper of singlet oxygen (101). Lycopene is a main colorant of tomatoes and watermelons. It exemplifies how a non-nutrient, by its colour, may help to identify foods in FBDG with biological properties beyond those usually sought from foods. Several carotenoids lacking provitamin A activity are readily absorbed from the diet and distributed to tissues. For example, lutein and zeaxanthin are selectively concentrated in the retina, and their dietary intake may be correlated with a reduced risk of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). In any case, increasing the consumption of foods rich in certain carotenoids, in particular dark-green, leafy vegetables, appears to decrease the risk of developing advanced
or exudative AMD, the most visually disabling form of macular degeneration among older people (102). Some carotenoids also possess potent antioxidant activity which may be a basis for their association with reduced risk of some forms of cancer although a recent report of the seven-country study concluded that, though average flavonoid intake may partly contribute to differences in coronary heart disease mortality across populations, it does not seem to be an important determinant of cancer mortality (1 03).
Polyphenols. Plant-derived polyphenols include a wide variety of chemical compounds, including the bioflavonoids. Many bioflavonoids possess antioxidant activity and have been shown to reduce oxidative stress status by quenching free radicals and/or binding to minerals like iron which catalyse free radical reactions. A limited number of experimental and epidemiological studies have associated increased intake of bioflavonoids with a reduced risk of cardiovascular disease and cancer (104-106).
Phyto-estrogens. These fall into three families of compounds, flavonoids, coumestans and lignans, which are found in a wide range of plant foods and--following their ingestion in-- animalderived foods (e.g. milk from cows feeding on certain clovers). They have been shown in human studies to moderate the expression of the menopause (107) and are likely to have wide-ranging biological effects on bone, cardiovascular disease and the risk of certain cancers (e.g breast and prostate), although they are generally weakly oestrogenic or even anti-oestrogenic. Some, like genistein, may be immuno-modulatory and anti-angiogenic, with potential importance in metastatic cancer and diabetic retinopathy (108).
Consequently, in terms of FBDG, these non-nutrient food components will become increasingly important as more is discovered about them, and constitute an important rationale for FBDG.
4.1.5 Dietary goals for vulnerable groups.
For the purpose of dietary guidelines the family should be considered the unit of consumption. This approach assumes that all members of the family consume the same mixed diet except for children under 2 years of age, elderly people who present difficulties in eating enough food, and persons who are ill and have special requirements.
In most countries there are some particularly vulnerable age/sex groups (some of which are dealt with below) and other groups which are vulnerable because of geographic or socioeconomic conditions, including groups at risk of specific deficiencies, e.g. rickets, beriberi or scurvy, for which specific guidelines may be necessary.
The "menu" of specific dietary guidelines will depend on the circumstances of a country, and so will their content. Only some general principles are illustrated below. In these groups, examples are given of guidelines appropriate for some commonly occurring deficiencies or imbalances; but the content of these guidelines should be specifically tailored to the particular nutritional and dietary situation in the country.
In most of the groups listed below there are certain health, food and nutritional beliefs whose nutritional impact may be beneficial, neutral or harmful. Those which are beneficial should be encouraged, while those which are harmful should as far as possible be identified and circumvented through culturally acceptable alternative dietary or health practices.
o Infants and young children
The general guidelines are designed to cover children above 2 years of age. Infants and children to 2 years are an especially vulnerable group in almost every country. Special attention is needed to ensure achieving full growth and development potential. This development should be followed by growth monitoring and promotion, preferably on an individual basis or community-based.
Nutritional requirements are normally fully covered by breast milk (if the mother is in good health and well-nourished) for the first 4-6 months of life. During this period exclusive breast-feeding is recommended. Too early introduction of any other liquid or solid feeding has been shown, in a wide variety of socioeconomic conditions, to reduce breast-milk production and increase risk of infection. Several measures to promote breast-feeding are already widely implemented (109,1 10).
After 46 months breast milk alone usually cannot provide all the nutritional requirements, and thus complementary foods are needed. These should be introduced following a country-specific infant feeding guideline which indicates at least in a broad way the quantity, quality and timing of foods to be introduced with proper hygienic care, in culturally acceptable and socioeconomically feasible ways (therefore, to be elaborated in partnership with the communities concerned). A clear national guideline and even adaptations to different dietary patterns are needed. These guidelines should be made available at all levels of the health system, including agricultural extension, community development and education services. WHO recommends that children should continue to be breast-fed up to two years of age or beyond, while receiving nutritionally adequate and safe complementary foods (111-113).
Major nutritional deficiencies such as protein-energy malnutrition, iron deficiency anaemia, vitamin A deficiency and so on, often become manifest during the second year of life but may begin to develop even during early infancy (due to intrauterine growth retardation, low birth weight, prematurity, inadequate lactation because of poor maternal health, etc.) or during the second six months of life. Laying a good nutritional foundation during the second semester of life is often the key to subsequent good growth and nutrition. Ensuring frequent feeding (4-6 times daily) during this period is of great importance, and also ensuring adequate amounts of food and adequate nutrient density of complementary foods. For this purpose, it is recommended to provide relatively thick porridge and add some oil or fat (non-saturated) where possible to achieve this, e.g. one teaspoon of oil with each serving of porridge.
Adequate feeding during the phase of mixed feeding, and after weaning, needs to be accompanied by appropriate public health measures to minimize infections (environmental health, food safety, immunizations, etc.) to ensure adequate nutrition. All this can best be done in the context of primary health care programmes and of community-based feeding, as well as through optimal family feeding and intra-family food distribution.
o Pregnancy
Dietary intakes, especially in food-deficit, low-income populations, are commonly not increased much or at all during pregnancy, and can thus be less than is recommended to increase maternal fat stores to support lactation It is usually important to recommend moderately increased dietary energy intake (approximately 10%) during the second and third trimesters. Body weight should be monitored during pregnancy. Particularly in the presence of excessive thinness, low BMI, no weight gain or low weight gain (<1 kg per month), energy intake should be increased. This is not necessary, however, if the gain is consistently >1 kg per month.
Iron deficiency anaemia is very common (>50% in developing countries; about 17% in industrialized ones) and is often associated with folate deficiency, particularly where malaria occurs. Foods relatively rich in iron, vitamin C, folates, and also vitamin A in vitamin-A-deficient areas, should be particularly encouraged as well as some foods of animal origin, while avoiding consumption of inhibitors of iron absorption, e.g. tea/coffee with meals.
Calcium intakes can be increased by ensuring daily intake of moderate amounts of dairy products, small fish (eaten whole) and soft bones (e.g. chicken). Tubers usually provide more calcium than cereals. Excessive calcium inhibits iron absorption.
Fruits and vegetables and good food-protein sources should, where possible, be increased in the daily diet.
Salt and energy intake should be restricted in case of oedema.
o Lactation
Lactating women are at some risk of nutritional depletion, particularly in low-income, food-deficit populations, where energy and other nutrient intakes may not be increased adequately to cover their increased requirements.
Energy and protein dietary intakes should be increased by about 20% based on the existing dietary pattern, preferably with additional protein foods. Body weight should be monitored regularly. Those women losing weight steadily should be encouraged to eat more and, if necessary, provided supplements, but not those who are overweight or gaining weight normally.
Fruits and vegetables should also be increased.
o The elderly
Most reports of nutrient recommendations currently in use do not specify the particular needs of the older age groups.
With advancing age, particularly beyond the age of 70, among the most important changes affecting appetite strength and energy needs are a decline in lean body mass and BMI. In the diet of the elderly it is therefore important to maintain adequate nutrient density to ensure adequate nutrient intake, to compensate for these changes. Thus, if nutrient sufficiency is to be maintained, the values of nutrient densities in Table 3 may need to be increased when dealing with the needs of the elderly because of the lower appetites, lower BMIs and lower total calorie intakes. As with other age groups, the importance of continued physical activity among the elderly--to stimulate appetite and maintain muscle mass and strength--should be a priority.
In countries where restricting fat intake is a priority, the detrimental effects of fat and energy restriction for those already at risk of losing weight and lean body mass should be considered. Restricting energy intakes in this group is not good nutritional practice.
Consideration should also be given to vitamin D intake for those among the elderly without adequate sun exposure and activity, and to vitamin B[12] in the presence of lower efficiency in absorbing food-bound vitamin B[12]. Folate and pyridoxine may also be problem nutrients in the elderly. Among the minerals, intakes of calcium and zinc may be low with the problem compounded by decreased absorption.
4.1.6 Nutritional quality of dietary patterns
Given the variety of foods that can be combined to provide a healthy diet, it is difficult to define the ranges of intakes for specific foods that can be combined to provide a nutritionally adequate diet. Although a large set of food combinations that are compatible with nutritional adequacy could be defined, these can hardly be extrapolated to different ecological settings. Another approach to defining nutritional adequacy of diets based on a scientific understanding of the biochemical and physiological basis of human nutritional requirements in health and disease has evolved over the past two centuries. This has permitted the definition of essential nutrients and the establishment of RNI.
FBDG as an instrument and expression of food and nutrition policy can be based directly upon diet and disease relationships of particular relevance to the individual country. In this way priorities in establishing dietary guidelines can address the relevant public health concerns, whether they are related to dietary insufficiency or excess. In this scenario, meeting the nutritional needs of the population takes its place as one of the components of food and nutrition policy goals, along with the priorities embodied in the FBDG for improved health and nutrition for a given population.
Three possible approaches are useful in assessing nutritional quality in the development and evaluation of FBDG:
o Food pattern
Adherence to a reference food pattern with an apparent favourable health relationship is one way of evaluating the nutritional quality of an envisaged dietary guidelines approach.
This is most likely to be a traditional food pattern of people with longevity, low morbidity and low perinatal and infant mortality rates (e.g. Scandinavian, Japanese, Mediterranean) whether the diet was established by tradition or acculturation. In most of these populations, other factors such as health care, educational system, safe water and socioeconomic development play important roles in relation to favourable health indicators.
Tracking health indices in populations in relationship to their intake patterns has, so far, been the most readily available evidence on which to base FBDG. Some key studies are:
o The Zutphen (Netherlands) study by Kromhout et al (1 14,1 15) shows that those men in the highest quintile of consumption of plant-derived foods (using dietary fibre as a marker) lived longest with lowest morbidity. Even one meal of fish a week also increased cardiovascular survival.
o Studies of US nurses (women) and health workers (men) by Willet and co-workers show that certain food sources of micronutrients (and possibly supplements) may reduce the risk of CVD, while alcohol may increase the risk of breast cancer in women (116-120). The complete data set clearly provides an opportunity to look at overall health/food patterns in prospective fashion, but this analysis awaits final compilation.
o Singapore's Food and Cancer studies by Lee et al (1 21) demonstrate that deviations from traditional Chinese and South-East Asian food patterns (e.g. those based around soya products) are associated with increased rates of certain cancers (e.g. breast).
o The Boston-lreland cardiovascular disease study of men by Kushi et al (122) study shows that plant-food intake is linearly and inversely related to increasing coronary mortality over 20 years, whereas fat-cholesterol indices (Keys and Hegsted scores) had a more J-shaped relationship. This suggests that food scores may be more useful than nutrient scores in the development of dietary guidelines.
o Data from the Women in Western Sweden study by Lapidus et al (123) show that higher levels of energy intake and, with it, more food were predictive of lower coronary mortality rates in women controlling for body weight. This is helpful in developing dietary guidelines for women that are not based on life-long dietary restriction.
o In US NHANES (124), a food diversity score, based on food groups, had predictive power for mortality and allowed sex differences in this prediction to be recognized.
o Food variety indices
While the value of increased food variety in either ensuring essential nutrient adequacy or decreasing the risk of food toxicity has been understood for sometime (125), food variety as a predictor of health outcome is relatively recent (124,126). But enough evidence is available to justify this technique's inclusion in the development of FBDG as a technique to reduce morbidity and mortality while awaiting further scientific studies on how it operates.
In deriving indices of food variety, decisions are required about the numerator (categorization of food) and denominator (time base over which variety is achieved).
4.1.7 Nutrient requirements and recommended nutrient intakes
These have been the subject of technical reports by both FAO and WHO, which are currently being updated, and many countries have established their own recommended nutrient intakes.
4.2 Food science and technology
Food science and technology are creating a new framework for FBDG, principally in the areas of food physico-chemistry; methods of food storage and preservation; changes in food preparation; and opportunities for use of formula foods where energy intake is low or usual foods cannot be eaten.
Physico-chemistry: Factors like viscosity and particle size of food with the same chemistry can influence food digestion and absorption (e.g. protein, bioavailability from peanuts, glycaemic index) and the colonic microenvironment (e.g. microflora, substrates for the colonocyte) (127129).
Preservation: Reduced use of salt and curing, and increased canning, dehydration, freezing and irradiation, are a result of innovations in food technology. New packaging techniques are also reducing food wastage and prolonging the shelf-life of fruits and vegetables. At the same time, new microbiological problems, e.g. Iisteriosis, may arise where the full impact of newer storage technologies is not appreciated. Some of these have implications for particular groups, e.g. the avoidance of soft cheeses, which may contain listeria, by pregnant women who could be at risk of abortion. Such factors may create the need for specific FBDG for special groups like pregnant women.
Preparation: Food-based dietary goals can encourage or discourage the use of certain food preparation techniques, e.g. boiling because of nutrient loss, frying with fat, microwaving for flavour retention, cooking with herbs and spices rather than with sodium chloride, soya sauce or monosodium glutamate.
Formula Foods: Where energy needs are low or usual foods cannot be eaten, nutrient (and non-nutrient) needs may be met by formula foods, and guidelines for their use may be required.
Functional foods: Foods are emerging--referred to as functional foods (130)-- which do not resemble, or are surrogates for, traditional foods, or [...] address some newly understood biological or health need. Some basic food commodities such as cereals and fruits, are being used more as nutrient delivery systems than as a basic commodity. The ability to distinguish between traditional foods and analogue foods is limited; hence consumers may be unaware of differences in nutrient content or bioavailability, and how these differences influence the adoption of FBDG (131).
4.3 Behavioural and social sciences and education
Both the practicality of FBDG and the consequences of following them require analysis through the behavioural and social sciences. For example, urging a reduction in the traditional use of salt may lead to an unintended reduction in the use of certain foods, e.g. potatoes or salted fish. Likewise, if energy restriction is inferred in FBDG, this may further exacerbate the current epidemic of eating disorders in young women in Western countries. An understanding of motivation and behaviour can anticipate and help to avoid unintended consequences of introducing FBDG.
Several research studies in nutrition education have attempted to document the difficulties that the general public has when interpreting dietary guidelines presented in terms of nutrients, even if the public is well-educated (132,133). For example, "cholesterol" is often equated with blood lipids, "saturated fat" as a food full of fat, and "polyunsaturated fat" as a food empty of fat (134). More complicated nutrient-based statements, including mention of specific fatty acids, may be dismissed altogether due to unfamiliarity. It is recommended, therefore, that dietary guideline advice be presented in food-based terminology whenever possible. Nutrients should be mentioned only in an instructional context, where the public has had an opportunity to learn new word meanings, rather than relying on their own word meanings for interpretive purposes.
Cognitive science has produced several findings relevant to the formation of dietary guidelines. First, it has been shown that people have the ability to code information in at least two different ways, either verbally or visually. Verbal coding includes words or text that are heard or seen. Visual coding refers to pictures or graphics that have been seen or observed. When both coding systems are used, the information is much more easily retained (135-137). In addition, the amount of information presented at one time will also influence its retention. Humans have an information-processing capacity of 7(2) concepts, or not more than 5-9 concepts in their working memory at one time. Thus, if people are expected to recognize the information as a set and use it all together (138), any information presented as a list or set should never exceed 5-9 concepts. In addition to being limited to 5-9 statements (the lower limits of information-processing capacity) they should be
illustrated to maximize their effectiveness.
4.4 Agricultural and environmental science
Considerations of agricultural and environmental science are important in developing and implementing dietary guidelines. After all, it is activities within these domains that largely determine whether the food supply can support and sustain adherence to dietary guidelines. Dietary advice is only appropriate if it can be put into practice. One implication of this is that, for dietary guidelines to be followed, the range of foods available to the target population should be nutritionally adequate, of good quality and able to support the recommendations in the guidelines. Most importantly, the recommended foods should be accessible to and affordable by the target population.
This does not mean that dietary guidelines should be based solely on currently available food supplies. In fact, they can be useful in assessing the adequacy of food supplies and, especially where food supplies are obviously inadequate, in assisting producers and planners to improve the quantity, quality and variety of available foods. For example, the inadequacy of food supplies in low-income, food-deficit countries does not preclude dietary guidelines from recommending adequate intakes. On the contrary, the need to assure the availability of nutritionally adequate food supplies should be a driving force behind food, agriculture and trade policies in those countries.
However, stressing that dietary guidelines should be feasible does imply that any changes in the food supply that might be required to implement the guidelines are not only possible but probable. In a country with an efficient system of food production, processing, and marketing and trade, changes in consumer demand for food products will alter their availability and price. To the extent that dietary guidelines can alter food demand and consumption patterns, supplies can also be altered. The greatly increased supply of low-fat foods in many countries, in response to increased consumer demand for these products, is a good example. But if dietary guidelines attempt to promote unrealistic, unattainable or undesirable (from a food consumer's point of view) dietary intakes, they will not be followed. To promote higher intakes of olive oil in countries where it is unavailable, prohibitively expensive or simply undesirable to consumers, is not an effective strategy to decrease
intakes of saturated fats, particularly in the near- to medium-term.
In all cases the role of environmental and agricultural science in developing and implementing FBDG needs to be recognized. This includes a range of issues related to land and water use and to the production and processing of crops, livestock, fishery and forestry products (139). Both basic and applied research can be especially important in either expanding the production of particular foods or in modifying their nutrient content and that of non-nutrient components to satisfy dietary guidelines. The concept of sustainable agriculture development is particularly important and needs to underpin efforts to meet the food needs of present and future generations.
5. Conclusion and suggested research priorities
Because many factors are still not understood in the relationships between food constituents, disease and health, there are numerous residual scientific concerns and areas of potential interest in those relationships. Much of the current research isolates and attributes the observed effects to a specific nutrient or non-nutrient component. However, it is well-recognized that the effect may be due to, or modified by, as yet unidentified food components. Research in this area will bring together work by food scientists, epidemiologists, biochemists and nutritional scientists.
Among the issues that have been identified are the following:
o The physico-chemical properties of foods and how they are processed, refined, prepared and stored affect their biological activity (140). This is important in diabetes, as the glycaemic index of a specific food is altered by particle size, viscosity etc. (141). There may be a further effect on the microflora of the large gut, and even on nutrient uptake, as less-digested food proceeds into the large bowel (142). To cite one example, cereal as an extruded product has different nutritional effects depending on the base from which it is made e.g. rice, wheat, or whole-meal flour, and with which it is chemically identical. Peanuts as peanuts or as peanut paste will affect differently protein bioavailability and fat content (143). Differences in the granularity of protein clots produced in the young stomach are believed to be related to differences in the availability of zinc, copper, iron and calcium from analogous or heterologous units.
o Food patterns and food preparation can also be important, e.g. in levels of vitamin A which vary depending on whether foods are steamed, fried or boiled (144). Food science will explore such relationships in greater detail as foods become the reference targets of guidelines. A dietetic component here is the consumer's ability to associate nutrient content (e.g. vitamins, fats or sugars) with various foods or food patterns.
o A possible future area of concern, based on experimental animal evidence, is the increasing refinement of the food supply which, in extreme cases, may lead to a risk of reduced availability of micronutrients such as copper, iron, selenium or zinc. Geochemical and agricultural variables can influence the content of iodine, selenium, fluoride and molybdenum in staple foods.
o Dietary guidelines will have to be developed concerning new foods which become available to populations in a particular cultural context, e.g. white bread and extruded snacks coming into traditional societies or instant noodles into Asian societies. Issues of dietary and plant genetic diversity retain their full importance.
o The increasing impact of "designer" or "functional" foods (130) is an extreme example. These simulated foods may lead to difficulties in food choice, in that they will not deliver what consumers expect based on existing knowledge. Also relevant are issues such as appropriate labelling, food legislation, and nutrition education. In formulating such foods, other non-nutrient components and even nutrients may not be included, e.g. breast-milk substitutes and various components such as long-chain fatty acids or immunological factors. Some foods may merely become vehicles for added nutrients, such as breakfast cereals.
References
1. Diet, nutrition, and the prevention of chronic diseases. Report of a WHO Study Group. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1990 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 797).
2. Energy and protein requirements. Report of a joint FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1985 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 724).
3. Requirements of Vitamin A, Iron, Folate and Vitamin B12. Report of a joint FAD/WHO Expert Consultation. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization, 1988.
4. Calcium Requirements. Report of a FAD/WHO Expert Committee. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1962 (WHO Technical Report Series, No 230).
5. Passmore R, Nicol BM, Narayana RAO M et al. Handbook on Human Nutrition Requirements. WHO Monograph Series, No 61. WHO, Geneva, 1974.
6. Requirements of Ascorbic Acid, Vitamin D, Vitamin B12, Folate, and Iron. Report of a joint FAO/WHO Expert Group. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1970 (WHO Technical Report Series No. 452).
7. Requirements of Vitamin A, Thiamine, Riboflavine and Niacin. Report of a joint FAO/WHO Expert Group. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1967 (WHO Technical Report Series, No 362).
8. Trace Elements in Human Nutrition and Health. World Health Organization, Geneva 1996.
9. Fats and oils in human nutrition. Report of a joint FAD/WHO Expert Consultation. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization, 1995 (FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 57).
10. Coste M. Tome D. Milk peptides with physiological activities. II. Opioid and immunostimulating peptides derived from milk protein. Lait, 1991, 71: 241-247.
11. Hansky J. Neuroendocrine factors in food In: McLean AJ. Wahlquist ML. (eds) Current problems in nutrition, pharmacology and toxicology. John Libbey: London 1988.
12. Jones DP, Coates RJ, Flagg EW, Eley JW, Block G. Greenberg RS, Gunter EW, Jackson B. Glutathione in foods listed in the National Cancer Institute's Health Habits and History Food Frequency Questionnaire. Nutrition and Cancer, 1992: 1 7: 57-75.
13. Maruyama S. Suzuki H. A peptide inhibitor of angiotensin l-converting enzyme in the tryptic hydrolyzate of casein. Agricultural and biological chemistry, 1982, 46: 1393-1394.
14. Shimizu M. Bioactive peptides from bovine milk proteins. Proceedings of the 24th International Dairy Congress. 18-22 September, 1994.
15. Kromhout D, Bosschieter EB, de Lezenne-Coulanders C. The inverse relation between fish consumption and 20-yearly mortality from coronary heart disease, cancer and all causes. The Zutphen Study. Lancet, 1982, 2: 519-521.
16. Kromhout D, Bosschieter EB, de Lezenne-Coulanders C. The inverse relation between fish consumption and 20-year mortality from coronary heart disease. New England journal of medicine, 1985, 312: 811-818.
17. Lapidus L, Andersson H. Bengtsson C, Bosaeus I. Dietary habits in relation to incidence of cardiovascular disease and death in women: a 12 year follow-up of participants in the population study of women in Gothenburg, Sweden. American journal of clinical nutrition, 1986, 44: 444-448.
18. Kushi LH, Lew RA, Stare J, Ellison CR, el-Lozy M, Bourke G. Daly L, Graham I, Hickey N, Mulcahy R et al. Diet and 20-year mortality from coronary heart disease. The Ireland-Boston Diet-Heart Study. New England journal of medicine, 1985, 31 2: 811-818.
19. Physical Status: the use and interpretation of anthropometry. Report of a WHO Expert Committee. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1955 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 854).
20. Hills AP, Wahlquist ML. Exercise and obesity. Smith-Gordon & Co. Ltd.: London 1988.
21. Wahlquist ML. Options in obesity management. Asia Pacific journal of clinical nutrition, 1992, 1: 183-190.
22. Torun B. et all., ED. Protein-energy requirements of developing countries: evaluation of new data. Tokyo, United Nations University, 1981, pp 1-268 (Food and Nutritional Bulletin, Suppl. 5).
23. Energy and protein requirements. Report of a joint FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1985 (WHO Technical Report Series, No.724).
24. IDECG. Protein-energy interactions Scrimshaw NS, Schrch B (eds). International Dietary Energy Consultancy Group. IDECG: Lausanne, Switzerland, 1992.
25. Paul AA, Southgate DAT. McCance and Widowson's: The composition of foods. 4th edition. Elsevier/North-Holland Biomedical Press. 1988.
26. Recommended Dietary Allowances (10th Edition), National Research Council (U.S.). Subcommittee on the Tenth Edition of the RDA, National Academy Press, Washington, DC 1989.
27. Lissner L, Levitsky DA, Strupp BJ, Kalkwarf HJ, Roe DA. Dietary fat and the regulation of energy intake in human subjects. American journal of clinical nutrition, 1987, 46: 886-892.
28. Micozzi MS, Moon TE. Macronutrients: investigating their role in cancer. Marcel Dekker Inc., New York, USA, 1992.
29. Wahlquist ML. Nutrition: does it matter? ln: Food and Nutrition in Australia. ML Wahlquist (ed). Third edition, Thomas Nelson Australia, 1988.
30. Greenfield H. The nutrient composition of Australian meats and poultry. Food and technology in Australia, 1987, 39: 181-240.
31. Nestel PJ, Eisenberg S. Nutrition and therapeutics. Editorial overview. Current opinion in lipidology, 1992, 3: 1-4.
32. Grundy SM. Multifactorial etiology of Hypercholesterolemia: implications for prevention of coronary heart disease. Arteriosclerosis and thrombosis, 1991, 11: 1619-1635.
33. Grundy SM, Senko MA. Dietary influences on serum lipids and lipoproteins. Journal of lipid research, 1990, 31: 1149-1172.
34. Mensink RP, Katan MB. Effect of dietary fatty acids on serum lipids and lipoproteins. A meta-analysis of 27 trials. Arteriosclerosis and thrombosis, 1992, 12: 911-919.
35. Mensink RP, Katan MB. Trans monounsaturated fatty acids in nutrition and their impact on serum lipoproteins in man. Progress in lipid research, 1993, 32: 111 - 122.
36. Abbey M, Nestel PJ. Plasma cholesterol ester transfer protein activity is increased when trans-elaidic acid is substituted for cis-oleic acid in the diet. Atherosclerosis, 1994, 1 06: 99-107.1992, 55: 46-50.
37. Knig KG, Navia JM. Nutritional role of sugars in oral health. Workshop on the Evaluation of the Nutritional and Health Aspects of Sugars. American journal of clinical nutrition, 1995, 62: 275S-283S.
38. Knig KG. Changes in the prevalence of dental caries: How much can be attributed to changes in diet? Caries research, 1990, 24(suppl 1): 16-18.
39. Crawley HF. The energy, nutrient and food intakes of teenagers aged 16-17 years in Britain; 1. Energy, macronutrients and non-starch polysaccharides. British journal of nutrition 1993, 70: 15-26.
40. Gibney M, Sigman-Grant M, Stanton JL, Keast D. Consumption of sugars. Workshop on the Evaluation of the Nutritional and Health Aspects of Sugars. American journal of clinical nutrition, 1995, 62: 178S-194S.
41. Wolever TMS, Jenkins DJA, Jenkins AL, Jossee RG. The glycemic index: methodology and clinical applications. American journal of clinical nutrition, 1991, 54: 846-854.
42. Muir JG, Young GP, O'Dea K. Resistant Starch - implications for health. Proceedings of the nutrition society of Australia, 1994, 18: 23-32.
43. Cummnings JH, gingham SA. Dietary fibre, fermentation and large bowel cancer. Cancer surveys, 1987, 6: 601-621.
44. Kolars JC, Levitt MD, Aouji M, Savaiano DA. Yogurt: an autodigesting source of lactose. New England journal of medicine, 1984, 310: 1-3.
45. Boudraa G. Touhami M, Pochart P, Rachina S. Mary JY, Desjeux JF. Effect of feeding yoghurt versus milk in children with persistent diarrhea. Journal of the pediatric gastroenterology and nutrition 1990, 11: 509-512.
46. Spiller RC. Pharmacology of dietary fibre. Pharmacology and therapeutics, 1994, 62: 407-427.
47. Schneeman BO, Tietyen J. Dietary Fiber. In: Shils ME, Ohlson JA, Shike M, (eds) Modern nutrition in health and disease, 8th edition. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1994:pp 89-100.
48. Bray GA, Zacchary B, Dahms WT, Atkinson RAL, Oddie TM. Eating patterns of the massively obese individual. Journal of the American dietetic association, 1978, 72:24-27.
49. Duncan KH, Bacon JA, Weinsier RL. The effects of high and low energy density diets on satiety, energy intake, and eating time of obese and non-obese subjects. American journal of clinical nutrition, 1983, 37:763-767.
50. Criqui MH, Ringel BL. Does diet or alcohol explain the French paradox? Lancet, 1994, 344: 1719-1723.
51. Trace element bioavailability and interactions. In: Trace elements in human nutrition and health. World Health Organization, Geneva. 1996.
52. The heavy metals: Lead, cadmium and mercury. In: Trace elements in human nutrition and health. World Health Organization, Geneva. 1996.
53. Detection and anticipation of trace-element related disorders. In: Trace elements in human nutrition and health. World Health Organization, Geneva. 1996.
54. Assessment of dietary intake of trace elements. In: Trace elements in human nutrition and health. World Health Organization, Geneva. 1996.
55. Guidelines for drinking water quality. Volume 1. Recommendations. Geneva WHO (2nd.ed.) 1993.
56. Rolls BJ, Phillips PA. Aging and disturbances of thirst and fluid balance. Nutrition reviews, 1990, 48: 137-144.
57. ICCIDD/UNICEF/WHO. Global prevalence of iodine deficiency disorders. MDS working paper No.1. Micronutrient deficiency information system. WHO Geneva 1993.
58. Gillespie S. Mason J. Controlling vitamin A defciency. ACC/SCN State-of-the-Art Series. Nutrition Policy Discussion Paper No. 14. United Nations ACC/SCN, Geneva 1994.
59. WHO/UNICEF/UNU. Indicators and strategies for iron deficiency end anaemia programmes. Report of a WHO/UNlCEF/UNU consultation. WHO (draft May 1944).
60. WHO. The prevention of childhood blindness. World Health Organization, Geneva 1992.
61. Sommer A. Vitamin A deficiency and its consequences: a field guide to detection and control 3 rd ed. 1995.
62. Czeizel A, Dudas I. Prevention of the first occurrence of neural tube defects by periconceptional vitamin supplementation. New England journal of medicine, 1992, 327: 1832-1835.
63. Fraser DR. Vitamin D. Lancet, 1995, 345: 104-107.
64. WHO/USAID/NEI. Vitamin A mortality and morbidity studies. Joint WHO/USAID/NEI Consultation of Principal Investigators. Vital: New York 1992.
65. Blumberg J. Role of Vitamins in health promotion and the prevention of noncommunicable diseases. Background paper prepared for the joint WHO/FAD Consultation on Preparation and Use of Food based Dietary Guidelines, Nicosia, Cyprus, March 1995 (full paper with 1 72 references available from FAO, WHO or the author).
66. Key T. Micronutrients and cancer aetiology: the epidemiological evidence. Proceedings of the nutrition society, 1994, 53: 605-614.
67. Steinberg D. Antioxidants and atherosclerosis. A current assessment. Circulation, 1991, 84: 1420-1425.
68. Ueland PM, Refsum H. Brattstrom L. Plasma homocysteine and cardiovascular disease. In: Francis Jr RB (ed). Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, hemostasis, and endothelial function New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc. pp 183-235.
69. NRC. Diet and health: Implications for Reducing Chronic Disease Risk. Committee on Diet and Health, Food and Nutrition Board, National Research Council. National Academy Press, Washington, DC 1989.
70. Blumberg JB. Changing Nutrient Requirements in Older Adults. Nutrition today, 1992, 27: 15-20.
71. Russel RM, Suter PM. Vitamin requirements of elderly people: an update. American journal of clinical nutrition, 1993, 58: 4-14.
73. Blumberg JB. The Requirements for Vitamins in Aging and Age-associated Degenerative Conditions. In: The Scientific Basis for Vitamin Intake in Human Nutrition. Walter P.(ed) Karger, Basel, 1995, pp 108-115.
74. Diplock AT. What Recommendations can be made for Optimal Intake of Antioxidant Vitamins and Carotenoids for Disease Prevention, In: "The evolution of antioxidants in modern medicine" Schmidt K. Diplock AT. Ulrich H. (eds), Hippokrates Verlag, Stuttgart 1994, pp. 19-28.
75. Nestel P. Food Fortification in Developing Countries. US Agency for International Development. Vital 1993.
76. Nutrient and energy intakes for the European Community Report of the Scientific Committee for Food (Thirty-fret series), Commission of The European Communities, Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, Brussels-Luxembourg, 1993.
77. Flanagan PR, McLellan JS, Haist MG, Cherlan MJ, Chamberlain MJ. Valberg LS. Increased dietary cadmium absorption in mice and human subjects with iron deficiency. Gastroenterology, 1978, 74: 841 -846.
78. Micronutrients and the nutrient status of soils: a global study. FAO Soils Bulletin 48. Silanp M. (ed). Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations. Rome 1982.
79. FAO. Micronutrient assessment at the country level. FAO Soils Bulletin 63. Sillanp M.(ed). Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations. Rome 1990.
80. Lee WTK, Leung SFS, Xu YC, Wang SH, Zeng WP, Lau J, Fairweather-Tait SJ. Effects of double-blind controlled calcium supplementation on calcium absorption in Chinese children measured with stable isotopes (42Ca and 44Ca). British journal of nutrition, 1995, 73: 311 -321.
81. LI R. Chen X, Yan H. Deurenberg P. Garby L, Hautvast JG. Functional consequences of iron supplementation in iron-deficient female cotton mill workers in Beijing, China. American journal of clinical nutnition, 1994, 59: 908-913.
82. NIHCC, Optimal calcium intake: National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Panel. Journal of the American Medical Association, 1994, 272: 1942-1948.
83. Kanis JA. Passmore R. Calcium supplementation of the diet: not justified by present evidence - I. British medical journal, 1989, 298: 137-140; II.ibid. 205-208.
84. Nordin BE, Heaney RP. Calcium supplementation of the diet: justified by present evidence. British medical journal, 1990, 300: 1056-1060.
85. New SA, Bolton-Smith C, Reid DM. Present and past dietary intake effects on winter time bone mineral density. In: Nutritional Aspects of Osteoporosis. Challenges of Modern Medicine. Burckhardt P, Heaney RP (eds) 1994;7:61-71. Ares-Sorono Symposia: Lausanne 1994.
86. Lutz J. Calcium balance and acid-base status of women as affected by increased protein intake and by sodium bicarbonate ingestion. American journal of clinical nutrition, 1984, 39: 281 -288.
87. Abelow BJ, Holford TR, Insogna KL. Cross-cultural association between animal protein and hip fracture. Calcified tissue international, 1992, 50: 14-18.
88. COMA. 1991. Dietary reference values for food, energy and nutrients for the United Kingdom: Report 41 on Health and Social Subjects, Committee on Medical Aspects of Food Policy, HMSO: London 1991.
89. Pollitt E, Iron deficiency and cognitive function. Annual review of nutrition, 1993,13: 521-538.
90. DeMaeyer EM, Dallman P. Gurney JM, Hallberg I, Sood SK, Srikantia SG. Preventing and Controlling Iron Deficiency Anaemia Through Primary Health Care. World Health Organization, Geneva, 1989.
91. Arthur JR, Beckett GJ. New metabolic roles for selenium. Proceedings of the nutrition society, 1994, 53: 1426-1428.
92. Beck MA, Kolbeck PC, Rohr LH, Quing S Morris VC, Levander OA. Vitamin E deficiency intensifies the myocardial injury of coxsackievirus B3 infection of mice. Journal of nutrition, 1994,124: 345-358.
93. Beck MA et al. Benign human enterovirus becomes virulent in selenium deficient mice. Journal of medical virology, 1994, 43: 166-1 70.
94. Selenium. In: Trace elements in human nutrition and health. World Health Organization Geneva. 1996.
95. Perry IJ. Beevers DG. Salt intake and stroke: a possible direct effect. Journal of human hypertension, 1992, 6: 23-25.
96. Law MR, Frost CD, Wald NJ. By how much does dietary salt reduce blood pressure? I-Analysis of observational data among populations. British medical journal, 1991, 302: 811 -823.
97. Swain A, Dutton S. Truswell AS. Salicylates in Australian foods. Journal of American Dietetic Association, 1985, 85: 950-960.
98. Thun MJ, Namboodiri MM, Calle EE, Flander WD, Heath CW. Aspirin use and risk of fatal cancer. Cancer research, 1993, 53: 1322-1327.
99. Loblay RH, Swain AR. Food intolerance. In: recent Advances in Clinical Nutrition: 2. Wahlquist ML. Truswell AS (eds). John Libbey: London 1986.
100. Britton G. Carotenoids. In: Natural Food Colorants. GAF Hendry and JD Houghton (eds). Blackie, Glasgow and London, 1992, pp141 -182.
101. Goodwin TW. Metabolism, nutrition and function of carotenoids. Annual review of nutrition, 1986,6: 273-297.
102. Seddon JM, Ajani UA, Sperduto RD, Hiller R. Blair N. Burton TC, Farber MD, Gragoudas ES, Haller J. Miller DT, Yannuzi LA, Willett W. for the Eye Disease Case-control Study Group. Dietary carotenoids, Vitamins A, C, and E, and Advanced Age-related Macular Degeneration. Journal of the American Medical Association, 1994, 282: 1413-1420.
103. Hertog MGL, Kromhout D, Aravanis C, Blackburn H. Buzina R. Fidanza F. Giampaoli S. Jansen A, Menotti A, Nedeljkovic S. Pekkarinen M, Simic BS, Toshima H. Feskens EJM, Hollman PCH, Katan MB. Flavonoid intake and long-term risk of coronary heart disease and cancer in the seven countries study. Archives of internal medicine, 1995, 155: 381-386.
104. Hertog MG, Feskens EJ, Hollman PC, Katan MB, Kromhout D. Dietary antioxidant flavonoids and risk of coronary heart disease: the Zutphen Elderly Study. Lancet, 1993, 342: 1007-1011.
105. Komori A, Yatsunami J. Okabe S. Abe S. Hara K, Suganuma M, Kim SJ, Fujiki H. Anticarcinogenic activity of green tea polyphenols. Japanese journal of clinical oncology, 1993, 23: 186-190.
106. Demrow HS, Slane PR, Folts JD. Administration of wine and grape juice inhibits in vivo platelet activity and thrombosis in stenosed canine coronary arteries. Circulation, 1995, 91: 1182-1188.
107. Wilcox G. Wahlquist ML, Burger HG, Medley G. Oestrogenic effects of plant-derived foods in postmenopausal women. British medical journal, 1990, 301: 905- 906.
108. Fotsis T. Pepper M, Adlercreutz H, Fleischmann G, Hase T, Montesano R, Valberg R, Schweigerer L. Genistein, a dietary-derived inhibitor of in vitro angiogenesis. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the United States of America, 1993, 90: 2690-2694.
109. Protecting, promoting and supporting breast-feeding: the special role of maternity services. A joint WHO/UNICEF statement. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1989.
110. The International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes: synthesis of reports on action taken (1981-1990). Document WHO/MCH/NUT/90.1.
111. Innocenti Declaration on the Protection, Promotion and Support of Breastfeeding. Breastfeeding in the 1990s: A Global/nitiative.WHO/UNICEF, Florence, Italy, 1990.
112. Forty-fourth World Health Assembly, May 1991, Resolution WHA44.33 on the World Summit for Children: Follow-up action.
113. Breast-feeding: the technical basis and recommendations for action. Geneva, Saadeh R. Labbok MH, Cooney KA, Koniz-Boer P (eds). World Health Organization, Geneva, 1993 (document WHO/NUT/MCH/93.1).
114. Kromhout D, Bosschieter EB, de Lezenne-Coulanders C. The inverse relation between fish consumption and 20-yearly mortality from coronary heart disease, cancer and all causes. The Zutphen Study. Lancet, 1982, 2: 519-521.
115. Kromhout D, Bosschieter EB, de Lezenne-Coulanders C. The inverse relation between fish consumption and 20-year mortality from coronary heart disease. New England journal of medicine, 1985, 312: 1205-1209.
116. Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Rosner BA, Hennekens CH, Speizer FE. Dietary fat and the risk of breast cancer. New England journal of medicine, 1987, 316: 22-28.
117. Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Rosner BA, Hennekens CH, Speizer FE. Moderate alcohol consumption and the risk of breast cancer. New England journal of medicine, 1987, 316: 11741180.
118. Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Rosner BA, Speizer FE. Relation of meat, fat and fiber intake to the risk of colon cancer in a prospective study among women. New England journal of medicine, 1990, 323: 1664-1672.
119. Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Willett WC, Manson jE, Rosner B. Speizer FE, Hennekens CH. Postmenopausal estrogen therapy and cardiovascular disease. Ten-year follow up from the nurses' health study. New England journal of medicine, 1991, 325: 756-762.
120. Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ, Ascherio A, Giovannuci E, Colditz GA, Willett WC. Vitamin E consumption and 20-year mortality from coronary heart disease in men. New England journal of medicine, 1993, 328: 1450-1456.
121. Lee HP. Diet and cancer among Chinese in Singapore. Asia Pacific journal of clinical nutrition, 1994, 3: 99-102.
122. Kushi L, Lew RA, Stare FJ, Ellison CR, el-Lozy M, Bourke G. Daly L, Graham I, Hickey N, Mulcahy R et al. Diet and 20-year mortality from coronary heart disease. The Ireland-Boston diet-heart study. New England journal of medicine, 1985,312: 811 -818.
123. Lapidus L, Andersson H, Bengtsson C, Bosaeus I. Dietary habits in relation to incidence of cardiovascular disease and death in women: a 12 year follow-up of participants in the population study of women in Gothenburg, Sweden. American journal of clinical nutrition, 1986,44: 444-448.
124. Kant AK, Schatzkin A, Harris TB, Ziegler RG, Bloch G. Dietary diversity and subsequent mortality in the First Hational Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Epidemiological Follow-up Study. American journal of clinical nutrition, 1993, 57: 434-440.
125. Smiciklas-Wright H. Krebs-Smith SM, Krebs-Smith J. Variety in foods. What is America Eating? Proceeding of a Symposium. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1986.
126. Hodgson JM, Hsu-Hage BH-H, Wahlquist ML. Food variety as a quantitative descriptor of food intake. Ecology of food and nutrition, 1994, 32: 137-148.
127. Fuller R. Probiotics in man and animals. Journal of applied bacteriology, 1989, 66: 365-378.
128. Englyst HN, Kingman SM, Cummings JH. Classification and measurement of nutritionally important starch fractions. European journal of clinical nutrition, 1992,suppl 2: 533-550.
129. Englyst HN, Cummings JH. Non-starch polysaccharides (dietary fibre) and resistant starch. Advances in experimental medicine and biology, 1990,270: 205-225.
130. National Food Authority. Functional Foods. Policy Discussion Paper. National Food Authority. Canberra 1994
131. Wahlquist ML. Food and Nutrition in Australia. 3rd edition, Thomas Nelson, Victoria, Australia, 1988.
132. Achterberg CL, Bradley E. Bulletin features found most and least appealing to an extension audience. Journal of nutrition education, 1991, 23: 244-250.
133. Achterberg cl. Qualitative research: What do we know about teaching good nutrition! Journal of nutrition, 1994,124: 1808S-1812S.
134. Auld GW, Achterberg C, Getty V, Durrwachter jG. Misconceptions about fats and cholesterol: Implications for dietary guidelines. Ecology of food and nutrition, 1994, 33: 15-25.
135. Paivio AD. Imagery and Verbal Processes. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston 1971.
136. Paivio AD. Mental representations: A Dual Coding Approach. New York: Oxford Press, 1986.
137. von Eye A, Wills SD, Butler J. The standardization of concrete and abstract texts for testing the prose memory of persons from 20 to 60 years. Technical Report No.1, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 1987.
138. Achterberg CL. Factors that affect learner readiness. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 1988, 88: 1426-1428.
139. FAO. International Conference on Nutrition. Food, Nutrition and Agriculture 1992;5/6.
140. Jenkins DJA, Wolever TM, Jenkins AL. Starchy foods and glycaemic index. Diabetes care, 1988, 11: 149-159.
141. Wolewer TMS, Jenkins DJA, Jenkins AL, Jossee RG. The Glycemic index: methodology and clinical implications. American journal of clinical nutrition, 1991, 54: 846-854.
142. O'Dea K, Nestel PJ, Antonoff L. Physical factors influencing postprandial glucose and insulin responses to starch. American journal of clinical nutrition, 1980, 33: 760-765.
143. Levine AS, Silvis SE. Absorption of whole peanuts, peanut oil, and peanut butter. New England journal of medicine, 1980, 303: 91 7-918.
144. Rahman MM, Wahed MA, Ali MA. -carotene losses during different methods of cooking green leafy vegetables in Bangladesh. Journal of food composition analysis, 1990, 3: 47-53.
<title>Preparation and use of food-based dietary guidelines</title>
Annex four - Examples of foods in current sets of dietary guidelines and food guides(1)
1. Foods included in dietary guidelines
2. A selection of food groups used in food guides for nutrition education of the general public (Table 9)
3. Visual presentation food guides
References
Annex four - Examples of foods in current sets of dietary guidelines and food guides(1)
^1 The following examples illustrate how foods and food groups have been incorporated into dietary guidelines in selected countries. They also indicate the types of food guides that have been developed as visual aids and teaching tools to help implement the guidelines. The inclusion of these guidelines does not mean they are being endorsed or promoted as "recommended" dietary guidelines or food guides, especially since some of the scientific assumption underlying some statements have been overtaken by more recent research and knowledge.
1. Foods included in dietary guidelines
A number of countries and organizations have developed dietary guidelines. While the consultation did not review them, examples of foods that feature in the current sets of dietary guidelines are provided in Table 8 (1) (the numbers in the set column refer to specific food guidelines). For example, in the Australian set guidelines 2, 6, 9 and 10 name foods, while guidelines 1, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8 (not shown in the table) are expressed in other ways, without naming foods. The latter category predominates.
The foods that appear in these guidelines are usually large groups, e.g. vegetables, fruits, cereals, meat; but in some cases they are more specific, e.g. citrus fruits, bread, fatty fish, rice. A few guidelines specify processing or lack of processing (e.g. whole grain, smoked, full cream, saltcured, fresh).
2. A selection of food groups used in food guides for nutrition education of the general public (Table 9)
Example 7(Fiji), is used throughout the South Pacific and in a number of African and other countries. It may have originated in the UK in World War 11. This three-food-groups system has one group of foods said to provide energy, another protein, and a third consisting of fruits and vegetables (in some sets termed as "health" or "selective" foods).
Example 5, is a four-food-group system proposed by Abrahamsson (2) for developing countries, especially for feeding children. It gives pride of place to the country's staple, which not only provides energy but also protein and other nutrients. For good nutrition it needs to be supplemented with foods from three groups: vegetables and fruits (for vitamins A, B and C), proteinrich food (especially for young children) and extra energy (most conveniently as some form of oil).
Example 4, in the Caribbean the food guide had more groups--six formerly and now seven. The current food guide strongly emphasizes fruit and vegetables, and includes, but de-emphasizes, fats and sugar.
In industrialized countries there are mostly four, five or three food groups. The foods that differ most between country systems are:
o Milk, which has its own group in Canada (3), USA (15), Australia (1), New Zealand (12), Denmark (6), Finland (8), Germany (9) and the UK (14), but not in the Netherlands (11) or Sweden (13). In the Netherlands, milk is grouped with other animal foods; in Sweden, it is grouped with cereal foods and potatoes as the basal diet in the bottom layer of the pyramid.
o Potatoes appear as a special food group in Finland (8). In some countries they are grouped with green vegetables (2) (3) (12). In other countries they are grouped with cereals (6) (11) (13) (14).
o Fats & oils do not appear in Canada (3). In some countries they appear as a small ("eat sparingly") separate group (1) (6) (8) (9) (11). In other countries they are combined with sugar in a small ("eat sparingly") group (8) (12) (14).
o Legumes appear with the meat group in some countries (1) (3) (14) (15), usually described as "dry legumes". In other countries they may be grouped with green vegetables.
Food groups are also being used to represent advice on vegetarian diets, therapeutic diets for diabetes mellitus, for lowering plasma LDL-cholesterol, and for describing an idealized Mediterranean diet.
It is much easier to illustrate unpackaged, single foods. Some countries have made suggestions where mixed dishes fit in their food group systems, e.g. in a reserve comprehensive list.
Note that these food guides in the table do not express all the dietary guidelines of the corresponding country. "Eat less or little fat" can be conveyed by having a fats and oils group and showing it very small (1) (11). In the US food pyramid fats are shown as small white circles against a black background. It remains to be seen how efficiently this pictorial symbolism can convey the message. It has proved very difficult to convey in visual form: "Balance energy intake against expenditure; avoid overweight/obesity" and "if you drink alcohol, do so in moderation".
In countries, the individual foods which are generally available and which educators wish to emphasize are mentioned in the text or shown in visual material. Preferred forms of the food can be described in accompanying text, e.g. Iow-fat meat, fatty fish, whole-grain cereals, etc.
3. Visual presentation food guides
The main forms in which dietary guidelines have been expressed as food groups are assembled in Table 10.
Table 8: Food groups included in current dietary guidelines
County
Year
Set
Australia
Eat plenty of breads and cereals (preferably whole grain), vegetables (including legumes), and fruits
Eat only a moderate amount of sugars and foods containing added sugars
Eat foods containing calcium
Eat foods containing iron
Denmark
Eat more bread and corn products, potatoes, vegetables and fruit
Eat less butter, margarine, fat, sugar, meat fat, and fewer fatty meat products and full-cream dairy products
France
For sufficient fibre take wholemeal breads, vegetables, cereals (dry) legumes, and dried fruits, etc
Germany
Eat sweets seldom
Eat fresh foods (fruits, juices, vegetables, milk)
Hungary
Reduce sugary snacks
Drink  litre of low fat milk per day
Eat fresh fruits, vegetables and salads more often
Always have whole grain bread on the table; choose potatoes over rice
Quench thirst with water
Japan
Eat 30 (different) foodstuffs a day; take staple food (ie rice), main dish and side dish together
Rep. of Korea
Drink milk every day
New Zealand
Eat a variety of foods from each of the four mayor food groups each day
Singapore
Reduce intake of salt-cured, preserved and smoked foods
Increase intake of fruit and vegetables and whole grain cereal products, thereby increasing vitamins A and C and fibre
United Kingdom
Eat plenty of food rich in starch and fibre (examples given)
Look after the vitamins and minerals in your food (milk, cheese, butter and margarine, eggs, green vegetables, carrots, liver, meat, fish, beans, bread, breakfast cereals, citrus fruits, fatty fish, dried fruit)
USA - Dietary guidelines for Americans
Choose a diet with plenty of vegetables, fruits and grain products
USA - NRC Diet and health
Eat five or more servings of vegetables and fruits each day (especially green and yellow vegetables and citrus fruits). Also increase intake of starches and complex carbohydrates such as breads, cereals and legumes. Increase of added sugars is not recommended
Table 9: A selection of food guides for nutrition education of the general public
1. Australia
Australian Nutrition Foundation (present)
Eat most
vegetables and fruit (including canned and frozen)
Eat most
cereal foods
Eat moderately
lean meat, eggs, fish, chicken (no skin), nuts
Eat moderately
milk, yoghurt, cheese
Eat in small amounts
fats- butter, oil, margarine
Eat least
sugar
2. Australia
Target on healthy eating (S. Australia and Victoria)
Large area
cereal foods
Large area
vegetables and fruit
Intermediate area
meat, fish, poultry, legumes, nuts, eggs
Intermediate area
milk, cheese and yoghurt
Minimal area
butter and margarine
3. Canada
Rainbow (1992)
Outer largest quadrant
grain products (5-12 serves/day)
Next, second largest quadrant
vegetables and fruit (including canned and frozen) (5-10 serves/day)
Next, second smallest quadrant
milk products
innermost quadrant
meats (lean), poultry, fish, dried legumes, eggs, tofu, peanut butter (2-3 serves/day)
other foods and beverages
4. Caribbean
New Circle
Semi circle (180)
fruits and vegetables: 1.75 to 2.5 lb
Next largest sector
ground provisions - bananas, breadfruit, yam, potatoes :12-18 oz
Next largest sector
cereals: 6-9 oz
Next largest sector (20)
food from animals: 4-6 oz
Next largest sector
legumes and nuts: 2-3 oz
Equal smallest sector (5)
fats and oils: 1-1.5 oz
Equal smallest sector (5)
sugar 1.5 oz
5. Food Square for DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
(esp. children), L. Abrahamson (1977)
Staple food
Protein supplement
(milk powder, meat, beans or fish)
Vitamins and minerals supplement
(mixed vegetables and fruit)
Energy supplement (oil)
6. Denmark
Kostcirclen
bread, grains and potatoes
vegetables
meat, fish, egg
fruit
milk and cheese
fats
7. Fiji
Three food groups of equal size
Energy
cereals, root crops, coconut, sugar, oil, butter
Health
vegetables, fruits, seaweed
Body building
meats, fish, chicken, eggs, milk, cheese, legumes, peanuts
8. Finland
Food circle, 1987
Largest sector
vegetables and fruit
Intermediate sector
cereal foods
Intermediate sector
milk, cheese and yoghurt
Somewhat smaller
meat, poultry, fish, egg, nuts
Smaller sector
potatoes
Smallest sector
oil and fat
9. Germany
Seven food groups
Largest area
cereals group and potatoes
Next largest
vegetables, legumes and nuts
Next
faults
Next
drinks
Next
milk and dairy
Next
meat, sausages, fish, eggs
Smallest
fats and oils
10. Islamic Rep. of Iran
Four groups shown, of equal size in posters, and a miscellaneous group
Milk group
milk, yoghurt. cheese, ice cream
Meat group
beef, lamb, organ meats, poultry, fish, chicken, eggs, legumes
Cereal group
bread, rice, macaroni, corn, wheat, barley, fruit and vegetables
Miscellaneous
nuts, fats and oils, sweets, spices, beverages
11. Netherlands
Maaltijdschijf
1/3 circle
bread, cereal products and potato
1/3 circle
vegetables and fruit
1/6 circle
meat, fish, poultry, milk, egg and cheese
1/6 circle
a little fat
12. New Zealand
National Heart Foundation of NZ (present)
Eat most
fruits and vegetables (fresh)
Eat most
cereal foods
Eat moderately
lean meat, poultry, fish, dried bean, nuts, eggs
Eat moderately
milk, cheese, yoghurt
Eat least
salt, sugar, butter, margarine, oil
13. Sweden
Matpyramid
Base
bread and other cereals, potatoes, milk, cheese, table fat
Middle
vegetables, fruit, fruit juice, dry legumes
Apex
meat and fish
14. UK
Food plate (1994)
Large sector
fruit and vegetables (including canned and frozen)
Large sector
bread, other cereals and potatoes (choose high fibre)
Intermediate sector
meat, fish, dry legumes, nuts eggs
Intermediate sector
milk, yoghurts, cheeses
Smallest sector
fatty and sugary foods
15. USA
New (1992) Pyramid
Base
bread and other cereals, potatoes, milk, cheese, table fat
2nd level
vegetables group (3-5 servings)
2nd level (a smaller area)
fruit group (2-4 servings)
3rd level
milk, yoghurt and cheese (2-3 servings)
3rd level
meat, poultry, fish, dry beans, eggs and nuts (2-3 servings)
Apex
fats and sweets: use sparingly
Table 10: Visual presentation of food guides related to dietary guidelines
1. Have a mixture of brief text with illustrations of major individual foods, with a spreadsheet for each food group (e.g. 'Eat well ... live well' by Guild of Food Writers and Coronary Prevention Group, UK, 1991)
2. Several food groups, with examples illustrated in each. Each group within the same sized rectangle (e.g. Australian posters of the late 1970s, with 5 groups; South Pacific Commission posters with 3 groups; UK World War II material).
3. Several food groups represented by rectangles, cubes or squares of different sizes (e.g. 'Are you overweight?' Australia 1985).
4. Steps or piles of blocks of different heights (e.g. New Zealand). Each block the same size. Like building blocks, these can convey servings--cereals 5 blocks piled up (= serves), vegetables 4, fruits 3, dairy 2 and meat or alternative 1 block serving.
5. Food circle, with food groups each the same sectoral size (e.g. Sweden food circle has 7 sectors of equal size).
6. Food circle with sectors of different area, typically largest for cereals and vegetable/fruit groups, smallest for fat (e.g. Netherlands Gezonde voeding met de maaltijdschiff, 1382; Finland has 6 sectors of different areas; Caribbean has 6 (old) or 7 (new)).
7. Circle with sectors for food groups of different area (narrow for fats) but also outer band of more processed products in each sector (group), with more fat, salt or sugar, so less recommended than the central area (inner circle) of unprocessed foods (e.g. South Australia 'Target on Healthy Eating').
8. The health food plate, which is a food circle, with sectors of different sizes, each illustrating major foods of the group, but the circle is seen as if tilted so drawn as an ellipse. It looks like a plate with a knife on one side and a fork on the other (UK Food Guide, 1994).
9. Triangle (some of these called a pyramid but drawn as 2-dimensional shape). Food groups that should tee eaten least are at the top; staple foods that should be eaten most are across the broad base of the triangle (e.g. Sweden 1977, USDA new food guide "pyramid" 1993; K. Baghurst (Australia) 1,2,3,4,5 + nutrition plan).
Pennington (1981) first suggested that the triangle or pyramid should be upside down, with the food group you should eat least of at the apex and below the other groups.
10. Pyramid, which shows different groups on two faces (e.g. Australian Nutrition Foundation from early 1980s; New Zealand National Heart Foundation).
11. Quarter rainbow, with 4 quadrants, the innermost one having the smallest area (so eat least) (e.g. Canada's Food Guide, 1992).
12. Traffic light: be careful with foods in red group; eat foods in orange group in moderation; eat as much as you like of foods in the green group (used especially for obesity and diabetic diets, e.g. UK Health Education Council, 1981).
OTHER SYMBOLS USED LESS OFTEN
Star
Arrows (e.g. Italy)
Groups of foods, shown without borders
Table with different size plates (under trial by USDA)
Supermarket trolley with different size columns (under trial by USDA)
References
1. Truswell AS. Dietary goals and guidelines: national and international perspectives. In Shils ME, Ohlson JA, Shike M. (eds) Modern nutrition in health and disease, 8th ea., Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger 1994, pp 1612-1625.
2. Abrahamsson L. Gebre Medhin M. The use of food group classification systems in developing countries. Human nutrition: applied nutrition, 1983, 37a:328-330.
<title>Preparation and use of food-based dietary guidelines</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
The consultation would like to express its gratitude to the participants and FAO/WHO secretariat members who all contributed vigorously not only during the consultation, but in giving time and effort in preparation for the meeting and in developing the report, subsequently. In addition, gratitude is expressed to the following scientists who generously responded to requests for reviews of some of the background papers: Professor G.H. Anderson, Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Professor W.P.T. James, Director, The Rowettt Research Institute, Aberdeen, Scotland; Dr O.A. Levander, Research Leader, Beltswille Human Nutrition Research Center, US Department of Agriculture, Beltswille, MD, USA; Dr Vinodini Reddy, Director, National Institute of Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research, Hyderabad, India; Professor Brittmarie Sandstrom, Research Department of Human Nutrition, The Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
<section>e</section>
List of abbreviations
List of abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this report:
AA
arachidonic acid
AMD
age-related macular degeneration
BMI
body mass index
CHD
coronary heart disease
CVD
cardiovascular disease
DHA
docosahexaenoic acid
DRV
dietary reference values
EFA
essential fatty acid
EPA
eicosapentaenoic acid
FBDG
food-based dietary guidelines
FFQ
food frequency questionnaire
IDD
iodine deficiency disorders
INTERHEALTH
WHO Integrated Programme for Community Health in Noncommunicable Diseases
INTERSALT
International Study of Electrolyte Excretion and Blood Pressure
MONICA
WHO Programme on Multinational Monitoring of Cardiovascular Disease
MUFA
monounsaturated fatty acids
NCD
noncommunicable diseases
NHANES
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (USA)
PUFA
polyunsaturated fatty acids
RAP
rapid assessment procedure
RDA
recommended dietary allowances
RDI
recommended dietary intakes
RNI
recommended nutrient intakes
