<section>e</section>
Foreword
Foreword
A Field Document is essentially technical in nature. Its primary purpose is to inform the relevant staff of the Government of Zimbabwe, particularly AGRITEX staff, of a methodology or of a process (including, usually, the results of using that methodology/process) that is fairly well tested and could be seriously considered for incorporation into Government methods and processes.
The methodologies, processes and results described have been developed by the Programme team of AGRITEX and FAO personnel. In some cases staff from other Zimbabwean institutions have also been involved. The methodologies/processes should not be seen as new, but rather current ones which have been updated both through the incorporation of modern technologies and also the experience of the Programme's implementation of AGRITEX's development sequence, using a Farming Systems Development/Land Use Planning/Participatory Extension approach, in two pilot areas during 1993. The use of the phrase "fairly well tested" has been necessary because of the unexpectedly short time period available for field operations.
This Field Document is released under the authority of ZIM/91/005: "Programme of Technical Assistance to AGRITEX". It can be quoted with due acknowledgments to the author(s) and FAO/AGRITEX.
Brian B Scoullar
Chief Technical Adviser
February 1994
<title>Gender issues, constraints and potentials in AGRITEX - An Overview</title>
<section>1</section>
Acronyms
Acronyms
AEO
Agricultural Extension Officer
AGRITEX
Department Of Agricultural, Technical And Extension Services
AEW
Agricultural Extension Worker
CAEO
Chief Agricultural Extension Officer
CAS
Chief Agricultural Specialist
CORFRE
Committee For On-Farm Research And Extension
DAEO
District Agricultural Extension Officer
DEVAG
Department of Agricultural Development
EW
Extension Worker
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organisation (Of The United Nations)
GTZ
German Technical Aid to Zimbabwe
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
PAE
Principal Agricultural Extension Officer
T & V
Training and Visit System
MCCDWA
Ministry of Community and Cooperative Development and Women's Affairs
MF
Master Farmer
MLARR
Ministry of Lands Agriculture and Rural and Resettlement
NORAD
Norwegian Agency For Development Cooperation
UN
United Nations
WID
Women In Development
ZNFU
Zimbabwe National Farmers Union
<section>2</section>
Executive summary gender issues, constraints and potential in AGRITEX
Executive summary gender issues, constraints and potential in AGRITEX
PURPOSE OF THE ANALYSIS:
The purpose of the analysis was to determine the relevance of gender issues in the delivery of extension and other agricultural related programmes. The study includes discussions, observations and recommendations on specific issues that would require follow-up.
METHODOLOGY USED
The methodology used in the study included field visits to all the provinces (8) and interviews with 140 AGRITEX staff of which 37 were female and 309 farmers, 170 female and 139 male . The focus of the analysis was on the views of field staff and farmers on the gender related factors in agriculture.
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
The general conclusion of the analysis center on the fact that AGRITEX services suffer from a number of weakness in their programmes for rural women including the following:
a. In Master Farmer training approach: there is a strong focus on the few farmers to the relative neglect of many resource - poor rural families, and among these are mostly women-headed households. From 1982 to 1990 only 33% of the total number of Master Farmers trained at Ordinary level are women against a background of 70% of farmers being women.
b. Misconceptions about and prejudices against women's actual and ideal roles, with the result that they are often excluded from the target audience of agricultural extension education and development programmes. The bee-keeping in Hurungwe Mashonaland East is a case in point were only 10% of the participants are women .
c. A Bender blindness and bias among the majority of AGRITEX staff which is translated into programmes and activities detrimental to women's access to agricultural services. About 80% of the Agricultural Extension Workers are men.
d. There is a lack of feedback on the transfer of technologies that involves a two-way or multi-directional communication between rural women, and extension personnel.
e. Inappropriate extension methodology for working with rural women.
f. "A farmer is a farmer", concept that characterises AGRITEX's view of its clientele is not grounded in a true understanding of the gender socio-economic conditions of the target group. The extension service and training is not gender-neutral. It impacts on male and female farmers differently.
g. AGRITEX has the potential to promote and enhance women's role in agriculture by increasing their decision making capacities and ability to participate in agricultural committees through training in leadership .
h. Women in the AGRITEX profession encounter a number of structural difficulties partly due to their multiple roles (reproductive and productive roles) that complicate their placement and result in frequent application for transfers. This also affects-their promotion to more senior posts.
i. The monitoring and evaluation of AGRITEX activities and programmes lacks a gender perspectives. AGRITEX has therefore been unable to increase benefits to women farmers, or reduce negative impacts on women, policies on women are usually done on ad hoc basis without the basis of hard data. There are no set standards to measure the effectiveness of extension.
j. There are information gaps with regards to gender and sociological aspects of the rural communities. The implication of this lack of knowledge on technology transfer is not appreciated. Needs of the farmers are overlooked. Related to this is the creation of a centrist tradition; the distancing of some officials within the profession from the culture and life of the rural farmers, and the assumption that a purely technical approach will provide all the answers. The socio-economic surveys currently being done in preparation for the execution of development projects lacks a gender and sociological perspective. The surveys lack a broader perspective towards the socio-economic situation of most communal farmers.
k. Despite women's predominant role in marketing very little has been done to help them in their marketing activities, either by way of organising them or suggesting better marketing strategies.
RECOMMENDATIONS
a. There is a need to improve statistical concepts and methods in AGRITEX aimed at gender specific data collection and analysis; to speed up collection of reliable comprehensive and unbiased data and to develop a set of Women in Development indicators and integrate them into an overall sectoral set of indicators.
b. The training of AGRITEX staff to have a gender appreciation and improve the way they work and programme activities for farmers is an urgent matter that should be addressed.
c. The instructional material produced for extensionists should be reoriented to include a stronger focus on rural women.
d. For women to be adequately served by agricultural extension, the extension message must be made more relevant to their needs; relevant to the crops they grow, the livestock they raise and the farming systems and time allocation contexts within which they work.
e. Since women are the majority of farmers there should an impact assessment from a gender perspective whenever a technology or project is being introduced to rural farmers.
- In technology development and transfer there is need to direct it towards the end-user. New technology it has been found may increase women's workload, decrease the range of production of food crops, cause changes in the division of labour between men and women or benefit male farmers more than female farmers.
- There is need for information on the effects of cash cropping on nutritional status and energy expenditure in the various types of farming systems.
f. The incorporation of a gender and sociological perspective in the framework of agricultural extension programming is a necessity. Achieving this goal requires AGRITEX staff to acquire a new set of conceptual and analytical perspectives and skills in order to deal explicitly, effectively and efficiently with women related issues in the spectrum of the agricultural projects in which they are involved.
Strengths of AGRITEX
- AGRITEX major strength lies in its philosophy, which reads, " To satisfy the agricultural extension, technical, and regulatory services needs of all farmers and other agencies". (AGRITEX 1982)
- It is one organisation that is widespread on the ground ant has potential to reach every farmer. Following the policy of expanding the extension services provided to small-holler farmers, in some districts the extension worker-farmer ratio is on average 1:700.
- AGRITEX has highly qualified and technically competent staff at all levels.
- AGRITEX has the potential to influence policy on matters relating to agriculture, because of its central role in one of the most important sectors of the Zimbabwean economy.
Lessons Learned
The analysis shows that AGRITEX's extension programmes lack an appreciation of gender and sociological issues which are critical to bridging the knowledge gap between the extension agent and its clientele. This is evidenced in the lack of gender disaggregated data to support or reject any of the issues raised in the analysis. The analysis therefore concludes that AGRITEX staff at all levels require a reorientation to a sociological and gender sensitised approach and issues raised concerning women farmers, irrigation schemes, and women in the AGRITEX profession will have to be addressed. This would also mean that incorporation of the gender perspective will not be the job of one person that is the WID specialist, but that of EWs, AEOs, DAEOs, CAEOs up to the Directorate
<section>3</section>
1.0 Introduction
1. 1 Objectives
1.2 Methodological Considerations
1.3 Background
1.0 Introduction
One of the actions to be taken by the WID Specialist envisaged in the project ZIM/91/005 is the establishment of database on WID to facilitate compilation, retrieval and dissemination of data for the other subject matter specialists . A first step towards the development of this data base is the subject of this study which was made by way of a constraint analysis. The initial observations will help to establish the framework for a data base on gender related issues in agriculture.
When we consider that the major agency that informs, trains and provides advisory service to the rural people is AGRITEX there is a need to examine the extent to which women farmers are included in the extension audience. There is a need to review the experiences of AGRITEX programmes with rural farmers from a gender perspective, to gain some insight into the constraints and possible solutions to the identified problems.
During the UN Decade for Women, studies and reports confirmed the major contribution of women in food production and agricultural work. Gender barriers inhibiting women from benefiting from agricultural development programmes have also been documented (FAO 1987). This has been acknowledged by most of the development community, namely the World Bank, FAO and a host of others, and a number of projects now actively seek ways to include women in the extension process. This shift to a gender approach has been primarily due to the overiding attention by development agencies to the need for socio-economic policies to take into account the women's role and the impact of these policies on women.
The incorporation of gender issues and analysis in agricultural extension programmes is a fairly recent phenomena resulting largely from the interaction of two fields; farming systems development and women in development (Feldstein and Poats 1990). Throughout its development the WID component has always been seen as a critique to the mainstream approaches to development, with little or nothing to offer in the development of extension methodologies, except maybe in the creation of women's only projects. With the development of gender analysis methodologies, WID has become pan of the mainstream approaches to the development of extension. The point of departure for WID programme of action in ZIM 91/005 will be that of offering critical support role to the strengthening of AGRITEX extension methodologies through taking into account the gender perspective.
This approach focuses on gender differences (that is socially and culturally determined differences between men and women) primarily in the division of labour in production or income earning activities and their access to and control over resources and assets.
1. 1 Objectives
The overall objective of the consultative meeting with AGRITEX staff and its clientele was to have an overview of the agricultural extension programmes and its effectiveness in meeting the smallholder farmers' needs, from a gender perspective.
One of the immediate objectives was for the WID Specialist to initiate dialogue with field staff and begin to sensitise them on the need to take into account gender issues in their daily operations.
Secondly, to talk to male and female farmers and hear their views with regards to the extension delivery system, and its impact on their daily lives.
1.2 Methodological Considerations
The study was largely a qualitative analysis designed to identify areas of concern from a gender and sociological perspectives. The identified areas of concern would in turn require follow up and detailed quantitative analysis.
The methodology for the study was unstructured and therefore not uniform. This was by design as the importance of the study was in the establishment of dialogue between the AGRITEX staff, the farmers and the WID specialist.
The discussion concentrated on the main areas of AGRITEX operations in terms of the services it offers; namely Crop Production, Animal Production, Conservation, Irrigation, Land Use Planning, Veld and Pastures, Farm Management, Agricultural Mechanisation, Horticulture and Forestry. Particular attention was paid with regards to gender issues as they relate to any of these specialist areas.
All the eight provinces were visited, and 309 farmers of which 170 were female and 139 were men and AGRITEX staff, (103 male and 37 female) were interviewed. For details on the AGRITEX staff that were interviewed see Appendix l below.
1.3 Background
1.3.1 Review of other studies
Agriculture in the Small Scale Resettlement and Communal Areas is largely a female activity. Most women in Zimbabwe (86%) live in rural areas and it is estimated that women account for 70% of the total agricultural labour (World Bank 1991).
According to Zwart (1990), female-headed households account for approximately 40% of tote households in Communal Areas because of the extent of male migration. In addition to providing the bulk of the labour on the family plots women supplement household income with earnings from off-farm sources. Women provide 60% of casual labour within agriculture and the majority of labour in the rural informal sector (Zwart 1990). Women are largely responsible for food, crop production and labour intensive tasks on other crops as well as fuel collection, child care and other domestic tasks. Despite this central importance in the rural production system, women have limited access to many factors of production. Further, this reliance on female labour results in severe labour constraints during certain periods of agricultural season. Therefore development of technology systems that will relieve the burden of women would make a significant contribution to improving the productivity of the
total farm system.
Recent etudes by World Bank (1991), Zwart (1990), and FAO (1990) indicate that the extension contact with women farmers is not in proportion to the contribution women make to the term production system. A sharper focus on women is needed in extension. The labour of women farmers may be statistically significant but their lack of access to resources, credit and training appears not to be visible (Mertens 1989, Truscott 1988, Zwart 1990 and World Bank Report 1991).
As farmers and farm managers, women face the constraints most producers in the Communal and Resettlement face including insufficient land, both quantitative and qualitative, and lack of farm implements lack of draft power and transport, and marketing problems. Women have a greater difficulty than men gaining access to land. Lack if access to land also inhibits women's access to institutional credit.
In addition, extension and research are often geared toward a male clientele. These policies tend to marginalise women as agricultural producers. Lack of resources and pressure on time and energies put enormous constraints on the ability of women to maintain their productivity, much less improve it (Zwart 1990; and Truscott 1988).
The World Bank (1991 p3) review into the agricultural sector list the following constraints as hindering agricultural growth in Zimbabwe: land policy, pricing and marketing policy and technology, credit availability, forestry, household food security, and wildlife. The above constraints have an impact on both male and female farmers, but the women's problems are compounded by the socio-cultural environment in which women operate.
In the Zimbabwean agricultural sector, development; projects have not taken adequate account of women's responsibilities, participation and priorities in their specific local conditions to determine factors constraining them in the achievement of the objectives of the programmes. In addition women's access to development projects is more limited owing to cultural traditional and sociological factors (Truscott 1988 and Zwart 1990). In particular, the "head of the family" concept which is used as the basis for allocation of resources in the rural area has historically ignored both the existence of female-headed households and the rights of married women to a joint share of resources (Munro 1988).
In general available FAO (1990) and World Bank (1990), studies show that the improvement of household food security and nutritional levels is associated with women's access to income and their role in households decisions on expenditure.
The creation of the Ministry of Community Development and Women's Affairs in 1982, according to Chengu 1992* (personal communication), may have had a negative impact on the development of an integrated or mainstream approach to gender issues in the various other government departments. Most of the highly technical department such as AGRITEX remained conservative dealing only with technical issues and assuming that gender issues were being dealt with by the Ministry of Community Development and Women's Affairs. Though, one can attribute the isolation of women's projects to the approach in the women in development at that point in time which advocated mostly for a design of projects exclusively for women (or a WID project in jargon) or to include a WID component in a larger project. Contrary to the new approach now of designing a gender-sensitive mainstream project which integrates women throughout all relevant components. After examining the matter for 16 years, most
development people who address gender issues feel that the latter approach is more effective (FAO 1990).
[ *Chengu is a former deputy secretary in the Ministry of Lands Agriculture and Water development. ]
An attempt at strengthening the role of women in agriculture was made through an FAO project ZIM/007 (1984-1991) entitled "Strengthening Women's role and Work in Rural Development" In its terminal report (1991) the project highlighted the following. "There was a lack of capacity within the development services which had prevented the provision of adequate and appropriate services to re-organise women's groups and led to women having poor access to technical advice, management systems and funds. In parallel to this rural women were poorly equipped with tools, suffered because of inadequate transport and access to inputs and lacked security of tenure to land" (FAO 1991).
The project ZIM/007 "Strengthening Women's Role and Work in Rural Development" was a pilot project in Mashonaland West started in 1984 under the Ministry of Community and Cooperative Development and Women's Affairs . The aim of the project was to investigate ways of removing constraints and gaining more effective participation of women in agriculture. The revised project (1986) emphasised the development of market-oriented field agriculture, as a way of providing the necessary experience for women and groups to advance into income generating activities and micro-enterprise of various kinds.
The training component of the project was relevant in terms of training women on how to plan, budget, keep records, and having an appreciation of group dynamics. The project, however had the inherent weakness of creating unnecessary hostilities at both the household and professional level because it treated women's issues as if they were separate from the rest of the community. A visit to the Mashonaland West province, the pilot area for the project revealed no evidence of the continuity of the programme .
AGRITEX is currently implementing a Norad funded programme, with the objective of "Strengthening AGRITEX capacity to reach women farmers", in eight districts with eight control districts. The project started operation in July 1992. An implementing planning workshop was held and AGRITEX staff involved in the project participated. A baseline study was undertaken and the results indicated that, " 10% of women cultivators regularly attend extension meetings hence AGRITEX extension is only reaching 5.3% of women agricultural active population" (Hakutangwi 1993, p3).
At the inception of the project, it was realised that AGRITEX lacked personnel who were conversant with gender and agricultural development approaches. Following this, four officers were sent for a three- month training in women and agricultural development. (Hakutangwi 1993, p1)
The project ZIM/91/005, a programme approach to strengthen AGRITEX extension programmes has a WID section, and this study is part of its action programme. Past and present experiences of AGRITEX with respect to WID issues will be incorporated in the WID programme of action.
1.3.2 AGRITEX Policy
AGRITEX objective is, "to implement the agricultural policy of government through the revision of agricultural technical and extension services, which stimulates the adoption of proven agricultural practices leading to increased, sustained and profitable production." (AGRITEX 1982). The target for AGRITEX is all farmers and their agencies. The rationale behind AGRITEX service being to feed the nation, generate foreign currency, and improve the quality of life of the rural population.
The Government Agricultural Policy advocates for the following:
- growth with equity
- fair distribution of land ownership
- reduction in poverty
- increase in both land and labour in all forms of agriculture
- increase in employment
- self-sufficiency and food security
- integration of the two agricultural sectors commercial and peasant
- promotion of regional and agricultural development
- development of human resources in the rural areas to the full potential (MLARR 1986)
The policy statements seem to cover all issues but what becomes an issue is the approach offered by AGRITEX, in translating these policy statements into practice.
The review which follows is made against the background of Government's Agricultural policy and AGRITEX objectives.
<section>4</section>
2.0 Review of AGRITEX programmes
2.1 Planning
2.2 Monitoring and Evaluation
2.3 Training
2.4 Soil, Water Conservation
2.5 Animal Production
2.6 Irrigation
2.7 Crop Production
2.8 Marketing of Crops
2.0 Review of AGRITEX programmes
2.1 Planning
2.1.1 Gender issues have not really been taken into account in the design of land use plans. Model B schemes is an example where cropping programmes did not take into account women's other household duties. The design of Model B schemes expected women to contribute an equal number of labour units as men to the cropping programme, but they are unable to do so because of other household duties. It should however be noted that resettlement planning is not the sole responsibility of AGRITEX, but is done in conjunction with other ministries.
Attempts at raising the women's dimension issues in land use plans have been made by the Chief Agricultural Planning Specialist who happens to be female. Efforts are being made to incorporate the interests and needs of people in the planning process. In some cases communal area people have been consulted with regards to the setting up and positioning of certain infrastructure such as wells and gates in grazing schemes.
Some officers involved in planning are undergoing training in Diagnostic and Design Surveys to facilitate the inclusion of socio-economic issues in the land use planning process. AGRITEX undertakes baseline and socio-economic surveys. AGRITEX has no capacity however to follow up the sociological issues and formulate strategies to deal with them. The department does not employ sociologists or social scientists to handle sociological issues in planning, monitoring and evaluation of its agricultural extension programmes.
Some AGRITEX field staff have come to realise that in dealing with farmers one should not overlook the socio-cultural issues in the adoption of technologies by farmers. There is need to look at the household as a unit of analysis in terms of production. This is part of the farming systems development approach envisaged in ZIM/91/005 to assist AGRITEX in utilising the approach.
The statement "Scientific principles operate the same irrespective of gender does not always hold true" (Feldstein and Poats, 1990). In rural communities major sociological and political blockages keep the poor women, and various other poor groups, from participating in formal extension programmes.
AGRITEX offers farm plans as a free service to farmers. Land use planning however is ahead of implementation due to limited financial resources. This is more pronounced in the case of the communal area reorganisation.
Requests for land sub-division in the small and large-scale sector is said to come mostly from widows. One of the reasons normally cited is that the women will be unable to cope in running large farms. The reasons however could be many, for example in the commercial farming areas, the women is hardly involved in the day-to-day running of the farm. In the small-scale sector for example EWs said that male farmers are reluctant to have their wives and to some extent children learn fanning operations, for fear of becoming redundant. One unfortunate consequence of this tendency occurred in Chitomborwizi small-scale farming community where male farmers perished in a bus disaster and the widows, and children are failing to cope. Matebeleland South province AGRITEX officials have made similar observations as EWs. There may be other reasons for widows to request for land subdivision which require follow-up. For instance, it might be that women fail to run the farms because there will
be pressure from debtors, to make them repay debts incurred by the husband when alive. Inability to manage may be due to lack of agricultural training. It could be the pressure being exerted by other inheritors such as sons or husband's brothers. The lack of exposure to farm operations when the husband is alive is a critical issue.
2.2 Monitoring and Evaluation
It is the responsibility of every branch within AGRITEX to monitor and evaluate its own programmes and activities. The Monitoring and Evaluation unit has undertaken the evaluation of the following extension strategies; (i) T and V systems, (ii) farmer and EW contact, (iii) radio listening groups, and (iv) farm and work studies.
AGRITEX's monitoring and evaluation unit or any other unit, does not collect data disaggregated by gender. Constraints that pertain to certain categories of farmers are not determined. Information required to prescribe solutions to ease constraints to adoption of technology and increase women's farm productivity are not there. There is need for gender disaggregate data to determine the overall effectiveness of the programmes that AGRITEX offers.
The breakdown of data on gender is important to the determination of the contribution that women are making or may make in the development efforts within the rural economy. It is essential for programme evaluation and advocacy of agricultural activities that require policy change.
Data disaggregation on gender lines is also important in establishing the number of women and men who are living in absolute poverty, the extent to which sex biases contribute to such conditions and to devise ways and means whereby the conditions that contribute to such situations may be alleviated.
Gender specific data also provide the sort of information which assist decision-makers in the determination of policy, planners in the development of plans and field staff in the implementation of such plans. This is important in the light of the contributions that women can make in decision-making in planning and implementation of agricultural activities that affect them most.
The production, analysis and dissemination of meaningful gender-based data will help critically assess some of the beliefs which have developed concerning women's contribution to agricultural production and their contact with extension staff. The information to be obtained in the process must serve to increase the visibility of women as they benefit from and participate in agricultural programmes. Finally it provides the rationale and means for understanding gender roles and intra-household dynamics as they affect farm production and it will contribute to improved planning of extension.
2.3 Training
Agricultural information is offered through the mass media and in-service training. From the overall training needs of field staff what has been observed to be lacking is the Agro-Home economics component.
Agro-Home Economics as an aspect of extension training is seen as necessary in terms of the information gap that seems to exist with regards to the nutrition value of certain crops. It is seen as important insofar as it seeks to demonstrate how to economise by growing of certain food crops which are essential as basic food crops.
Agro-Home Economics would also form part of the EW training so they can in turn advise farmers and answer some of the farmers basic questions related to certain crops. The Ministry of Health and Child Welfare though responsible for supplementary feeding programmes and setting up of nutrition gardens also rely on AGRITEX's EWs' advice for growing certain crops.
The Agro-home economics component is also being considered as a necessary component for training EWs. It will enable EWs to advise and answer farmer questions with regards to economic, nutritious and basic food crops. An agro-home economics manual has already been written.
An urgent need to train all levels of staff in AGRITEX on gender awareness, together with the development of gender training manuals was identified at the NORAD-funded workshop held early this year. The workshop was held to discuss baseline results from the pilot districts where the programme ZIM/023 Women's Extension Programme AGRITEX/NORAD is being implemented.
2.4 Soil, Water Conservation
Some of the approaches devised for soil and water conservation were designed long back and have not been revised. Some of the approaches have proved unpopular to farmers, because of the huge labour demands required in the construction. For example, farmers have appreciated the need to have contour ridges in their fields, but some do not construct them Those who have done so, have reduced the width of the contours. Poor farmers, elderly people and women find it difficult to dig contours. Economically they find it difficult to hire labour to dig the contours.
2.5 Animal Production
The focus on animal production has been with the big livestock such as cattle. The rationale being that cattle are highly valued both for economic and socio-cultural reasons. Markets for large livestock are also developed in comparison with the small livestock. Women do participate in schemes such as small-scale dairy and fattening schemes, however the extent of their participating is not documented.
There is also a noticeable difference between men and women in terms of aquaculture preferences. Animal Production Specialists said that women prefer setting up small ponds, unlike men who prefer big dams. The use of netting in harvesting of fish may be a factor, in terms of why women prefer ponds to dams. This has been observed in Mhondoro. Follow-up is essential on this as the branch is in the process of expanding aquaculture in other areas, namely Murehwa, Masvingo and in the Midlands.
A study by Govereh, Chigume and Sen (1992) on constraints to the development of aquaculture and utilisation of small water bodies in Zimbabwe, has made the following observations, that; women are not involved in fishing because this is perceived as a male activity, Women from male-headed households are responsible for the day to day management of fish ponds owned by their husbands. And female headed households are not fish pond owners because they have poor access to land and labour.
Women are generally engaged in the rearing of small livestock, such as poultry, rabbits, goats, etc. In some instances groups have been formed and subsequently saving clubs have also been formed to support these programmes. A major weakness identified in these endeavors has been with the marketing as well as the limited technical advice. There has been little emphasis on the development of this sector of animal production. In terms of ownership for women, they do own small livestock and are able to enjoy the benefits directly, as little or no consultation is required in the disposal or selling of small livestock.
2.6 Irrigation
2.6.1 Gender issues arising from irrigation activities relate to the following; firstly the issue of the type of technology that will be adopted in the scheme whether flood or overhead irrigation. Both have implications on women's labour and health. In terms of labour contributions, considerations should be given to their continuing activities in dryland areas, in small gardens and at the household levels. These commitments have been ignored leading to over-estimates with regards to women's labour contributions in the schemes. For example, the one hectare efficiency plot size recommended for farmers, does not take into account women's roles in the drylands as well as in the household.
Secondly there is the issue of access and control of irrigable plots. This stems from the criteria used for selection of participants. For example, the use of Master Farmer Certificates which few women farmers have and the use of local leadership, may contribute to undue discrimination against women owning the plots. According to the EWs and farmers interviewed the commonly used eligibility criteria for selection of farmers into irrigation schemes is as follows:
- Master Farmer certificate
- Membership in the Agricultural Extension fan-per groups
- Age of the farmer between 18 and SO years
- Possession of basic farming implements and draught power
- Labour availability.
2.6.2 Impact of irrigation on women farmers
Some of the FAO (1990) studies have shown that with the introduction of technologies such as irrigation schemes, the women's workload is sometimes significantly increased without a concurrent increase in incomes. The same studies have shown that in irrigation schemes the women's workload increased disproportionately at the expense of the dryland cropping and other off-farm income earning activities. But this is not to say that irrigation schemes cannot benefit women. These studies (FAO) have also demonstrated that irrigation technology can increase crop production and make more water available to households and livestock. It also can actually reduce the time spent on fetching water. No studies of this nature have been carried out in Zimbabwe. Most have been limited to the role of women in irrigation schemes namely Madondo (1992) and Chimedza (1986). Farmers in general, however see themselves as benefiting from the schemes through access to money. In some cases discussed with
the EWs, women farmers have no access and control over the income generated from the schemes. This may appear to be a household level issue but it will be important to examine the assumptions underlining scheme design. In a number of FAO ( 1990) studies it has been shown that, when irrigation schemes are designed on the mistaken assumption that the farm family has unified goals and motivations and that household responsibilities and incomes are jointly shared, pre-existing gender imbalances are likely to worsen.
Introduction of irrigation schemes has both positive and negative consequences, and AGRITEX as part of its advisory service should prepare farmers for these.
2.6.3 Marketing in irrigation
Marketing and transporting of produce from the irrigation schemes to the market was identified as a major problem in all the schemes visited. There was stiff competition with other schemes and the large commercial sector growing the same crops. Some women farmers from Insukamini irrigation scheme have ventured into neighbouring Botswana to sell their agricultural produce. This attempt by the women to overcome the problem of marketing surplus perishable produce 'has however proved futile and complex for them. The women would require information and advice on the technicalities of exporting crops, to other countries. The Marketing Adviser should investigate this initiative by women and establish whether there are mechanisms at the local level to facilitate the exporting of agricultural produce by smallholder farmers. This also includes some of the proposals by farmers to set up canning factories.
2.6.4 Health and environmental considerations in irrigation schemes
It has been found that in Zimbabwe, water borne diseases are more widespread in irrigation schemes than anywhere else (Taylor, 1986). Since it has been documented Madondo (1992) that women play a major role in irrigation schemes, their health may be at greater risk if health considerations are omitted during the design of the schemes.
On environmental matters these relate to the use and concentration of pesticides, herbicides and fertilisers on the scheme. Women again are more exposed and should therefore be trained in the management and use of these chemicals. There is also the issue of conservation measures which are not always in place at some schemes, leading to land degradation. This was evident in some of the schemes visited. The construction of mechanical conservation works has also implications on the women's labour.
2.6.5 Time use and labour availability
Labour availability is often handled in an unsatisfactory way in project preparation. There is heavy reliance on abstract deductive reasoning rather than empirical evidence. The total population of the project area may for instance be divided by the number of households to derive an average household size; then a series of assumptions are assigned (usually labour unit per adult male; 0.5-0.75 labour unit per adult female and 0.5 per children aged 12-15). This procedure frequently leads to overestimation of actual labour availability because it overlooks variation in household size as well as constraints on the labour supply deriving from the gender division of labour, migration and off-farm employment, children's school attendance and time required for domestic tasks.
By now it is widely recognised by Development experts that the disregard of the gender division of labour can lead to mistaken assumptions about labour availability, and over estimation of labour availability for irrigation schemes.
In the Insukamini scheme, so far three people have left the scheme, one female and the rest male. The reasons given was failure to cope with the labour required to run the plots. For the lady that left the scheme, it was due to old age, she could not cope with the demands of the scheme. Neither did she have sufficient funds to hire labour.
Given a scenario where a farmer has 0.5 hectare in irrigation and five hectares of dryland an average farmer cannot cope with the labour requirements. The farmer will be forced to choose either to neglect the dryland or irrigation plot during the rain season.
2.6.6 Tenure of irrigated land
The majority of farmers on the smallholder irrigation plots are women, though the plotholders may be registered in the husband's name or "normally" the head of household (see Table 1 p18)
There is a great deal of variations depending on whether it is a traditional irrigation scheme established prior to independence. Prior to independence the head of household was undisputable male and the plot was required to be registered in the husband's name, regardless of whether he was around to do the farming. Nowadays, with women being regarded as majors in their own right, women can register plots in their married names, or in their own right. Their status is not relevant so long as she satisfies the selection criteria for the scheme. There is also the conditionality that those who register for the plots should farm the land and attend meetings and training courses for the irrigators. This is one of the reasons why there is an increase in the numbers of women registering for plots in their own right. In terms of policy formulation this is important. If certain guidelines are set that would ensure direct targeting of beneficiaries this would be more progressive.
Registration requirements for plotholders in irrigation schemes set by AGRITEX and local authorities ensures that the person who farms the plot benefits directly. In most cases it is women. The women are also increasingly having access and control over irrigable plots.
There is a greater proportion of males registered in irrigation schemes found in resettlement than in communal areas. In resettlement areas, this is so because males are expected to be on the farms and not go elsewhere in search of employment.
Registering a plot in the husband's name who is away most of the time can prove problematic in terms of getting loans. The credit card has to be in the plotholder's name to facilitate loan application and delivery of agricultural inputs.
In introducing new schemes, certain assumptions about the household should be put to test. For example, age restrictions based on the age of the household head who may be old and a polygamist with young wives. These wives may be excluded from participating in a scheme because the husband is too old. Women in polygamous households are disadvantaged in terms of access to resources.
This entitlement to irrigable plot or lack of it is also a sore point with regards to women, especially as it relates to inheritance and women's productivity in the schemes. One old scheme visited had a one hectare plot fallow because the couple who had been cultivating the plot had divorced. The couple had no children. Another abandoned plot was due to the fact that the woman had given up, because the money generated from the scheme was being used by her husband to marry more wives.
TABLE 1: DISTRIBUTION OF PLOTS BETWEEN MALE AND FEMALE FARMERS IN IRRIGATION SCHEMES VISITED
Scheme name
No. of Plotholds
M
F
Ave. size each
Total ha of scheme
Date established
Insukamini (Midlands)
Mkoba (Midlands)
Hama Mavhaire (Midlands)
Nyamaropa (Manicaland)
Mavhurazi
Murara (Mashonaland East)
NOTE:
Only six irrigation schemes were visited on this exercise. There are 65 smallholder irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe covering 400 hectares and support 6,000 farmers. Issues arising from each irrigation are unique, and therefore more investigations are necessary.
2.7 Crop Production
With respect to horticultural crop production and marketing, EWs confirmed that women's participation at the smallholder level is quite significant. Most of the demonstrations on horticulture are attended by women from both communal and small-scale fanning areas. Farmers' major problems in horticulture are to do with pests control and the marketing of produce.
Specialists in horticulture felt that horticulture is still being seen as a sideline by most of the AGRITEX staff and there seems to be reluctance in its promotion in some areas. The specialists find it difficult to promote especially in dry areas. Farmers are therefore denied a training in horticulture by this lack of interest on the part of other AGRITEX staff. This however is said to vary among the various agricultural regions. Farmers especially women engage in small-scale horticultural activities, are therefore denied a training in horticulture by this lack of interest on the part of other AGRITEX staff. Lack of interest in horticulture is said to vary among the various regions of the country. For example, in the dry areas of the country. Some EWs felt that it was futile to concentrate on horticulture in areas that are dry with no water for carrying out the horticultural activities. Also farmers were said to be reluctant to learn knowledge that they would never apply.
Tobacco is one of the cash crop with huge returns. In terms of labour requirements it is labour intensive. It is one of the cash crops being promoted in both resettlement and communal areas. Tobacco institutes now accommodate women trainees but do not offer them training at higher levels. One woman trained in tobacco farming has been withdrawn from the resettlement area where she was farming. It will be important to know the reason why (Chasi 1993, personal communication). There seems to be problems in terms of what specialists in tobacco are supposed to do, like for example, climbing on top of barns. Since a lot of women at smallholder level are now growing tobacco and it is one of the largest foreign exchange earners, impediments to women's training opportunities at both farmer and professional levels should be looked at. While emphasis should be placed on food crops, it is also important to encourage women's involvement in the more lucrative cash crops.
Food crops such as cowpeas, groundnuts, beans, sweet potatoes, etc. women grow them to supplement family diet, but are labour intensive. Normally in terms of crop priority they are the least favoured in terms of the land allocation which is nominally marginal land, and time allocated only after tending of the "major" crops such as maize. Some of the food crops such as cowpeas and beans are inter-cropped with maize to maximise returns. Ibis inter-cropping is one of the major reasons why farmers resisted mono-cropping in the past which was one of the Master Farmer requirements.
Most food crops are some of the neglected items on both the research and extension agendas. There has been no extension drive towards these basic food crops. Attempts are being made by some non-governmental organisations to promote the food crops for example, a GTZ programme in Masvingo. Besides focusing on food crops the project does also address broader Bender issues.
In addition crops that are ideally suited and recommended for the dry and arid, semi-arid zones such as sorghum are labour intensive, especially with regards to bird scaring and processing. Women have to pound the sorghum to powder after extensive winnowing. In terms of time required in comparison to maize, these crops take more time. There seems to be no developments, in research into these crops, beginning with agro-ecological suitability, and technology for processing them and also farmer preferences are not tested which is important for adoption. Farmer response to newly introduced crops should be tested for their socioeconomic value and their labour requirements. Small grains are recommended for the dry areas of Zimbabwe but farmers are reluctant to grow them. Basically this has to do with the labour intensive nature required in the cultivation and processing these crops. The sorghum crop is susceptible to Quelier birds and so one has to spent hours guarding the crop
when it is ripening. According to studies in Zambia by Feldstein and Poats (1990) bird scaring accounts for 52% of the total labour expended in growing sorghum. Because bird damage contributes to low sorghum yields, women spend almost 12 hours per day in the fields scaring away birds. The processing of small grains takes a lot of women's time as this involves winnowing, pounding and grinding. The producer price for small grains is very low in comparison with other large grains such as maize. So again farmers are reluctant to invest money and time on the small grains. Nowadays few people find the meal prepared from small grains palatable, so that is another reason why farmers are reluctant to plant these crops.
2.8 Marketing of Crops
Local marketing of products poses no problem for women. Markets that involves travelling from the community are problematic and this is mostly done by men. In Mashonaland East for example, farmers are organised into commodity production groups and sales of the produce are organised that way too. Men transport the produce to the markets in Harare and Marondera, while women remain behind in the rural areas. Women's marketing ability of agricultural produce in far away places from home is constrained by institutional and social biases especially young couples.
Women would require training in marketing, management of small enterprises, credit and savings. Different studies have shown that market opportunities and transport linkages can stimulate women farmers to produce food surplus and thus augment household income. Currently AGRITEX is offering no advisory service on marketing strategies.
<section>5</section>
3.0 Women farmers
3.1 Women Farmers and Extension
3.2 Study tours for women
3.3 Access to income
3.4 Issue of labour
3.5 Decision-making
3.6 Land Tenure
3.6 Women and Credit
3.0 Women farmers
3.1 Women Farmers and Extension
There is a general preference and high attendance rate by women for the group approach than the T and V system of extension. For women farmers the T and V system seems to be okay where there is a female EW. There is less suspicion with regards to women EW visiting their homesteads in the absence of their husbands than male EWs doing so. There seems to be less restrictions imposed by husbands on women attending agricultural meetings when the husbands are aware that other women from the village will be attending as well.
According to the DAEO Gokwe some women leaders in the Gokwe district for example, have requested for female EWs. The Gokwe district has 80,000 households, of these 200 belong to widows, 30,000 are de facto female heads of households (36%), about 6-7,000 households have residents husbands, but show no interest in agricultural meetings, 10,000 of the maleheaded households permit their wives to attend meetings, the balance of 40,000 households have men head of households who are also farmers but some never attend meetings or even if they do, they do so alone (DAEO Gokwe 1993).
With the introduction of female EWs in the district, there has been an increase in the percentage of women attending agricultural meetings from 10% to between 15-20% women in each group (DAEO Gokwe 1993)
In Gokwe the Zimbabwe Farmers' Union is encouraging the formation of the New Look Groups which have preference for women EWs. This has been requested in recognition of the fact that there are still remnants of cultural inhibitions with regards to women attending agricultural meetings addressed by male EWs. This attitudinal problem does not seem to lie with women themselves but with their husbands who grant them permission.
The major constraints identified by women farmers are the limitations of time and technology. Time is the factor in terms of what women can achieve within a given day which means some meetings if they are not held on chisi* day they are unable to attend. Some of the agricultural implements being developed are pretty heavy for women and therefore not used. In some instances, they add labour requirements for other labour intensive activities such as weeding. For example the ripper plough or the ox-driven cultivator is very heavy for women.
* Chisi is a traditional public holiday when no-one is allowed to engage in any agricultural field activities.
Training and extension services are the major vehicles through which rural farmers are encouraged to adopt new crops and more productive practices. Despite women's indispensable role in production, most training and extension programmes have not been planned to reach women producers adequately. Training and extension services are usually offered to men. There has not been a concerted effort on the part of extensionist to encourage women to attend training sessions and programme it in such a way as to attract them. Some are now advocating for agro-home economics as part of extension and training. This again should be directed to both men and women, because in the life of a rural household, farming is of concern to all members of the family, and, therefore, related extension programmes should reach both gender.
In the socio-economic surveys that are currently being carried out by AGRITEX there is a lack of gender analysis. Efforts at making extension services available to women farmers thus need to take account of the specific local conditions. It is necessary to determine the nature of the gender division of labour, the pattern of production, special constraints facing women as well as other relevant factors when undertaking socio-economic baseline studies. This would in turn make it possible to devise appropriate training and extension programmes to enable women to participate more effectively.
Even in the formulation and the debating of such important things as the by-laws for irrigation or grazing schemes, women are silent So there is need to come up with an approach that encourages women to effectively participate without unnecessarily separating them from the mainstream. Also setting to work on those women's attitudes which hinder their ability to take up opportunities and develop.
Some EWs have observed that there is a certain class of people who come to EW meetings. For example, its mostly the elderly women and men. Some are inclined to believe that older people come for training because they can spare the time as they may have less responsibilities and also no children to look after. The young people will not be attending possibly because they have not really had an appreciation of farming as a way of life, and only go back to farming as a last resort. In the interim the newly married with husbands in town will be getting remittances so do not solely rely on farming as a source of income. Again their interest in farming may still be limited. Further still some said with the introduction of young male EWs in most areas one should not overlook the aspect of jealousy in husbands disallowing the young wives to attend EW meetings.
Some farmers said that they would want also to be advised on the size of their fields, so that estimates can be worked out in terms of the inputs required for such a size, for the variety of crops grown in the area. The farmers feel there is a wastage because either the inputs run out before completion of planting the field or they buy more inputs than required. Some farmers would want their soils tested so as to have the right type of fertiliser and maize variety prescribed, but this is not being done.
3.2 Study tours for women
Normally few women are able to travel to other districts on a study tour, especially if it means putting out for a number of days. It is recommended that the timing and duration of the study tour be a subject for debate with farmers (fe/male) to ensure that the timing suits women as well. It may be during school holidays when the elderly children are at home and can look after the young ones, when the mother is away. The selection system of who goes on a study tour may be biased in favour of men as it is (male) councillors and male dominated committees who are left to do the selection.
Women farmers find it difficult to travel and stay overnight to attend a course. Even for study tours to other provinces, women who go are just a handful The majority are men who are mobile and have less commitments. Gender issues, if they are not taken into account in designing a study tour or course, may affect the attendance rate for women, which may be very low.
The same can be said with regards to short courses. The field staff normally go by the ideal "farmers calendar" in programming activities, without consulting farmers. There is a lack of flexibility and sensitivity with regards to negotiation for time with farmers.
Women's participation in training courses can be increased by reducing the need for them to leave their families for long periods.
3.3 Access to income
The issue of women's lack of access to income from agricultural production should be recognised as a disincentive for them as farmers. Four isolated cases in Gokwe, Marange, Nyamaropa and Zvimba were cited as instances were women actually stopped farming because at the end of each season the men were marrying additional wives from the proceeds of the agricultural crops. This usually occurs with cash crop farming where money is received as a lump sum each season.
3.4 Issue of labour
EWs confirmed that women provide most of the labour at the smallholder farming level. During peak sessions however, there is labour scarcity and the women are stretched to the limit. The employment of casual labour is a possibility but the cost is now prohibitive. This is especially so during the school term when the children are in school. Labour availability for farming may be based on false assumptions if the household division of labour is not critically analysed from a gender perspective.
3.5 Decision-making
The level of decision-making for women at the farm level is still very weak and low. This does affect the disposal of money after harvest and sales, and also the buying of inputs for the next season, which most women do not have control over. Decision-making at household level by women is tied up with the issue of ownership and land tenure. In the traditional culture of Zimbabwe, women do not own any property. This changed soon after 1980 when legal instruments were put in place to ensure that women do actually own property through the Matrimonial Causes Act, (1985) and the Legal Age of Majority Act (1982).
The decision-making process at household level does has a bearing on the establishment of on-farm trials. Female de facto heads of households may be agreeable to an on-farm trial being carried out at their farms, but have to get permission from their husbands. This may cause delays in terms of meeting planting dates. Instances of female de facto heads of households withdrawing their offer of farms for research after consultation with husbands are common. This hampers women from participating in trials that affects them and in which their critical contributions are essential.
The prevalence of female-headed households varies from district to district, depending on its proximity to an urban area, mine or any area of concentration that absorbs male labour. In resettlement schemes and remote areas one finds a higher proportion of male-headed households. The former because off- farm employment is discouraged and its a condition that one should be unemployed. In the latter because the employment opportunities are not there and may be far away.
Farming Committees and Decision Making
It has been observed that in committees, whether irrigation committees or village development committees, women tend to be selected to post of treasurer or secretary, and men tend to occupy the post of chairperson. It does not necessarily follow that men make the decisions. They may be just used as spokesman for the group and be in the post as a mere figure-head.
With regards to women's participation in leadership positions, this is still very low. Though increasingly they are taking up positions as chairpersons in the various committees, the numbers are still negligible. Leadership courses are also helping to instill confidence in the women. This also helps to conscientise the communities that the selection of a person to leadership position means that the person has to have leadership capabilities not necessarily being male. Most of the women being selected to such leadership posts are usually widows and elderly women. It has to do perhaps with reduced responsibilities at household levels having children already grown up and capable of looking after themselves. As most of the posts require a lot of travelling and meetings this is given as one major reason why women shun these posts and allow men to lead. Even in instances where they have been elected some women have turned down the offers.
Women-at various levels are said to make decisions but are sanctioned from voicing them, in public fora. Even if views are changing, now, women themselves still feel that society does not expect them to contribute in a public debate. Decisions are made and women allow men to endorse and voice them.
3.6 Land Tenure
In resettlement areas it is possible for a female head of household to have a permit issued in her name. Settler selection criteria gave priority to widows and other female heads of households as beneficiaries because of their poverty and disadvantages under which they cultivate in the communal area sector. The ministry policy specifically affirms that in resettlement areas there should be land assigned to the women in their own right (MLARR 1985).
Gender issues that pertain to land tenure centre on credit and security of tenure for widows. In general, women's rights to land are limited and the issue has proved to be difficult to address. In resettlement areas, the main issues are the security of tenure and women's rights to land. Although there is little evidence that security of tenure affects agricultural investment in resettlement areas, the vagueness of the permits to reside and cultivate could pose a problem, for both men and women.
With respect to women's land rights at present if a settler dies the widow is usually allowed to maintain the holding not as a matter of right but as a matter of administrative discretion on the part of the scheme administrators. Hence security of tenure for women is not guaranteed and can be problematic in some circumstances.
Women farmers provide most of the labour for communal area agriculture (Cliffe 1986 in World Bank 1991). Studies of the role of women in Agriculture in Zimbabwe show that although women provide most of the labour the male head of household even if only occasionally resident makes the basic farm management decisions. Often he will also claim control of any cash earnings from the woman's work on the farm, or even off-farm (Bruce 1990 in World Bank 1991 p75).
Where divorce takes place a woman traditionally has no rights to her husband's land. The Matrimonial Causes Act provides for a more equitable division of matrimonial property on dissolution of marriages by divorce, but the late husband's land from his patrilineage is not part of the matrimonial property. Some suggest that it will not be so treated. A recent High Court decision (George Khoza and Muriel Khoza H-C - B-106/87) determined that after divorce, the wife has no right to live on her husband's communal lands, not even in a house she bulk and furnished during marriage (Maboreke 1990) in World Bank (1991). The impact of the Matrimonial Cause Act would be limited because most divorces are conducted with no legal formalities. (Pankurst and Jakobs 1988 in World Bank Report 1991 p75).
The most urgent need of women with respect to access is the creation of a legal framework for widows that provides a secure right to a portion of their late husbands' land. A law on transactions should allow a VIDCO to refuse an application to sell land if the wife objects (World Bank Report 1991 p98).
Some have further argued that discrete land rights will achieve little without an understanding that the land's produce is at the woman's disposal (Pankhurst and Jakobs 1988; Chimedza 1988; and Gaidzanwa 1988). Financial autonomy is seen as the real issue and is still an open question as to what extent this can be attained through greater tenure rights for women.
Women in rural areas in practice still do not own anything and final decisions lie with men. This could be a factor in terms of why women are not following some technical advice.
3.6 Women and Credit
The availability of credit is indispensable to small farmers to improve their agricultural productivity and to enhance their household income and food supplies. They need short-term credit to purchase agricultural inputs such as improved seeds, fertilisers, insecticides and herbicides. They also need medium and long-term credit to purchase labour saving tools and implements or to establish small-scale dairy or poultry enterprises. Analysis of credit schemes in Kenya, Malawi, Sierra Leone, Zambia and Zimbabwe found that by and large women received less than 10% of the credit directed to smallholders and merely 1% of the total credit to agriculture (FAO 1990, (b) p8).
Evidence suggest that women are better credit risks than men and generally having superior repayment rates. But there is no concomitant effort to ensure that they have information and access to credit. Women's access to credit is still limited. Women feel that when they apply for a loan they should do so in their own right, without having to commit the husband's name as well. In order to secure a loan women still have to get their husbands' consent. The conditions set for them by finance houses are still restrictive, for the women to borrow money to buy inputs. Together with the use of credit, farmers also need to generate her/his savings otherwise they will often fail to repay the loan. Women's access to credit may be constrained by their inability to produce collateral, but this is the position of all communal area farmers. Finance houses are not eager to offer credit when the issue of collateral is raised.
Credit and marketing of cash crops are often linked, as when the GMB deducts short-medium term loans by AFC from the crop sales of communal area farmers. Since men traditionally market these crops, women have not had independent access to credit and indeed until recent legislation gave women rights, they could not contract debts. Now that this is possible for women over the age of 18. The AFC has made some loans to women, but an adequate legal framework for lending to women still has not been created. In rural areas, there are savings club and occasional credit offered by shopkeepers (World Bank 1991 p18). With reference to savings club for the past 1991-92 season these were exhausted as the money was being used to buy food to combat the drought effects. For the 1993 season without the free seed packs, most farmers would have faced problems in buying basic agricultural inputs. Group lending schemes being promoted by AFC seem to be offering hopes for the women farmers, as no
collateral is required as a condition for the offer of a loan.
Various initiatives have been made to link savings groups to AGRITEX farmer groups. Savings club may be of considerable value in assuring poor farmers and especially women farmers of access to minimal amounts of agricultural inputs, for example a bag of fertiliser.
<section>6</section>
4.0 Training and extension issues
4.1 Issues Raised by Extensionist
4.2 Extension Approaches
4.3 Gender of EW
4.4 Technology Development
4.0 Training and extension issues
4.1 Issues Raised by Extensionist
On training and extension issues the major issues are summarised below as follows:
The quality of extension training seems to be going down at a time when women are now taking up the opportunity. Especially with the Master Farmer training programme. This has been attributed to inadequate resources to support the programmes. Farmers are not receiving for example badges when they qualify for the Master Farmer.
Lessons to farmers would be more effective if visual aids are shown. Extension workers feel that they would require these visual aids for demonstration to farmers.
Issues that were raised and of major concerns to the extensionist in the field are as follows: social dimension of extension which is not currently being addressed; gender issues and the characteristics of farmers; cultural inhibitions to successful implementation of extension programmes; programming of extension activities which do not over-load the farmer and the extensionist; relevance of training farmers for advanced and ordinary Master Farmer certificates.
On sociological and gender issues, its absence in the department means that there is a lack of knowledge base to assist and direct the extension activities and it is not included in the programmes of training. If the real farmer has not been identified this may mean that the extension message has no specific target. The process of decision making in the farmer situation is not understood neither is there an attempt to understand the farmers' priorities nor problems or explore the farmers' potential. This would help AGRITEX understand that the priorities they reflect as a government department may not necessarily be in consonant with priorities of a farm family.
For a technical oriented department that has to deal with farmers, some level of social sensitivity is required. In-service training that would make the staff have an appreciation of gender and social issues is essential.
The resource disparities among farmers should be recognised and acknowledged so as to gear training and technology appropriate to address these practical issues.
The emphasis by AGRITEX to date has been on putting or directing resources towards technical training of subject matter specialists, with little emphasis on the understanding of the clientele and the EWs.
The basic extension methods course given to new recruits when they join AGRITEX should include a gender awareness course as part of the induction. The content has to be reviewed.
Reporting system is said to be technically oriented with emphasis on numbers. There is no room for example to report on the socio-economic factors which inhibit farmers from adopting certain technologies even if they are, these are screened and left at supervisors level. In a technical oriented report social issues are viewed as irrelevant.
4.2 Extension Approaches
4.2.1 Group approach
The group approach to extension is very much now favoured in terms of cost effectiveness and saving time. Farmer groups on the other hand can programme their work and the timing of meetings with the EW. If the group is strong and dynamic it is able to initiate demand led extension and dictate the time and issues to be discussed with an EW. The formation of commodity groups is critical in also making extension to be responsive to farmers' needs and priorities.
Since independence, AGRITEX has directed itself increasingly to groups of farmers. Through establishing Master Farmer Clubs (now incorporated in the ZNFU), good farming competition groups; and savings clubs, AGRITEX developed various forums for farmers (Truscott 1987:5). Four characteristic types of farmer organisations are enlisted by Bratton; information groups, labour groups; market groups and multipurpose groups. (Bratton 1986 p371) makes the following observations:
"The emerging pattern of membership by wealth is accentuated when the sex of respondents is taken into account. Women most frequently belong to the poorer groups that pool labour, men by contrast, dominate the market groups which specialise in bulk commodity transactions. Culturally this reflects a division of labour in which women undertake the basic production tasks and men control the allocation of surplus. Labour groups do, however, offer women a potential base from which to organise and accumulate wealth for themselves, providing they occupy the executive positions of leadership on group committees. Otherwise, the social composition of farmer organisations does not challenge the traditional patterns of gender inequality. Indeed in labour groups where a membership of female workers undertakes field operations under the direction of a committee of male farmers, group organisations may actually reinforce the subordination of women" (Bratton 1986 p 374).
Bratton and Truscott conclude that groups of farmers have more access to production services than individual farmers.:
"The diffusion of technical innovation, whether from scientific research or the accumulated experience of farmers themselves (particularly MFs') is clearly heightened by the existence of voluntary organisations" (Bratton 1986 pp377).
Truscott adds:
"...over and above the important function of providing a collective forum for learning and training, groups also get together for such important functions as the sharing of implement, labour-sharing, sharing of draft power, collectively organised buying of inputs and marketing of produce - activities which have such important productivity implications" (Truscott 1988 p76).
AGRITEX aims at supporting this kind of group functions because it wants to increase the "self-reliance" of farmers. But in practice the Extension Service has not yet adopted the right strategies to reach this goal, as observed by Bratton (1986),Truscott (1988) and Drinkwater (1987). It is hoped that the development of an appropriate approach would take a gender perspective.
The women's groups formed through the then Ministry of Community Development and Women's Affairs were also regular recipients of agricultural information, and advice. EWs have been able to respond to these groups' needs when they asked for advisory assistance through the Ward Community Development Worker. This cooperative approach by the two departments had the potential of enabling large number of women to receive agricultural information (Mutimba 1987 7p22-23 in FAO 1987). The extent to which this potential was exploited by AGRITEX is not documented.
In view of the above review of the group approach, in terms of its effectiveness to enable AGRITEX to reach women farmers more, one can only conclude that the group strategy minimises the problem; it does not completely eliminate it. EWs 's contact with [arm women can be facilitated by adjusting the contents of extension messages (to focus on crops controlled by women), the timing and pace of contacts, the extension language and the mode of contact. Due to social reasons it is usually easier for male EWs to work with female or mixed - sex contact groups as opposed to individual female contact farmers.
4.2.2 Master Farmer Training
From 1982 to 1990 a total of 67,779 farmers graduated in the Ordinary level Master Farmer training programme. Women constituted only 33.2%. For the same period at Advanced Master Farmer training level, a total of 7,256 farmers were trained. Of these 24.5% were women . On this aspect of training AGRITEX extension service is having a limited outreach on women. For details see table 2.
TABLE 2: MASTER FARMERS TRAINED DURING THE PERIOD 1982 TO 1990 DISAGGREGATED BY GENDER
Province
Total for M.F. Ordinary Level
Percentage by sex
Total for M.F. Advanced Level
Percentage by sex
Male
Female
Male
Female
Midlands
Mash Cetral
Mash West
Mash East
Mat North
Mat South
Masvingo
Manicaland
Overall Total
Note: Mat South ad North and Manicaland may have a significantly higher percentage of female traind in the Master Farmer training programmes, due to male migration. Migration in more pronounced in these areas.
There has been an increase in the number of farmers (fe/male) joining the Master Farmer training programme. This is because the certificate is increasingly being used as a requirement in joining various new agricultural schemes. In the past it was also used to select farmers for the smallscale farming areas. Now it is used as one criterion for selection to join irrigation and resettlement schemes, for joining the Zimbabwe Farmers' Unions, and for tax exemptions in buying other agricultural inputs.
It is usually the old generations that attends the Master Farmer training, those above 35 years. For both male and female farmers.
To qualify as a Master Farmer one has to demonstrate the skills practically. In the event that one does not have direct access to land, one may not be able to demonstrate.
Prior to 1980 (independence) women were not awarded Master Farmer certificate even in instances were they had completed the course. The absentee husband was awarded instead and the certificate written in his name. The rationale behind it was that women did not own any property and national registration cards were also a requirement. That also explains why there are fewer number of Master Farmer trained women. It was also unheard of, for a women to get a Master Farmer certificate before the husband did. It is still an issue now for some households.
There is evidence to support that there is a high drop out rate of women attending the two-year ordinary Master Farmer course. It was confirmed by EWs and farmers. This issue has never been investigated fully and yet its relevance is very crucial. The fact that the Master Farmer certificate is one criterion being used for selection of farmers participating in new programmes such as irrigation and resettlement schemes makes it even more relevant.
The reasons mentioned by women farmers for dropping out of the Master Farmer training course are sighted as when a family crisis occurs. The crisis may take the form of illness or death in the family, or drought. When a crisis of this nature occurs a woman's time will be occupied because she has to perform other duties to deal with the crisis. The transfer of an EW to another area is a factor which should not be, because the one taking over should get some handover notes and carry on from where his/her predecessor left of. Some did not have the fields in which to demonstrate the skills learnt. For those with fields, some farmers said they did not have money to purchase the necessary agricultural inputs. Some mentioned that they were not aware of such a programme as the Master Farmer course. Some married women who had come from home/districts areas where Master Farmer training is effective and the farmers keen, did not know how to initiate these programmes in the new homes.
This is especially difficult for them in their capacity as varoora (sister-in-law) and vatorwa the latter literally translated means foreigner, so they have no say except to accept their new homes as they are. Some complained that they really did not have the time to attend to the meetings. These reasons coincide with the reasons given in the recent baseline study (1993), carried out by AGRITEX Monitoring and Evaluation Unit.
The drop out rate for women in the Master Farmer training programmes could also be statistically significant because now there is an increase the number of women undergoing the training. For example in the sample for the " baseline study (1993) " 42 of the 69 farmers currently undergoing training are women. This compares well with the figures from the provinces of Master Farmer trainees as shown below:
M
F
Nkayi
Masvingo
The figures are for one ward respectively, in each district.
In Mashonaland Central Province, for example, since 1954, a total of 5,396 Master Farmers have been Brained, and of these 190 are de facto female heads of households, and 410 are female heads of households and the rest are men. For the advanced Master Farmers training 709 farmers have passed, of these 25 are female heads of households and 23 are de facto female heads of households and the rest are male.
There is now a general trend towards having more women joining in the Master Farmer training course, but the statistics is not gender disaggregated and therefore difficult to interpret. More women heads of household attend Master Farmer courses than women in male headed households. One can only surmise at the reasons as they are not documented. It is possible there is a rationalisation of the division of labour in terms of male attending certain meetings and the wife remaining behind to do other duties. There is a possibility that the husband would wish to get the certificate first before the wife does.
Recommendations
There is a need for gender related courses as well as leadership courses for women to enhance their agricultural productivity. The timing for meetings and courses should be determined by farmers (women) and the following time preferences have been observed. During the summer season farmers prefer afternoon sessions, to allow them to do farm work in the morning. In the afternoon children will be back from school and can take over tasks such as herding cattle. During the dry season farmers would prefer courses to be held in the morning, so that in the afternoon they can work on handicrafts. The programming of activities together with farmers is highly recommended in extension.
4.3 Gender of EW
There are conflicting reports with regards to the issue of whether the gender of the EW has an impact or not in the effectiveness of extension. Some EWs have argued that the individual's ability for organising farmers Is more important and the character of the person is also put to test by the farmers. But some EWs have generally felt that female EWs have more impact on farmers especially female farmers than male EWs. With women EWs, female farmers feel they can discuss their social problems and are more open and truthful about why they cannot adopt certain technical advice. Even reasons for failure to save money to buy agricultural inputs for the next season are discussed openly.
In terms of working to rules, some EWs feel that men are prone to drink and have a higher absenteeism from duty than female EWs. In terms of programming activities women EWs are said to be more sensitive to women's other chores. Because of this women EWs say that they are able to keep time and stick to relevant issues, that relate to the farmers' needs, than their male counterparts.
Some EWs have raised the issue that the EW is wholly and foremost a profession but rules of society govern the way the EW is expected to behave. The EW also relies on his/her knowledge of the clientele. So with personal problems relating to farming activities, women are said to be freer to discuss these with female EWs than the male.
Participation by farmers in the Master Farmer training course may be influenced by the sex of the trainer. In the Mutoko case for example some even feel that the quality of extension will improve if we have more women EWs. One EW in the Mutoko district stated that in a group of trainees that she took over from her predecessor a male EW, there were 12 male and 1 female trainees. Now in the new group she is currently training there are 14 male and 9 female trainees. The reason for this increase according to the female farmers was because she is a female EW. The women felt free to come and the men had no objections.
So there is need to explore the issue of the gender of EWs further. There seems to be a trend that in the remote areas, the gender of EW is significant. One is inclined to believe that if one puts female EWs in these remote areas, they are likely to be more effective in reaching out the women farmers. But again this could work negatively for women EWs who would have to be deployed in the remote areas.
4.4 Technology Development
A review of some of the technology developed for communal area farmers from a gender perspective has revealed the following observations:
- The ripper plough was not popular with farmers especially women farmers, because it tended to reduce labour requirements for ploughing but increased labour for weeding. Ripping and zero-tillage as opposed to conventional ploughing and cultivating offers potential for more timely planting. The main agronomic disadvantage of low tillage systems is the potential build-up of weeds and compacted zones. Weeding is mostly done by women and this means increased labour.
- The high wing ridger designed for making ridges was too heavy to use by women and therefore is not adopted by farmers. The same case with the de-huller. It had again to be modified after it proved to be too heavy for women.
- The use of cultivators developed to reduce weeding time again has not been appreciated by women farmers. The cultivators are therefore hardly used. One of the reasons being that women, inspite of AGRITEX advising them to do mono-cropping, end up with mixed cropping to maximise the benefits. Women farmers should therefore be consulted in the initial tests of these machineries. A sampling of communal area and resettlement area farmers who will be the end users of the machinery would be advisable and critical in terms of testing the usefulness of a given technology.
Again, like in all AGRITEX's spheres of activities there is no gender disaggregated feedback in terms of farmers' response to technology development This is important because technology is developed to meet the people's needs. Those who normally use it should offer their response. This will also lead the farmers to be aware that such a technology exists and determine its usefulness. Tied to this is the issue of whether the formulation of technical packages and recommendations does give sufficient priority to the primary objectives of raising communal area farmer incomes. Technology development is based on certain assumptions. For example, a typical one is that draught power is available to the farmer. The farmers especially women are looking for labour saving technology and not technology that is not compatible with their farming system. Technology recommendations do not always fully consider the major constraints facing communal farmers including rainfall and seasonal
labour shortages.
There is a comparative lack of improved technology for the more draught-tolerant small grains (sorghum and the millets) that play a central role in the food security strategies of rural household. This exacerbates the problems in Natural Region V and places poorer resource deficient household at a disadvantage.
The most successful and widely adopted technologies are the comparatively high input and high cost systems of maize and cotton. The adoption of these technologies however, is highly skewed and the majority of communal area farmers have not found it possible to adopt all of the technical packages of these crops.
A theme which emerges is the lack of analysis that takes full account of the farm profitability of the technologies, for example fertiliser use.
Some of the factors identified in the World Bank (1991 p 21) that constrain the adoption of improved technology in communal areas are as follows; "agro-ecological factors", including, (i) rainfall and soil fertility, (ii) individual farmer resource constraints including draught power, labour bottlenecks and availability of land, (iii) input supply and marketing systems, (iv) social and cultural constraints (v) weaknesses in technology transfer systems and limited income earning opportunities. These factors cut across gender but impact on women more because of their status in society.
One can sum this up to say many agricultural technologies including conservation measures, have had limited success often because of the socio-economic, agronomic and ecological inappropriateness of these designed interventions. This problem is increasingly recognized.
It is therefore recommended that in view of the disproportionate contribution that women make to the total farm system and farm economy calls for greater focus on technology related issues affecting women:
- greater research attention needs to be devoted to small grains,
- improving farm incomes should be the primary goal of all technology generation and transfer systems; and,
- the development of household labour saving devises must be viewed as an integral part of the technology adoption and income improving process.
<section>7</section>
5.0. Women professionals in AGRITEX
5.1 History of Women in Extension Service
5.2 General Conditions of Service
5.3 Further Training
5.4 Transfers
5.5 Maternity leave
5.0. Women professionals in AGRITEX
5.1 History of Women in Extension Service
The first group of female EWs were trained at the Alvord college in Masvingo in 1972. They were seven and had completed between two and four years of secondary education. In the agricultural colleges the women could not be accommodated as there were no female halls of residence. Of the seven that were trained in the first group, four are still with AGRITEX. The second group had six women. Those that have remained with the department (AGRITEX) one has managed to go for a diploma course and is now an Agricultural Extension Officer (AEO) one step up. The other three are still ordinary EWs after 20 years of service. Three went for further training and are now teachers. One joined a Bank (Standard Chartered Bank of Zimbabwe). Three went into secretarial posts, one is with the Masvingo provincial AGRITEX office.
These women pioneers in extension field were disadvantaged from the onset. They received one year training as opposed to some of the male EWs who had received two years of training. Their salaries were lower than men. They did not accrue any pension benefits and based on the public service rules of that time, they were also regarded as temporary employees. The situation changed after 1980 with the advent of independence when women were granted equal status with men, with the act for equal pay for equal job being promulgated. The female EWs were attached to male EWs for a period of three weeks before being deployed in their own area They were also given relatively small areas of operation in comparison with male counterparts. Their salary was Z$38 in comparison with Z$70 per month for men.
The first group of female EWs felt that they were well received by farmers, especially the female farmers. The female farmers were also said to be interested in Home Economics courses.
The three women still in AGRITEX as EWs feel that they have been discriminated against with regards to promotional posts to supervisor level. One of them acted in a supervisory capacity for a consecutive period of three years and not got the post. The EWs denied that they were not applying for promotional posts for fear of being transferred. Contrary to this all three are prepared to transfer to other parts of the district if they are promoted. The EWs feel that they are being denied the opportunity to apply for certain supervisory posts as these posts are not advertised in time for them to apply. Normally the women EWs said they got to hear of the vacant posts after interviews for the posts would have already been carried out and it is too late to apply.
The women feel that they had received a lot of in-service training and were up-graded to full-time EWs, together with men who had received less training than the required two years. Some men had undergone six months training for "specific" tasks such as conservation works. These had also been up-graded and to the dismay of these women had risen to supervisory levels, and yet the women had one year training prior to joining the service. One of the women has also completed a certificate in community work, but to go for a diploma course is too late for the woman, according to the age requirements for the agricultural colleges. There are also men who have been in the service for 20 plus years and still at the EW levels and just waiting and looking forward to retiring. The fact that there is no female EW who has attained the level of supervisor is disheartening, particularly to the young ones who have just joined the service.
Women have risen among other ranks in AGRITEX and there is no reason why ten years after independence there are no female EW supervisors. Their capacity is not in question as some of them have acted in various parts of the country as supervisors. In Manicaland province, annually there is an examination set for EWs and women have also come up on the top, so some of them are competent and should be considered for promotional posts.
With regards to the issue of the three female EWs who have not been promoted, it is because of the standing Public Service rules and not to do with AGRITEX management. According to one senior manager the new requirement for one to be promoted to supervisor level is that one should have obtained a minimum of five Ordinary level passes in five subjects.
The women may fail to fulfil this education requirement and hence do not qualify for the promotional posts. More information is required before any conclusions can be made with regards to why women are not being promoted at the EW level. At other levels women appear to be promoted.
There is only one female CAS and one female DAEO in the country. Most of these female professionals interviewed, feel that they had to work extra hard as compared to their male counterparts. One interesting comment made was that the hours of work for man can stretch beyond normal working hours whereas for women they cannot because of their productive and reproductive roles within the home. That explains partially, why married women are less mobile than single women both in terms of career advancement and even day to day mobility at work. The expectations and demands for these women to run the household and professional work programmes effectively may be too high.
5.2 General Conditions of Service
An article appeared in one of the national daily newspapers, the "Chronicle", dated 14 January, 1993 entitled "Extension Workers are not too happy with their lot". The article suggested that the Agricultural Extension Workers (AEWs) felt that they were being considered as less essential in comparison with school teachers. The AEWs complained that they were being treated unfairly, because they had to meet similar requirements for training as those of teachers. That for both to be admitted into training colleges, they should have a minimum of five "O" levels. Both are trained for three years. The EW starting salary is Z$763, while that of a school teacher is Z$1,200. This again applies for an AEW employed by the Ministry of Education and Culture as a teacher, the starting salary will still be Z$763.
This does have a bearing in terms of attracting both male and female EWs into the profession. Equally more so for female staff who have traditionally been attracted to teaching and nursing.
One can argue that even if a need for more female EWs is identified, it will be very difficult to attract them into a lowly paid profession.
Some female EWs have gone back to teaching sacrificing an extra two years training to get a teaching certificate. Some are also contemplating leaving AGRITEX once they have saved enough money for tuition fees to pay for teacher training course. Conditions of service for women in AGRITEX are reviewed against the background that agriculture has been a male dominated field which has not really attracted women. Women have traditionally shunned taking up careers in forestry or agriculture.
Some female AGRITEX staff feel that women in the service should have confidence in their abilities. They should be prepared to take up challenges such as promotions even if it means being transferred. Heads of branches should not overtly sympathise with women as that also compromises their performance, and the way they are viewed by their counterparts. Some women are said to lack confidence even in the work they do, to the extent that they have to constantly check and concur with their counterparts for approval. The attitudinal problem towards the female sex also affect the women m the AGRITEX profession. Some of the professional staff felt that raising issues in a meeting can be a very difficult task for women. Even if one is raising technical issues there are problems with convincing colleagues. The women professionals also feel that they are left out in the decision-making process that affects their day to day activities at whatever levels of their areas of operation. So
most women resort to keeping quiet in meetings. Female professionals feel they are more readily accepted by farmers than their male colleagues. Male colleagues have a tendency to put the women's professional competence to test which farmers rarely do. Some women professionals feel that their contributions in meetings are ignored or ridiculed and not taken seriously. Their recommendations may never be directly taken on. These seems to be stemming from their colleagues and immediate bosses at work. There seems to be a carry-over assumption that women do not make sense are, emotional, and therefore critical decisions are made on their behalf.
Women professionals in AGRITEX have sometimes experienced insubordination by fellow women juniors, in a situation where they would expect support. Female professionals feel that in the initial encounter with their new bosses, and new jobs, they have to work extra hard to prove that they are professionally competent. Whatever they do is critically reviewed in comparison with their male colleagues. Any slight mistake is blown out of proportion. Female professional promotions are also negatively viewed by male colleagues, and are seen as not based on merit but other criteria such as favouritism.
Attitudes towards women are a result of socialisation and this means that the question of prejudice applies to both men and women. Both men and women professionals can be gender blind. Men and women within the AGRITEX profession require gender awareness training.
Women professionals have raised the issue that even if their conditions of work are improved they are still constrained by the controls exercised over them by their husbands. An example is that of a couple of two EWs married, the wife is not allowed to speak at the EW meetings. When the two were placed in adjacent working areas, the wife stayed at home and the husband covered her job for her.
Another case is that of an EW married to a teacher. EWs in the month of November to December 1992 were almost working seven days a week distributing drought relief packs to farmers. Because this female EW was working full-time she could not perform her other household duties as instructed by the husband. She was thoroughly beaten and when in the meantime she was heavily pregnant
5.3 Further Training
Further training for EWs is limited to in-service training which does not in any way enhance their status. Both the certificate and diploma level staff have to resign to go for further studies. The risks are very high in terms of resigning to pursue further studies, because there is no guarantee that he Department will take them back The major opening for advancement will lie with being trained for teaching.
The curricula for EWs should be reviewed in view of the changing environment in which they are operating. For a stars if the entry qualification for the certificate course now requires four years of secondary school instead of two years of secondary school; then the certificate should assume greater strength in content than before. The upgrading of certificate levels to diploma levels should be fairy easy if the certificate content is revised.
An upgrading exercise for EWs should be put in place, through offering in-service training. Both the young and old EWs prefer an in-service-service training that would lead to a diploma level instead of resigning and joining the colleges. For the old EWs they are constrained by age limits for entry into colleges, so an in-service training to upgrade them will meet their needs.
Women officers in AGRITEX who hold first degrees would wish to pursue post graduate degree courses through the Wye College programme, but preference is given to the diploma people and those degreed but who have had long service with AGRITEX. The coordinator of the course felt that AGRITEX should review this criteria, so that more women could participate in the programme. The programme is suitable for women professionals with their multiple roles of reproduction, household chores and looking after the family welfare. The sense of injustice is rife among EWs as they feel that the Technical Specialists fields are being catered for while the' are being neglected. For example the in-service degree programme with Wye College. And also the opportunities for rising professionally up the ladder is nil at EW level but at the specialist and officer level one can go up the ladder. The supervisory post is limited to a few and the chances of one being promoted are very slim.
In terms of further training, some married women professionals feel they are left out. Some are excused from attending a course without their knowledge, and would only be aware of it, after the training. This also compromises the women's chances of promotions. This may be an example of the made boss being over-sympathetic.
Women in the AGRITEX service incur a lot of expenses when they are breast-feeding and attending courses away from their duty stations. Because there are no nursing facilities for babies at the training centres, the women will have to stay with relatives or stay at hotel where their maids and babes are accommodated. Some courses are compulsory and cannot be postponed or deferred to another date. The women have to foot the bills from their own pockets. This applies to many women farmers who do not attend the meetings or courses, as a result.
5.4 Transfers
The desire of woman professionals to be with their husbands can have a negative effect on their promotional opportunities. Some women professionals fail to apply for promotional posts because it would mean transfer if they get it. This is common among young couples. Some of the old women professionals who are married said they had no problems in transferring and leaving husbands behind
Soon after independence 1980 when more women were introduced into AGRITEX they posed no threat burrow men feel threatened. Men are resenting it, especially when women advance more then their counterparts.
Female EWs and AEOs are said to be disruptive when they seek transfers to join or be near their husbands. This again affects promotional opportunities for women. Some women do not apply for promotional posts if that would mean being transferred to another district or province. A case in point is of a female officer who has a potential for promotion, but has been shifting from one province to another following her husband. In so doing her career advancement is compromised as AGRITEX can only accommodate her if there is a vacant post. The existence of a vacant post again does not necessarily mean it would follow in line with her field of expertise. It may mean change of area of specialization and also possibly a junior post.
Transfers are a problem at province level as this may create a vacant post where one did not exist It is presently the policy of government that all vacant posts are frozen until further notice. In terms of manpower development plans certain officers are selected for training in certain areas of specialization to meet the gaps at province or district level. So once they transfer to another province that is a loss to that province.
Swapping of officers is also a common practice, in sorting out the problem of transfers. Just as issues of training arise, so does the issue of getting an officer or EW who is not motorised. It means the impact of the incoming officer will be limited in comparison with the predecessor. So again heads of sections are reluctant to allow for a transfer if it means a loss.
The women professionals complained that the issue of transfers is often trivialised and the response in many cases is negative. Some feel that this lowers their performance and productivity.
5.5 Maternity leave
The majority of officers raised the issue of maternity leave for women as an issue of concern. The views range from viewing it as a privilege for women, to disruption of AGRITEX activities. As a privilege, it is seen as an extra leave women enjoy on top of study leave and annual leave. In terms of disrupting activities, this is said to be noticeable at officer level where there is an element of specialisation and therefore difficult to have temporary replacement. In the past there was usually a replacement rotating around filling in the vacancies at EW level. But now with the advent of economic reform programme and the rationalisation of the public service it is now impossible, to employ reserve personnel.
At EW level it is common practice for them to take care of a colleague's area of operations in their absence. This is viewed as not being disruptive because of the system in place of backstopping each other and this is rare and seen in isolated cases and therefore not worth mentioning. The fact that maternity leave was mentioned as an issue reflects the fact that there is still a general resentment towards having women in a service that has been predominantly a male preserve. It shows a lack of appreciation on the part of some male staff of the reproductive role women still have to perform, besides their professional role.
Instances quoted are where an EW goes on maternity leave during critical periods like when farmers are preparing for agricultural shows. There is usually a vacuum when specialists go on maternity leave.
For the period that these women officers/EWs are breast-feeding, they will not be able to attend courses that are far away from their homes or institutions. Training centres do not have facilities for baby care. For a year or two, an officer may therefore be immobile, in terms of travelling away from duty station.
<section>8</section>
6.0 Other issues arising
6.0 Other issues arising
In Zimbabwe despite the growing awareness about the role of women in agriculture, agricultural development policies and programmes have not adequately addressed the needs of small farmers particularly women. Most of the income-generating projects that have been directed at rural women have taken the form of small projects such as poultry raising and vegetable gardening. These projects have suffered from lack of infrastructural facilities, inadequate funding, isolation from mainstream development efforts and inadequate policy support. Some of the projects geared to assist women also take the form of small components linked to but not necessarily integrated into larger agricultural projects. In many cases, projects for women have also focused on non-agricultural activities such uniform making, bakery and handicrafts which do not address women's needs for assistance in their primary agricultural responsibilities (FAO 1991, World Bank 1991).
The other was an institutional problem in that the women's programmes came under different ministries initially, Community Development and Women's Affairs, Political Affairs and now under the Ministry of-Employment Creation, as opposed to Ministry of Lands, Agriculture and Water Development. This led the other ministries and department, under them to be complacent about taking women's issues, assuming that they were being dealt with, and it was not their portfolio. AGRITEX among them did just that. It is recognised that programming and implementation of agricultural projects are most effectively carried out by AGRITEX in this country. But again the major impediment to incorporating gender issues into food and agricultural development policies and strategies teas been the lack of comprehensive data on the nature and role of women's contributions to food and agricultural production. Data and statistics by gender and activity at the village level are indispensable in framing
measures at integrating women in development. It will be the major focus of this project (ZIM/91/005)
Impact of Economic Structural Adjustment on Extension Services
With the introduction of the economic reform programme and the emphasis on cutting back of government expenditure, this also affects AGRITEX's programmes. Though limiting this may be to extension programmes, it poses a challenge to AGRITEX to encourage food crops that are mostly women's domain and the provision of inexpensive and appropriate inputs and technologies. The situation is not so encouraging if one reviews structural adjustment programmes, in the light of shrinking resources and massive male migration and of a bureaucratic under-resourced extension services.
<section>9</section>
7.0 Issues for follow-up
7.0 Issues for follow-up
The critical challenge to be addressed by ZIM/91/005 is not only the incorporation of sociological (including gender) perspectives and methods into AGRITEX analysis and planning but also the use of the concomitant results in the programmes of its extension and technical services.
In the course of the constraint analysis a lot of issues within the services have been raised which require answers. Some of these questions are as follows; to what extent is agricultural policy based on understanding of women's role in economic and social change? Does this understanding extend to a sufficient allocation of resources? In particular, does it appear that the practice of AGRITEX extension is changing accordingly?
This study suggests that AGRITEX needs to examine more closely whether rural women are yet in focus, and establish evidence on whether AGRITEX's extension is actually reaching rural women effectively.
The problems and issues that emerge from this analysis require urgent attention in terms of verification and formulation of strategies to deal with them in the context of AGRITEX's mainstream activities. The issues can be categorised as coming under the following subject areas:
i. Extension farmer contact and adoption from a gender perspective.
ii. Gender issues in irrigated agriculture.
iii. Women professionals in AGRITEX.
iv. AGRITEX's perspectives on specific WID projects.
It is further hoped that verification studies envisaged through this analysis will not stop short after demonstrating how development in the agricultural sector has marginalised women's resources and activities, but will lead to development of a methodology to bridge the 88p between research and practice, that it will not be confined to iterating the quality and degree of women's disadvantages, but would place women in the center of the agricultural extension and planning process.
<title>Gender issues, constraints and potentials in AGRITEX - An Overview</title>
8.0 Conclusion
8.0 Conclusion
The analysis appreciates the fact that the pressure on extension services to meet pre-planned goals provides few incentives to incorporate women as an extension resource in themselves. Rural women have abundant potential for organisational and management skills. They operate channels of communication and hold indigenous technical knowledge of use in farming systems which are vital to the successful adoption of innovations. But the resources will remain untapped by AGRITEX unless it invests in overcoming some basic constraints. Bringing women into extension process is still problematic for AGRITEX's mainstream extension services. In short, working with rural production systems in Zimbabwe mew working with mostly women and training to reach them effectively. It is therefore the contention of this analysis that because women play an important role in agriculture, they should be integrated into mainstream development efforts. The economic rationale behind this approach is that
the full productive potential of human resources both male and female, cannot be realised if women who make substantial contributions to food output and provisioning, do not have adequate access to resources, productivity enhancing inputs and services.
<title>Gender issues, constraints and potentials in AGRITEX - An Overview</title>
<section>1</section>
Appendix I : List of interviewers
Appendix I : List of interviewers
LIST OF PERSONS MET IN THE CONSULTATIVE MEETINGS BETWEEN DECEMBER, 1992 TO FEBRUARY, 1993
1. Acting Assistant Director (Field)
2. Acting Assistant Director (Agric Engineering)
3. Assistant Director (Technical)
4. Acting Chief Agricultural Specialist (Irrigation)
5. Chief Agricultural Specialist (Engineering)
6. Chief Agricultural Specialist (Conservation)
7. Chief Agricultural Specialist (Animal Production)
8. Assistant Chief Agricultural Specialist (Animal Production)
9. Chief Agricultural Specialist (Crop Production)
10. Chief Agricultural Specialist (Planning)
11. Chief Agricultural Specialist (Training)
12. Chief Agricultural Specialist (Management)
13. Agricultural Engineer (Tiriwangani Koza)
14. Acting Chief Agricultural Officer (Mashonaland East)
15. Principal Agricultural Extension Officer (Technical)
16. Chief Agricultural Extension Officer (Mashonaland Central)
17. Provincial Extension Worker Supervisor (Mashonaland Central)
18. Principal Agricultural Specialist (Mrs Christine Nesangano)
19. Principal Agricultural Extension Officer (Field) Mashonaland East
20. Principal Agricultural Extension Officer Technical) Mashonaland West
21. Provincial Agricultural Extension Specialist (Irrigation) Mashonaland West
22. Provincial Agricultural Extension Specialist (Training) Mashonaland West
23. Provincial Agricultural Extension Worker Supervisor Mashonaland West
24. Provincial Agricultural Extension Specialist (Land Use Planner) Mashonaland West
25. Provincial Agricultural Extension Specialist (Conservation) Mashonaland West
26. Acting District Agricultural Extension Officer Chinhoyi
27. District Agricultural Extension Officer for Makonde Mashonaland West
28. Provincial Agricultural Farm Management Specialist Mashonaland West
29. Provincial Agricultural Farm Mechanisation Mashonaland West
MIDLAND PROVINCE
30. Chief Agricultural Extension Officer Midlands
31. Principal Agricultural Extension Officer (Field)
32. District Agricultural Extension Officer Gweru/Shurugwi (Female)
33. District Agricultural Extension Officer Gokwe
34. District Agricultural Extension Officer Zvishavane
35. District Agricultural Extension Officer Mvuma
36. District Agricultural Extension Officer Mberengwa
37. District Agricultural Extension Officer Mvuma
38. District Agricultural Extension Officer Kwekwe
39. 16 Female Extension Workers
MATEBELELAND NORTH
40. Provincial Agricultural Specialist (Land Use Planner)
41. Provincial Agricultural Specialist (Land Use Planner)
42. Provincial Agricultural Specialist (Horticulture, Ms Dube)
43. Provincial Agricultural Specialist (Land Use Planner)
44. Provincial Agricultural Specialist (2) (Irrigation)
45. Extension Worker, Nkayi (F)
46. Extension Worker Supervisor for Inyati
47. District Agricultural Extension Officer Inyati
MATEBELELAND SOUTH
48. Provincial Livestock Specialist
49. Mrs Mugwaba
50. Mr Sibanda x (2)
51. Mr Mazivo
52. Mr Alibaba
53. Mr Mufumbi
54. Mr Mafu
55. Mr Moyo
56. Chief Agricultural Extension Officer Matebeleland South
MASVINGO
57 Chief Agricultural Extension Officer
58. Principal Agricultural Extension Services (Technical)
59. District Agricultural Extension Officer Masvingo
60. Senior Specialist Livestock (Ms)
61. Extension Worker (Mrs) (Summerton)
62. Extension Worker (Mrs)
63. Extension worker (Mrs Maridza)
64. Extension worker (Mr Machimbirike)
65. Extension worker (Mr Chipare)
66. Extension worker (Mr Manyakara)
67. Extension worker (Mr Mtoko)
68. Extension worker (Mr Chikwayi)
69. Extension worker (Mr Wafa)
70. Extension worker (Mr Tapfumaneyi)
71. Extension worker (Ms Makhotore)
72. Extension worker (Ms Chikoma)
MANICALALAND
73. Principal Agricultural Extension Officer (Mr Sithole)
74. 10 Agricultural Extension Supervisors for Rusape, Buhera and Mutasa.
75. Executive Officer
76. 7 Agricultural Extension Supervisors for Manicaland, Buhera
77. District Agricultural Extension Officer Buhera
78. 7 Agricultural Extension Officers Masvingo, Manicaland and Buhera
79. Principal Agricultural Extension Officer (Chivizhe) (Field)
80. Irrigation Officer (Sikumi)
81. Extension Worker (Ms Mutseiikwa)
82. Extension Worker (Ms Shunga)
83. Extension Worker (Mr Sithole)
MASHONALAND EAST
84. Extension Worker Supervisor (Mr Rungano)
85. District Agricultural Extension Officer Wedza (Mr Maizaiwana)
86. Agricultural Extension Officer Livestock Wedza (female)
87. Extension Worker Zute South (Muruda)
88. Extension Worker Chitawa (Maganga)
89. Extension Worker Zute North (Ms Nyakusendwa)
90. Extension Worker Mutandwa (Zhanje)
91. Extension Worker Zute North (Tuturije)
92. Agricultural Extension Officer Livestock Murehwa (Mazana)
93. Extension Worker Musame (Mushaniwani)
94. Extension Worker Supervisor Musame (P Deve)
95. Extension Worker Murehwa (Mrs Chivanganani)
96. Extension Worker Chinoyi ward (Masekesa)
97. Extension Worker (Ms Bako)
98. District Agricultural Extension Officer Chesango Mutoko
99. Extension Worker Supervisor Mutoko (Mudarikiri)
100. Extension Worker Mutoko (Ms Mutangadura)
101. Extension Worker Mutoko (Ms Munaeta)
Male
Female
Total 140
COMMUNAL FARMERS MET
Female
Male
Total
1. Mangwende communal area Musami
2. Wedza communal area
3. Kawere Mutoko
4. Makosa Mudzi/Mutoko
5. Nyawasha
6. Insukamini
7. Mkoba
8. Hama Mavhaire
9. Nyamaropa
10. Muranda
11. Murara
Total 170
<section>2</section>
Appendix II : References
Appendix II : References
Agritex
"AGRITEX Aims and Objectives Training Branch" 1990, AGRITEX HARARE
Bratton M.
"Farmer Organisations and Food Production in Zimbabwe" World Development Vol 14, No. 3, p367 - 384
Chambers R.
"Rural Development: Putting the Last First" Harlow, Longmans
Drinkwater M. J.
Exhausted Messages "Training and Groups A Comparative Evaluation of Zimbabwe's Training and Visit System," Working Paper AEE 2/87, originally presented at a Seminar in the Department of Agricultural Economics and Extension University of Zimbabwe Harare
FAO
1990 (a)
"Women Food Systems and Agriculture" Rome
FAO
1990 (b)
"Gender Issues in Rural Food Security in Developing Countries" Rome
FAO
"Strengthening Agricultural Extension Management and Training" Rome
FAO
"Report of Workshop, Effectiveness of Agricultural Extension Services, in reaching rural women in Africa" Volume 1
FAO
AG:GCP/ZIM/007/ITA Terminal Report "Strengthening Women's role and Work in Rural Development" Zimbabwe Rome
Feldstein H.S. and Poats S.V.
"Working Together Gender Analysis in Agriculture" Volume 1, Kumarian Press Oakwood
Govereh J., Chigume S.M and Sen S.
"Socio-economic and marketing constraints to the development of aquaculture and utilisation of small water bodies in Zimbabwe" AGRITEX FISHERIES UNIT FAO/UNDP Support for Rural Aquaculture Extension (ZIM/88/021)
Hakutangwi M. B. K.
"ZIM/023 Women's Extension/Norad-funded Programme" Annual Report and Plans 1992-1993. Agritex
Madondo B. B.
"The role of women in Male-headed Households in the Management of Smallholder Irrigation Schemes in Manicaland province Zimbabwe" AGRITEX HARARE
Mertens J.
Gender induced Differences in Access to Agricultural Knowledge Networks in a Communal Area of Zimbabwe Wageningen Agricultural University
Munro M.
"Building on Gender Awareness. The policy and practice of rural extension for women" RRDC Bulletin
Pambirei N. C.
"Experiences derived from managing extension programme in rural areas" Agritex Harare
Truscott K.
"Monitoring and Evaluation Report No.2: Preliminary Evaluation of 287 Groups Assisted by the Project 1987/1988 Season" Project: Strengthening the role and work of women in Rural Development Harare
World Bank
"Zimbabwe Agricultural Sector Memorandum" World Bank Washington
Zwart G.
"Women's Issues in Agriculture" Background Paper Prepared for World Bank Zimbabwe Agriculture Sector Memorandum
