<title>Male involvement in reproductive health: Incorporating gender throughout the life cycle</title>
<section>1</section>
I. Introduction
I. Introduction
In the last few years more attention has been focusing on the issue of male involvement^1 in reproductive health, and as its importance is acknowledged, more programmes are trying to incorporate it as one of their components. However, existing programmes tend to share potentially problematic aspects: first, male components are usually limited to male methods of family planning, only one element of reproductive health. Second, they tend to address men only, in a similar way as the old programmes addressed women only without taking into account their gender relations. A focus on men only is as inadequate as a focus on women only because it fails to take into account the way in which many decisions are made and the context that influences them. Third, they tend to be grounded on a negative premise, men's irresponsibility, rather than a positive one of promotion of men's rights. Fourth, by viewing men as a route for women's well-being they instrumentalize men and fail to address
men's needs.
^1 The language of "male responsibility" and "male involvement" has been recently criticised as judgmental, for it suggests that men are irresponsible or uninvolved. Moreover, at the macro level, men are sometimes seen as being too involved in reproductive health, for in many places they are in charge of making the important decisions regarding policy and the provision of services (Verme, Wegner and Jerzowski, 1996). A suggestion that it would be more appropriate to use the phrase "men as partners", for it is considered more neutral and evokes more balanced roles has been dismissed as trying to ascribe universality to a western concept.
These problematic aspects emanate from:
· A female bias in the gender literature, and the consequent lack of knowledge of the male side of gender The gender literature tends to be by women on women.
· The traditional inability to set up programmes on the understanding of gender relations, disregarding the power relations and the gender roles that influence decision-making related to reproductive health.
· The way in which programmes were traditionally institutionalized, through the maternal and child health (MCH) facility of the Ministry of Health, that focused on women (and children, in the traditional dyed) and barred men from access to services and from exercising a number of responsibilities in the area of reproductive health of their wives and health of their children.
· Commonly held myths and erroneous assumptions about men's views of family planning, sexuality and health.
· The lack of data to understand male perspectives and the extent of their involvement in reproductive health issues. The surveys most relied upon for reproductive health (RH) programmes usually ask questions only of women, assuming that they are the ones who make the decisions regarding reproduction and that the men are either not involved or marginally involved.
While it is commonly agreed that programmes that aim to improve both women's and men's reproductive health should incorporate men, it is important to keep in mind a potential danger for women: when not adequately focused, the result of the programme may be the translation of the locus of control from women to men in reproductive health issues, with the consequent loss of women's autonomy in an area that is seen by many as one of the few in which women can effectively exercise decision-making.
Given that the aim of the programmes is to improve the reproductive health of both women and men, better programmes have to develop concrete strategies to understand and incorporate the male perspective and male needs in the same way as attention is given to women's perspectives and needs. In order to avoid a shift in the locus of control, programmes should aim to incorporate adequate male involvement, not only more involvement. Thus programmes should be based on the understanding of gender dynamics, on how decisions are made and implemented, on the changing needs of both genders and their interaction. Much more needs to be known about the relations between men and women in the particular contexts where programmes will be set up in order to make an effective change. This knowledge will aid in the definition of what is meant by adequate involvement (it can be defined from the point of view of the women, the men or the programme).
Two issues merit consideration regarding the resources needed to cater to men's reproductive health needs: in the first place, the more services are set up based on an understanding of the underlying gender relations, the more they will benefit both women and men. When adequately set up, services for men will not only address their own needs, but will contribute to relieve women of one of their many burdens. Thus, services for men do not compete with the already scanty resources available for women's services. Secondly, as discussed in this paper, services for men are not necessarily expensive.
The focus on men in this paper does not mean that a gender approach is not used. Conversely, the emphasis on women in much of the gender literature has left male perspectives as the missing link to a true gender approach. Far from arguing that the focus should be on men and women separately, we argue for the need to base our strategies, be they oriented to men or to women, on the analysis of gender interactions and needs. This paper is meant to help strengthen a component of a broader and more comprehensive gender approach.
In this paper our aim is to look into the socio-cultural aspects that shape male perspectives, based on the socially-embedded gender relations in the different stages of the life cycle, and to use this knowledge to suggest ways to increase men's involvement in reproductive health issues and to improve services. Within this context, information, education and communication (IEC) and advocacy strategies are also suggested. Finally, some recommendations are given for helping UNFPA Country Programmes better address male involvement in reproductive health.
ICPD and male involvement
The ICPD devoted an entire section of its Programme of Action to male involvement and responsibility (Chapter IV, section C). In brief, it calls for an understanding of men's and women's joint responsibilities, so that they become equal partners in public and private life, and to encourage and enable men to take responsibility for their sexual and reproductive behaviour. This is to be achieved through the following actions:
- The promotion and encouragement, by Governments, of the equal participation of women and men in all areas of family and household responsibilities, including family planning, child-rearing and housework.
- The emphasis of men's shared responsibility and the promotion of their active involvement in responsible parenthood, sexual and reproductive behaviour, including family planning; prenatal, maternal and child health; prevention of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV; prevention of unwanted and high-risk pregnancies; shared control and contribution to family income, children's education, health and nutrition; and recognition and promotion of the equal value of children of both sexes.
- Ensuring that children receive appropriate financial support from their parents by, among other measures, enforcing child- support laws.
- The promotion of the full involvement of men in family life arid the full integration of women in community life.
In other sections of the PoA, mention is made of the need to develop new methods for regulation of fertility for men and to carry out special research on factors inhibiting male participation in family planning in order to enhance their involvement and responsibility in this aspect (12.14.). Also, chapter 7 states the need to develop innovative programmes on RH information, counselIing and services for men and adolescents such that they `both educate and enable men to share more equally in family planning and in domestic and child-rearing responsibilities and to accept the major responsibility for the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases." (7.8). Young men should also be educated to "respect women's self-determination and to share responsibility with women in matters of sexuality and reproduction" (7.41)
<section>2</section>
II. Gender and the life cycle approach to reproductive health
II. Gender and the life cycle approach to reproductive health
As previously mentioned, there are serious shortcomings in the reproductive health field because of the lack of knowledge concerning gender from the male perspective. In the broadest terms this means that only one side of gender relations has been investigated, and that virtually all of our theories and applications are to some extent suspect, undoubtedly biased, and will need to be re-thought and amended at some time in the future when data on male perspectives is available. The implications of this lack of male gender theory are significant for the applied fields of population and reproductive health which depend, in part, on the social science literature for theoretical constructs, methodological tools and other applications for the allocation of resources and the design of effective programmes and services.
Given the aforementioned dilemma, there is a need to develop a practical methodological tool for initiating discussion on the topic and beginning to fill in the gaps in our knowledge. In order to facilitate this process, we suggest the utilization of a life cycle approach to examining the hierarchical gender system and its implications for sexuality and reproductive health. The life cycle is a common feature of all human populations and provides a useful format for incorporating interdisciplinary perspectives, including the elusive socio-cultural context. Moreover, the format can be effectively utilized to generate participatory discussions (with colleagues or informants) in settings where little is known about male perspectives.
The life cycle approach has been very useful in the understanding of the prevalence and incidence of stage-wise discriminatory health and education practices affecting women. The assessment by juxtaposition of the male-specific aspects of the life cycle with those of the female can highlight the key issues, characteristics and roles of each gender, thus leading to a pertinent analysis of the actual, ascribed and prescribed roles of each gender, thereby helping to identify significant areas of intervention. A revision of the existent socio-cultural research studies and literature on the issue of gender will permit a fresh look at the main gaps in knowledge, notions, myths, stereotypes and prejudices relating to men that affect male reproductive health motivations and behaviours.
Our general purpose at this initial stage is to suggest basic questions, including raising a series of interrelated issues concerning the confluence of socio-cultural, political-economic, and health factors in order to link them with male involvement programmes.
The Socio-cultural Approach: Holistic Perspectives
Socio-cultural research is based upon a holistic interdisciplinary methodology for examination of specific questions and hypotheses. In the broadest sense, socio-cultural research is based upon investigation of a problem(s) in the larger social, political-economic, and environmental context. The major aim of the approach is to come to a deeper understanding of multi causality as it is reflected in social processes. While no study can effectively incorporate all possible aspects of the holistic context, it is essential to identity a few: key dimensions for investigation. In the present case, we are interested in identifying and understanding the evolution of male gender perspectives on sexuality and reproductive health. Our examination will include political-economic, social-structural and cultural, and socio-medical dimensions.
Examining the Gender System: Male and Female Intersections
In order to analyse the hierarchical gender system in any given society one must begin with a basic assessment of social structure, that is, the major characteristics of social organization that govern social relations. The type and organization of the social structure have major implications for the gender system. Gender perspectives (including those concerning reproductive health and sexuality) are embedded in this larger structure. It is thus necessary to identify the salient characteristics of social structure for each region (or sub-group of interest) and assess its implications for the gender system. For example, in many parts of South Asia, the social structure is patrilineal, and is based upon male descent, authority, and power. As such, all children are born into the kinship group of their father, while females leave the group upon marriage and join the kin group of their respective husbands. Adult males are ascribed formal financial responsibility for their parents
(and anyone residing in the parental household) as well as their own households. Accordingly, males are the sole heirs to property (primarily land) upon the death of their father or other male relatives. (In the rare occasions of divorce, the children remain with their father, and mothers must return to their parental household without financial compensation or sometimes rights of visitation with the children). Polygamy is socially sanctioned although generally only affordable by more prosperous households.
The asymmetrical social and economic structure outlined above has major implications for sex preference of children, cost and value of males and females to the household, capital investment in males and females (medical treatment, education, nutrition), socialization processes, and many other aspects of behaviour. In the exercise that follows, we will begin to identify some of the major characteristics of social structure and their implications for the gender system, especially regarding male perspectives on reproductive health. Our example will focus on assessing what is currently known/not known at various stages of the life cycle for the case of South Asia. It is not meant to be a comprehensive exercise, but an illustration of the way in which the socio-cultural context can be linked to reproductive health services to improve them.
During an internal workshop of the CST Harare, a preliminary version of this paper was presented. A working group composed of UNFPA Country Representatives and CST advisers reviewed the following matrix from a southern African perspective. In terms of the female adolescent, the group proposed focussing on the topic of the declining age of menarche in southern Africa. The group stressed that virginity is not always highly valued in all societies and that first sexual encounters are often associated with rape, incestuous relationships, as well as with confusion and physical and psychological pain. Sugar daddies are a consequence of the economic situation, as well as young daughters being forced into prostitution. Although there is shame associated with menstruation, there are also positive rituals for it associated with womanhood. There are many female-headed households and even child-headed households. The notion of delayed marriage is being replaced by a pre-marital
relationship. The implications these facts have for reproductive health programmes are that promotion of responsible sexual and reproductive behaviour should be addressed within a broader sociopolitical context. It should be recognised that particularly for adolescents, economic survival and empowerment have major influences on their behaviour. The information, education and communication (IEC) strategies applied need to be more sensitive to how masculinity is defined. The examples provided for this region differ significantly from those in this document, which is additional evidence of the need to emphasise the socio-cultural approach.
For purposes of the current exercise, the South Asian model will be examined throughout four basic stages of the life cycle: Infancy and Childhood; Adolescence; Adulthood; and Older Ages. In order to conduct a similar exercise in other regions, it will be necessary to analyse the four life cycle stages according to the socio-cultural context which affects the way they are defined.
SOCIAL STRUCTURE AND THE GENDER SYSTEM: IMPLICATIONS FOR RH AND SEXUALITY THROUGHOUT DIFFERENT STAGES OF THE LIFE CYCLE
INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD
COMMON ISSUES TO BOTH GENDERS
Socialization processes which inculcate ideas of male power and authority and female subordination
FEMALE
MALE
Sex selection via testing for the purpose of eliminating female foetuses.
Preferential treatment with respect to investment of household resources for food, medical treatment, education, etc.
Neglect and induced morbidity and mortality (including infanticide) to eliminate female infants in situations of economic crisis.
Socialization processes whereby males are taught that daughters are less valuable than sons to the household and thus may be treated dismissively.
Differential allocation of food and medical treatment with implications for morbidity (including stunting and RH problems) and mortality.
Concepts of manhood which emphasize male dominance, power, authority, and entitlements are inculcated.
Concepts of womanhood that emphasize a secondary, subsequent and supportive, rather than a leadership role.
Formal economic responsibilities for the household in adult life are firmly ingrained.
Differential allocation of educational resources with implications for empowerment.
Rites of passage ceremonies with implications for health, RH, and socialization into male roles as prescribed in the social structure.
Rites of passage ceremonies with implications for health, RH, and socialization into female roles as prescribed in the social structure.
KEY INFORMATIONAL NEEDS
More in-depth knowledge of male perspectives on socialization processes during childhood (including rite of passage ceremonies); concepts of manhood and their inculcation in childhood; male perspectives on the differential treatment and roles of girls and boys.
Formulation of appropriate curricula and material in formal and non-formal education programmes, including the evaluation of existing curricula and pedagogical material, teacher and health worker training, counselling, parental/family involvement, etc.
IMPLICATIONS FOR REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH PROGRAMMES
Develop an Advocacy/IEC strategy directed to both parents and children, to promote the value of the girl-child, the value of education for her, to promote the value and importance of sharing life roles and responsibilities based on each individual's comparative advantage, the importance of equal care and nourishment for both genders
ADOLESCENCE
COMMON ISSUES TO BOTH GENDERS
1. Transition from childhood to young adulthood (physical and social).
2. Increasingly delayed marriage due to education and migration for education and work.
3. Breakdown of traditional familial controls on courtship, marriage and sexuality.
4. Lack of information and education regarding RH and sexuality.
5. Influence of role models in definition of behaviour.
FEMALES
MALES
Menarche
Expected to provide labour (and sometimes financial support to the household) before marriage. In some societies daughters are expected to forgo schooling and work to provide resources for the education of their brothers.
Formal financial responsibility for the parental household in old age.
Less access to higher education than males thus creating knowledge and power imbalance.
Expected to seek education, find wage labour job and delay marriage for an extended period in order to support the education of siblings, provide capital for the household, build house for parents, etc.
Traditional family controls to avoid initiation of sex. Virginity highly valued.
Parental pressure to postpone sexual activity during period of delayed marriage (to avoid untimely
Boyfriend pressure for initiation of sex.
Peer pressure for initiation of sex during period of delayed marriage.
Early sexual experiences often associated with pain, physical mistreatment, unwanted pregnancy and STDs.
Definition of manhood tied to initiation of sex (which sometimes leads to commercial sex).
Breakdown of traditional system with onset of out- migration.
Usually free from suspicion of being infertile.
Females not prepared to negotiate sexuality in Post- traditional settings.
Sex often related to expectation of physical pleasure and experience but no expectation that men should help women to feel the same way.
Sexuality related to expectation of love and marriage.
Increased risk of STD/HIV associated with migration to cities for work and education.
In some societies, pressure to prove fecundity before marriage.
Risk taking behaviour associated with definition of masculinity.
Increased risk of pregnancy and STD/HIV associated with migration to cities for work and education.
Responsibility for sexual outcomes seen as female.
Transmission of HIV/AIDS is increased due to gender disparities in relationships; for example when there is a large age difference.
The inculcation of shame regarding menstruation leads to lack of proper knowledge of hygiene (with implications for infection), lack of attention to RH issues (including RTIs and STDs), and related health problems.
Male peer groups from young age and also mass media often promote a direct identity between masculinity and dominance in decision making.
KEY INFORMATIONAL NEEDS:
Information concerning RH, sexuality, and gender relations issues confronting adolescents who migrate to cities for education and work during the period of delayed marriage.
Participatory research involving adolescents in identifying problems and finding solutions and identify effective strategies and channels for informing, promoting and sustaining healthy reproductive behaviours.
Information relevant to the constellation of factors necessary for the design of adolescent and "male friendly" services.
Deeper understanding of male perspectives concerning sexuality (especially roles and obligations for different types of partners); sexual initiation; "dating" and courtship behaviour; RH and sexuality knowledge and practices.
Risk-taking behaviour and its determinants. Health-seeking behaviours.
IMPLICATIONS FOR REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH PROGRAMMES
Based on an understanding of the determinants of behaviour and of risk behaviour, design an EC strategy to avoid unsafe behaviour.
Promote responsible sexual and reproductive behaviour, keeping in mind is that if men do not take full responsibility for their sexual and reproductive behaviour, it is not due to their irresponsible nature, but because they are acting within a set of cultural norms that determine gender relations, gender roles and acceptable behaviour for each gender.
Advocate for the implementation of a sexuality and reproductive health education programme.
In the services for adolescents, incorporate components to teach sex negotiation skills, skills to counter peer pressure, decision-making skills, components to make each gender understand the other gender's expectations regarding sexuality and sexuality outcomes.
Develop an EC strategy that fosters masculinity definitions not linked with early practice of sexual relations
Identify healthy and socially acceptable rites of passage for men.
Link RH programmes with job creation programmes.
Insure confidentiality in services.
ADULTS
COMMON ISSUES TO BOTH GENDERS
1. Lack of information regarding RH and sexuality for both sexes.
2. Increased labour migration (including rural/urban, circular, and international) and exposure to increased STD/HIV infection.
FEMALES
MALES
Patrilocal marriage (women join the kinship group of their spouses upon marriage) thus disenfranchising them from familial social and power networks.
Patrilocal marriage. Men establish an independent household and are expected to assume formal responsibility for the economic foundation of the family.
Polygamy. The hierarchical system of power within the household gives senior wives control over access to food and other household resources thus positioning women in competition with each other for economic resources. This often leads to health problems for minor wives who lack sufficient access to food and medical treatment especially during pregnancy.
Division of labour which marginalises the roles of men in various aspects of parenting.
Lack of knowledge of female RH issues (particularly regarding pregnancy, childbirth, and post-partum) due to rigid division of gender domains.
Dowry. Payment of expensive dowry to husband's family as part of marriage contract. The practice has lead to severe cases of abuse and sometimes mortality to wives whose families have not settled their contractual arrangements.
Lack of knowledge regarding dangers of differential access to food and nutrition for male vs. female children and wives.
Lack of knowledge and awareness of male RH issues and concomitant lack of services.
Traditional practices "birth traditions" concerning pregnancy, childbirth, and the post-partum period which can have dangerous consequences for mothers (food taboos, binding of the uterus, "sweating," etc.).
Monopoly of most knowledge of health issues.
Traditional ideas about where and how to deliver babies.
Outcomes of sexual relationships related to morbidity and mortality, abortion.
Seen as responsible for contraception and as guilty for infertility.
Accepted double standard in sexuality.
Lack of knowledge about the implications of rape and other sexual and domestic violence on the other sex.
In some societies, dowry to be paid to wife's family.
Expression of male power and legitimacy over the partner in sexual matters.
KEY INFORMATIONAL NEEDS
Information on RH, sexuality and gender relations from the male perspective.
Information concerning different perspectives on sexuality and RH among males and females.
Information concerning social and physiological issues concerning female menopause.
Information on different perspectives on number, spacing and role of children in the family.
Information concerning the socio-cultural and gender context of HIV transmission.
IMPLICATIONS FOR REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH PROGRAMMES
Develop an EC strategy to raise awareness among men of reproductive health risks and effects of harmful practices.
Design EC approaches that target men's informational needs regarding RH, sexuality, nutrition and to promote healthy behaviour.
Develop programme components to promote quality communication between spouses and promote gender equality.
Conduct participatory research (as with adolescents) which involves adult males in identification of current problems and solutions, including design of "male friendly' services.
Raise awareness among men about the value of women's work and contribution to the household.
Provide counselling and treatment for both men and women related to rape and sexual violence.
OLDER AGES
COMMON ISSUES
Lack of knowledge of health, RH and sexuality issues among and regarding older men and women
FEMALES
MALES
Longevity and age differences with spouses lead to greater frequency and longer periods of widowhood.
Sexuality and RH Issues not addressed by men in part due to conflict with male ideals of power and control (extending to the body).
Gain of status and power in household in older ages.
Longer period of fertility can lead to fatherhood later in life.
Loss of power, status, property through widowhood.
Increased poverty.
Loss of power after son assumes role of household head and/or retirement in some societies.
Major responsibilities for care of aged.
Sexuality and RH issues not addressed due to lack of knowledge, neglect, discrimination, poverty and no provision of services.
Extra-marital partners among those who can afford it is a mark of status, manhood and accomplishment may create increased risk of STD/HIV infection.
KEY INFORMATIONAL NEEDS
Basic information concerning RH and sexuality problems (physical and social) for men and women in order to assist with the design of better services.
IMPLICATIONS FOR REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH PROGRAMMES
Develop informational and social support programmes for both men and women on menopause, clarifying commonly held myths.
Create awareness of the risks of AIDS transmission.
Create awareness of each gender's reproductive health concerns during this period.
Promote communication between partners on sexuality/reproductive health issues.
<section>3</section>
III. Services
III. Services
The understanding of male perspectives to reproductive health and sexuality is the starting step to set up services that respond to their needs and, as required by the ICPD, are culturally sensitive. This will make for services that are both more effective and cost-effective.
The challenge:
The challenge resides in the design of services for men, in light of the gender approach, from the male perspective, simultaneously revisiting the services for women, without sacrificing women's programmes, given that women suffer a disproportionate burden of ill-health, only partially explained by biological differences and rooted in the gender differences.^2 This may mean either developing new services for men, or more likely, when resources are scarce, modifying existing women-oriented services to integrate men's concerns in sexual and reproductive health, making sure that confidentiality is maintained for both men and women. This may mean redesigning programmes and strategies to integrate men's needs through providers' education. While designing appropriate strategies for men, programmes can largely benefit from the lessons learned from women's services.
^2 Over one-third of all healthy life lost in women is due to reproductive health problems, compared to 12% for men (WHO).
SOME COMMON MYTHS
1. Men are opposed to family planning and want more children than their partners. DHS evidence from some African countries has shown that men's opposition to family planning and desire for a larger number of children is not as widespread as previously supposed.
2. Men always want sex, initiate sex and orchestrate sex. Male desire is supposed to be separated from affection. They are not expected to be faithful and to show emotions, fear, insecurity without their virility being questioned. They are expected to be strong and take risks.
3. Men tend to engage in deviant behaviour. They are many tunes portrayed in negative stereotypes as violators, insensitive to women's concerns, uncaring and abusers of women's rights.
4. Men will talk only to male service providers. Male RH programmes with female staff, including for the practice of vasectomy have shown as good results as those with male staff. The essential is not the sex of the provider but the respect and confidentiality with which men are treated.
5. Serving men is expensive. There are a number of examples of good quality care with limited resources, especially when existing services are rationalized.
6. All men have the same needs and concerns. Specific strategies are needed to service the specific needs of different men, young, older, rural, urban, educated, non educated, homosexual. Not every action taken for men's health is male's involvement
What should services for sexual and reproductive health of men include?
These may include the following activities: family planning including vasectomy; fertility evaluation and infertility; information, education and communication (IEC) including counselling; prevention and treatment of STDs and AIDS; sexuality and sexual dysfunction; urologic conditions; screening for cancer; substance abuse and mental health needs; referral to other services, both medical and social; prevention of gender-based violence; promotion of responsible attitudes towards sexuality and sharing the concerns for pregnancy support, parenting, including identification of early signs of diseases for children, such as malnutrition. The priorities for programme components are to be determined according to local needs.
The objectives for men's services may be:
To improve the sexual and reproductive health of both men and women by addressing men's issues, to meet the sexual and reproductive needs of men including contraceptive needs; to improve communication and encourage discussion between partners regarding their sexual and reproductive health; and/or to determine men's priorities.
WHY INVOLVE MEN?
1. Men have their own sexual and reproductive health concerns and needs which are not always met. The focus on male involvement only as a means to improve women's reproductive health may cause an oversight of men's own reproductive health needs. Due to their ascribed gender roles, men tend to have little knowledge about their own physiology and health including sexual and reproductive health.
2. Men's health status and behaviour affect women's health and reproductive health. Involving them increases their awareness, acceptance and support to their partners' needs, choices and rights. In terms of contraception, for example, it means encouraging them to give more support to their partners who use female-dependant methods. In terms of HIV prevention, all methods except for the female condom, are male controlled, therefore there is a need to involve men in this domain. The ICPD PoA underlines the importance of having men "accept the major responsibility for the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases".
3. Talking of female alone or male alone is not an adequate approach to reproductive health issues. Many of the decisions regarding reproductive health and family planning are made within a set of gender relations that affect them or their implementation. In addition, all methods of family planning and most methods of STDs and HIV prevention, are traditionally labelled either as male-only or female-only methods. More attention should be paid in identifying to what extent each one of the methods requires co-operation and support of both sexes and its implications on the health and sexual relationship of both partners.
4. Positive climate to address emerging issues: ICPD has provided the opportunity for moving from family planning to reproductive health and from a woman-only approach to a gender approach. Following Cairo and Beijing, in most developing countries, there is a positive climate to promote and address a broader variety of issues on sexual and reproductive health including gender issues and male involvement.
5. Involving men gives the opportunity for increasing and communication on the issue of equality between men and women. The process of empowering men, regarding RH issues, will help them to be more sensitive to women's needs and therefore more supportive of participating in efforts of enhancing women's status.
6. There are a number of well documented examples from different developing countries of successful and unsuccessful approaches to reach men and to support male involvement
initiatives from which lessons can be learned.
<section>4</section>
IV. Advocacy and IEC strategies
IV. Advocacy and IEC strategies
Advocacy will be necessary to reach policy and decision-makers, as well as programme managers, in order to convince them that programmes, activities and resources need to be focused on promoting and facilitating male involvement in reproductive health. Information, education and communication (IEC) efforts will focus on promoting active involvement of the men themselves in reproductive health issues throughout their life cycles. These strategies will need to be tailored to the socio-cultural aspects of each target audience.
1. Collect and assess baseline information
It is important to begin any advocacy and information, education and communication (IEC) initiative with a participatory approach to collecting and assessing baseline information about the current situation (socio-cultural, political and health) related to gender roles and responsibilities, as well as their impact on the reproductive health situation of both men and women in the population. Also, it will be important to identify the means through which information and ideas are transmitted to the population, to see who are the true community leaders and power brokers that affect public opinion. In the area of interpersonal communications, information could be collected to respond to issues such as whether separate discussion groups should be conducted for men and women, what topics can be discussed in mixed groups and when to target couples rather than men and women as individuals. Focus group discussions with men can be very helpful in collecting this type of information.
2. Integrate into existing programmes, activities and strategies
It is possible to integrate skills and approaches into activities and services of different agencies that can complement or support one another. For example, counselling is important for helping men and women to better understand how strengthening male involvement in reproductive health can be of benefit to both them and their families. Counselling is particularly important for young people, for it is an effective means of personalizing information and responding to concerns and fears and correcting misconceptions, and it can be incorporated into school activities, youth centre activities, as well as in places where young men tend to gather in the community. Interactive and participatory educational approaches can be incorporated into already planned activities, including small group presentations, role plays and simulation games. Staff outreach, hotlines (where there is access to effective telephone service) and resource centres targeted specifically for boys and men can
help them gain access to relevant reproductive health information and evaluate how it relates to themselves personally, as well as provide an opportunity to have a confidential dialogue over sensitive issues with a trained counsellor.
3. Identify and promote convincing arguments
Both individuals and groups of people with common interests will be more inclined to try out behaviours that are not the ones traditionally linked with their gender if they are convinced that such behaviour will be of benefit to them and their families socially, economically, and educationally. It is important that the goal of education and communication activities is seen as stimulating reflection and discussion rather than persuading and convincing people to adopt ready-made solutions. Change can only come from within the group and it usually knows best what is feasible and likely to work. Thus, a key goal is to help the group come up with its own ideas for solutions. Barriers to establishing equitable gender relationships should be identified along with possible ways to overcome them.
Since people see the world in different ways, depending upon their perspectives, it is helpful to segment the population so that messages can be appropriately developed and shaped. Accordingly, within the general population, it helps to decide if the arguments are being developed for men or women, people that are single or have children, people that are young, middle aged or older, as well as looking at differences based upon income and educational levels and social status. Young people are particularly known for having special words and a language of their own.
For policy makers some convincing arguments might come from citing the relationship between internationally recognized human rights instruments and promoting gender equity, strengthening and supporting the male role, and promoting reproductive health. Also, decision makers will be attracted to the cost-benefit arguments of supporting responsible male involvement in reproductive health and how effective it is to focus on prevention through early intervention, particularly with young people. Establishing a national policy can help to institutionalize the political commitment and vision of the government for more equitable roles and responsibilities. It can also help to promote a consensus among leaders and organizations in a position to promote reproductive health, provide a consistently applicable framework for identifying and responding to needs, recognizing that men have special needs distinct from women but equally important, and establishing a wider perspective that
includes more than the health sector, such as employment, education, family life and the media.
In developing appropriate messages, it is important to focus on the positive aspects of what can be achieved by strengthening the role of men in reproductive health. It can be helpful to package and disseminate research findings that highlight the importance of male reproductive health needs and the importance that their participation in reproductive decisions has for women's health as well. Men can be very sensitive to anything perceived as an attack on them and good humour is an essential ingredient in information, education and communication (IEC) efforts. Entertaining stories which can be presented in many ways are a good avenue for broaching sensitive topics and stimulating discussion in groups. At the same time, it is important to combat some of the negative myths related to how people perceive men's attitudes and behaviours.
4. Sensitize media specialists and orchestrate mass media collaboration
Media professionals are looking for information and stories that will be exciting, news worthy and that will capture the attention and interest of the population. They need to be sensitized to the importance that male involvement has for both men's and women's reproductive health and they need to be continually provided with new information that is expressed in a catchy way so that they themselves will be motivated to promote the topic. Since the mass media is an ongoing means of sending messages and influencing public opinion, time and effort invested in cultivating the collaboration of media specialists can have a big pay off.
5. Mobilize other means of communication
Traditional means of communication, such as drama, folklore, songs, dances, utilizing local markets, fairs and festivals, as well as mass communication such as television, radio, newspapers and magazines are all very effective in disseminating information and promoting new ways of looking at gender roles and responsibilities. They can be an entertaining way of using drama, dialogue and debate to highlight the most pertinent issues and provide various perspectives on how they might be addressed. Printed materials, such as fotonovelas and comic magazines are popular with young people and adults with a minimal literacy level. While being entertaining, they can be an effective forum for reproductive health information dissemination, providing real life examples of issues such as sexuality that people might otherwise feel uncomfortable discussing.
Other helpful approaches include: using personal stories to illustrate why the issue of gender is important and how others have developed more equitable and healthy relationships; ensuring that where appropriate there are facts to substantiate the messages; and utilizing quotes and statements from people that are well known and respected.
6. Start where there is the best chance of success
Changing behaviours related to gender roles and responsibilities may be a lengthy process. Resistance to change is firmly entrenched and a single exposure to an idea is not sufficient to result in such change. Accordingly, when promoting gender role behaviour change, it will be important to seek out those individuals who might be more receptive to change or to trying something new, for these are the ones who will be most likely to take the risk of going against the tide of what the others do. Also, it is important to enlist support from those that are known and admired by the target audience.
Sharing the work in Burkina Faso
The sexual division of work and responsibilities in most societies imposes on women a multitude of "feminine" tasks which tend to be more numerous than men's. Thus time budget studies inevitably find that women have a longer working day than men do. Many West African women, for example, put in a 12-hour day. Concerned by the health consequences of this workload, the Regional Antenna of Women and Health (with financial support form the Canadian International Development Agency) undertook a pilot project in selected villages in Burkina Faso to encourage men to help with domestic tasks. The results seem to indicate that the sexual division of labour is more flexible than pessimists might have thought.
One of the men involved in the project tells of the difficulties faced by the men who decided to help their wives as a result of the training and discussion groups held by the project. "When we started carrying the water and fetching the wood, even the little children made fun of us because this had never been seen". Nevertheless, the elders recognized that there was no taboo against men doing domestic tasks. After the initial difficulties' helping the women has become a habit and the men are reaping the benefits: "Our wives are cleaner, smarter, they have some time to look after themselves and us, they are more relaxed" Both wives and husbands claim they discuss problems more often. It is interesting that the men would now like to acquire bicycles or wheelbarrows so that carrying wood and fetching water can become less tinny.
Extracted from "Femmes et Santé", No.5, November 1993
<section>5</section>
V. Male involvement in unfpa country programmes
V. Male involvement in unfpa country programmes
Within the context of UNFPA Country Programmes and ongoing activities, there are many ways that gender can be mainstreamed into reproductive health activities and programmes A culturally sensitive approach to decision-making and service and information provision can help to improve the quality of UNFPA's support without incurring a great deal of additional resources.
1. Identify men's needs in sexual and reproductive health using a holistic approach, including a socio-cultural and gender perspective.
The starting point is a clear understanding of the problem. For this, we need to collect information that will help us to understand: how men relate to women regarding reproductive health issues, based upon what factors men make decisions in this domain, what the limiting factors are for access to services (cultural, social, economic, gender relations, as well as those related to the services themselves), and the male perspectives throughout the different stages of the life cycle.
The research results provide the basis for the determination of priority goals, groups for action, as well as culturally appropriate strategies to reach them. The ICPD places emphasis on adolescents, rural populations and ethnic groups as priority target groups, but priorities need to be locally identified according to the society's most pressing needs. These could also be fishing, forestry or nomad communities, often out of reach of any reproductive health service.
UNFPA programmes could support socio-cultural research through multi-disciplinary and participatory studies that integrate male involvement issues in on-going as well as future reproductive health programmes.
2. Identify and document successful and unsuccessful approaches to reach men and support male involvement
UNFPA could support the documentation of successful and unsuccessful approaches to reach men and support male involvement initiatives, from which lessons can be learned from different parts of developing countries. Qualitative and quantitative information should be collected.
3. Introduce Strategies and approaches that will promote decision-making about the roles of men and women that will result in healthy reproductive health behaviours.
Based upon the information collected in the research, UNFPA could support the design and integration of strategies and approaches into existing programmes and services that will help to influence how decisions are made related to the reproductive health of both men and women. Where sex-specific roles result in negative reproductive health behaviours, activities could be developed to introduce new ideas and activities that would be healthier for the reproductive health of both sexes (such as rites of passage, what constitutes masculinity and masculine behaviour, etc.).
4. Identify and apply lessons learned from currently available services for men and young adults in public, private and NGO sectors.
Many activities may have been implemented by international and local NGOs or the private sector. It is important to consult with those in charge of initiating and implementing these activities to identify lessons learned in local cultures and to link the services with those already existing. UNFPA could support mechanisms for the development and maintenance of partnerships with other international, national and local groups in countries so that activities to promote male involvement will be integrated into all their programmes and that gaps in needs can be mutually covered, overlaps can be avoided, and the male population's needs are served by ensuring that the widest breadth of services can be provided in the easiest and most accessible way. Activities could be supported that will help to develop the awareness of these partners in understanding how to co-operate and why it is important.
5. Develop a culture-sensitive strategy to address sexual and reproductive health needs not already covered.
This could be done through locally acceptable approaches, based on understanding needs, bearing in mind that there are no universal approaches. Services can be set up in a variety of ways: male-only clinics and men only services; new hours of services in already existing services; outreach programmes; community-based services.
Male clinic and men only services: offering men a variety of sexual, reproductive health and general health services. On-going programmes from different parts of the world have identified the following elements of success: a comprehensive approach to men's health; start with separate services from women and later integrate them with men's services; counselling addressed to men's needs and involving both partners if necessary; media promotion; staff trained in the meaning of gender perspectives in the context of their own work; there is no need to have a new director for the male services if there is already one for women's.
New hours of services and new location: given that most of the existing experiences are on male-only clinics, much less is known about setting up special time schedules for men within women's services. One of the lessons learned is the importance of guaranteeing confidentiality and appropriate counselling for men and the presence of health providers who understand both women's and men's perspectives and concerns.
Outreach programmes community-based distribution (CBD) and informal sector: experience from women's and youth sexual and reproductive health in this regard have proven to be successful and are well documented. However, much more needs to be known about the community's perspectives regarding the acceptability of these approaches to reach men and the best way to attain this. New information is needed about effective educational strategies to reach men, their views on reproductive health and the views of both women and men on men's involvement in reproductive health.
6. Develop a client's perspective and a provider's perspective
When setting up services for men, the same as in the case of services for women, the user's perspective is a central aspect. Furthermore, the provider's perspective should also be taken into account in the design of effective services.
7. Develop a culturally relevant quality of care framework for men's services
The elements that constitute quality of care for men may not coincide with those identified for women's services due to cultural aspects and to particular aspects of the male perspective.
8. Train health workers in the issue of services of sexual and reproductive health of men throughout the different stages of the life cycle.
Assess the providers' (females and males) biases against male methods of family planning and male involvement, train them to understand the importance of constructively involving men in reproductive health, and of addressing the meaning of gender within their activities with women and men. Train them to understand men's needs and the benefits of shared responsibilities in reproductive health. This may entail training male educators to provide training for young boys. Female educators should be also aware of special needs of young boys and men.
9. Develop information, education and communication (IEC) strategies and approaches, through a participatory process involving men and their role models.
Men should be involved from the beginning in needs assessments through to the implementation of strategies and activities in identifying needs, developing convincing arguments, and selecting approaches and avenues for effectively reaching both men and women in the population through specially targeted outreach activities. UNFPA could support the use of participatory and mass media communications approaches, using multiple channels. Focus could also be placed upon interpersonal communication to improve the discussion and decision-making process related to the sexual and reproductive health of both men and women Channels should be identified and utilized to reach men and support them through specially targeted or outreach initiatives and peer educators and leaders should be trained and supported to work with men in all different phases of the life cycle. Just as men need to understand and be sensitive to the reproductive health needs and requirements of women, so too women
must become aware of how improving the reproductive health of men will benefit both of them as well. Initiatives and educational programmes that stress that males and females both have shared responsibilities in sexual behaviour, family formation and child rearing based on mutual support could be promoted. Population education programmes could be reexamined so that they incorporate the analysis and promotion of male involvement in the context of education and learning; increase men's awareness and access to reproductive health services and develop services with a "male reproductive health model", according to men's sexual and reproductive needs including counselling.
10. Advocacy strategies should be developed and applied.
UNFPA could support activities to sensitize media specialists as well as activities that help to orchestrate mass media collaboration in the promotion of reproductive health and the role of men. Activities could also be supported that sensitize and mobilize decision makers. Partnerships could be developed or strengthened with key stakeholders, national and community leaders and role models, and national and locally organized interest groups. Research findings could be packaged to promote convincing arguments in favour of male involvement in reproductive health throughout the life cycle. UNFPA could also support the selection of key spokes people from all walks of life that can promote a focus on male involvement in reproductive health in many different settings and through many different interest groups.
11. Special focus on adolescent and young boys.
Transmission of STDs and AIDS and teenage pregnancy are often caused by ignorance and poor sense of responsibility of young boys. The key issue is to involve the young boys themselves in defining messages for information, education and communication (IEC), and the type of innovative services they would require regarding their own sexual and reproductive health. Currently, most projects and programmes do not take into account the gender perspectives. Information, education and communication (IEC) will promote the positive male role models, peer education, fostering of positive attitudes regarding sexuality (not focusing only on the negative outcomes of sexuality), and awareness of girls' problems. Key gathering places for young people could be identified and UNFPA could support the training of young people to serve as role models and peer educators to work with young people where they ordinarily live and play.
12. Provide support for operational research.
UNFPA could support fact finding about issues and existing socio-cultural conditions related to issues of male involvement, as a first step in operational research. UNFPA could support the testing of different participatory approaches to education and the promotion of positive reproductive health behaviours. It could also assess the impact of having male-specific and female-specific services and discussion groups as well as mixed ones to see which are the most effective.
13. Strengthen the capacity of national institutions.
UNFPA could support the coordination of activities and promote networking and sharing of lessons learned among appropriate and associated groups in the country. Include promotion and advocacy, training, and monitoring implementation, outcome and impact.
14. Links with other services.
UNFPA could provide support so that other services promoting male involvement in reproductive health in the community could be linked with services provided in clinics, hospitals, the private and NGO sectors.
15. Cost recovery.
Given the important reduction in funding that many reproductive health and family planning programmes are undergoing world-wide, it is necessary to devise appropriate cost recovery schemes. Experience has shown (i.e. PROFAMILIA in Colombia) that when services are of good quality and respond to men's specific needs, they are willing to pay for them. UNFPA could support the development and testing of different approaches to cost sharing and cost recovery, particularly in cases of promotion of greater male involvement in reproductive health.
<section>6</section>
Conclusions
Conclusions
To benefit both women and men, reproductive health programmes should be based on a better understanding of gender dynamics, the changing needs of individuals throughout their lives and their decision-making processes. While the female side of gender has been largely explored and documented, there are shortcomings in understanding gender from the male perspective, which this paper explores.
This paper analyses the social structure and the gender system throughout the different stages of the life-cycle from infancy and childhood to adolescence and adulthood. It also examines the implications for key information needs and reproductive health programmes, including advocacy and information, education and communication (IEC) strategies. It concludes with some suggestions for incorporating male involvement in reproductive health within UNFPA-supported programmes and activities.
<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
This is the first of a series of Occasional Inter-Agency Technical Support Services System papers. The purpose of the series is to provide timely and relevant inputs to contribute to the process of national capacity building by translating state-of-the-art knowledge and country level experiences into operational strategies, bringing together the multi-disciplinary resources of the TSS System.
The idea to do collaborative work on male involvement in reproductive health originated in a CST Bangkok internal seminar which was attended by two FAO TSS specialists. It was identified and adopted as a system-wide priority issue. A joint TSS-CST drafting committee produced a first draft, which was broadly circulated for comments and inputs throughout the system. After these inputs were incorporated, the document was discussed between CST and TSS staff at the internal seminars of the CSTs of Addis Ababa, Harare and Kathmandu in order to incorporate practical aspects from field experience. Several country programme managers and UNFPA Country Representatives participated in these seminars.
The original drafting committee was composed of Jacques du Guerny (Chief, SDWP/FAO), Janet Edmondson (FAO-CST Bangkok) who worked on the socio-cultural dimensions of male involvement, Malika Ladjali (TSS-WHO), who developed the components related to services, Marilyn Rice (TSS-WHO), who worked on the IEC/Advocacy issues and Marcela Villarreal (TSS-FAO), who worked on the problem statement and on the socio-cultural issues.
Given the nature of the paper, which focuses on hands-on operationalization of the issues, bibliographical references have been omitted. A large number of references consulted can be made available by the TSS specialists involved.
The innovativeness of this approach stems from the fact that from the outset, the discussion involved the different disciplines and agencies present in the system and brought together the conceptual and the empirical aspects of the topic. This document provides one example of the way in which the integration of the different components of the system can have far reaching and practical implications for country programmes and national capacity building. It is hoped that the present paper will contribute to demonstrating the pioneering role of the TSS system in integrating multi-disciplinary and inter-agency approaches to population issues for the benefit of country programmes.
We would like to gratefully acknowledge the active contribution of the all the CSTs to this paper, and in particular the CST Addis Ababa for providing the first opportunity for the TSS specialists to discuss the issue of male involvement in reproductive health programmes with CST Advisers, Country Representatives, other UN agencies, NGOs, programme managers and parliamentarians.
Jacques du Guerny
Chief
Population Programme Service
FAO
