<title>Farmers rights in the conservation and use of plant genetic resources: A Gender Perspective</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to extend their appreciation to the following people who provided invaluable comments, guidance, and technical accuracy to the document: "Pepe" Esquinas-Alcazar, Clive Stannard, Charles Spillane, Marie Randriamamonjy, Andrea Leppart, and Una Murray. Thank you also to Ilaria Sisto, Nadia Scialabba, and Emilia Iacobucci with translation of the abstract. However, none of the above is responsible for the views expressed, or for the inaccuracies herein. That responsibility is ours alone.
S.E.B
C.L.M.H
<section>2</section>
Introduction
Introduction
As men and women farmers' knowledge, skills and practices contribute to the conservation, development, improvement, and management of Plant Genetic Resources (PGR), their different contributions should be recognized and respected by the International Undertaking, particularly in terms of Farmers' Rights. An analysis and understanding of men and women farmers differential roles and responsibilities in PGR conservation and management, as well as the intrinsic value of their knowledge, is crucial to sustainable, effective, and socio-economically appropriate PGR conservation initiatives, and to the provision of appropriate and targeted support. Efforts are required at all levels to develop and implement gender-responsive policies, programmes and actions for the conservation and sustainable use of plant genetic resources.
<section>3</section>
What are farmer's rights?
What are farmer's rights?
As an annex to the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources (unanimously adopted through Conference Resolution 8/83^3) the Conference Resolution 5/89^4 defines Farmers' Rights as "rights arising from the past, present and future contribution of farmers in conserving, improving and making available plant genetic resources, particularly those in the centres of origin/diversity." The purpose of these rights is stated to be "ensuring full benefits to farmers and supporting the continuation of their contributions."
^3 Extract of the Twenty-Second Session of the FAO Conference, Rome, 5-23 November 1983
^4 Extract of the Twenty-Fifth Session of the FAO Conference, Rome, 11-29 November 1989As part of this Resolution, the 25th Session of the FAO Conference endorsed the concept of Farmers Rights with a view to:
· ensuring global recognition of the need for conservation and the availability of sufficient funds for these purposes;
· assisting farmers and farming communities throughout the world, especially those in areas of original diversity of plant genetic resources, in the protection and conservation of their PGR and of the natural biosphere; and,
· allowing the full participation of farmers, their communities and countries in the benefits derived, at present and in the future, from the improved use of PGR.
During the 26th Session of the FAO Conference, Resolution 3/91^5 was also adopted unanimously by over 170 countries, endorsing that:
· nations have sovereign rights over their plant genetic resources;
· breeders' lines and farmers' breeding material should only be available at the discretion of their developers during the Grind of development
· Farmers Rights wild be implemented through an international fund on PGR which will support PGR conservation and utilization programmes, particularly, but not exclusively, in the developing countries;
· in view of the pressing and permanent need for effective conservation and sustainable use of PGR, the resources for the international fund and other funding mechanisms should be substantial, sustainable and based on principles of equity and transparency; and,
· through the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, the donors of genetic resources, funds and technology will determine and oversee the policies, programmes and priorities of the fund and other funding mechanisms, with the advice of the appropriate bodies.
^5 Extract of the Twenty-Sixth Session of the FAO Conference, Rome, 9-27 November 1991
The concept of Farmers' Rights provides a measure of counterbalance to "formal' Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) and patents that compensate for the latest innovations with little consideration of the fact that, in many cases, these innovations are only the most recent step of accumulative knowledge and inventions that have been carried out over millennia by generations of men and women in different parts of the world (FAO, 1 995a).
Farmers' Rights arise from the past, present and future contributions of farmers in conserving, improving and making available PGR, particularly in centres of origin. They are not assigned to specific varieties, types of plants, or to specific farmers. Their purpose is to encourage farmers and farming communities to nurture and conserve, and to utilize and improve, plant genetic resources (FAO, 1996).
All modern plant varieties contain only those genes that have originated from farmers' traditional varieties (landraces) or wild crop relatives. Yet in many instances, the small scale fanning communities of women and men in the centres of crop diversity are not the farmers to whom improved crop varieties have been provided. Yet these are the women and men which have historically provided the germplasm upon which scientific plant breeding is based. It could be said that germplasm is provided by small-scale subsistence farmers to plant breeders whose varieties are then adapted/developed for medium to large scale commercial farmers (Spillane, 1996).
The contributions of communities to the conservation and regeneration of plant genetic resources (PGR) have been substantial and it has been widely agreed that there should be some form of recognition of their tremendous value, not only to the communities, but also to the nations and to the world as a whole. However, a number of key questions remain, including: how to recognize and attribute a "true' value to these contributions. Furthermore, there has been much debate on how to "activate" or "implement" Farmers Rights, particularly in a way that respects both the tangible, and the not so tangible, contributions of the various actors experimenting with, and conserving, PGR.
<section>4</section>
Who are the world's farmers and how are their contributions to PGR recognized?
Who are the world's farmers and how are their contributions to PGR recognized?
It is estimated that 1.4 billion rural people are dependent on small-scale resource poor farming in developing countries (Spillane, 1996). Who do we mean when we speak of "farmers" or "small farmers"? Farmers are both men and women who have domesticated, developed, conserved and made available plant genetic and other natural resources (land; water; vegetation; animal, bird and fish life) to which they have access in order to obtain a livelihood and ensure the well-being of their family through the provision of basic requirements such as food, fuel and water and income from the land.
Statistics show that women's substantial contributions to agriculture range from 40 percent in Latin America to 60 and 80 percent in Asia and Africa. In Sub-Saharan Africa, women dominate the smallholder sector and produce, on average, 70 percent of the food for use in the region (FAO, 1995; Dankelman and Davidson, 1988). For example, in Sudan, women farmers represent 57% of the traditional sector while in Benin, 60-80% of the women are in agricultural work. Yet, while these statistics clearly demonstrate that rural women are indeed "farmers" in their own right, for years, they have been relatively 'invisible' partners in agricultural processes and thus have played a very limited role in policy decisions. This invisibility has been compounded by the use of agricultural censuses which only include/define those farmers whose labour is remunerated and hence visible to the formal state sector.
Over the last few decades, increasing numbers of researchers, extensionists, and policy makers have moved away from a rather top-down "science and technology transfer" approach to agriculture, paying increasing attention to local farmers' opinions, needs and experiences. Yet for many reasons, they have largely, and wrongly, assumed that men are the sole source of agricultural knowledge - or that men's and women's knowledge is identical. The transposition of earlier colonial views and present-day assumptions and stereotypes onto local cultures of the roles of women and men in society - and in particular - agriculture have contributed to this errant assumption.
What continues to be ignored is not only women's contributions in terms of labour and skills, but also their decision-making about how natural resources are used to satisfy the multiple needs of rural households. Rural women's (as well as men's) expertise and responsibility for decision-making about the use of PGR, and indeed other biological resources, makes their contribution and participation central to PGR conservation and indeed all sustainable agricultural development strategies at the local, national, and global levels.
In applying Farmers' Rights to the conservation and management of PGR, we need to look at other rights of farmers and also at other social, legal and institutional aspects. For example, it has been shown that the species, ecosystems and ecosystem services which are most overexploited tend to be the ones with the weakest ownership (McNeely, 1988).
These are often open access resources where the traditional management practices have been removed.
To identify differential rights of farmers, we need to understand the society, the traditions and customs, the roles and responsibilities, and the status of men and women, together with the type of farm-livelihood systems. Therefore, the following questions require further investigation:
· What are the determinants of social status (e.g. gender, seniority and marriage) and who takes decisions and decides on natural resources management issues? For example, if it is a male domain to discuss and decide on land use, then women's inferior role may be taken for granted; if women's roles are deemed inferior to men's then this will be reflected in the decision making process.
· What role do contemporary practices and attitudes play in exercising rights (social groups, power struggles, land ownership and rights of men and women over natural resources, responsibilities). For example, if men hold primary rights to land for agriculture/gardening then how can women, who may lack security of tenure and incentives to invest, benefit from their roles in, and contributions to, the conservation and use of biodiversity?
· How have changes in farming practices, population pressure, migration patterns, legislation, and so forth, affected the rights of women in contrast to men. For example, what influence has a change in state land laws had on the application of customary laws, and on the rights of men and women? and finally.
· Are there any clear relationships between the situation of farmers' rights and their level of education, income and social status and the intensity and duration of their contact with the formal agricultural sector and marketing channels?
<section>5</section>
Women farmers' knowledge, innovations and practices in natural resources management and plant genetic resources conservation
I. Men's and women's different knowledge, priorities, and needs in PGR conservation and utilization
II. Women conserving, developing, and utilizing less common PGR
III. Seed selection
IV. Home gardens as "experimental stations"
Women farmers' knowledge, innovations and practices in natural resources management and plant genetic resources conservation
Farmers' local knowledge is comprised of structured systems of classification and self management governing resource use. These knowledge systems are dynamic, responding to, and developing from location-specific agro-ecological changes. They contain sets of empirical observations about local environments and are often expressed using farmers' own terminologies. They are accessible to, and developed by, those members of a social group charged with specific resource management and production responsibilities (Fernandez, 1994).
Because a basic social differentiation^6 among adult, economically active members of a society is "gender"^7, responsibility for different activities is distributed along gender lines; in other words, men and women. "Gender" refers not to women alone, but to the socially constructed roles of, and relationships between, men and women in a society. This necessarily implies addressing the different roles and relationships of women and men along other lines such as age, class, ethnicity, etc. In other words, poor women may have quite different responsibilities and roles (and therefore needs and priorities) in a society than better-off women, as may resource-poor women and better-off men.
^6 There are other socio-economic differentiations such as class, ethnicity, age etc. For example, a male farmer working on a large estate producing cash crops may hold different knowledge from resource-poor small-scale male farmers and/or female farmers producing primarily food or subsistence crops.
Through the resulting division of labour, which is often very clear cut, men and women develop and generate specialized knowledge, even though they may retain a general knowledge of various activity areas. The knowledge and experience gained is, in turn, transmitted to group members responsible for similar activities in the future (Fernandez, 1994). This includes specialized knowledge of the diverse species, varieties, and agro-ecological systems with which they work.
I. Men's and women's different knowledge, priorities, and needs in PGR conservation and utilization
In much of the developing world, the on-farm and in-situ conservation and use of plant genetic resources begins with women. As farmers, they are responsible for growing and collecting food. Rural women are also largely responsible for the use and management of natural resources to provide daily domestic household needs including water, fuel, fodder, food, medicinal products and fibre. The processing and storage of food crops is also mainly their responsibility. With the increased monetization of the economy, men often specialize in producing cash crops for the external market. In this way, specific spheres of activity become the specialized domains of either men or women as they develop their expertise over time, and indeed, generations.
Case Study i: Potato Production in Me Andes (Orjeda, reproduce in Quiroz 1994)
Perhaps the most well-known case is from South America which illustrates the extent of the knowledge that women have of seed diversity in their area. A few of the older women farmers in the Quechua communities of the Andes have been found to hold specialized knowledge of plant breeding, which has been handed down and improved over generations.
Potatoes are normally, propagated via asexual reproduction, by planting whole tubers or sections; the resulting plants are 'clones' whose characteristics are identical to those of the Parent' potato. However, a few of the old women farmers in the province of Cuzco, use true potato seed, a practice which has been all but abandoned. Older people who came to their community from the highlands to help with the harvest taught the Quechua women about the fruit of the potato plant, which contains the seed and this traditional method of propagation.
Since the potato's centre of origin is in the Andes, there are countless varieties in the region. People have different uses for each type. Using seed for propagation enables the women to breed new varieties with characteristics which they themselves choose. Before harvesting the potato crop, the women collect the fruits and store them in a large ceramic bowl outside the house where they remain until the following October. By then they have become black and rotten. Allowing the fruits to rot before planting the seeds is an essential part of the process, since it produces chemicals which activate the dormant seeds prior to germination.
The seeds are planted just before the rains, and the plants are allowed to grow until they produce tiny tubers. These foundation seed potatoes are then harvested and put away until the following year, when they are planted out and produce first-generation tubers. The products of this harvest, 'grandchildren' of the original seeds, are used for 'tuber seeds'. Women sort the 'tuber seeds' by shape and colour and other desired characteristics, often dividing them into as many as 12 types. These are usually distributed among their children, who plant them as food crops; some are also given away in sets as wedding presents to help young couples get a start.
II. Women conserving, developing, and utilizing less common PGR
The fundamental need for the conservation of PGR is their conservation in situ in their natural ecosystems and habitats and the maintenance and recovery of those resources in danger of extinction in their natural environments. Women's special knowledge of the value and diverse uses of plants for nutrition, health and income has important implications for the conservation of plant genetic resources. The decision to conserve less common plant species and varieties and to select which crop varieties to grow and how depends, to a large extent, on their usefulness to the farmer and the community. Women are also key decision makers in determining which food and other products to keep for home consumption, and which to sell at the local market.
Case Study ii: Landraces and Food Security in the Andes (Rea, 1995)
An example from the Andes shows that sometimes decisions taken by men to grow crops do not meet women s needs. At the "Gene Traders' conference in London in 1992, Miguel Altieri showed a slide of a woman farmer planting her own potatoes, hidden in her skirt, while her husband was looking the other way. Agricultural advisors had convinced her husband that planting one crop, Desiree, would increase his yield and income, and confirm his identity as a modern farmer. His wife, instead, valued the variety of landraces grown traditionally by the family for specific properties, including: early maturation, frost resistance, nutritious value, unusual taste, quick cooking time, and resistance to blight. Her family's food security depended on this diversity and the aversion of risk, and she is bound, by custom, to pass on tubers of each variety to her daughter on marriage, for the next generation (Rea, 1995).
III. Seed selection
It is estimated that ninety per cent of the planting materials used in developing countries is produced by the farmers themselves, ie. from saved seed (Spillane, 1996). The selection of wild genetic resources for home planting, of seeds for conserving for next year's planting and of vegetative propagatory material, and of the mixture of plant species to intercrop in gardens and fields is usually carried out by women. This selection is a sophisticated process that takes into account many different genetic characteristics and traits: organoleptic properties that confer taste, color, palatability and texture; resistance to pests and diseases; adaptation to soil and agro-climatic conditions and so on. The selection criteria are built up and developed over years of experience with a view to minimizing risk (i.e. reducing the losses from climatic vagaries and pest and disease attacks and optimizing production on different sites) and ensuring food security and secure livelihoods.
Case Study iii: Seed and Plant Selection and Use in Zimbabwe (Chimedze and Muntemba, 1995)
A study from Zimbabwe showed that through their daily work, managing soils and other land-based resources, women have accumulated intimate knowledge of their ecosystems, including the management of pests, the conservation of soils, and the development and use of plant genetic resources. Over years of work in the field, one researcher found women selecting specific seed to respond better to the various soil types and growing conditions. In fact, women in Zimbabwe do not, in general, buy seed for the basic food under their control, i.e. various millets, sorghum, groundnuts, and sweet potatoes; rather they select seed, looking for particular traits such as stability, disease resistance, drought tolerance, palatability, and storage quality.
Women have identified which plants to grow where in order to control pests and diseases. They intercrop, mingling plants that complement each other. They continually research and develop improved ways of storing produce from one agricultural season to the next. Their role in in-situ plant genetic resource conservation and use is invaluable, as they continue to develop genetic diversity, preserving cultivars which are environmentally sustainable and socially acceptable.
IV. Home gardens as "experimental stations"
In many households, women manage those components of the farming system that contain high levels of biodiversity such as home gardens - and make extensive use of gathered species and tree products. Women also make extensive use of wild patches and marginal areas within community lands where they gather traditional vegetables, condiments, and other (medicinal) plants that are crucial for the nutritional well-being and health of rural families throughout the world. In this way, rural women practice "in-situ conservation" in their home gardens and fields as well as in the common property resources (woodland, wetlands, etc.) that they utilise for wild plants and other products.
Case Study iv: Biodiversity in Homegardens in Northeastern Thailand (Moreno-Black, Somnasang, and Thamthawan, 1994)
In Northeastern Thailand, the home garden is important as an informal 'experimental station' in which women transfer, encourage and tend indigenous species, trying them out and adapting them for use. As a result, these gardens often represent a refuge where less common species and varieties are preserved.
One study, malting use of interviews, focus groups and household surveys, collected information from 60 of 110 households in a village about their different home gardens. These home gardens contained 230 different plant species; individual garden diversity ranged from 15 to 60 different species. Non-domesticated plants were found in 44 (88%) of the gardens. Of all of the plants recorded during the surveys, 29% were classifiable as non-domesticated species. However, there existed considerable variation between the individual gardens. While some contained no non-domesticated plants at all, the garden which was most diverse contained 10 different non-domesticated plant species.
The researchers concluded that the considerable variation among the gardens was probably related to the high degree of control exercised by individual women with respect to plant choice and management. Home gardens are tailored to each woman's own practices, although personal constraints such as off-farm employment, family size, household composition and local traditions are of influence on the number and variety of non-domesticated species. Most plants are used for food, although a number of women grow plants also for their medicinal, religious or decorative value. While some of the non-domesticated species appeared spontaneously, a sizable number of plants were taken from the wild or obtained from friends, neighbours, other villages, and even government agencies. A few of the plants had been deliberately spared when the forest was cleared for further house-building.
Through their experimentation, practices and preferences, and their control over the gardens, women have increased the probability that these wild plants and less common species and varieties will be maintained over time. This is increasingly important as rapid economic and population growth in the region drastically affect the forest areas and threaten potentially useful plant genetic resources. Women's house gardens, a form of traditional agriculture, can provide not only a source of stability in the face of these changes, but also conserve a multitude of plant genetic resources to feed their families and communities, among other uses.
<section>6</section>
What has gender to do with farmers' rights?
What has gender to do with farmers' rights?
As men and women farmers' knowledge, skills and practices contribute to the conservation, development, and management of PGR and thereby to sustainable agriculture, their different contributions must be recognized and respected. An analysis and understanding of men and women farmers' differential roles and responsibilities in PGR conservation and management, as well as the intrinsic value of their knowledge, is crucial to the solution of situation specific problems and to the provision of appropriate and targeted support.
There is, today, little disagreement on the need for recognizing and rewarding farmers' innovations relating to the improvement and conservation of PGR. The challenge is how to do this through Farmers' Rights. Plant genetic and other biological resources have added or associated values which are not necessarily reflected in their price in the market place. The benefits of their existence confer on society as a whole and not only on those directly concerned (de, they are a public good).
Farmers' Rights are generally considered to be group (collective) rights that do not necessarily imply direct compensation or bilateral reciprocity, such as selling a license for exclusive rights to collect and use crop germplasm. Rather they are, or could be valued by non-market mechanisms, such as a direct levy on users or consumers of crop genetic resources in developed countries or a national assessment based on UN funding formulas (Brush, 1994). There is not necessarily a clear linkage between the "conserver/developer" of PGR and the user who may be in a different region, country or continent.
It is important that Farmers' Rights, once fully operative, not only recognize the value of PGR resources, but also specify ways for benefits to accrue to the contributors, of whom many are women, as noted above. The need for Member Nations, multilateral agencies, donors, policy makers and planners, scientists, and technical agents, to recognize gender disaggregated contributions and potential benefits of men and women farmers, is not yet specifically noted under the agreed texts on Farmers' Rights. However, the need for gender responsiveness is now mentioned in various other international agreements recognizing the distinctive contributions women make to the development and nurturing of natural resources and the rights they have to benefit from the use of these.
Most notably, the legally binding Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCED) came into force on December 29, 199: and clearly recognizes "...the vital role that women play in the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity", and affirms "...the need for the full participation of women at all levels of policy-making and implementation for biological diversity Conservation (Preamble)."
Further, Agenda 21, the Action Programme adopted by UNCED recommended that, "Governments should recognize and foster the traditional methods and knowledge of indigenous people and their communities, emphasizing the particular role of women, relevant to the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of biological resources, and ensure the opportunities for tile participation of those groups in the economic and commercial benefits derived from the uses of such traditional methods and knowledge."(15.4)
Cooperative efforts are required between rural communities, breeders and other national and intentional researchers, and agencies, in order to better provide for more sustainable conservation and utilization strategies overall. These will require paying close attention to the different knowledge and experiences of both rural men and women to provide a more accurate picture of both the extent of PGR diversity, and the various contributions of all actors in a specific location. These efforts must also provide social and economic incentives and means for conservation and further development of potentially different PGR by men and women.
In this respect, it is important to ensure that all contributors to PGR innovation, management and conservation have access to relevant decision-making processes, and that the different experiences, knowledge, needs and priorities are recognized and incorporated into activities associated with Farmers' Rights. In this way, Farmers' Rights will be more equitable, transparent, and more effective in supporting the initiatives of the different actors. This will, in turn, through sustainable practices, increase the likelihood of conservation of PGR overall, both for local utilization and for the sake of global biodiversity.
Similarly it is important that all contributors to PGR conservation, use and management participate fully in the assessment of needs and in the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of programmes and interventions. The widespread use over recent years of participatory rural appraisal approaches help to ensure that all community members (according to age, gender, social and economic status, ethnic and religious groups, etc.) participate actively in the development process as both actors and decision makers, and to ensure that their differential experiences, knowledge, needs and priorities of the different are considered.
<section>7</section>
Equitable and gender- responsive application of farmers' rights: areas of action
I. Policies and development programmes
II. Legislation
III. Participation in decision making, at community, regional and national levels
IV. Access to productive resources
V. Access to agricultural services
VI. Community development
Equitable and gender- responsive application of farmers' rights: areas of action
The creation of an Intentional Fund has already been proposed under the International Undertaking to be used in support of in-situ conservation and to benefit rural men and women who produce and conserve PGR. To ensure that the resources will be allocated in a sustainable, equitable and transparent way mechanisms are required to:
· protect and compensate the use of knowledge, innovations and practices of farmers relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of PGR for food and agriculture;
· promote their wider application with the consent and involvement of holders of such knowledge, innovations and practices; and
· encourage the equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of PGR, knowledge, innovations and practices.
In order to address the socio-economic and gender issues highlighted above, the international community should also adopt a concrete set of principles on Farmers' Rights that are designed to promote the conservation and sustainable use of PGR essential to agricultural development. Such a legal instrument should therefore: recognize ownership and rights to receive benefits from farmers' local knowledge for those communities who create, develop and enhance it; take into account the differential access of women and men to decision making structures; and respond to the differential needs of women and men farmers in PGR management and conservation. One risk to avoid is where only the formally educated and economic elite of countries with access to genetic resources and related technologies for their improvement will benefit, and the poorer and marginalized groups that nurture PGR, often women, will be by-passed. If this happens, Farmers' Rights may be widely discredited,
particularly among farmers who continue to grow traditional crops.
Farmers in all regions of the world should be assisted in their conservation of natural resources and more specifically the selection, conservation, improvement and sustainable use of PGR. Appropriate incentives should be developed, with the active participation of those concerned, to convince communities, industry and governments of the benefits of conservation and development efforts and to provide financial resources, legal support, and technical capability to develop agricultural systems that are suitable for local agro ecological conditions and, where possible, based on locally available resources. Incentives should be used to enable farmers to divert land, labour and capital towards conserving biological resources and to facilitate the participation of certain groups in activities that promote the sustainable use of those resources.
The constraints to ensuring that women farmers, as well as men, benefit from their contribution to PGR conservation and use, through appropriate support, incentives and an enabling environment, are essentially the same as those outlined in any text on gender and agriculture. It is the recognition of the implications of these constraints with regard to PGR conservation that is essential to finding and implementing viable, effective and equitable programmes.
A number of specific areas justifying attention are indicated below with examples of appropriate action that needs to be adopted.
I. Policies and development programmes
Unfortunately, a widespread lack of attention by, decision-makers in the agricultural and environmental sectors to the differential knowledge, needs and priorities of men and women as agricultural producers and managers of natural resources has reduced the effectiveness and equity of policies and programmes in promoting sustainable agricultural production systems and PGR conservation efforts.
Action Required:
· The participation of women farmers and the recognition of their contributions in the design and elaboration of such policies and programmes at all levels is essential.
· This also requires the adoption, by key PGR planners and decision-makers, of methodologies for the collection and application of gender-disaggregated data and information of PGR conservation, utilization, and innovation.
II. Legislation
PGR and other biological resources are often under threat from over-exploitation through inappropriate legislation; and/or where the responsibility for their management has been removed from the local people who rely on them and transferred through nationalization to government agencies located in distant capitals. The rural populations who live closest to the areas with the greatest biodiversity are often among the most socially and economically disadvantaged (McNeely, 1988). These rural communities, who might otherwise benefit from the development of these resources, bear the cost of conservation. Under such conditions and economic pressures, the poorest have no alternatives, but to deplete the diversity upon which they depend.
Action Required
· Legislation should be reviewed to identify and address areas which may impede conservation and sustainable use of natural resources by women, including PGR.
· Local communities should be responsible for the management of natural resources which they utilize. Mechanisms are required to ensure that the different socioeconomic groups in the community benefit equally and that in return, they are accountable for the sustainable management of the resources. Since rural women are largely responsible for natural resources management they require particular assistance to protect and use benefit from the PGR diversity.
· A mechanism for gander-responsive monitoring and feedback should be established
III. Participation in decision making, at community, regional and national levels
As poorer farmers, and most notably, women farmers, are often excluded from decision making processes at different levels, their substantial efforts and innovations in PGR conservation and management may not be recognized and their specific needs and priorities may therefore be neglected. In recent years, Participatory Rural Appraisal (ERA) and other similar participatory tools and techniques have been developed and adapted for use in different regions and sectors. Additional efforts are still required to ensure a gender sensitivity of such approaches in PGR conservation and utilization.
Action required:
· Mechanisms are needed to improve the active participation of women and other disadvantaged groups in decision making, structures, especially at community and regional levels.
· Farmers, communities and countries, and men and women at all levels should participate in the design and implementation of programmes policies and agreements related to PGR In this way incentives can be identified to address problems perceived by those concerned (e.g. men and women farmers' participation in the design of community level programmes).
· A participatory process (including monitoring and feedback) is required that enables the assessment of the needs, constraints and opportunities of different members in Else community (by gender, age, social status, religious, and ethnic groups, livelihood system, etc.) and the subsequent development and implementation of action plans by the community.
· Those who develop breeding materials should be empowered to decide, at their discretion, if the materials will be made available to other (i.e. external) users.
IV. Access to productive resources
Farmers' insecure land tenure and/or limited access to irrigation water may lead to unsustainable land use and farming practices as farmers will have little opportunity or incentive to invest labour or money in conservation efforts. Security of tenure as it relates to PGR includes common property and collective local decision making as well as private property. Women farmers throughout the world face insecure land tenure arrangements and despite land reform and the recognition of women's rights to land in state laws, often the application of customary laws perpetuates the discrimination at community levels.
Action Required
· Traditional measures for conserving PGR should be identified and built upon in such a way as to promote more equitable access by all members of the community.
· Efforts are needed to ensure that both women and men farmers have security of tenure and water rights in order to provide incentive to invest in ensuring ion, term productivity of Else land and conservation of PGR
V. Access to agricultural services
As agricultural services and extension tend to be directed to the male head of household, regardless of the division of roles and responsibilities for different farm-household enterprises, women farmers have been shown to benefit little from support in terms of information and technology, inputs and credit, extension and research.
Modern plant breeding has concentrated on developing a small number of varieties which are widely adapted to many environments. In fact, conventional research and extension efforts have focused on introducing high yielding hybrid seeds and exogenous varieties to the detriment of local (traditional) varieties which have been adapted, for livelihood security reasons, to the diverse agro-ecological environments. The introduction of these exogenous seeds and related inputs has also differentially impacted rural men and women, often differentially benefiting better off male farmers in the community.
Action Required:
· Appropriate support services, including information, technologies, technologies, improved genetic resources, and funds, for Else conservation and improvement of PGR need to be targeted to different groups of farmers according to their needs and priorities.
· Participatory research and plant breeding should be promoted with different socio-economic groups in rural communities in order to improve the productivity of and income gained from, local varieties and to promote marketing of special products derived from these materials.
· Improved marketing and extension services are also worthy of investment to assist in developing more integrated farming systems.
· Throughout public information and communications services all parties should be fully informed of long term consequences of their actions and Else benefits of PGR conservation as this will motivate and promote sustainable practices. All members of Else community should be informed of available incentives so that they are able to take advantage of them
VI. Community development
In general farmers are interested in conserving resources. However, they are constrained from doing so because they do not receive any recompense for their efforts and they do not receive the benefits of their labours to increase their families' livelihood security. There is a need to build on traditional ways and means of managing PGR which may have been weakened in recent years due to the pressures of economic change at national/international levels. Smallholder farmers, especially women, have limited access to education, security' of tenure, credit and in the struggle for subsistence they may not have the option to invest in the conservation of PGR and the ecosystem.
Action Required
· PGR conservation should be integrated into other community development programmes and Else incentives provided should contribute to improving the quality of life of Else communities, promoting a sustainable relationship between people and their resources enhanced land tenure arrangements, training and education, credit and employment in activities related to PGR building up of local institutions, capacity building) and collecting and dissemination;, information on the status and trends of PGR.
· Non Governmental Organizations should assist in the entire process as they are close to the communities and have the capacities to provide long-term support.
· The establishment of strong village level institutions with adequate representation of both women and men farmers can be key in promoting successful programmes.
<section>8</section>
Conclusions
Conclusions
Country-level experience has shown that the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation and reporting mechanisms pertaining to Farmers' Rights and the conservation and utilization of PGR should be gender-sensitive in order to ensure that all related programmes, policies, and actions are sustainable, effective, and equitable. Thus, the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture and Member Nations should recognize in designing and implementing relevant policies and programmes, that:
· The Farmers' Rights concept should more specifically determine who the farmers are that should benefit and be assisted to promote the conservation and sustainable use of PGR;
· Many of the world's small-scale farmers in the centres of crop genetic diversity are women, thus benefits and support should be designed and implemented so as to reach women as well as men farmers;
· Farmers' Rights mean specific rights at both the local and national level, and that both are complementary to national agricultural and socio-economic development.
<section>9</section>
References
References
Appleton, Helen, Maria Fernandez, Catherine L.M. Hill, and Consuelo Quiroz. "Claiming and Using Indigenous Knowledge." in Missing Links: Gender Equity in Science and Technology for Development. Ed. Gender Working Group, United Nations Commission on Science and Technology for Development. Ottawa: International Development Research Centre, Intermediate Technology, Publications and UNIFEM, 1993.
Appleton, Helen, Maria Fernandez, Catherine L.M. Hill and Consuelo Quiroz. "Local Science and Technology. 'Appropriate Technology, Vol. 22, No. 1, June 1995.
Brush, Stephen R. "A Non-Market Approach to Protecting Biological Resources." in Intellectual Property Rights for Indigenous Peoples A Source Book. Ed. Tom Greaves. Oklahoma City: Society for Applied Anthropology, 1994.
Chimedza, Ruvimbo and Shimwaayi Muntemba. "Securing the Family's Food". Appropriate Technology, Vol. 22, No. 1, June 1995.
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). "The Forgotten Farmer: Plant Genetic Resources, Women and the CGIAR." 1995.
Cordeiro, Angela. "Diversity: A Feminine Noun". Seedling The Quarterly Newsletter of Genetic Resources Action Intentional, July 1995.
The Crucible Group. People. Plants and Patents The Impact of Intellectual Property on Biodiversity. Conservation. Trade and Rural Society. Ottawa: International Development Research Centre, 1994.
Dankelman, Irene and Joan Davidson. Women and Environment in the Third World. Alliance for the Future. London: Earthscan Publications Ltd., 1988.
Esquinas-Alcezar, Jose. "Farmers' Rights". Paper presented to the Patenting Life Workshop, Session on Patents, Biotechnology, and Developing Countries. Brussels, Belgium, 3-4 March, 1994.
Eyzaguirre, Pablo and Ruth Raymond. "Rural Women: A Key to the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Agricultural Biodiversity." Paper presented to the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing 4 -15 September 1995, IPGRI.
Fernandez, Maria. "Gender and indigenous knowledge in various organizations ". Indigenous knowledge and Development Monitor, Vol. 2 December 1994.
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations. "Information Document Presented to the First Session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity on Progress made on Resolution 3 of the Nairobi Final Act: Ex Situ Collections and Farmers' Rights, 28 Nov. - 9 Dec. 1994.
FAO. Harvesting Nature's Diversity Oct. 1993
FAO. A Fairer Future for Rural Women. 1995
FAO. Gender, Biodiversity, and Local Knowledge Systems (Links) for Strengthening Agricultural and Rural Development. Project Document. Women in Development Service, February 1996.
International Plant Genetic Resources Institute (IPGRI) Geneflow: A Publication About the Earth's Plant Genetic Resources (Special Issue on Women and Plant Genetic Resources. (under old name of International Board for Plant Genetic Resources), 1991.
Kettel, Bonnie. "Natural resources and gender implications. Appropriate Technology, Vol. 22, No. 1, June 1995.
McNeely, Jeffrey A. Economics and Biological Diversity Developing & Using Economic Incentives to Conserve Biological Resources. Gland, IUCN, 1988.
Moreno-Black, Geraldine, Prapimporn Somnasang, and Sompong Thamthawan. "Women in northeastern Thailand: preservers of botanical diversity." Indigenous Knowledge and Development Monitor, Vol. 2, No. 3, 1994 (Special Issue).
Quiroz, Consuelo. "Biodiversity, indigenous knowledge, gender and intellectual property rights". Indigenous Knowledge and Development Monitor, Vol. 2, December 1994.
Quiroz, Consuelo. "Local Knowledge Systems (LKS) in Latin America: Current Trends and Contributions Towards Sustainable Development." Paper presented at the World Bank Workshop on Traditional and Modern Approaches to Natural Resources Management in Latin America. Washington, April 25-26, 1993.
Rea, Val. "Gender: A vital issue in Biodiversity." Appropriate Technology, Vol. 29, No. 1, June 1995.
Rocheleau, Dianne E. "Gender and Biodiversity A Feminist Political Ecology Perspective." IDS Bulletin, Vol. 96, No. 1, 1995.
Rojas, Martha. "Women and biodiversity Special Report". IUCN Bulletin, No. 3, 1995.
Rural Advancement Foundation Intentional (RAFI). "Conserving Indigenous Knowledge: Integrating Two Systems of Innovation." An independent study commissioned by the United Nations Development Programme, 1994.
Spillane, Charles. Personal communication. 1996.
UNEP/CBD/IC/2/14. "Farmers' Rights and Rights of Similar Groups." Intergovernmental Committee on the Convention on Biological Diversity, Second Session, Nairobi, 29 June - 21 July 1994. Item 4.2.4
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED). Convention on Biological Diversity. 1992
UNCED. Agenda 21 1992.
Wilson, E.O. The Diversity of Life. London: Penguin, 1992.
<section>e</section>
Abstract
Abstract
As men and women farmers' knowledge, skills and practices contribute to the conservation, development, improvement, and management of Plant Genetic Resources (PGR), their different contributions should be recognized and respected by the Intentional Undertaking, particularly in terms of Farmers' Rights. An analysis and understanding of men and women farmers' differential roles and responsibilities in PGR conservation and management, as well as the intrinsic value of their knowledge, is crucial to sustainable, effective, and socio-economically appropriate PGR conservation initiatives, and to the provision of appropriate and targeted support. Efforts are required at all levels to develop and implement gender responsive policies, programmes and actions for the conservation and sustainable use of plant genetic resources.
A travers leur connaissances, leur qualifications et leurs pratiques, les agriculteurs et les agricultrices contribuent a la conservation, au développement, a l'amélioration et a la gestion des ressources phytogénétiques. Ces différentes contributions doivent être reconnues et respectées par l'Engagement International sur les Ressources
Phytogénétiques, en particulier en termes des "Droits des agriculteurs". L'analyse et la compréhension des rôles différents et des responsabilités des agriculteurs et des agricultrices dans la conservation et la gestion des ressources phytogénétiques, ainsi que de la valeur intrinsèque de leur connaissances, est cruciale aux initiatives de conservation des ressources phytogénétiques, si celles-ci veulent être durables, effectives, et socio-économiquement appropriées. Telle compréhension est aussi importante pour un soutien approprie et cible de ces initiatives. Des efforts vent nécessaires a tout les niveaux d'intervention pour développer et mettre en oeuvre des politiques, des programmes et des actions sensibles aux questions de genre pour la conservation et l'utilisation durable des ressources phytogénétiques.
Hombres y mujeres rurales contribuyen con su conocimiento, habilidades, y costumbres a la conservación, desarrollo, mejoramiento y manejo de los Recursos Genéticos Vegetales (RGV), y por eso sus diferentes contribuciones deben ser reconocidas y respetadas por el Compromiso Internacional, particularmente en términos de derechos de los campesinos. Para el desarrollo de iniciativas sostenibles, efectivas y apropiadas desde el punto de vista socio-económico y de la conservación de los RGV y la provisión de apoyo adecuado y enfocado a los beneficiarios, es de fundamental importancia analizar y entender los diferentes roles y responsabilidades de hombres y mujeres rurales en la conservación y manejo de los RGV, como también el valor intrínseco de su conocimiento. Se requieren esfuerzos a todos los niveles pare desarrollar e implementar políticas, programas y acciones con un enfoque de genero, con el objetivo de lograr la conservación y uso sostenible de los RGV.
