<title>Modules on gender, population &amp; rural development with a focus on land tenure &amp; farming system* - (November 1995). Modules on gender, population and rural development with a focus on land tenure </title>
<section>1</section>
Module I: The population parameters of rural development
Gender in rural development and population issues
Policy and programme costs of neglecting gender
Sustainable agriculture, rural development and population growth
Population versus food trends and their implications
Endnotes
Module I: The population parameters of rural development
(Topouzis/du Guerny, SDWP, November 1995)
Gender in rural development and population issues
Rural development is the process of sustained growth of the rural economy and improvement of well-being of rural men, women and children.^1 Genders ^a plays a central role in this process, as does population.
(^1 Women are Farmers Too)
^a(Gender refers to socially and culturally defined roles and attributes attached to each sex, as well as to the relations between the sexes. Gender approaches emphasize: a) the social construction of male and female roles (as opposed to their biological distinctions); b) the gaps between women and men in all spheres of life; and c) the relations between men and women. "Gender places people at the, center, women and men. With its emphasis on how society constructs opportunities and life chances, it allows for differentiation among women and men, for example, by age or income." See Kathleen Staudt, "Technical Assistance and Women: From Mainstreaming Toward Institutional Accountability," June 1994, p. 4.)
Within a farm household, all household members -- men, women and children -- have a gender- and age specific role to play (farming, trading, wage labour, etc.) and combine efforts to generate food and income for the family's survival. Until recently, however, the contributions of women and children within the farm household remained invisible. Equally invisible were women's limited access to productive resources, and particularly land, and the gender-specific constraints they encountered. As a result, the gender implications for agricultural and rural development policies and programmes were frequently overlooked, thus compromising their success and sustainability.
Work done in one hectare farm in one year in the Indian Himalayan
Source: Vir Singh, "Hills of Hardship", 1987, cited in Most farmers in India are Women, FAO, 1991, p.4.
That rural women play a major role in agricultural production, food security and rural development, and that in many countries, they are the mainstay of agricultural sectors is now recognized worldwide. Whether reference is made to sub-Saharan Africa or the Caribbean where women produce 60-80% of basic foodstuffs, or to Asia, where they perform over 50% of the labour in rice cultivation, or to the Pacific or Latin America, where their home gardens represent some of the most complex agricultural systems known, women have a major responsibility for, and knowledge of, food systems and agriculture. Rural women the world over are also responsible for rearing small livestock and handling large livestock not raised on free ranges (which is the domain of men), for gathering food, fodder and fuelwood and for drawing water. They often provide most of the labour for, and make decisions on, a wide range of post-harvest operations, including storage, handling and marketing, and for
off-farm food processing either in micro-enterprises or as wage workers in agro-industries. To this should be added their community roles as well as their childbearing, childcare and domestic roles.
In many parts of the world, women's contributions even exceed those of men. To give but one example, in the Indian Himalayas (see Figure 1), it was found that a pair of bullocks worked for 1,064 hours, a man for 1,212 hours and a woman for 3,485 hours a year on a one hectare farm. In effect, this means that a year of farm work by a woman is equivalent to that of one man and two bullocks! In this case, women's work, which includes weeding, irrigation, transporting organic manure and transferring it to the field, seed sowing, harvesting and threshing, amounted to more than male and farm animal work combined.^2
Despite women's important contributions to rural and socio-economic development, gender bias and blindness persist at all levels: farmers today are still generally perceived as "male" by policy-makers and agricultural service deliverers alike and women are mere assistants to their husbands.^3 In this equation, the male farmer is also the head of household, the decision-marked and thus the target group of agricultural policies, programmes and services. As a result, rural women have often been the last to benefit, or have been negatively affected, by economic growth and development.
Poverty, food insecurity and environmental degradation have a disproportionate impact on rural women, not only due to their inferior socio-economic, legal and political status, but also due to their critical roles as both producers and household managers. Rural women are also normally worst hit by generally low and sometimes worsening health and nutrition conditions and by growing labour shortages due to male out-migration.^4 Growing population pressure on increasingly degraded land, male out-migration, and socio-economic changes are transforming the traditional pattern of intra-household rights and obligations and the very role of women in agriculture. At the same time, levels of time and human energy inputs required in women's farm- and home-based productive and reproductive chores are increasing, giving rise to what the United Nations has termed "the feminization of agriculture."
Rural women's socio-economic status and productive and reproductive roles have a significant impact not only on agriculture and rural development but also on population dynamics, on fertility/mortality (through their role in health and nutrition), and on the environment. This was highlighted at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (1992) and the International Conference on Population and Development (1994). Rural fertility in particular, which is higher than urban fertility across developing regions, has been found to be closely linked to women's lower socio-economic status. Thus, it is probable that having a large number of children continues to be a major asset and source of immediate and long-term economic and social security for rural women.^5 In developing regions, this is reflected in the high value placed on child labour and in the absence of labour-saving home and farm technologies and of social safety nets^6.
Policy and programme costs of neglecting gender
The effects of the disproportionate impact of poverty, food insecurity and environmental degradation on rural women are systemic and have far-reaching implications for all initiatives aimed at raising levels of nutrition and standards of living; improving production and distribution of food and agricultural products; enhancing the living conditions of rural populations; checking population growth; and improving reproductive health.
The cost of ignoring gender has been amply demonstrated in recent research on the economic contributions of rural women and is becoming increasingly more explicit as concepts and definitions of economic activity become more gender balanced. A recent World Bank study in sub-Saharan Africa strongly suggests that potential agricultural output is substantially reduced owing to women's disadvantaged access to resources, inputs and support services (land, labour, technology, extension and credit).^7 It is further pointed out that "the effectiveness of policy interventions and agricultural support services hinges critically on a solid understanding of who is doing what with what at the household level, and of the dynamics of rural intra-household decision-making."^8
Ignoring gender considerations largely explains why new technologies and development initiatives often produce unsatisfactory results, both in terms of degree and in terms of the distribution of benefits, particularly among women. It is also partly reflected in the perpetuation of chronic development problems such as rising food insecurity among vulnerable groups in some developing countries, the feminization of agriculture and poverty, environmental degradation and high population growth. These problems are often inextricably linked and tend to reinforce one another. As part of an inter-dependent systems, changes in one variable often trigger a response in one or several others.
Thus, a critical area which needs to be addressed is the limited appreciation of gender and other relationships within and between rural households, of the access to resources that different household members have at their disposal, of the constraints under which different household members operate, and of the complexity of the farming systems they practice. All these factors, in turn, impact on the demographic characteristics and strategies of a household.
Sustainable agriculture, rural development and population growth
Generalizations on cause and effect relationships between population growth, gender and environmental degradation have in recent years been found to be misleading. Such stereotypes attribute environmental degradation primarily to subsistence farmers who tend to sub-divide the available land and bring marginal lands under cultivation and grazing under population pressure; pastoralists who overgraze; and fishermen who overfish.
Recent literature, however, has increasingly questioned these stereotypes, arguing that population dynamics are much too complex to be reduced to simple relationships. The assumption that population growth is a main cause of poverty and environmental degradation has been attributed to the neglect of linkages between these problems, including the wider gender and social inequalities, unequal land tenure, power relations and political mobilization. For instance! rural women, in their efforts to satisfy their basic needs and, lacking alternative means of employment or access to capital, are frequently pushed to overexploit resources. This is largely due to gender relations and gender-specific constraints that are not being addressed, and in particular to the fact that resource access and land tenure patterns tend to favour men (see Module ill, as do the availability and quality of the means of production.
Thus, tenurial relations, land alienation, the expansion of commercial farming, and certain public policies, all of which have systemic effects on gender relations, can have more of an impact on environmental degration than does population growth per se. In other words, "it is not principally the sheer numbers of people that determine environmental health, but rather how those people act within particular socio-economic and ecological contexts."^9 For instance, in Tanzania's Rufiji district, it was recently found that unchecked deforestation was taking place in the delta region as a result of market forces, deficient definition of land tenure rights and social disruption caused by compulsory resettlement in villages.^10
By extension, "reducing the rates of population growth requires much more than the distribution of contraceptives and family- planning services," argues the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD). "It also requires food security, good education and health services, better security for the aged, more opportunities for women and improved social and economic conditions for vulnerable low-income groups."^11 In other words, reducing population growth is not solely a 'population' issue but also a 'gender,' 'land tenure,' 'environmental' and 'agricultural' issue which needs to be addressed in a holistic and systematic manner.
Population versus food trends and their implications
According to the United Nations World Urbanization Prospects, in 1995 the rural population comprises about 55% of the total population -- 3,132 million rural inhabitants against 2,585 million urban residents. Africa and Asia are the least urbanized continents. Worldwide, the rural population is projected to peak around 2015. Africa's rural population is projected to continue to increase thereafter. Asia's rural population will increase until 2010 after which it will begin declining. Latin America's rural population is already on the decline. By the year 2025, there will be about 3,230 million rural people, or 39% of the total population, with no continent exhibiting a majority rural population. According to United Nations data, 50% of the projected increase in urban population will come from rural-to-urban migration.^12 In the less developed regions, over 1.1 billion of the urban population in 2025 would be migrants.
In terms of food trends, contrary to the widely held assumption that the world food situation is steadily improving, for many developing countries, population growth is exceeding the rate of increase in food production. In addition, meeting future food needs becomes an even greater challenge as the impact of the, Green Revolution levels off, unused agricultural land becomes increasingly scarce, and environmental sustainability concerns become more important.^13 In the last 10 years, food production per capita declined in 76% of the countries in Africa, 64% of the countries in Latin America, and 48% of those in Asia. Food yield per hectare must increase by 40% over the next 20 years to maintain the present level of food availability.^14
The 1992 International Conference on Nutrition estimated that 780 million people in developing countries do not have access to enough food to meet their basic daily nutritional needs. Most of these fall into three categories: a) children under 5 years of age, especially girls; b) women of childbearing age, ^b especially those that are pregnant and/or breast feeding; and c) low-income households, a large percentage of which are female-headed. In general terms, it has been found that rural female household members often get less food than males both absolutely and in terms of nutritional requirements.
(^b Childbearing age is generally defined as 15 to 49 years of age.)
TABLE 1
Urban, rural and percent rural by major UN area and region 1995-2010-2025 i/ii/
(1) Urban Popul ^iii
(2) Rural Popul
(3) % rural Popul
(1) Urban Popul
(2) Rural Popul
(3) % rural Popul
(1) Urban Popul
(2) Rural Popul
(3) % rural Popul
World Total
More
Developed
Regions
Developed
Regions
Africa
46B
Asia
Europe
Latin America & Caribbean
Source: Adapted from the United Nations World Urbanization Prospects: the 1994 Revision - Annex Tables, in Jacques du Guerny, Note on the United Nations World Urbanization Prospects: Some Highlights and Remarks, FAO, March 1995.
i/ Oceania has been omitted because it is too small for this scale.
ii/Regions are UN regions.
iii/ Population in millions The numbers have been rounded to the nearest unit).
The above-mentioned demographic and food trends will pose fresh challenges to national governments and to development agencies alike. Some of these challenges hinge on linkages between gender, population and agricultural issues which will be addressed in modules Il-V. To give but some examples:
1. In many developing countries, the backbone of national food security is the small scale farmer. ^c Eighty percent of the developing world's agricultural output -- i.e. crops and livestock -- is generated by small-scale men and women farmers. Subsistence farmers also play an important role in other productive activities, such as fish farming, agro-forestry, management and extraction of forest and wildlife products, and part time off-farm occupations.
(^c The definition of small scale farmers has been the subject of much debate and still remains fuzzy. According to FAO, "they constitute the bulk of the world's farmers, operate in a context of increasing local population pressure, have a very small resource base generating a chronically low standard of living either involving absolute poverty or verging on it, rely to a greater or lesser degree on subsistence production, and tend to be on the margin rather than in the mainstream of society in terms of political influence and the provision of health, education and other services.- See Farm Management Research for Small Farmer Development. FAO, 1993, p. 1.)
One of the principal constraints facing subsistence farmers, and particularly women farmers, is access to productive resources, including land, labour and capital. Module 11: Gender, Fertility/Mortality and Land Tenure examines the main constraints to men's and women's access to land, to security of tenure and to sustainability, indicating how these constraints may impact on fertility and mortality.
The labour, knowledge, and management capacity for productive activities within a farm household is usually provided by both male and female family members. Since rural households are both production and consumption units, the decision-making process is far from simple. It is further complicated by dynamic relationships among individuals of differing age, sex, and kin status within the household; by relationships between different households; and by often complex rights and obligations of households to the larger community of which they are part.^15 The gender division of labour in farming systems and its implications for fertility and mortality are examined in detail in Module III: Gender, Fertility/Mortality and Farming Systems.
2. Migration movements in developing countries are likely to trigger changes in both farming and land tenure systems (see Module IV: Gender, Migration, Farming Systems and Land Tenure). At the same time, the food needs and demands of urban areas will be expanding on a massive scale, placing great pressure on food producers in rural areas, many of whom are women. The growing burden of rural women's responsibilities in sustaining their families has yet to be systematically addressed in agricultural policies (including food security, pricing, extension, agricultural credit and agricultural research policies). What will the long-term implications of out-migration for food production, food security and sustainability be?
To some extent, current demographic and socio-economic trends, however problematic or alarming, are presently being accepted at face value. Massive rural-to urban migration, for instance, as projected by the United Nations for the next few decades, is being tolerated as an inevitable process, despite its potentially severe repercussions on urban. as well as rural areas. In fact, there has been little consideration of whether and how rural development policies and programmes could check this trend.
So far, the response has been to invest most available resources into urban areas and urban development, thus exacerbating the urban-rural disequilibrium and fuelling further massive rural-to-urban migration. Urban bias is further compounded by sectoral, vertical approaches to development, which limit both their scope and efficacy. They may also inadvertently be contributing to the polarization of existing urban-rural dichotomies. The cost of considering urban and rural development, conceptually as well as programmatically, as two separate issues rather than as interacting components of a system could have far-reaching implications for development efforts as a wholes.^16 The significance of the urban-rural continuum is discussed in detail in Module IV: Gender, Migration, Farming Systems and Land Tenure.
3. The incidence of the feminization of agriculture and poverty is expected to rise in the coming decades. What will be the short and long-term implications for subsistence agriculture? The feminization of agriculture in many countries in Africa, the Near East, Latin America and the Caribbean (see Box 2), which often goes hand in hand with female pauperization, could transform cropping patterns and farming systems in general, with potentially serious implications for food security, sustainability and demographic behaviour (see Module lIl: Gender, Fertility/Mortality and Farming Systems). Studies in some African countries indicate that the loss of male labour can lead to shifts in production toward less nutritious crops or to declines in yields and outputs. In Ghana, for instance, the lack of male labour for clearing thick bush and women's inability to undertake this operation with simple hand tools has led to longer cropping rotations on land that should have been followed
after one to three years. As a result, land fertility and yields declined soil erosion have increased.^17
In the 1980s, a major shift took place in smallhoder agriculture in many sub-Saharan African countries as a result of male rural to urban migration (itself result of the search for off-farm employment in urban centres and the decreasing size of family landholding) as a consequence of very rapid population growth an the fragmentation of landholdings among sons. Thus, smallhoder agriculture has been transformed into "feminised" agriculture, in entire district or provinces of many countries, In some district or provinces of many countries. In some district of Eastern and Central Province in Kenya, for example up to 90% of farms are being managed by women. In some district of Zambia's Luapulu and Northern province, 50-75% of the farms are managed by women. In Lesotho, between 60-70% of all rural households are headed by women.
In the Near East, over the past 15 years, the migration of 6 million men from their countries has changed the gender division of labor arrangement In Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Yemen, Morocco, Sudan and Turkey. Women constitute the majority of agricultural wage labourers in Turkey (54%), Morocco (44%) and Syria 40%. In addition, female-headed households have increased to 16% of the total households in the region with 36% in Mauritania, 25% in Pakistan, and 24% in Sudan.
Source: FAO, Proposal for a Policy Framework and Regional Programme of: Action for Women in Agriculture in the Near East, FAO 1995 & Women, Agriculture and Rural Development in Sub-Saharan Africa, LAOS 1995.
(^2 Shifts in Smallholder Agriculture)
Despite the growing incidence of female-headed households ^d, their specific needs, constraints and interests are not reflected in mainstream development projects and agricultural policies as such. Official statistics in many developing countries are only beginning to record de jure and de facto households headed by women. It is important to underscore at this point that female-headed households should include not only those created through male out-migration but also through polygyny. The latter category includes autonomous households of second, third, fourth, etc. wives and their children. Co-wives often live separately from their husbands, and cultivate and manage their own land. As polygyny is prevalent in parts of Africa (according to' the World Fertility Survey, about half of marriages across sub-Saharan Africa except for Lesotho are with multiple wives^18), but especially in West Africa, the inclusion of such female-headed households in farm surveys, official
statistics and demographic surveys is critical to integrating their needs, interests and constraints in policies and programmes.
(^d About one-third of smallholder African households are headed by women, as many as two-thirds of rural households in Lesotho, 45% of households in Kenya and one-third of households in Malawi. Cited in Roca, 1991, op. cit., p. 12.)
This would necessitate adjustments in the design and implementation of agricultural and rural development initiatives, (including targeting of female-headed households, sensitization of extension workers and farming systems specialists, and integration of gender concerns in farming systems research, farm household modelling, etc). It would also require adjustments in population policy and programmes as the intra-household and demographic dynamics of female-headed households are different from those households headed by men.
'Food security' 'Sustainability' and 'Poverty Alleviation': " Rural DeveIopment", "Gender " or " Population " issues? The Need for a Holistic Approach
Key concepts that are routinely used in development parlance such as 'sustainability,' 'food security,' and 'poverty alleviation' are usually perceived as agricultural issues, and as such they dominate the policy agenda of developing countries. They have also been given highest priority by the international development community following the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (1992), the International Conference on Nutrition (1992) and the Social Summit (1995)
Food security is defined by FAO as "enough nutritious and safe food being available and accessible for a healthy and active life by all people at all times". At the household level, it is defined as the capacity of a household to procure a stable and sustainable basket of adequate food. The nature of food access depends on the particular conditions prevalent in a given farming system. Food may be derived from home production, through purchase, through gathering (e.g. fishing) , or through barter arrangements, gifts or other means of transfer
(^3 Definition of Food Security)
To take but one example, 'food security' issues, for FAO, pertain to the availability of foodstuffs, the risk entailed in food production and in the markets for food, and family purchasing power (see food security definition in Box).^19 Food security, however, is also a 'population' issue: at the macro level, neo-Malthusian theory essentially continues to attribute food insecurity to high population growth. At the micro level, rural women tend to have as many children as necessary to secure enough labour to produce food for their families.
That food security is also a 'gender' issue is hardly surprising: Women in al} regions of the developing world play a predominant role in household food security through agricultural and food production. Despite the attention focused on food security in recent years, however, the significant contributions of women farmers are still not reflected in agricultural policies and programmes. ^e Evidence also suggests that even when developing countries recognize that women farmers play a key role in increasing agricultural productivity and achieving food security, supportive measures have been too weak and too slow.
(^e This is partly due to the fact that food security at the national level is often achieved by predominantly male commercial farmers (i.e. Zambia, Zimbabwe and Malawil. The fact that women grow alternative food crops to the main staple (maize or rice), such as cassava, sorghum and millet, which in some areas constitutes the basic staple food, by selling food surpluses in local markets, and by spending a great proportion of their income on buying the food they need has been largely neglected. Constantine Safilios-Rothschild, "Agricultural Policies and Women Producers," op. cit., p. 57.)
What the above arguments show is that food security is clearly a "rural development," "gender" and "population" issue. The same applies for concepts such as 'sustainability', 'poverty alleviation' and a host of other frequently used development concepts.
The shortcomings of sectoral, vertical approaches to development programmes hardly need mentioning. In the case of population programmed, initially, demographic concerns focused on population education (in order to influence rural women to have smaller families by teaching them how population factors, such as family size, affect their income, food supplies, and the health and education of their families). The strategy was to attach specific population components to rural development projects in which women participated. This was, in fact, tantamount to further vertical, sectoral interventions which had very limited effectiveness. Next, population initiatives concentrated primarily on reproductive health and family planning, without due consideration to the socio-economic and institutional environment of rural populations within which these operate (i.e. the farm household and the land tenure systems, etc.)
In the case of agricultural and rural development programmed, vertical approaches often resulted in such programmes working independently of population programmes and, sometimes, even of women-in-development projects. Agricultural and rural development programmes rarely build-in demographic variables within a gender perspective. Gender, a critical link that often brings rural development and population issues together, has not been duly reflected in policies and programmes to date. For this reason, important linkages between gender, population and agriculture/rural development have remained invisible and thus absent from the agenda of policy-makers (see Module V: Gender, Population, Land Tenure and Farming Systems: Main Policy Issues).
A systems approach to gender, population and rural development issues could help to put into sharp focus existing linkages and their potentially significant implications for policy and programme planning. Agricultural programmes have gender and population dimensions which can jeopardize the very success and sustainability of development programmes, if these are not addressed. Similarly, population programmes have gender and agricultural dimensions which impact indirectly on demographic variables. At present, however, population programmes do not sufficiently address the dynamics of the productive capacity of rural women, and their interface with demographic determinants such as fertility, mortality and migration.
In conclusion, vertical and gender-blind approaches to rural development have limited our understanding of the linkages between gender, population and agriculture/rural development and the dynamic relationships that result from the interface of these linkages. This has compromised the effectiveness of development interventions. In fact, to some extent, vertical approaches to development have inadvertently marginalized gender and population issues, created a dichotomy between rural and urban development, and reduced population to the very narrow parameters of family planning and reproductive health. A host of seemingly unimportant linkages between gender, rural development and population thus remain obscure. The five modules in this series will focus on two institutional linkages between gender, population and agriculture and rural development: farming systems and land tenure.
Endnotes
1. Geoffrey McNicoll and Mead Cain (eds.), Rural Development and Population: Institutions and Policy, a supplement to the Population and Development Review, vol. 15, 1989, p. 3.
2. This example does not include off-farm activities of men and women. Cited in In India. Most Farmers are Women, FAO, June 1991, pp. 4-5.
3. Constantina Safilios-Rothschild, "Agricultural Policies and Women Producers," in Aderanti Adepoju and Christine Oppong eds., Gender. Work and Population in Sub-Saharan Africa, London, 1994, p. 56.
4. Zoran Roca, "Women, Population and Environment in Agricultural and Rural Development: Policy Challenges and Responses," FAO, 1994, p. 3.
5. Zoran Roca, "Women, Population and Environment in Agricultural and Rural Development: Policy Challenges and Responses," FAO, 1994, p. 3.
6. Condition de la femme et population le cas de l'Afrique francophone, United Nations, 1992, p. 36.
7. Raising the Productivity of Women Farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa, World Bank Discussion Paper #230, 1994.
8. ibid.
9. UNRISD. The Environment and Rural Development: Towards Ecologically and Socially Sustainable Development in Rural Areas, Draft paper prepared for the 23rd Meeting of the ACC sub-committee on Rural Development, Paris, 31 May-2 June 1995, p. 28.
10. ibid.
11. Ibid., p. 30.
12. World Urbanization Prospects. 1994 Revision, UN Department of International Economic and Social Affairs, 1994.
13. Farming Systems Development: A Participatory Approach to Helping Small-Scale Farmers, FAO, AGSP, 1994, p. 1.
14. Ibid.. pp. 1 -2.
15. "Sustainable Development of Rural Households: An FAO Special Action Programmed Draft paper, 1994.
16. Jacques du Guerny, Note on the United Nations World Urbanization Prospects: the 1994 revision: Some Highlights and Remarks, FAO, March 1995.
17. Gender Issues in Rural Food Security in Developing Countries, FAO, Women in Agricultural Development Paper, 1990, p. 7.
18. Cited in Zoran Roca, Women and Population in Agricultural and Rural Development in Sub-Saharan Africa,- op. cit.. p. 5
19. Cited in Farm and Community Information Use for Agricultural Programmes and Policies, FAO, AGSP, 1994, p.19.
<section>2</section>
Module II: Gender, rural fertility/mortality and land tenure
What have gender and rural fertility/mortality to do with land tenure ^a?
Linkages between gender, fertility/mortality and land tenure
Legal conditions: rules, regulations and customs
Transaction costs
Credit/Savings
Location
Income
Land prices
Gender disparities in access to land
Ownership
Land use
Land and regularization (including demarcation of parcels and adjudication)
Gender disparities in security of tenure
Size of landholding
Quality of land
Gender disparities in sustainability
Female-headed farm households
Main policy issues and research needs
Endnotes
Module II: Gender, rural fertility/mortality and land tenure
(Topouzis/du Guerny, SDWP, November 1995)
What have gender and rural fertility/mortality to do with land tenure ^a?
(^a Land tenure refers to a collection of rights, only some of which are held at any one time by a particular individual or social unit. These range from those held by a society's political entities on down to individuals who may have their tenures secondarily from other individuals (such as a sharecropper who has his tenure rights from someone who has leased the land from yet a third person}. All of these 'land tenures' co-exist. In fact, it is quite common to have different individuals holding different tenures to the same piece of property but using it at different times. In West Africa, one group may own' rights to the harvest from gum arabic trees, another group to pasture their animals in the grove, yet another group of individuals will have gleaning rights to all wood fall. Jim Riddell, Statement on Land Tenure for the Agrarian Reform and Land Settlement Service, FAO, 1993, p. 1.
Acknowledgments: This module is the product of a collaborative effort between the Population Programme Service (SDWP) and the Agrarian Reform and Land Settlement Service (SDAA), with inputs from the Integration of Women in Development Service (SDWW). Special thanks are due to Jim Ridell, Paolo Groppo and Richard Trenchard who devoted much of their time and contributed significantly to the module and to Tim Aldington, Sally gunning and Alain Marcoux for their comments.)
The need to link agricultural and population policies has increasingly been recognized in recent years. Major agricultural development goals, such as improvements in land productivity, the establishment of secure cultivation rights and the redistribution of land are believed to be influenced by demographic conditions. Similarly, demographic behaviour and demographic trends are shaped by the rural environment, including land/tenure arrangements and conditions.
An important element in the land-fertility/mortality interface is gender. Institutional arrangements and socio-economic and socio-cultural norms can contribute differently to the experiences of men and women in relation to land and fertility. Whilst the issue concerns all rural households, it is also important to recognize some of the specific constraints that affect female-headed households.
The objective of this module is to stimulate discussion among land tenure, gender and population specialists on the interface between gender, rural fertility/mortality and land/tenure in order to identify key policy issues and related research needs. The following questions are addressed: What are the main constraints to men's and women's access to land, to security of tenure and to sustainability and how do these obstacles impact on fertility and mortality? Do certain tenure conditions contribute to specific demographic responses? If so, what is the role of gender therein? How can changes in tenure systems contribute to favourable demographic responses, particularly with regard to fertility/mortality?
Much of the existing literature on the subject generated by demographers has sought to establish direct linkages and deterministic relationships between the land fertility/mortality interface. Land tenure specialists, however, believe that such direct linkages may have oversimplified these relationships as well as the complexities of such relationships vis-a-vis land tenure systems. This module seeks to develop a more holistic framework to the interface between land/tenure and fertility/mortality within a gender perspective. The framework is predicated on the assumption that differing household demographic conditions demand differing land and tenure arrangements, and similarly, that certain land and tenure arrangements are better suited to certain types of household demographic situations.
Figure 1 Interface between land tenure and demography
demographic condition (fertility/mortality) ® tenure response tenure condition ® demographic response (fertility/mortality)
In other words, there are optimal land tenure arrangements for given demographic situations. When the equilibrium between the two (land tenure arrangements and demographic responses) is upset, there is a need for policy intervention to facilitate the necessary adjustments.
The assumption that differing household demographic conditions demand differing land and tenure arrangements and vice versa, however, does not mean that generalizations can be made about the precise nature and impact of these relationships. Indeed, one of the criticisms that can be levelled at much of the existing literature is the tendency for deductive over determinacy: many of the arguments and conclusions reached are based on oversimplified assumptions and generalizations. This is due to the fact that general rules have been arrived at out of certain relationships and trends between fertility/mortality and land tenure from specific contexts. Such generalizations, however, can be misleading. Firstly, the relationships between gender, land tenure and demography are complicated and mediated by a wide range of other (non-demographic) factors. Secondly, these relationships are largely determined by local conditions and are thus context-specific.
For instance, demographers have argued that certain forms of land tenure systems may leave families little choice other than to have more children to ensure economic security and old-age support. In the case of Mexico, to give but one example, tenancy and fertility have been found to be positively related in the ejido ^b system. Crop lands are granted to individual families who cannot sell, lease, or mortgage the land. Heirs may receive rights to the land but these may be lost if the land is not cultivated for two consecutive years. Thus, demographers have argued that the ejido system of granting land on a usufruct basis creates pro-natalist incentives for women (the motives behind it being family labour, land retention, consumption).^1
(^bEjidos are land areas that were distributed to the people under the revolution. of 1910-1917. These areas were made up of individual allotments consisting of family plots which were to/be farmed collectively. FAO, The Legal Status of Rural Women in Nineteen Latin American Countries, 1994, p. 44.)
While tenancy and fertility may be positively related in the case of the ejido system, it would be wrong to draw policy recommendations on the basis of this example alone. In other words, it may not be the system of granting land on a usufruct basis that creates pro-natalist incentives for women as such. The elide system is shaped by the specific socio-economic, socio-cultural, and political setting in which it takes place; without it, the tenure response could be very different and thus not possible to apply in other circumstances.
The interface between gender, land tenure and fertility/mortality should be approached inductively. To this effect, there is a need to develop a broad conceptual framework and identify the range of local/context-specific factors that influence related inter-relationships in practice. In so doing, it is possible to develop broad guidelines that can facilitate the incorporation of land and tenure considerations into population and gender programme formulation and execution procedures. The proposed guidelines are based on two hypotheses. In any given rural context, a change in household demographic profile demands, in theory, an equivalent land or tenure-related response. This response may include changes in land size, agricultural land use, tenure arrangement, intensity, etc. Likewise, one can assume that a change in land or tenure may, in theory, permit or allow an equivalent demographic response.
Additional considerations, however, are important as these assumptions are not based on empirical evidence. Demographic responses are not dependent solely on tenure conditions and vice versa. Nonetheless, the impact of certain population programmes may be reduced if agricultural producers are not able to make the desired or appropriate land-related responses. Similarly, tenure responses are not universal. They vary according to geographical region, locality, producer-type, proceeding household demographic characteristics and strategies, prevailing socio-cultural attitudes, household socio-economic conditions, etc. As a result, one cannot ascribe a given response to a changing condition without examining the array of local and supra-local factors and relations and determine the impact of demographic and land/tenure changes on a household. Nonetheless, a conceptual framework can help to identify certain key areas for analysis and delineate significant inter-relationships
between gender, land tenure and fertility/mortality.
The capacity of a household to make an appropriate land or tenure-related response depends on three conditions: land access, security and sustainability. Firstly, are men and women able to acquire the land that they need? Secondly, are they guaranteed the rights and conditions that permit secure use of this land (including laws, customs, rules and regulations, etc.)? Thirdly, are households able to use the land in a sustainable manner? This last point refers to the use and management of land resources in a rational manner that sustains and enhances the land's productive potential. It avoids degradation and depletion of resources through appropriate management practices which both yield production benefits while being conservation effective. If these three conditions are met, one may conclude that the system can accommodate any potential land or tenure-related response that demographic changes may induce or demand.
The analysis of the gender, land tenure and fertility/mortality interface should therefore focus on the identification of systemic, local household constraints that inhibit these responses. Are there, for example, context-specific or systemic, national constraints that inhibit men's and women's access to land? These constraints may vary according to location, producer type, and household income. While they do not necessarily lead to changes in demographic behaviour, they can contribute to such changes, along with other factors. Policy-makers need to be aware of the likely impact of certain types of constraints that can adversely affect the realisation of appropriate tenure or land adjustments, and more importantly, of the need to examine the nature of these constraints in a given area/context.
A further dimension to land needs to be added. Land and tenure issues are often gender-specific: women and men experience them differently. As a result, it is necessary to incorporate a specific gender component into the conceptual framework. This will permit the inclusion of specific problems and constraints that characterize the land and tenure experiences of men and women.
In reality, the constraints and needs of rural women demand added emphasis and attention to address their problems and needs. Formal and informal laws, customs, rules and regulations tend to discriminate against women across developing regions. These disadvantages impact both on female-headed households and on female members of male-headed households. In the former instance, discrimination through traditional legislation and socio-cultural customs can impose severe constraints on the capacity of such households to access or maintain land. In the case of the latter, attention needs to be directed at the intra-household division of activities, labour and land utilization strategies.
Too often, research, policies and programmes have failed to examine the differing experiences of men and women within the household. These differences can have e substantial impact on the ability of households to respond to demographic change. In many parts of sub-Saharan Africa, for example, women are largely responsible for household food security. Similarly, in many instances, women's access to land is determined by land allocation mechanisms that differ from those that determine men's access. In such cases, the ability of a family to support new family members is largely dependent on female access to land, and not family access to land. It is clear, however, that in these circumstances, gender disparities in land access and tenure security impact most on ate facto and de jure female-headed households. As a result, specific attention needs to be directed toward the experiences and constraints affecting these households.
The approach presented in this module involves several breaks with previous approaches to the land/demography interface. Firstly, it offers a broader, more holistic conceptual framework that focuses on structural constraints. Secondly, it eschews generalizations and avoids assumptions. instead, it embodies a call to respect local specificity and differences between experiences. According to this approach, relationships between population, land/tenure and gender are determined by to-car conditions and constraints. Each context, is therefore, different. Demographers, gender specialists and policy-makers in general need to be made aware of these differences and of the need to undertake local analyses of conditions and constraints in order to better understand the precise relationships between these variables in a given context. Having emphasized the need for local specificity, however, it is also possible to develop broad guidelines to help policy-makers design optimal tenure
arrangements for different types of households.
Linkages between gender, fertility/mortality and land tenure
1. Access to Land ^c
(^c Access to land referee to the institutional mechanisms (public and private) through which people can acquire the right to own, use and transfer land.)
Differing household demographic conditions demand differing land arrangements. Land arrangements can be divided up between physical and rights based characteristics. The former concern the size and degree of fragmentation, location and quality of a landholding. The latter refer to the rights, security, conditionality and legal status that is conferred on an individual (or collective) piece of land. One of the most important factors determining the relationship between households and land is a household's ability to acquire access to land. An analysis of fertility and mortality trends should, therefore, include a study of the constraints affecting the ability of different types of households to acquire access to land in order to make appropriate responses to demographic changed ^d
(^d Production, land use and other constraints should also be examined)
A series of typical general constraints inhibiting access to land can be identified:
- legal conditions
- transaction costs
- credit savings
- location
- income
- land prices
Each of these generic constraints assumes a particular form and relevance according to specific conditions in different regions, socio-cultural and socio-economic contexts and as a result of the social, cultural, economic, political, production and demographic conditions of individual households. It is, therefore, not possible to make generalizations regarding the precise content and impact of these constraints apart from providing broad guidelines. Furthermore, as land access issues throughout most developing regions are characterized by high levels of gender inequality, additional emphasis will be placed on this issue.
Legal conditions: rules, regulations and customs
Every household decision to acquire additional land is governed by a set of rules and regulations. These may consist of national and/or local laws, customs or policy conditions. Each of these, however, imposes a distinct conditionality on the capacity of a household to gain access to land. It is essential, therefore, that the full range of legal, customary and policy conditions that affect access to land is analyzed in order to determine the differential levels of access afforded to different types of rural households, also broken down by gender. It is important to bear in mind that both modern and traditional laws tend to be interpreted in favour of male ownership and control and that in some cases, laws may bar women from acquiring or disposing of land without their husbands' consent. The impact on female-headed households can be severe: in the case of sub-Saharan Africa, for instance, widows may be forced to abandon the land altogether and return to their parents'
village.
Transaction costs
Institutional procedures of acquiring land often involve transaction costs (i.e. registration fees) which may be prohibitively high for resource-poor farm households. Moreover, as women tend to have lower incomes than men, they may be less likely to afford the cost of transaction fees.
Credit/Savings
Many farm households do not have access to credit, as they do not have the collateral -- usually land title or cattle -- required for agricultural loans. The resulting vicious circle -- without land farmers cannot get credit and without credit they cannot acquire land -- often means that high fertility may be among the few alternatives available for these households to improve their tenure status. Socio-cultural constraints and stereotypes of non-creditworthiness tend to preclude women from obtaining access to many formal sources of credit, like banks, cooperatives and credit unions. An analysis of credit schemes in Kenya, Malawi, Sierra Leone, Zambia and Zimbabwe found that, by and large, women had received less than 10% of the credit directed to smallholders and 1% of the total credit to agriculture.^2
Location
Poor farmers often have fragmented plots of dispersed or remote land. As a result, their labour productivity is reduced while their workload is increased (they often require more time to transport tools, inputs and harvested produce from one plot to another and may spend more time commuting). These conditions increase the need for additional labour and may therefore encourage men and women to have more children. Women tend to have even more marginal and remote land than men, and in many cases, their land is less fertile.
Income
A household's ability to acquire land is largely dependent on the combined income of its members (on- and off-farm income and remittances). Many farm households often do not have the income required to purchase land without credit. A large number of children is often perceived as one means with which to increase source of income within a family and thus be in a better position to acquire land. Women tend to have substantially lower incomes than men, as they engage in unpaid on-farm and domestic labour or informal sector activities which yield meager earnings.
Land prices
The price of land is often prohibitively expensive for many rural households, and particularly for female-headed households, which are often also denied credit. The response of resource-poor families may well be to opt for a large family in the hope that this may increase family income and therefore improved the ability of the household to acquire land.
Gender disparities in access to land
Disparities in male/female access to land are virtually universal. In Latin America, men and women do not have equal access to land even in those countries where legislation has removed gender barriers to land ownership.^3 In this region, as well as in the Caribbean, women's access to land and to other property generally takes place through a male relative.
Like the- gender division of labour, the gender division of: private property is also regarded as natural and, therefore, not to be questioned. Women's effective exclusion from the possession and control of land is largely the basis of their subordination and dependence on men in rural India.
Source. G. Kelkar, "Violence Against Women in India" Bangkok, Asian Institute of Technology, Gender-Studies- Occasional-Paper 1, 1992, p. 16
In most of (patrilineal) Africa, the usufruct right to land prevails and customary land use practices often determine access to land in terms of use rights or ownership. Women are essentially temporary custodians of land passing from father to male heir, even though they may be de facto heads of household. As unpaid labourers on their husbands' land, while also cultivating separate plots in their own right, African women usually lose the rights to land following the death of their spouse^4. Widows and divorced women have virtually no tenure or inheritance rights with which to ensure food security for themselves or their children (it is only through their male children, or male relatives from their husband's lineage that women have land tenure rights).^5
Socio-economic and socio-cultural norms and institutional arrangements accentuate women's inequality of access to land, thereby indirectly encouraging high fertility. For instance, the fact that land title and land tenure tend to be vested in men may be a legal condition, but it also reflects socio-cultural tradition. In indict, daughters usually waive their land rights in favour of their brothers, to avoid being denounced as "selfish," and risk being alienated from their natal families.^6 This often results in social pressure for women to bear as many sons as possible, as this can be their only means of security of access to land. In the Middle East, women rarely own land, and when they do, the land is often controlled or managed by male relatives until marriage, after which the titles are transferred directly to their sons.^7
Even when women have user rights, they have limited rights over the fructus of their labour. As a result, their restricted bargaining power over the use of the fructus is not likely to be reflected in decisions regarding the education of girl children, known to delay age at marriage and childbearing, thereby reducing fertility and mortality.
2. Security of Tenure ^e
(^e Security of tenure refers to the processes by which rights (and their value) are protected.)
Figure 2: Inheritance patterns of land in India - Inheritance of Land - India (based on 145 Indian communities)
Source FAO, Most Farmers in India are Women, 1991, p. 16.
Another important factor determining the relationship between rural households and land is security of tenure, or the ability of men and women to maintain the rights and conditions that permit secure use of the land. Security of tenure is to a large extent a social contract through which the community bestows to an individual or household the right to cultivate land. It is a critical socio-economic and psychological right granted to individual men and women or to groups under different forms of land tenure. Security of tenure allows individuals or groups to reap the benefits of their labour and ensures that their children have future control over the land. An analysis of fertility and mortality trends should, therefore, include a review of tine constraints (including gender) that affect the ability of different types of the households to maintain use rights in order to make appropriate responses to demographic change. Security of tenure is especially Important to women,
given their lower socio-economic status end limited access to productive resources and services, as it affects both their productive and reproductive lives. Constraints to security of tenure are linked to a variety of factors, including land ownership, use, regularization (including demarcation and adjudication), among others.
Ownership
Demographers have focused primarily on one aspect of security of tenure -- lend ownership -- and its interface with fertility, end have established a negative relationship between ownership ^f end family size. It has been argued the; ownership tends to reduce fertility by providing an alternative means of security in old age, thus substituting for children's support.
(^f According to demographers. land ownership, includes all legal and institutional arrangements that specify how land is to be used and how produce from the land is to be distributed." See C. S. Stokes and W. A. Schutjer, "Access to Land and Fertility in Developing Countries," in Rural Development and Human Fertility, op. cit., p. 197. According to the FAO Land Tenure and Agrarian Settlement Service, ownership refers to the collection of rights held over land Institutions (legal and otherwise) are concerned with how rights are owned, accessed and transferred.)
According to demographers, research in the Philippines and India has shown that land owners have smaller families than tenants.^8 A 1978 FAO study on Population and Socio-Economic Change in 18th and 19th century Hungary found that agricultural producers who did not own land had nothing to lose by having a large number of children, while farmers who owned land and who therefore had much to lose from subdividing the land for their children had lower rates of fertility.^9 It has also been argued that the total effect of land ownership is to reduce fertility through its influence on female education and village-level traditionalism.^10 However, ownership of land per se is only one element of security of tenure and does not necessarily guarantee use rights.
Land use
In many developing countries, security of tenure is guaranteed by the utilization of land. As long as a farmer cultivates the land, he/she enjoys security of tenure. However, under external pressures (population growth, competition for resources for instance on land that has the potential for irrigation), use rights can be eroded. Women tend to be among the first to lose use rights. Polygamy and high fertility (i.e. in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa), besides being factors related to labour requirements, are among the demographic mechanisms that have been devised by some societies to ensure land use rights.
Land and regularization (including demarcation of parcels and adjudication)
Demarcation of parcels refers to the physical identification and recording of specific plots that facilitates the resolution of ownership and/or border disputes. It is also a vital precondition for the development of land cadastres and record systems. The demarcation of parcels is a critical element of tenure security, without which, under certain conditions, land titling may become meaningless.^g While demarcation of parcels is prevalent in many parts of Asia and Latin America, this is not yet the case in Africa, except for urban peripheries where the value of the land increases as a result of its investment potential. However, the demarcation of parcels is gradually becoming a priority in Africa as well because of land shortage due to degradation, increasing population pressure, etc.
(^g For instance, in Nicaragua, over the past 40 years, succeeding governments distributed land titles to small farmers without first annulling old titles and without delimiting borders. These titles, instead of increasing security of tenure have created the opposite effect, aggravating land conflicts. This has fed to the emergence of a new type of "guerilla". movement, in the place of Sandinistas and anti-Sandinistas, fighting for security of tenure. The case of Nicaragua should be viewed in a historical perspective: until the end of the 1980s, the pressure on land was kept under control through various policies (the Somozistas and the Sandinistas exerted firm control on land allocation). When the new government took power, ushering a new economic order, the rush for more fertile land was immediate and only at that moment did the problem of legal delimitation of borders become an issue.)
It has been argued that insecurity of tenure does not stem from indigenous systems themselves, but from external factors or pressures which do not take into account the structure and operation of existing tenure systems and their socioeconomic impact.^11 Traditional land tenure systems are often unable to absorb outside pressures such as population pressure on land, war and civil conflict, drought, famine, environmental degradation, environmental- and conflict-induced refugees, the introduction of new technologies and cash crops, and government intervention. In such cases, insecurity of tenure and land tenure conflicts may result. In Kenya, public intervention led to increased tenure insecurity: the land titling programme failed to achieve its goals and security of tenure was further eroded because the formal registration system did not replace the indigenous one, as it was attempted without popular participation and therefore without due consideration of local traditions
and norms.^12
The implications of security of tenure become particularly relevant when external pressures menace this security. As seen in Figure 3, security of tenure is threatened when the population/arable land equation reaches a certain level, or threshold, beyond which it may lead to land conflicts. A single threshold would apply for a certain type of production system as the minimum surface required to ensure the survival of a family. When the population increases at a rate that exceeds the capacity of the production system to adjust in order to increase its productivity -- passing from line A to B -- the surface per capita will fall below this line or threshold. From that point -- or point C -- it can be argued that there emerges a problem of security of tenure as a result of population pressure on land affecting the existing system.
Figure 3: The Interface Between Land and Population
Gender disparities in security of tenure
Even when women have access to land, their security of tenure is often precarious. Under customary law, men and women usually have clearly defined rights to land, trees and water as well as usufruct rights, bestowed on them by the community elders. Women thus retain control over the land they use and its products.^13 Traditional communal rights are in many regions being replaced by land tenure systems based on exclusive use, ownership and titling which tend to erode the rights of vulnerable groups, including women and minority, ethnic or nomadic groups. For instance, in Jamaica, in 1954, 56% of farms were owned by men, but by 1961 the figure had increased to 76%. Women's inequality of access to land was a result of the increase in purchase of legal titles, in line with the British legal tradition, that linked the use of the land with individual property. It also stemmed from the fact that land settlement schemes granted resources mainly to male heads of household, who were
perceived to be the ones responsible for the sustenance of their family.^14 This ignored the fact that in many parts of the world it in fact the women farmers who are largely responsible for food production and security.
Agricultural transformation is another factor contributing to the erosion of women's security of tenure. For instance, in the case of the Nair community in Kerala, India, the commercialization of agriculture and the subsequent demand for land eroded women's traditional land rights.^15 Another generic example is the substitution of food crops with cash crops. Before the introduction of cash crops, women, who usually produce the bulk of food crops, are traditionally entitled to land. Once cash crops are introduced, however, the same right to land with high potential is claimed by the men who grow them. As cash crops are perceived to be more profitable than food crops, competition for land use rights results between men and women, which can lead to a progressive marginalization of women farmers formerly cultivating fertile land. Thus, combining factors like agricultural transformation with population growth can change the interface between gender, land and population (see
Figure 3).
When security of tenure is menaced, women tend to be among the first groups to lose use rights. This may contribute to high fertility; families may perceive having a large number of children (with preference for sons) as a rational strategy through which to improve food and tenure security and ensure old-age support. The same strategy has been noted where women will strive for a large family to overcome the labour constraints induced by disabled husbands. However, it should be noted that this often takes place at the expense of sustainability and of future generations.
3. Sustainability
A third important factor determining the relationship between rural households and land is sustainability. This refers to the capacity of a farm household to utilize and manage land in a rational manner that sustains and enhances the land's productive potential, according to short-, medium- or long-term economic, social, cultural and environmental requirements. Similarly, it refers to the ability of the land or tenure condition to support any changes in land use and in agricultural practices that may arise owing to demographic adjustments. Sustainability, therefore, refers to the ability of a household to enjoy the benefits of production without jeopardizing future use of the land by those or other households.
Any analysis of fertility and mortality trends should thus begin with a study of the constraints that affect the ability of households to use land sustainably in order to make appropriate responses to demographic changes. Constraints inhibiting sustainability include a wide range of factors from size of landholding and quality of land to land management, water management and other factors. Examples of how size of landholding and quality of land can adversely affect sustainability are provided below.
Size of landholding
According to demographers, the size of landholding influences fertility by altering the cost-benefit of the value of additional children. Demographic studies in India, Bangladesh, Iran, Thailand, the Philippines and other developing countries have shown that larger landholdings may encourage greater fertility to accommodate increased labour requirements.^16
More importantly perhaps, population pressure on land, an urgent problem in many developing countries, is an important constraint to sustainability and security of tenure. Rwanda, Somalia, Kenya, Burundi, Lesotho and Malawi are just a few countries which will be able to feed less than half their populations from their own land (even using high levels of farm inputs), if current trends of pressure on land continue. According to the State of the World's Population 1990, "in Rwanda, the average smallholder farmed a mere 1.2 hectares in 1984. With a total fertility rate of more than 8-children per woman, half of them male, each son would receive on average around 0.3 hectares at age of marriage. The grandsons, at projected fertility rates, would receive less than 0.1 hectares each, some time around the year 2040. Thus, in only 60 years, the size of the average landholding would have dwindled by more than 90% because of population growth.^17 Obviously, such a projection is likely
to result in out-migration once the land cannot assure self-sufficiency and survival.
When access to land per capita decreases, sustainability and security of tenure also decrease (see Figure 3). In fact, sustainability and security of tenure are substantially determined by the population/asset equation.
sustainability and security of tenure = assets (land, livestock, etc)/population
When sustainability and security of tenure are threatened as a result of land shortage, they may lead to land tenure conflicts which may even contribute, through exacerbating other conflicts (ethnic, etc.), to the outbreak of war (a case in point is Rwanda), or to migration, or both.
The absence of evidence pointing towards farm households having smaller families because of land shortage indicates that the value of children still lies in their l numbers to provide the labour force at home and the fields, and in the hope that at least some will find paid employment that will subsidize their parents' agricultural income. The fact that no positive relationship has been established between fertility levels and the growing demand for land (to augment existing holdings in order to cater for a growing family and/or to grow surplus crops for sale) is also indicative of the growing burden of farm tasks on women, and consequently of their growing need for child labour. High rates of absenteeism from school during the peak agricultural season, as well as primary school drop-out rates are one proof in this respect.^18
Quality of land
A 1995 FAO report on Women, Agriculture and Rural Development covering nine countries in sub-Saharan Africa reports that women's landholdings tend to be less fertile than men's.^19 This translates into greater labour requirements and lower productivity, which, in turn, put pressure on families to find alternative means of improving their tenure conditions, such as having more children.
Gender disparities in sustainability
A 1994 World Bank study on improving the productivity of women farmers in sub-Saharan Africa argues that over the past thirty years, efforts to improve women's rights to land have been neutralized as a result of growing population pressure on increasingly depleted land and the fact that as the quality of the land deteriorates, women are managing smaller plots.^20 Depleted land, small, unsustainable plots and lack of tenure security often mean that women farmers have little incentive to invest in their land and to adopt new technologies and environmentally-sound agricultural practices. In view of these seemingly insurmountable constraints, agricultural extension workers are reluctant to work with women farmers, thereby further constraining women's productivity and income. As mentioned earlier, in the case of sub-Saharan Africa, where women are largely responsible for household food security, the question of sustainability largely falls upon the women (rather than the family);
however, because of their limited rights and voice, women are often also the ones most ill-equipped to respond to changes in land or tenure conditions.
Female-headed farm households
Gender disparities in land access, tenure security and sustainability impact most on female-headed farm households. These tend to be poorer and more disadvantaged than households headed by men. In Bangladesh, many female heads of household are either landless or have small, marginal holdings. In Guatemala and Et Salvador, many of the farms managed by women are less than a half hectare. In Botswana, female headed farm households tend to work less land, have access to less farm equipment, and own fewer cattle and small stock than male-headed households.^21
Women own less land than men in all developed and developing regions (see Table 1) and data on land disaggregated by gender are rare. In a 1995 FAO report on Women, Agriculture and Rural Development covering nine countries in sub-Saharan Africa, five were not able to provide gender-disaggregated data on land ownership and use (see Table 2). Female land ownership ranged between a low of 3% in Zimbabwe in the small-scale commercial sector to a high of 25% in the Congo and Tanzania. Women's holdings ranged from one-half the size of male holdings in Morocco to approximately 72% of the size of male holdings in Tanzania. In the Congo, nearly 60% of women cultivate less than 1 hectare of land and in Zimbabwe 86% of the women-headed households have less than the sample mean arable land holding. ^22
Table 1: Percentage of Ownership of Cultivated Land by Women Farmers in Thailand, Trinidad, Nigeria, Syria
Land Ownership
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Personally owned
Husband's land
Gift from husband
Family land
Government land
Communal land
Squatted land
Rented land
Source: Manju Dutta Das, Improving the Relevance and Effectiveness of Agricultural Extension Activities for Women farmers, FAO, 1995, p. 37.
Table 2: Women, Land Ownership & Average Size of Holdings in sub-Saharan Africa
Country
Women's Land Holdings as % of Total Agricultural Holdings
Average She of Holdings (Hectares)
Women's
Men's
Benin
Congo
Morocco
Tanzania
Zimbabwe
Small-scale commercial sector: 3
Large-scale commercial
Source: Women. Agriculture and Rural Development. A Synthesis Report of the Africa Region in preparation of the fourth World Conference on Women, FAO, 1995, p. 23.
Given the fact that gender disparities in land access, tenure security and sustainability affect female-headed households more severely than other households, special attention needs to be directed at the experiences, constraints and needs of these households in agricultural and population policies and programmed.
Main policy issues and research needs
Land tenure is one of many variables indirectly influencing rural fertility and mortality. Linkages between gender, fertility/mortality and land tenure are the result of the interplay of a host of diverse factors (legal, socio-economic, socio-cultural, etc.). Thus, it is not land tenure per se which determines fertility and mortality trends, but the fact that different forms of tenure can limit or increase men's and women's choices, thereby influencing fertility/mortality. Thus, improving land tenure systems is not likely to directly affect fertility/mortality but can create a favourable environment for such change, provided that other conditions are also met. As seen above, children can contribute to reinforcing certain dimensions of security of tenure. High fertility can also enhance security of tenure through migration and remittances. But a change in land tenure conditions does not lead directly to a change in household size.
Land reform in Costs Rica in the 1970s'was viewed- as demeans of stemming rural-to-urban migration. However, an unintended effect. of land reform :was- to stimulate fertility and rural: population. growth. Thus, the failure to evaluate and coordinate public policies led to an unintended and undesirable consequence.
Source M. Seligson. "Public-Policies in Conflict: Land Reform and: Family Planning in Costa-Rica", cited in C. S. Stokes: -and: W. A. Schutjer, "A Cautionary Note on Public Policies :in Conflicts:. Land-Reform. And Human Fertility in Rural Egypt,. Comparative Politics, vol. 16, 1983 p.97.
(^4 Conflict between land reform & population policies in Costa Rica)
Access to land, security of land tenure and sustainability are key elements in the gender, land tenure - fertility/mortality interface. Constraints relating to access, tenure security and sustainability impede the improvement of men's and women's productivity and socio-economic status and are in part responsible for shaping household demographic strategies. Women cannot assume responsibility over their reproductive rights until they have economic security. Achieving economic security will in part necessitate innovations in land tenure systems to support and protect the land rights of farm women. In other words, fertility/mortality patterns are unlikely to change unless women farmers are also supported through land tenure, legal and institutional reforms (beyond ownership) as well as changes in the socio-cultural environment. Conversely, gender disparities with regard to land access, security and sustainability are likely to contribute to unintended demographic responses such
as high fertility and mortality and migration.
A given demographic situation has an optimal land tenure arrangement and vice versa. In view of the constant changes in demographic and, to a lesser extent, land tenure conditions, there is a need for continuous adjustment between the two (land tenure arrangements and demographic responses). Appropriate policy interventions can help adjust these variables. To this effect, the following issues need to be addressed and researched:
1. There is a need to prepare guidelines for policy responses to the interface between land/tenure, gender and fertility/mortality. While, as mentioned above, the specificity of each case should not be overlooked, a checklist based on the framework outlined above could help design appropriate policy responses to demographic conditions, which can then be tailored to each particular context. The guidelines would address questions such as: How do different types of tenure arrangements affect different types of farm households (male-headed households, female-headed households, etc.) and what are the implications for agricultural and population policies? What type of tenure arrangements is optimal for different types of family households and different size households, to ensure sustainable household production? For instance, what type of tenure arrangements would assist large, medium and small female-headed households?
2. Political and economic liberalization, their effects on agricultural production and impact on tenure systems need to be investigated along with the demographic responses they are likely to trigger.
3. The need to introduce institutional mechanisms to provide security of tenure to men and women farmers merits some attention. The greater the intensification of land use, the more institutional arrangements may be needed to ensure security of tenure for men and women farmers.
4. Ways in which land tenure innovations can help to support women's access to land and security of tenure, thereby expanding their choices so that they are in a better position to manage their fertility need to be further explored. This is likely to necessitate legal, institutional and socio-cultural supportive measures to assist in the practical implementation and enforcement of such innovations.
5. The gender differentials of the intra-household division of labour and land utilisation strategies need to be researched along with their impact on the ability of farm households to respond to demographic change.
6. Finally, it may be worth re-examining whether land ownership by women is as critical a gender issue as has widely been assumed. In other words, are there other aspects of security of tenure as important, or possibly more important, than ownership, and if so, how can these be addressed? How feasible a policy goal is land ownership for women in developing countries, given the complex legal and socio-cultural constraints involved? How can other aspects of women's security of tenure be improved?
Endnotes
1. Arthur DeVany and Nicholas Sanchez, "Land Tenure Structures and Fertility in Mexico," in Schutjer, Stokes and Cornwell, "Relationships Among Land, Tenancy and Fertility: A Study of Philippine Barrios," 1981, p.85.
2 FAO, A fairer Future for Rural Women, 1995.
3. FAO, The Legal Status of Rural Women in Nineteen Latin American Countries, 1994, p. 44.
4. Susan Bullock, Women and Work. Women and World Development Series, London: Zed Publications. 1993, p. 45.
5. FAO/UNFPA, "Case Study on Population, Status of Women in Rural Development in Phamong District. Lesotho,' in Koran Roca, Women in Agricultural Development, Paper No. S: Women and Population in Agricultural and Rural Development in Sub-Saharan Africa, FAO, 1991, p. 10.
6. Govind Kelkar, Violence Against Women in India Perspectives and Strategies, Bangkok, Asian Institute of Technology 1992, Gender Studies Occasional Paper 1, p. 14
7. FAO, Women, Agriculture and Rural Development: A Synthesis Report of the Near East Region, prepared for the Fourth World Conference on Women and the Regional Plan of Action for Women in Agriculture in the Near East, 1995, p. 19.
8. C. S. Stokes and W. A. Shutjer, "A Cautionary Note on Public Policies in Conflict:-Land Reform and Human Fertility in Upper Egypt,. Comparative Politics, vol. 16, No. 1, 1983, p. 98.
9. Rudolf Andorka, Population and Socio-Economic Chance in Peasant Societies: The Historical Record of Hungary: 1700 to the Present, FAO, 1978, p. 31.
10. W. A. Shutjer, C. S. Stokes and Gretchen Cornwell, "Relationships Among Land, Tenancy and Fertility: A Study of Philippine Barrios,. 1981, p. 95.
11. Lars-Erik 8irgegard, "Natural Resource Tenure: A Review of Issues and Experiences with Emphasis on Sub-Saharan Africa,. Rural Development Studies. No. 31, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, International Rural Development Centre, Uppsala, 1993, cited in Patricia Parera, Rural Women's Access to Land,- IFAD Working Paper, June 1994, p.1-6.
12. ibid.
13. Parera, 1994, op. cit.. p.1-3.
14. "Rural Women of Latin America and the Caribbean," FAO, 1993, p. 19.
15. FAO, Most farmers in India are Women, June 1991, p. 16.
16. Stokes and Schutjer, 1983, op. cit. p. 98.
17. Nafis Sadik, The State of the Worlds Population 1990, p. 9, cited in Zoran Roca, 1991, op cit., p. 10
18. Roca, FAO, 1991, op. cit p. 10.
19. FAO, Women, Agriculture and Rural Development: A Svnthesis Report of the Africa Region, prepared for the Fourth World Conference on Women, 1995, p. 23.
20. World Bank, Raising the Productivity of Women Farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa, Discussion Paper #230. 1994.
21. All examples are from Katrine A. Saito and Daphne Spurling, Developing Agricultural Extension for Women Farmers, World Bank Discussion Paper, No. 156, 1992, p. 15.
22. FAO, Women. Agriculture and Rural Development: A Synthesis Report of the Africa Region, 1995, op. cit.. p. 24.
<section>3</section>
Module III: Gender, rural fertility/mortality & farming systems
The agricultural gender division of labour
Linkages between fertility, mortality and farming systems and their implications
Main issues and research needs
Endnotes
Module III: Gender, rural fertility/mortality & farming systems
(Topouzis/du Guerny, SDWP, November 1995)
What have Gender and Rural Fertility/ Mortality to do with Farming Systems? ^a
(^a A farming system is a group of farm households operating in a more or less homogeneous agro-ecological setting that have similar socioeconomic characteristics and comparable resource endowments as well as similar constraints and opportunities for development.
Acknowledgements: This module is the product of a collaborative effort between the Population Programme Service (SDWP) and the Farm Management and Production Economics Service (AGSP). Special thanks are due to Karl Friedrich and Horst Wattenbach who devoted much of their time and contributed significantly to the module and to Tim Aldington, Alain Marcoux and Heiko Bammann for their comments.)
Fertility and, to some extent, mortality, levels and trends in rural populations have traditionally been analyzed in terms of socio-cultural and economic variables, including the value of children, age at marriage, malnutrition, prolonged breast feeding, education, employment, and the status of women. In the past decade, however, institutional factors and gender relations have clan hewn recognized to influence fertility and mortality patterns. This module focuses on the gender dimension of the linkages between fertility, mortality and farming systems, with emphasis on sub-Saharan Africa. In particular, the following questions are addressed: What are the implications of fertility and mortality on the dynamics of farming systems? What are the demographic implications of changes in farming systems? How can policy interventions create a desirable synergy between evolving farming systems and population variable?
About 80% of African women live and work in rural areas under conditions that support and sustain high fertility and where the expected economic contributions of children is substantial. In fact, sub-Saharan Africa exhibits the highest rates of economic activity and fertility and the highest levels of maternal and child mortality in the world.
Source: Aderanti Adepoju and Christine Oppong (eds.) Gender, Work and Population in Sub-Saharan Africa, Geneva: ILO, 1994, pp. 1, 17
(^1 Fertility and Mortality in sub-Saharan Africa)
The objective of this module is to stimulate discussion among farming systems, gender and population specialists in order to: a) identify the main policy issues emerging from the interface between gender, rural fertility/mortality and farming systems; b) indicate what research is needed to address these issues; and c) define possible areas and/or points of intervention for rural development and population programmes and policies, given existing knowledge.
"What is not Counted is Usually not Noticed" J.K. Galbraith
No statistically observable relationship has been found between different type; of agricultural work and fertility to date in sub-Saharan Africa.^1 This has been attributed in part to difficulties in defining and measuring women's economic activity, as a substantial part of women's farming remains officially undocumented. Women's contributions that have most suffered from neglect and bias include 'informal sector activities,' 'home-based production,' and work on 'family farms.' Another problem is that different countries define and measure women's work in diverse ways.^2 Therefore, it is not surprising that demographic data linked to information on female or male economic activities are lacking or based on estimates. ^b
(^b No country in Africa has complete vital statistics and a published national census within ten years of a continuous population register, according to Oppong. The sources of demographic data available include censuses, survey and administrative records. Demographic surveys include the World Fertility Surveys (which is weak on women's economic activity rates), the Westinghouse Demographic and Health Surveys fin which only Ghana had a module on women's economic activity); surveys undertaken in the context of the African Household Survey Capability Programmer and socio-economic surveys with demographic components, such as the Living Standards Measurement Study of the World Bank.)
The agricultural gender division of labour
Although gender-disaggregated data on production is essential to making women's contribution visible and to identifying gender-specific needs and constraints, it is not the "panacea for improving the visibility of women; it only uncovers the tip of the iceberg."^3 Below that lie conceptual and methodological problems that are often reflected in gender stereotypes which have a marked impact on agricultural and rural development policies and programmes. Such stereotypes are themselves a manifestation of gender bias and of the absence of gender analysis. For example, it is commonly assumed that men cultivate cash crops while women grow food crops; and that women are subsistence farmers while men are commercial farmers. Official statistics from a number of countries, however, reveal a different picture: in Ghana, for instance, one-third of farmers producing cash crops like cocoa, rice and sugar cane, and one-quarter of farmers producing tobacco, coconut and oil palm are women.^4
Gender-disaggregated data alone do not reveal the complexity of gender dynamics, inter-relationships, interests, responsibilities and decision-making processes within the farm household. As many development projects are designed without the participation of women beneficiaries, their planned role therein is often not one they are able or willing to undertake. This raises the question of whether gender roles, needs, constraints and economic decision-making within the household have been adequately understood.^5
Gender-disaggregated data and gender analysis of the farm household system need to be bolstered by a corresponding allocation of resources and by participatory methodologies to ensure female involvement in policies and programmes. A review of agricultural projects funded by USAID showed that projects that delivered resources to women according to their role in the farming system were more likely to succeed than projects in which women did not receive resources. Even if a mainstream project was concerned with activities that were primarily women's responsibility, women's participation was low unless delivery systems explicitly earmarked resources or services to women.^6 Gender analysis in baseline situations did not automatically guarantee that female farmers would participate, even when there was no formal barrier to their participation. Socio-cultural norms, traditions and stereotypes, often related to female fertility and reproduction can be formidable obstacles to women's
involvement in programmes and projects.
Linkages between fertility, mortality and farming systems and their implications
a) The Interface between Gender, Farming Systems and Demographic Change
Farming systems to a large extent depend on complex inter-relationships between men's and women's labour. At the center of these inter-relationships, however, lies an asymmetry o, male and female interests, duties, obligations and contributions within the Arm-household. More specifically, the extent to which activities, rights and decision-making are undertaken jointly or separately is relevant to almost all aspects or ramify life, including property ownership and management, production and management of produce. domestic tasks try etc.^7
Five main gender patterns of farm management have been identified: separate enterprises, separate tasks, shared tasks, separate fields, and women-owned or women-managed farms. While men, women and children work to the same degree during the peak or harvest period, women and children's work is predominant in the off-season. In addition, men's labour input is most critical for a more narrow range of farming activities (especially land clearing and herding livestock), or else it is performed once yearly (construction of dwelling units, thatching huts and granaries). In contrast, women's labour input is constant throughout the year, encompassing a wide range of labour intensive, often tedious, tasks. Women's labour is also characterized by high fragmentation in terms of time.
When farm and domestic tasks are combined, women's working days are considerably longer than men's. In Asia, the Pacific and in Africa, women average 12 to 13 hours more work a week than men. In the Philippines, one study found that when housework and childcare were taken into account, the average hours worked per week by women reached 70, compared to 57 for men. In Latin America and the Caribbean, women work 5.6 more hours a week than men.^8
TABLE 1: Women in most regions as much or more time working than men when unpaid housework is taken into account
Note: Numbers in parentheses refer to the number of studies in each region.
Source: Data are averages from a small number of studies in each region, 1975/88, compiled by the Statistical Office of the United Nations Secretariat.
Farming systems cannot be understood without taking into account the evolving and complex family roles and relationships which underpin them and the competing demands made upon women's time and energy resulting frown their productive and reproductive roles.^9 In sub-Saharan Africa, and in other developing regions, a large proportion of economic activity takes place in familial contexts (family-based enterprises) and most productive resources are in the control of kin. This is especially the case for women who are primarily involved in family or home-based economic activities, like food production, processing and distribution. ^10
Working with accurate labour/production profiles at the farm-household level and understanding intra-household dynamics is critical to identifying and addressing male and female roles and constraints as well as to assessing intra-household dynamics. This, in turn, is critical for effective policy-making and programme planning.
Key concepts underlying the collection and analysis of data for economic and demographic surveys, like 'household,' 'parenthood' and 'marriage,' have often been poorly conceived and operationalised, thereby perpetuating stereotypes. For instance, as marriage in parts of Africa is potentially polygamous, female-headed households (not resulting from male out-migration) are common (see Module I)^11. This may considerably complicate the definition of the farm household as an analytical unit. According to Adepoju and Oppong, "women's work has frequently been so inadequately recorded that it is virtually impossible to make satisfactory correlation's between variations in women's economic activities and demographic evidence regarding differences and changes in birth and death rates."^12
At the micro level, assumptions about the nature of family systems, particularly in the case of Africa, are based on the stereotype of the nuclear family unit (husband, wife and children). According to this stereotype, the nuclear or conjugal family is synonymous with the domestic group and simultaneously forms the unit for economic and demographic decision-making and related activities. For example, erroneous assumptions have been made that women's work is incompatible with high fertility and that women as wives are primarily unpaid family workers whose economic interests coincide with those of their husbands.^13
The following working conceptual framework outlines some linkages between division of labour by gender and age, farming systems and household demographic characteristics and strategies. The framework assumes that families optimize the mix of these variables and that there is a rationale for existing patterns between them. Changes in farming systems tend to be more rapid than changes in the division of labour and the household demographic characteristics and strategies. This can cause dysfunction's in the last two that can be systemic, triggering, in turn, changes in the farming system itself.
In short, the farming system, farm household labour and demographic profiles are linked in such a way that changes in one set of variables has direct or indirect consequences on the other two. To ensure that changes in farming systems are synergistic with changes in the labour profile and that they do not result in undesirable changes in demographic variables, it is important to look at the three sets of factors as forming an inter-dependent system. In case of dysfunction, what needs to be considered is the new optimal mix between farming system, labour profile and household demographic factors and which of these factors need to be changed through appropriate policies.
FIGURE 1: Household Labour Profile, Farming System and Demographic Profile
Development interventions have often had adverse consequences on rural women's socio-economic status and productive/reproductive roles largely because the linkages between farming systems, labour profiles, and population over time have not been systematically taken into account. Such interventions include:
- Changes in cropping patterns or crop mix, emphasizing cash crops for export at the expense of subsistence crops.
- New technologies whose introduction displaces more women than men farmers, and whose use by men only-widens the productivity gap between women and men. Some production technologies increase the labour burden on women farmers without increasing their share of or control over farm revenue.
- Changes in land access, from communal ownership in which women had secure access to land to private property in which only male heads of household can hold title.
- Agricultural extension services, credit, inputs, technical assistance, etc. which tend to be targetted to men only, thereby widening the male/female productivity gap, marginalizing women even further.
By overlooking the demographic implications of changing cropping patterns and new technologies and by not ensuring women's access to services, many development interventions have either resulted in unchanging high fertility (and mortality) levels, or may even have contributed to increased fertility, as women try to compensate for their increase in workload, displacement or marginalization by having more children.
b) Labour Bottlenecks and Fertility/Mortality
It has been shown that seasonally of labour demands on time and energy can have an adverse effect on women's ability to cope with the demands of farm work, pregnancy or lactation.^14 In Eastern Uganda, women's farming work peaks during the rainy season (June-July and January).
"It is in this period that a family must acquire most of its food requirements until the next rainy season. Agricultural activities are therefore at their peak... Yet the rainy season is a period when most women are pregnant, having conceived in the slack period when there are many festivities. But they cannot sit and rest as any medical personnel would advise. They must perform all other duties as usual, that is household duties, food production and processing plus providing all these services essential for the family. The demand made on women's time and energy is too high to match their energy intake. This is because at that hectic time, particularly just before the harvest, food is always scarce in rural areas."^15
A 1994 study on the influence of reproductive status on rural central Kenyan women's time use has shown that the demands of reproduction require Embu women to decrease the amount of time spent on subsistence agriculture, tending animals, commercial activities and housework. Agricultural and economic work activities were found to be particularly curtailed in the third trimester of pregnancy and the first period of breast feeding. Over the two-year cycle of pregnancy and breast feeding, women allocated approximately 53 eleven-hour work days less to subsistence agriculture and other work activities than women who were not pregnant or breast feeding. This labour loss can place considerable stress on Embu household food production and income-generation, it is argued, particularly among poor households.^16
One insight generated by this data is that agricultural development programmes need to ensure that they do not increase household labour demands to levels that cannot be met by women. The authors argue that "excessive direct demands on women's labour, or indirect demands due to changes in labour patterns of other household members may force women to work beyond what is physically good for them and their infants. This could force women to decrease the amount of time spent in agricultural programme activities to the extent that it could put those programmes at serious risk for failure."^17
Periods of strenuous farm labour, such as planting and weeding, have also been associated with low birth-weights, early weaning, and thus short birth intervals and pressures toward higher levels of both infant mortality and fertility. Weeding, done in the rainy season when diarrhea illness peaks is also the period when food stocks are lowest. Pregnant women have been known to lose weight and seasonally of birth weights has been recorded.^18 It has also been shown that women without a co-resident man to share tasks with, have shorter periods of breast feeding duration, indicating their increased economic constraint to work outside the home. Thus, breast feeding and weaning to some extent may affect family size by impacting on fertility and mortality.^19
TABLE 2: Comparison of the Number of Hours Devoted to Activities by Non-Pregnant Non-Lactating (NPNL) Women and Pregnant/Lactating Women Over a Two-Year Period
Hours per two-year period
Activity Category
Non-Pregnant Non-Lactating 24 months
Pregnant (9 months) & Lactating (15 months)
Difference
Child Care
Other work:
Animal Care
Commercial
Food preparation
Housework
Manufacture
Subsistence agriculture
Wild foods
Source: Derived from "The Influence of Reproductive Status on Rural Kenyan Women's Time Use," op. cit., 1994, p. 352.
c) Fertility, Agricultural Production and the Socio-Economic Value of Children
High fertility rates reflect the socio-economic value of children, particularly in rural areas^20 as well as high infant mortality rates. Children in developing countries contribute significantly to household labour: they assist in gathering and processing foods and in selling them in the market; they take care of animals; the girls help their mothers care for younger children and also carry water and fuelwood and help with the cooking; the boys help in irrigating, fishing and harvesting. Once they grow up, children are also expected to take care of their parents in old age.
As water and soil resources are depleted due to environmental degradation and women's agricultural responsibilities increase, the need for additional children becomes more important to compensate for the increased labour demands of the household. " (Children) provide desperately needed labour to assist in farm, home and market. They provide the links of kinship without which wives have no enduring rights in their marital homes or husband's assets, including land and thus security as well as economic status in old age. Without them conjugal links are tenuous and fragile. Without them daily laborious tasks cannot be completed. Without them a woman in virilocal marriage remains an outsider, marginal".^21
Table 3: Labour Profile by Age and Sex in Rajasthan, India
Time allocation (no. of hours per day) revealing segregation of activities by age and sex - Rajasthan
age
no. of
m
f
m
f
m
f
m
f
m
f
m
f
sample
ploughing digging
irrigation fields
harvesting
groundnut picking
vegetable picking
cutting grass from fields
weeding fields
total agriculture
husking, winnowing
parboiling grain husking
cattle/goat grazing
making cow-dung cakes
total allied
service
prod. of strawmats, ropes
selling goods (stationery, fish, grain)
manual labour
total non-agriculture
Cooking (grinding, cutting, etc)
sweeping washing clothes and utensils
fetching water
fetching fuel
total household, activities
schooling
playing children
time spent of child care
total schooling and child care
total include activities not listed
Source: Jain and Chand in Saradamoni (ed.), Women. Work and Society. 1985, cited in Most Farmers in India are Women, FAO, 1991, p. 6.
In Rajasthan, India, girls of 5-9 years contribute more than twice as much as boys in terms of agricultural activities, household chores and childcare and continue to contribute significantly more than men throughout their lives (see Table 3). In Africa, children under 13 years contribute around 113 of their father's labour input, less of their mothers.^22 Girls of 7 years of age contribute several hours of work each day pounding millet and spinning cotton. This increases to 4 1/2 hours at 9 years (including fetching water and washing the laundry), 6 1/2 hours at 11 years (including firewood porterage) and 7 1/2 hours at 13 years. At 15 years of age, a girl spends almost 10 hours a day in productive tasks. Against this, boys of 7 years average 1 1/2 hours, reach a peak of 6 hours at 13 years, and fail to 4 1/2 at 15 years.^23
In rural areas, the "net" value of children (children's present economic value plus anticipated support in old age, minus the cost to raise them) to their parents, and especially to women, is most often positive. This means that high fertility is a rational strategy. The larger the number of children, the greater the chances of a more efficient and timely execution of farm and domestic tasks.
The persistence of large families can be, in part, explained by the division of labour, labour force needs and access to land (which is discussed at length in Module II). This is especially true of subsistence agriculture ^c, where no major changes are being introduced (e.g. in technology, commercialization, etc.) that would reduce labour-intensive production systems.^24 New technologies, including mechanization, fertilisers, etc. can induce changes in farming systems, but may end up increasing further the need for women's and children's labour, especially in the off-season. There is no clear evidence yet of differentials in high fertility and large family sizes between areas with rural development projects and those without.^25
(^c The term "subsistence", as used here, does not indicate a minimum of food and shelter necessary to support life; and "subsistence production" is not used to signify "subsistence living." Small subsistence farms range from those which produce only just enough to meet the needs of domestic family consumption to those that sell about 50 per cent of their products (La-Anyane, S., The Agricultural/lndustry of Western Africa. Accra: Ghana Universities Press, 1988, p. 20).
Children's contributions in farming systems and the farm-household economy are not usually quantitatively defined and the implications of their contributions are not built-in related programme interventions. For instance, when children are in school during peak labour season, the women are left with an increased labour burden. Poor rural households may have to take children out of school in order to have enough labour on the farm and at home.
The implications of children being taken out of school are far-reaching: it has been found that education can increase agricultural productivity by augmenting the productivity of measured inputs and enabling farmers to respond more quickly to disequilibria. The social rates of return to education have been calculated at 25-40% for Malaysia, 14-25% for Thailand and 7-11% for South Korea.^26 It has also been found that girls are more likely to be taken out of school than boys. Research has demonstrated that young women who have had some education are more likely to have a fewer number of children. For instance, in Namibia, women with no education have a total fertility rate (TFR) of 6.6 children, those with less than 7 years of primary education have a TFR of 6.1, those with 7-8 years of primary education have a TFR of 5.2 and those with some secondary education have a TFR of 4.1.)^27
At present, the division of labour is analyzed in terms men's and women's contributions. This method, however, does not take into account the entire farm-household, which also comprises children, who, as shown above, contribute substantially to the household economy and the elderly. A more accurate picture of the farm household's labour profile and a better understanding of intra-household dynamics would emerge if the contributions of boys and girls were also included on the basis of person days for each on- and off-farm activity and household task.
d) Mortality and HIV/AIDS
Maternal and infant mortality are closely linked to childbirth and to women's productive role. In recent years, economic recession and structural adjustment and stabilization programmes have contributed to a decline in the health and nutritional status of women and infants. More urgently, however, the spread of HIVIAIDS is also contributing to a dramatic rise in adult, infant and child mortality in some sub-Saharan African and Asian countries. In Uganda, life expectancy is projected to decline, in part as a result of HIV/AIDS: in 1975-1980, life expectancy stood at 47 years; by 2,0002,005 it would have risen to over 54 years, but is now projected to fall to under 44 years -- 10 years less than originally projected. In Zambia and Zimbabwe, the decline in life expectancy could even be more dramatic: while in 1975-1980 it stood at about 49 and 54 years respectively, by 2,000-2,005 it is expected to drop to 46.5 and 51 years instead of 60 and 66 years (in the absence of
AIDS).^28
In the next three years, AIDS will cause more deaths in African children than either malaria or measles, according to UNICEF.^29 Similar effects are being evidenced in other countries in Africa: It has been estimated that three-quarters of the 11 million people infected with HIV in sub-Saharan Africa have yet to develop AIDS.^30 Parts of Asia are similarly expected to be significantly affected by the spread of the epidemic in the next decade.
Recent work by FAO in East Africa has shown that AIDS mortality is not only a medical and demographic concern but also an agricultural and more specifically, a farming systems concern, particularly in terms of the effects of AlDS-related mortality and morbidity on farming systems and rural livelihoods, the coping mechanisms adopted by rural communities and the types of intervention that can mitigate the adverse impact of the epidemic. Given the particularly important gender dimension of the disease, special attention needs to be placed on the impact of HIV/AIDS on farm women and on female-headed households. A brief summary of the findings of these studies and their implications is presented below.
Case Study on the Impact of HIV/AIDS-related Mortality on Farming Systems and Rural Families in East Africa: ^d
(^d The case studies are drawn from two FAO studies: (a) "The Effects of HIV/AIDS on Agricultural Production Systems and Rural Livelihoods in East Africa": In this study, multidisciplinary national research teams carried out HIV/AIDS impact studies in different farming systems of Uganda, Tanzania and Zambia, with emphasis on qualitative data gathering methods derived from rapid and participatory rural appraisal (RRA, PRA); and (b) "The Socio-Economic Impact of HIV/AIDS on Rural Families in Uganda. with an Emphasis on Youth": This study, conducted in six villages of Kabarole, Gulu and Tororo districts, used PRA/RRA to: assess the socio-economic impact of the disease on the rural household (household economy, health, education, etc.); identify risk factors contributing to the spread of HIV/AIDS among youth; and conduct a Knowledge-Attitude and Practice survey on HIV/AIDS among the youth. The field work was carried out as part of an ongoing agricultural extension project.)
The primary impact of HIV/AIDS-related mortality on agricultural production systems is loss of labour. Two of three farming systems examined in one FAO study on "The Effects of HIV/AIDS on Agricultural Production Systems and Rural Livelihoods in East Africa" were found to suffer from serious labour shortage, which in one of the villages was primarily caused by AlDS-related mortality. Some of the effects of labour shortage on agricultural production observed in a community that had suffered over a prolonged time from AlDS-related mortality in Uganda included:
- Reduction in the acreage of land under cultivation Delay in farming operations such as tillage, planting and weeding Reduction in the ability to control crop pests
- Decline in crop yields
- Loss of soil fertility
- Shift from labour intensive crops (e. 9. banana) to less labour intensive crops (such as cassava and sweet potato)
- Shift from cash oriented production to subsistence production
- Reduction in the range of crops per household
- Decline in livestock production Decreased food security Loss of agricultural knowledge and management skills^31
The burden of the impact of AlDS-related mortality disproportionately affects women and girl children. The FAO study on "The Socio-Economic Impact of HIV/AIDS on Rural Families" found more households headed by AIDS widows than by AIDS widowers. Widows with dependent children tend to become entrenched in poverty. They may lose access to land, labour, inputs, agricultural extension, credit, and other support services. HIVIAIDS stigmatization compounds their situation further, eventually severing assistance from the extended family, which is often their only safety net, and the community.^32
BOX 2 illustrates how AIDS mortality affects a farm household and how it impacts on food security, on the standard of living of a family (and particularly on its nutritional and health status). The working conceptual framework presented in Figure 2 and the other tables on the division of labour by gender and age show how the loss of one or more family members can have multiple repercussions on the farming system through quantity of work, type of work and skills mix, an end to remittances and a reallocation of resources. The loss of both parents to AIDS can also lead to children- and grandparent-headed households.
The FAO studies also found that it is becoming difficult to implement agricultural programmes as a result of Al DS mortality. Agricultural extension services have been hard hit by the disease. In Uganda's Rakai district, 20-50% of all working time of extension services is lost due to HIVIAIDS. Extension staff are frequently absent from work attending burials and caring for sick relatives. At the same time, a number of extensionists are falling sick and dying. In fact, agricultural extension workers are in themselves a "high risk" group in terms of susceptibility to HIV/AIDS, given the fact that they are mobile, come to contact with a large number of people and have not been targetted by HIV/AIDS awareness campaigns. The epidemic has also made it more difficult for extension staff to meet with farmers. If a meeting coincides with a funeral, it is rescheduled. In some communities in Rakai district in Uganda where there have been as many as 10-1 5 deaths in one month,
extensionists are finding it increasingly difficult to operate.^33
Helen, a widow in her late 30s, has six children. She married when she was 13. Her husband died of AIDS in 1988. She also has AIDS, is bedridden and is severely undernourished. Helen lives with her daughter, who is 19, is unmarried with a child of two years and has had five years of schooling. Her daughter is the only one taking care of her. "Without her, I could not have managed. I would not be alive today," Helen said.
None of her sons work. When her husband died, they dropped out of school because she could no longer afford to pay school fees. Now they cannot find jobs. One of her sons is living nearby, but only has a small cassava shamba which is not enough to feed his own family, let alone his mother and sister.
When her husband was alive, the family grew potatoes and sorghum on their 3-acre plot. Some of the sorghum was sold to buy soap, salt, meat, fish and paraffin. These days, Helen only grows cassava and millet. The husband's family has not claimed the land-yet, but she fears this may happen at any time. When she feels strong she- works as a casual labourer to earn some cash. The daily wage of casual labourers is about 1,000 US$ (about US$: 1). She would: like to grow beans-to improve the family- diet but cannot- do so at present as her yields have declined drastically. The old: cassava shamba (field) is nearly depleted and the new one is too young to harvest Helen was. not able to harvest millet: this year because she suffered from severe body: pain and was too weak to work. The family does not grow enough food to live on. Her diet consists of boiled::-cassava or millet and- a few greens without sauce : (there- is: no money to buy oil with which to prepare -the: sauce).
Helen's daughter tries to prepare two meals a day, but often they only have one. Helen had not eaten fruit for-over a month.
The widow has received no moral or material support -from her late husband's family or from: the village. :No one ever: comes to see her. Attitudes toward: her and her family were very negative, she said. She does not want to ask: for help: from her husband's male relatives because she fears that their wives will suspect that she is sexually involved with them.
When she is not bedridden, Helen-works from 5:00 am to 9:00 pm. This long workday exhausts her but she- cannot afford to rest because she and her daughter do not have Enough to live on. She described her situation as a vicious circle: she cannot grow enough food to feed herself and her family because she is too weak and hungry; yet she would need to eat properly in order to be strong enough to work in the shamba.
Source: D. Topoozis, The Socio-Economic Impact of HIV/AIDS on Rural Families, FAO, 1994 p. 15.
(^2 The Impact of AIDS mortality on a Rural Household)
Some AIDS widows in Uganda pointed out that as soon as their husbands died, they had lost access to agricultural extension advice which they considered invaluable (and to which few women have access to). The death of their husbands, they explained, did not only amount to the loss of their labour and income, but also to the loss of their access to credit, extension and information, access to cooperatives or other farmers' organizations, and the loss of knowledge of certain cash crops and of specific farming practices. Given the added burden of AIDS stigmatization that these widows face, losing access to extension at a time when they needed was of paramount importance to them.
It is important to underscore that even though to date HIV/AIDS appears to have hit Africa more severely than other developing regions, and certainly more is known about the nature of HIV/AIDS impact in Africa, comparable findings are likely to be relevant for a number of Asian and Caribbean countries affected by the epidemic. In fact, AlDS-related mortality is not only an African concern. To give but one example from Asia, high HIV infection rates in the Northern Thai provinces necessitate an investigation of what the impact of mortality is likely to be on rice-based farming systems. In particular, insights into the impact of HIVIAIDS on the division of labour by gender and age and the repercussions on demographic patterns could provide the foundation for policies designed to mitigate the adverse effects of the epidemic on agricultural production, farming systems and small farmers.
Main issues and research needs
i) Need for gender-dissagregated data and gender-responsive methodologies in farming systems research, including data linking agriculture and population
It has been argued that farming systems research has not successfully integrated gender issues and has not provided gender-disaggregated data.^34 This is only partly true, however, given the fact that no country systematically collects farming systems data as such: farming systems research usually takes piece in light of specific interventions and contexts. However, the collection of dissagregated data by age and by sex on a project or programme basis, revealing intra-household gender roles, needs and constraints, could go a long way towards establishing more accurate labour profiles and throwing some light on linkages with population issues.
The conceptualization of the farm household as a production unit can be problematic and the fact that households can comprise two or more productive subsystems has not yet been fully acknowledged by policy-makers and development planners alike. This may be the result of socio-economic factors as well as gender blindness. For instance, in much of Africa, depending on the number o, wives within a household, only one productive system is controlled by the man; the others are usually controlled by the wife or co-wives. In other instances, as a result of migration (male or female), the remittances many families rely upon represent another productive sub-system.
Furthermore, gender roles have not been sufficiently understood when it comes to technology generation and transfer and the need to link demographic data to information on female or male economic activities in the context of farming systems has yet to be addressed. The section on labour bottlenecks and fertility/mortality has shown that there is a need to explore how changes in farming techniques may affect women's farm work both in terms of increasing or decreasing their workload as well as in terms of their ability to breast-feed.
ii) Differentiate between different groups of subsistence farmers by gender and by socio-economic status, ensuring that de facto and de jure female-headed households are included among policy, programme and project target groups.
There is a general tendency to assume that subsistence farmers are a homogeneous group with uniform interests, needs and constraints. However, upon closer look, subsistence farmers comprise a wide spectrum of sub-groups according to gender, farm size, annual income, etc. Thus, one can distinguish, for instance, female-headed households, which have less access to land, productive resources and support services, landless labourers, etc.
It is also commonly assumed that rural women are a homogeneous group. Yet, research has shown that new technologies can affect different strata of rural women in very different ways. In the Philippines, for instance, the introduction of wet-seeding/direct-seeding technology, using High-Yield Varieties (HYV) in rice cultivation, which reduces the demand for pulling/seeding and transplanting (tasks normally performed by women) has had opposite effects on women subsistence farmers and on landless women. The effect of HYV on women subsistence farmers has been to lower fertility rates and maternal and infant mortality while the effect on poor landless women has been increased fertility (with preference for sons because of the greater demand for male labourers) and infant mortality.^35
iii) Address the Interface Between Labour Bottlenecks and Fertility/Mortality
Findings on the role of reproduction on rural Kenyan women's time use provides valuable insights into the interface between heavy labour and pregnancy on the one hand, and the agricultural calendar on the other. These need to be taken into account when designing interventions, to ensure that women's workload is not increased and that their energy intake is adequate. Little is known, however, on how the pressures on women's time at certain points of the agricultural cycle may lead to curtailment of breast-feeding and the consequent demographic effects different types of agricultural innovation may have on these.
There is a need to further explore how changes in farming techniques may affect fertility as well as women's farm work in terms of their ability to breast-feed. More specifically, the following questions need to be addressed: To what degree does this occur? What farm tasks are the most strenuous and potentially dangerous to pregnant women? How can they be compensated for by new technologies? How can such new technologies be made acceptable and attractive to farmers?
One way to begin addressing some of these questions would be to categorize farming systems not only by physical characteristic (i.e. rain-fed small farms, swidden farming in uplands, irrigated fields, etc.), but to distinguish them on the basis of intra-household dynamics. This will necessitate supporting data on the type of technologies that would accompany each type of farming system as well as a prioritization of other sub-groups of farming systems.
iv) Assess the Gender-Differential impact of the Introduction of New Technologies, in view of its Potential Effect on Fertility/Mortality, including the benefits of different types of technical change in agriculture on the two sexes
The introduction of new technologies has tended to benefit men at the expense of women, by marginalizing women, by increasing their workload or by being inappropriate for their use. By identifying and understanding the role of women in farming systems, and by consulting them prior to the introduction of new technologies, it will be possible to facilitate the generation of technologies that women farmers can use. It would also be important to empirically assess how the introduction of new technologies at certain points of the agricultural cycle affect the labour inputs of women, particularly during pregnancy and lactation, and to determine whether it is likely to contribute to high fertility and mortality.
v) Quantify, Document and Take into Account the Economic Contributions of Children by Gender
Even though it is logistically and practically difficult to measure and document the economic contribution of children, there is a need to investigate whether and to what degree new technologies can indirectly affect fertility patterns and neutralize gains in fertility reduction by increasing girls' labour inputs, leading them to drop out of school. The quantification of children's labour contribution would be most effective if undertaken on the basis of person days per activity and season. This will allow policymakers and planners to make demographic- and gender-responsive decisions about the introduction of new technologies, the introduction of new crops, etc.
Key questions that need to be addressed include the following: could changes in farming systems (cropping patterns, new technologies, etc.) better balance the gender and age division of labour and therefore offset the growing need for Chile labour and the growing responsibilities of women and girl children in agricultural production? What are the implications of children's labour contributions to farming systems and the farm-household economy? What are some of the policy adjustments that can be made to avoid children being taken out of school to make up for labour needs? What are the implications of women's increasing labour burdens on fertility, and more particularly, on decision-making concerning family size?
Finally, given the significant but invisible contribution of children and youth to agricultural and rural development, efforts could be made to:
- investigate how gender-disaggregated data on children's contributions can be incorporated in censuses, surveys, etc.;
- analyze the interface between children's and youth's farm labour and demographic factors (especially fertility and migration); and
- identify appropriate methodological tools to facilitate the development of a more holistic perspective on the socio-economic contribution of children and youth in the farm household and in the community in order to enable them to benefit from their contributions.
vi) Address the Socio-Economic and Demographic Effects of HIV/AIDS Mortality in Policies and Programmes
The systemic effects of the socio-economic impact of HIV/AIDS at the household level, including rural livelihood systems and rural men and women themselves, need to be factored in population as well as in agricultural rural development programmed, taking into account the gender dimension of the epidemic. Thus, development projects in countries most affected by the HIV/AIDS epidemic (i.e. oilseed project in Uganda, agricultural extension project in Zambia, cash crop project in Zimbabwe, etc.) need to consider the demographic and gender dimensions of the project, and in particular the potential effect of HIV/AIDS (on mortality and morbidity) on men and women farmers' livelihood systems. Responses to the epidemic also need to consider the linkages between gender, household food security and social support functions and should be people-centred.
As little is known about the impact of HIV/AIDS on agricultural production systems in Asia and related linkages with population issues, research needs to be conducted on a pilot basis. For example, in Thailand, research on the impact of AIDS-related mortality on rice-based farming systems, and in particular, on the division of labour by gender and age and the repercussions on of HIV/AIDS on demographic patterns could help guide policies designed to mitigate the adverse effects of the epidemic on agricultural production, farming systems and small farmers.
Endnotes
1. Christine Oppong, Introduction to Aderanti Adepoju and C. Oppong, Gender. Work and Population, Geneva: ILO, 1994, p. 10.
2. ibid., pp. 10-11.
3. A. Evans, "Statistics," in Ostergaard, L. (ed). Gender and Development: A Practical Guide, London: Routledge, 1992, p.12, cited in Caroline Moser, "Evaluating Gender Impacts," Conference Paper on Evaluation and Development, World Bank, December 5 and 6, 1994, p. 14.
4. K. Ewusi. "Women in Occupation in Ghana," paper presented at the Seminar on Women and Development held by the Council on Women, Legon, Ghana, 1978, cited in Constantina Safilios-Rothschild, "Agricultural Policies and Women Producers," in Gender, Work and Population in Sub-Saharan Africa, op. cit., p. 57.
5. Oppong, Introduction to Gender, Work and Population, op. cit., p. 5.
6. A.S. Carloni, "Women in Development: AlD's Experience 1973-1985," vol. 1, Synthesis Paper, Programme Evaluation Report No. 18, cited in Women, Food Systems and Agriculture, Women in Agricultural Development Paper, FAO, 1990.
7. Christine Oppong, Introduction to Gender, Work and Population in Sub-Saharan Africa, op. cit., p. 3.
8. The World's Women: Trends and Statistics 1970-1990, United Nations, New York, 1991.
9. Oppong, Introduction to Gender. Work and Population in Sub-Saharan Africa, op. cit., p. 2.
10. Ibid.
11. Oppong, Introduction to Gender. Work and Population in Sub-Saharan Africa, op. cit., p. 3.
12. Cited in Introduction, Gender. Work and Population. op. cit., p. 3.
13. Ibid. p. 3.
14. Ingrid Palmer, "Seasonal Dimension of Women's Roles," in R. Chambers, R. Longhurst and A. Pacey (ads.), Seasonal Dimensions to Rural Poverty, London: Frances Pinter Ltd,1981, cited in Oppong, Introduction, op. cit., p. 14.
15. FAO, Manual on Project Planning and Formulation of Integrated Population, Women in Rural/Agricultural Development Projects, draft mimeo, 1990, cited in Zoran Roca, "Women and Population in Agricultural and Rural Development in Sub-Saharan Africa," Women in Agricultural Development paper, No. 5, p. 19.
16. Michael Baksh, Charlotte Neumann, Michael Paolisso, Richard Trostle and A. Jansen, "The Influence of Reproductive Status on Rural Kenyan Women's Time Use," Social Science Medicine, Vol. 39, No. 3, 1994, pp. 354.
17. ibid.
18. Ingrid Palmer, Gender and Population in the Adjustment of African Economies: Planning for Change, Geneva: ILO, 1991, p. 33.
19. Christine Oppong, "Population, Development and Gender Issues in Namibia," ILO, 1994, p. 120.
20. Aderanti Adepoju, "The Demographic Profile: Sustained high Mortality and Fertility and Migration for Employment," in Gender, Work and Population in Sub-Saharan Africa, op. cit., p. 24.
21. Christine Oppong, "African Mothers, Workers and Wives: Inequality and Segregation," Working Paper No. 2, Population, Human Resources and Development Planning in Sub-Saharan Africa, Geneva, ILO, cited in Gender. Work and Population, op. cit., p. 24.
22. Palmer, Gander and Population in the Adjustment of African Economies, op. cit., p. 32.
23. Brenda McSweeney, The Negative Impact of Development on Women Reconsidered: A Case study of the Women's Education Project in Upper Volta," unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Maryland, Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, cited in Palmer, op. cit., p. 32.
24. Zoran Roca, "Women and Population in Agricultural and Rural Development in Sub-Saharan Africa,' FAO Women in Agricultural Development Paper, No. 5, 1991, p. 12.
25. FAO/UNFPA Case study on Population, Status of Women in Rural Development in Lesotho, Sierra Leone and Zimbabwe, 1989, in ibid., p. 19.
26. D. T. Jamison and L.J. Lau, Farmer Education and Farmer Efficiency. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1982, cited in Hans P. Binswanger and Klaus Deininger, "Towards a Political Economy of Agriculture and Agrarian Relations," Draft paper, World Bank, March 1995, p. 19.
27. Christine Oppong, "Population, Development and Gender issues in Namibia," ILO, 1994, p. 36.
28. See Selected Pages from "World Population Prospects: the 1994 Revision, forthcoming in 1995 from the Population Division, Department for Economic and Social Information and Policy Analysis, UN Secretariat, p. 137.
29. Cited in World Bank, AIDS Prevention and Mitigation in Sub-Saharan Africa: An Updated World Bank Strategy, June 1995, p. xv.
30. World Bank, 1995, ibid. p. iii.
31. Tony Barnett, "The Effects of HIV/AIDS on Farming Systems and Rural Livelihoods in Uganda, Tanzania and Zambia," FAO, 1994 and The Effects of HIV/AIDS on Farming Systems in Eastern Africa, 1995, Chapter 3.
32. Daphne Topoozis, The Socio-Economic Impact of HIV/AIDS on Rural Families with an Emphasis on Youth, FAO, 1994, pp. 17-20.
33. FAO, The Effects of HIV/AIDS on Farming Systems in Eastern Africa, AGSP, 1995, pp. 73-74.
34. Constantina Safilios-Rothschiid, "Agricultural Policies and Women Farmers," in Gender, Work and Population in Sub-Saharan Africa op. cit, p. 55.
35. Zoran Roca, "Women, Population and Environment in Agricultural and Rural Development: Policy Challenges and Responses," FAO, 1994, p. 10.
<section>4</section>
Module IV: Gender, migration, farming systems & land tenure
What have gender and migration to do with farming systems and land tenure?
A. Gender, rural-to-urban migration & farming systems
Rural-to-urban migration: a gender perspective
"Push/Pull" factors and gender selectivity
Linkages between gender, rural-to-urban migration & farming systems
Female-headed farm households
The interface between gender, the rural-urban continuum and farming systems
B. Gender, rural-to-rural migration and land tenure
Case study on the interface between gender, land tenure and migration: The onchocerciasis control programme in West Africa
Main policy issues
Research needs
Endnotes
Module IV: Gender, migration, farming systems & land tenure
(Topouzis/du Guerny, SDWP, November 1995)
What have gender and migration to do with farming systems and land tenure?
Migration is radically changing the socio-economic, demographic and development pr of lie of developing countries, with far-reaching implications for agriculture-based economies. According to United Nations estimates, 50% of the projected increase in the world's urban population will come from rural-to-urban migration so that by 2025, over 1.1 billion of urban people in Less Developed Regions will be rural migrants. ^a Clearly, the socio-economic and demographic ramifications of this massive rural exodus will have a marked impact not only on urban but on rural areas alike. Rural-to-rural migration, which accounts for a large percentage of population movement and is primarily effected through marriage, similarly has important implications for agricultural and rural development.
(^a The remainder 50% of the projected growth in the worlds urban population will be largely through natural increase of urban inhabitants.
Acknowledgments: The Population Programme Service would like to thank Horst Wanenbach, Farm Management and Production Economics Service, and Gerard Ciparisse, Agrarian Reform and Land Settlement Service, for their substantial contributions to this module and Tim Aldington, Sally gunning and Alain Marcoux for their comments.)
It is the impact of migration on rural areas, and particularly on farming systems and land tenure, that are the focus of this module. The first part of the module analyzes the linkages between gender, rural-to-urban migration and farming systems, while the second part identifies some linkages between gender, migration and land tenure using the Onchocerciasis Control Programme (OCP) in West Africa as a case study. Key questions to be addressed include the following: What is the gender differential impact of rural-to-urban migration on farming systems and the farm household? What are the implications of the changing composition and size of the rural labour force for farming systems? How does migration interface with gender and land tenure? Why is it important to consider demographic and gender variables in development projects such as the Onchocerciasis Control Programme?
The movement of men and women across a specific boundary for the purpose of establishing a new permanent residence. Migration can be internal (migration within a country, including rural-to-rural) or international (migration between countries).
Source: Adapted from The Population Handbook, The Population Reference Bureau, Washington D. C., 1991, p.57
(^1 Definition of Migration)
The objective of this module is to stimulate discussion among farming systems gender and population specialists on the implications of the interface between migration, gender, farming systems and land tenure for population, agricultural and rural development programmes in order to identify key policy issues and related research needs.
A. Gender, rural-to-urban migration & farming systems
Rural-to-urban migration: a gender perspective
Rural-to-urban migration is a mechanism of individual and group adjustments to development gaps created between the dynamic and inviting industrial sector in urban and pert-urban areas and the often more inert and less attractive agricultural sector in rural areas.^1 Such adjustments usually trigger both positive and negative effects. On the positive side, migration helps to reduce pressure on agricultural land and food supplies, provides opportunities for the rural unemployed and underemployed, and is associated with rising living standards and livelihood prospects at the household and community levels in urban as well as rural areas. On the negative side, new imbalances in both origin and destination areas are created. In most of urban Asia, Africa and Latin America, this is manifested in high unemployment and growing social unrest, while in rural areas it translates into declining agricultural output (at least for subsistence crops), growing pauperization (particularly
among women), and a disruption of traditional family and social structures.^2
For many development specialists and policy-makers, migration invariably tends to conjure the image of men moving to urban centers in search of employment. Surprisingly, even though rural exodus is known to be triggered by land degradation, extant literature tends to focus on the area of destination, viewing migration as a process of urbanization, rather than from the point of origin and destination. These stereotypes have concealed both the gender dimensions of migration as well as the rural-urban continuum ^b which can have significant repercussions on farming systems, land tenure, agricultural production, food security and sustainability.
(^b While there are distinctive differences between intrinsically urban and intrinsically rural populations, urban/rural differentiation is more appropriately perceived as a continuum rather than a strict dichotomy. Graeme Hugo, "Migration and Rural-Urban Linkages in the ESCAP Region,- Migration and Urbanization in Asia and the Pacific: Interrelationships with Socio-Economic Development and Evolving Policy Issues, United Nations, New York, 1993, p. 92.)
Table l: Migrants to India's Urban Areas by Sex, 1961-1981
Year
Number of Migrants
Male %
Female %
Source: Census of India, 1971 & 1981, in P. Pathak, "Urbanization, Female Migration and Employment in India," Issues in the Study of Rural-Urban Migration: Report and Pacers of the Expert Group Meeting on Trends, Patterns & Implications of Rural-Urban Migration, Bangkok, November 1992, United Nations, New York, 1994, p. 62.
While male rural-to-urban migration has received considerable attention and has been the subject of extensive research, the gender (and population) dimensions of migration, particularly from the point of view of area of origin, have been largely neglected. These dimension include i) migration-induced changes in gender relations within the farm household and their demographic effects, including the demographic behaviour of female-headed farm households; ii) female rural-to-urban migration; ^c and iii) migration-induced changes in land tenure and their demographic implications. ^d
(^c Recent migration research has shown that, contrary to popular belief, female migrants constitute roughly half of all internal migrants in developing countries. In some regions, female migrants even predominate: in most South-eastern Asian countries with data available, women outnumber men among rural-to-urban migrants (with the exception of Brunei Darussalam and the "frontier" area of Sabah in Malaysia). In the 1970s, the dominance of women among Thai and Filipino migrants was pronounced; and in most Latin American and Caribbean countries, women outnumber men in net rural-to-urban migration; see Hugo, 1994, op. cit., pp. 4753. Conversely, rural out-migration patterns tend to be predominantly male in all countries of Africa, parts of Asia and the Pacific, and the Near East.
^d In some countries, like Lesotho, where just over half of adult males work in South Africa, more than half of all rural households are headed by women. The high incidence of female-headed households is reportedly having an impact on the land tenure system, as owners of land left uncultivated for up to two years lose title to such land. (See Aderanti Adepoju, "The Demographic Profile: Sustained High Mortality and Fertility and Migration for Employment," in Adepoju and Oppong, 1994, op. cit., p. 32) Analytical data is needed, however, to analyze the impact of increasing numbers of female-headed households on existing land tenure systems and the institutional mechanisms through which these households can be assisted with supportive land tenure arrangements.)
As a result of this neglect, the gender dimensions of migration have yet to be incorporated in the development agenda. The 1994 International Conference on Population and Development only refers to gender as "an interesting aspect of internal migration." ^e There is no analysis of the gender implications of female migration on farm households, on family demographic strategies, and on agricultural production and food security, and no mention of the impact of migration on the rural women left behind.
(^e "Whereas in Gabon and the Congo, men constitute the majority of migrants to cities; in the Philippines and Panama it is the women who dominate the urban migration flows. As a result, in the rural areas of Gabon, there are only 83 men for every 100 women, while in the rural areas of Panama there are 114 men for every 100 women." National Perspectives on Population and Development: A Synthesis of 168 National Reports Prepared for the International Conference on Population and Development, 1995, p. 93.)
The neglect of the gender dimensions of migration is also reflected in data collection and analysis: statistical information on rural-to-urban migration by gender is often not available and data on female-headed farm households is limited. Information on female-headed farm households has focused on the heads of household per se rather than on the female-headed farm household unity^3 As a result of such lacunas, decision-makers are not aware of related policy implications, and agricultural as well urbanization programmes do not often take into account gender as an integral variable of migration.
"Push/Pull" factors and gender selectivity
Urban "pull" factors (conditions encouraging people to move to the cities) for men tend to be similar worldwide, and include prospects of earning higher wages, a perceived demand for labour and better social services. "Push" factors (conditions encouraging people to leave the land) vary considerably among regions and countries, as well as among social groups, and between men and women. Rural unemployment resulting from rapid population growth and the mechanization of agricultural processes has been identified as the leading cause of rural-to-urban migration, especially in Latin America.^4 Another major "push" factor out of rural areas is the growing shortage of fertile arable land in the context of high population growth, landholding inequality, environmental degradation, rural poverty, and the lack of infrastructure and social services in rural areas. Adverse environmental conditions, unfavorable macroeconomic policies and declining markets for certain types of produce are
also important "push" factors for male out-migration in Africa.^5
In the case of male rural-to-urban migration, young men seek employment in the cities, leaving behind female relatives to manage on their own and to provide for both the elderly and the young. This results not only in changes in family structure, but usually leads to adjustments in family roles, and more importantly, in the division of labour as well as in the way labour is utilised in the community of origin and destination.^6 In the long term, it also leads to an aging of the labour force. As a result of these adjustments, women often assume major responsibilities for, and in some countries become the backbone of, subsistence food production {a phenomenon which has been termed the 'feminization of agriculture') and in the management of their families' livelihoods.
In the case of female rural-to-urban migration, "pull" factors are often reduced to a false distinction between associational (non-economic, such as wanting to join the family} and economic motives. Associational "pull" factors have to some extent hidden an often very different reality. In Latin America, rural women out-migrate due to lack of access to land and the mechanization of agricultural production, and move to the cities in search of employment in textiles, food processing and other labour intensive industries, as well as in the informal sector.^7 In French-speaking Africa, a recent United Nations study found that more than half of migrant women interviewed reported economic resorts, and particularly employment, as the main reason behind their decision to migrate. Family reasons came a far second (35%).^8 In Thailand, one survey found that 74% of single female migrants reported moving for economic reasons, while 52% of married female migrants had migrated for
economic reasons and 26% for family reasons.^9
Migration can be particularly significant for women as it usually entails a marked change in status -- from unpaid family farm workers to employees or to self employment in urban areas.^10 To date, however, there is no consensus about whether migration improves or erodes women's position vis-a-vis men, as a result of the diverse factors that condition and mediate the effects of migration on women's position and the diversity of women's circumstances across developing countries.^11
Linkages between gender, rural-to-urban migration & farming systems
Rural-to-urban migration is an imporant factor influencing the evolution of farming systems, along with changes in the rate of capital formation in the agricultural sector and the relative decline in agricultural prices.^12 One study on the impact of heavy male circular migrations from rural areas in Indonesia found that in eastern Kalimantan, women's involvement in rice and vegetable production increased as a direct result of male out-migration.^13
The impact of rural-to-urban migration on a farm household, and more specifically, on a farming system, mainly depends on three factors: a) the gender and age of the migrant (whether it is a parent or offspring/man or woman that is migrating); b) the type of migration movement (whether it is temporary or permanent); and c) the employment conditions and self-sufficiency of migrants. In addition, the impact of migration varies between and within countries, depending on the particular socioeconomic circumstances of the migrants, the agro-ecological environment, prevailing socio-cultural conditions and a wide range of other factors.
(^1 Circular migration refers to short-term sojourners. One form of circular migration is seasonal migration, with the migrant returning to the rural area at times when his labour is needed for agriculture.)
FIGURE 2: Working Conceptual Model on the Linkages Between Labour, Farming Systems and Demographic Characteristics & Strategies
Rural-to-urban migration impacts on gender roles and relations in the farm household through adjustments in three productive resources: labour, capital and land. Rural-to-urban labour migration may be beneficial to the farm household through migrants' remittances which may be used to invest in the land, to acquire more land or to hire labour. However, besides reducing the available labour supply on the farm, migration may also have a negative effect on food production and security. In fact, it has recently been argued that the effects of rural-to-urban migration on food production may be amplified as a result of the way family labour is divided by gender and age.^14
i) Farm Labour Shortages
Long-term male rural-to-urban migration may fundamentally change the gender division of labour in a farm household. Men may not be available for ploughing and planting which are both time- and energy-intensive.^15 For women, this translates into a marked increase in agricultural work, including a wider range of farm tasks, a heavier workload and less time for domestic tasks and childcare. For instance, in Myanmar, migration has been cited a one of the reasons why women have taken up ploughing and water collection by bullock-cart.^16
With a diminishing supply of labour for male and shared farm tasks, women must either depend on hired labour (which many cannot afford) or resort to limiting agricultural operations. For example, if women have problems hiring and/or supervising labour, then ploughing may be undertaken less frequently, or on less land.^17 Thus, labour shortages may lead to a reduction in total agricultural output and underutilized or idle productive land. This may, in turn, result in changes in cropping patterns with direct repercussions on dietary standards, family nutrition and welfare. It may also undermine food security and contribute to the adoption of unsustainable agricultural practices and to land degradation.
Furthermore, out-migration of men and working-age youths -- which is especially common in Latin America -- can have negative effects on rural households by transferring workloads from adults to the elderly and by increasing the labour burden of girl children, which may have important repercussions on their fertility behaviour. Older daughters, who are usually responsible for caring for younger siblings and for helping with domestic chores, may have to take part in a variety of economically productive activities on the family farm instead. However, once younger sisters take over some of these tasks, older daughters are expected to marry or are encouraged to seek wage labour in cities.^18
Women's greater involvement in agricultural production and increased responsibility in managing households, may or may not modify their socio-economic status. In Latin America and parts of Africa (i.e. Eritrea), some women have gained greater power in making decisions about agricultural activities, in controlling and handling farm earnings, and in investing remittances, but have tended to revert to their subordinate role upon the man's return.^19 Usually, the reason why women's position does not improve in the long-term is because they are denied formal rights to land, have no security of tenure and no access to other productive resources. In sub-Saharan Africa, while day to-day management of the farm is undertaken by women, decisions affecting long-term investments continue to be made by migrant men, and usually only upon their return.^20
In Asia, it has been argued that rural-to-urban migration has benefited neither urban nor rural areas, and has created serious problems both at the point of origin as well as at the point of destination. Studies for several Asian countries have conclusively shown that it is primarily the young, able-bodied and better educated rural inhabitants who emigrate, leaving substantial gaps in the agricultural and rural labour forced ^g As farming is essentially a family enterprise in most Asian countries, the out migration of able-bodied young workers leaves the burden on older and younger persons in rural areas who tend to be less productively^21 The long-term implications of agricultural labour force shortages are likely to result in a decline in food production and in the health status of rural families (including a rise in mortality).
(^g In Malaysia, rural-to-urban migration has resulted in labour shortages and the ageing of the labour force in the traditional plantation agriculture. See Tey Nai Peng and Halimah Awang, Some Implications of Rural-Urban Migration in the ESCAP Region, Issues in the Study of Rural-Urban Migration: Report and Papers of the Expert Group Meeting on Trends, Patterns and Implications of Rural-Urban Migration, Bangkok, Thailand, 3-6 November 1992, United Nations, 1994, p. 25.)
Similarly, in the case of sub-Saharan Africa, where land is not generally scarce, any reduction in the labour force is likely to decrease overall production of subsistence crops, even with a very low marginal productivity, unless it is compensated by technological means.^22 It has, in fact, been argued that rural-to-urban migration is one of the main factors contributing to the reduction (in terms of relative value) of the time devoted to subsistence farming,^23 thereby leading to national food deficits and rising food prices in many African countries.^24
In one hamlet in Usambara, Lushoto district, Tanzania, young men migrate to urban centers or to plantations as soon as they marry, to save money in order to invest in agriculture, and particularly to buy land and agricultural inputs. The main reason why they migrate is because their village is surrounded by plantation forest and can therefore mot expand any further. Meanwhile, population pressure is intensifying. Male migrants visit their village of origin about twice a year.. The women left behind Tend to: employ hired labour to make up for the :labour- shortage or else work as wage labourers themselves in nearby vegetable cultivation. Clearly, men's decision to marry before they migrate shows that demographic :strategies influence the structure of farm households and of farming systems.
At first glance,. it: appears that :there is no clearly visible impact of this male migration on the farming system the women continue their vegetable (cash crop) cultivation using traditional irrigation systems, but are also involved in commercial crop production. However, an: investigation of how the :division of labour is adjusted to compensate for male absence, how childcare and-nutritional status are affected as a result of women's increased on- and off-farm-responsibilities, and how this, in turn affects fertility decisions could reveal otherwise.
Source: Personal communication, Horst Wattenbach, FAO,. AGSP, August: 1995
(^3 Migration, Demography and Farming Systems)
The decline in food production in sub-Saharan Africa has been associated not with the first wave of migration which involved men (and which reinforced women's specialization in subsistence farming), but with the second wave of migration which involved women. The fact that women farmers are not paid for subsistence farming could contribute to a crisis in the subsistence sector, prompting women to out migrate. ^h Strong socio-economic ties within the extended family can exert two opposing influences, which, combined, can undermine food security. On the one hand, the dissociation of child-bearing from the cost of child-rearing resulting from the support provided by the extended family could slow down fertility decline, thereby increasing population growth. On the other hand, non-commercial circulation of subsistence crop surpluses (through exchanges of foodstuffs for manufactured goods between urban and rural areas within families with migrant members) could discourage farmers
from growing them, thereby reducing food production.^25 If what farmers receive from their urban kin does not exceed what they provide them with in return, and they do not reap enough profit from this exchange, this system of family assistance could threaten subsistence production.
(^h Fargues argues that the reason why (unpaid) subsistence farming survives, in much of Africa is because it is run by women, op. cit.. 1989, p. 57.)
ii) Income Diversification and Management
Remittances can be of great significance to a rural family and comprise a considerable portion of the household income. The complexity and wide range of impact of remittances in rural areas has been well illustrated in a study in the Philippines which showed that: a) for some families, remittances are a survival strategy than ensures subsistence but does not necessarily lead to significant improvement in living standards; b) for other families, remittances are a means with which to invest in agriculture or in their children's education; and c) relatively better off families use remittances to invest in productive activities through purchasing agricultural land and growing cash crops.^26
Remittances sometimes help to alleviate rural poverty and relieve women from physical burden by withdrawing them from arduous farm labour. For example, in the Near East-- where remittances have raised rural living standards significantly in a number of areas -- many families are able to subsist without increasing female farm labour. In other cases, however, women continue to produce most of the food for the family, while remittances are used for other purposes.^27
However, male migration does not always lead to more income for the farm household. In Lesotho, where nearly half of rural households are headed by women, one survey found that fewer than half of those women received any remittances from their absent men. Research in Pakistan and India shows that migrant men send remittances to their fathers -- to pay debts or buy land-- rather than to their wives who are running the households.^28 In Malaysia, most of the remittances are used to maintain rural families or repay social debt and only a small portion of the remittances are used directly as investment for rural development.^29
Remittances may not always end up in the area of origin of the migrant and, if they do, they are not always put to productive use within the village or the community. Often, they are simply too low to bring the family above the poverty line, and women's dependence on their husbands and kinsmen increases. If wives receive remittances only irregularly or not at all they are forced to engage in whatever non-agricultural wage-jobs are available in order to provide for their families.^30
Moreover, remittances do not always improve women's position within their families, as key decisions may still continue to be made by men. Nevertheless, there is evidence that the status of women can be enhanced through higher living standard thanks to migrant remittances. A study in Egypt, for example, shows that migrant wives acquire major new financial, productive, and supervisory responsibilities and, in fact, succeed in separating themselves from the traditional patterns of extended household production and consumption. Some invest in farming, but, most frequently, remittances are used to invest in women's non-agricultural occupations.^31 From the perspective of women's needs, the positive effects of the use of migrants' remittances in many countries have been improvements in community infrastructure and services, ranging from health care centers to technological modernization, such as the installation of communal grain mills, motor pumps, etc.
Female remittances appear to end up more frequently in the area of origin than male remittances. In Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand migrant unmarried daughters are subject to greater pressures than sons to share their income with the family. One study of migrant women in Bangkok found that three in four sent back remittances.^32 Little is known, however, on how female remittances are spent and/or invested in farm and off-farm activities. The significance of migrant contributions in general to agricultural investment and the resulting impact on farming systems has yet to be systematically analyzed and the repercussions on gender (division of labour, status, etc.) remain to be assessed.
iii) Family Structure and Fertility
Male rural-to-urban migration tends to conserve the traditional kinship relations and patriarchal and seniority values, thus reinforcing gender asymmetries in intra-household distribution and management of productive resources. This has been recorded across sub-Saharan Africa,^33 as well as in Latin America and Asia. For example, studies in Mexico and the Dominican Republic have shown that it is the extended family that decides who will migrate with the view to consolidating the extended family structure.^34
Evidence on the impact of migration on fertility is inconclusive. It has been argued that rather than lowering fertility, migration seems to maintain it at high levels, by undermining the socio-economic security of women. In order to cope with their own and their families' insecurity and increased farm, off-farm and house tasks, having a large number of children is for many women a "technological solution" (in the absence of time-and labour-saving farm and home technologies), and a means of ensuring future financial support. Clearly, expectations outweigh any perceived burden of child dependency.^35
Evidence from Africa also suggests that cash cropping and wage migration tend to reinforce patriarchal relations and large family-size. From a woman's perspective, the physical and income costs of child-bearing are offset by the compatibility of child care and work with food and export crop production, and by children's contributions to her labour burden. In the case of Asia, however, it has been shown that as migration has increased in incidence, the decline in household size has also increased. One survey of rural Thai households found that out-migration reduced household size by an average of approximately half a person.^36
Female-headed farm households
Migration has potentially far-reaching effects on household structure by increasing the incidence of female-headed households through the sex-selectivity of migration.^37 Female-headed households are most vulnerable among the rural poor to seasonal stress and are dependent on access to common property resources. When temporary migration becomes long-term or permanent, de facto female-headed households become farmers in their own right but encounter a variety of production constraints. With, or without, the assistance of their children, women often find it increasingly difficult to adequately offset the labour contributions of their absentee husbands.^38
A study in Botswana shows that female-headed households are significantly poorer than other households as women are handicapped in crop cultivation if they do not have a team of oxen or if they lack the physical strength to handle ploughing oxen. Some women hire farm labour, but scarcity of male labour at ploughing time makes this help expensive in relation to women's earnings potential. Also, while sizeable areas of land are hard to cultivate without purchased inputs, women heads of household seldom have the cash to purchase these in sufficient quantities, and thus tend to cultivate smaller tracts than male heads of households.^39
Furthermore, agricultural modernization processes have been associated with large-scale losses in the kinds of domestic crop processing and field work on which female heads of households have been traditionally dependent for their income and access to food staples.^40 Since time is their scarcest resource and they need a crop which gives the highest possible output per labour hour, many women farmers in Africa are replacing traditional subsistence crops, such as yams, with cassava-(which gives a much higher yield of starch per labour hour but is less nutritious).
The interface between gender, the rural-urban continuum and farming systems
An important but neglected facet of migration is the rural-urban continuum. Contrary to popular belief, male and female migrants do not simply become urban dwellers, thereby permanently severing ties with their rural origins. In fact, most maintain close links with their rural home areas, help their families invest in agriculture and land and some eventually resettle in their villages. Yet, the urban-rural dichotomy persists. This is partly because distinguishing rural and urban development and urban and rural inhabitants is statistically convenient: "Persons belong or do not belong to the urban (or the rural) category: there is no intermediate state and as a result the notion of the distance between the categories tends to be ignored. Therefore, a person belonging to a rural area contiguous to an urban district receives the same treatment as one far from any urban center.... This [dichotomy] fits in nicely with the "push" and "pull" analysis and has many advantages, except
perhaps that it might be misleading for rural development...".^41 Over the last two decades in particular, there has been a gradual blurring of the distinction between urban and rural populations in developing and developed countries alike, as a result of the increased mobility of people, goods, services, capital and ideas.^42
An important dimension of the urban-rural continuum is the circulation of staple foodstuffs outside the market, its impact on food production and on the farmers producing subsistence crops (a majority of whom are women). In the case of sub-Saharan Africa, foodstuffs supplied by rural family members to urban migrants play an important role in the economies. According to budget-consumption surveys, in 1970, 15% of households in Bamako, 30% in Abidjan, Bouake and Lomé received food supplies on a regular basis from the villages in exchange for services, particularly taking in villagers' children during secondary schooling.^43 This tradition is reported to be intensifying throughout the region.
TABLE 2: Proportion of Households Receiving or Sending Aid According to Place of Residence and Relation to Partner in Cote d'lvoire, 1985
Aid
Abidjan
Other urban
Rural
received
sent
received
sent
received
sent
Son or daughter
Father or mother
Brother or sister
Source: Côte d'lvoire, Enguête permanente après des ménages 1985, Abidjan, 1986, cited in Philippe Fargues, "Subsistence Crop Deficit and Family Structure in sub-Saharan Africa," Population, Institut National d'Etudes Démographiques (English Selection), Vol. 2, 1990, p. 65.
These services or manufactured goods (including foodstuffs) provided by urban dwellers are exchanged for subsistence foods, which thus circulate from rural to urban areas outside the market. In this transaction, it is the rural areas that lose in terms of food exchange.^44 According to one demographer: "The competition between the family network and the urban food market could, a priori, either encourage the farmers to produce a surplus of subsistence food or dissuade them from doing so, depending on the difference between what they receive from their urban kin and what they give them. We suggest that, if this balance is negative, that is, if the farmers do not feel they reap enough profit from the exchange, this system [of family assistance] may well threaten subsistence production."^45
This may have serious implications given the fact that urban population food needs are in large part satisfied by agricultural and other productive activities of rural men, women and children (although pert-urban agriculture is also important). Many socioeconomic, demographic and environmental problems confronting cities today have, in varying degrees, their roots in, or are the reflection of, crises in rural areas. Thus, preventing or easing urban problems can in part be effected by addressing them in the context of the rural-urban continuum, rather than disparate urban and rural development programmes.^46 To give but one example, pert-urban agricultural programmes need to take into account the potential impact of such programmes on subsistence production in rural areas.
B. Gender, rural-to-rural migration and land tenure
This section will focus on the role of rural-to-rural migration in non-population development programmes and on its potentially catalytic effect in reshaping gender relations. The Onchocerciasis Control Programme (OCP) in West Africa is used as a case study.
What the case study shows is that migration deeply transforms the relationship between people who have relocated and the land, since those installed in new settlement areas do not own the land they cultivate. In these circumstances, women's socio-cultural and economic dependence on their husbands, which arose from the fact that men had entrusted part of the land they owned before migrating to their wives, has no longer a raison d'être. If advantage was deliberately taken of the changed relationship between migrants and the land and of its socio-cultural and economic implications, this would facilitate women's access to and control over land.
Case study on the interface between gender, land tenure and migration: The onchocerciasis control programme in West Africa
The case of the Onchocerciasis Control Programme (OCP) in West Africa illustrates how closely a 'population' issue, such as migration, interfaces with land tenure and gender issues and how overlooking migration can jeopardize the sustainability of an otherwise successful project. It also shows how new settlement schemes can provide a unique opportunity to change land tenure arrangements in such a way as to improve men and women's access to land and enhance their socioeconomic status. The change of women's status, in particular, and the ensuing benefits for their families are, in turn, likely to enhance the land settlement schemes themselves.
Onchocerciasis, or river blindness, used to affect some 2.5 million people in West Africa, and as many as 60% of the adults in some parts of the river valleys afflicted with the disease before the onset of OCP in 1974. Villagers were forced to abandon their communities en masse. The health toll was only one of the disastrous effects of onchocerciasis. When OCP began, some of West Africa's richest river lands had been left uncultivated for several kilometers at a stretch. Food production had plummeted as people abandoned fertile valleys and crowded onto marginally productive, over-farmed lands, causing severe environmental degradation.^48
As a result of larvicide and medical campaigns in 11 sub-Saharan African countries, over 25 million hectares of once-abandoned arable land have been made suitable for resettlement and cultivation. It has been estimated that this land area has the potential to feed about 17 million people, using traditional agricultural technologies and practices.
OCP has been hailed as one of the most successful medical and development programmes in the developing world, virtually eliminating river blindness as a public health hazard within the programme area while also opening up to cultivation and resettlement an area with considerable development potential.
However, the region is now facing considerable demographic pressure on the available tracts of land which could jeopardize the sustainability of the valley's exploitation. The very prosperity of the settlers is threatening the fragile eco-systems of the river valleys. Given the substantial and growing environmental degradation that has accompanied resettlement, it has become apparent that without settlement policies aimed at ensuring security of land tenure, the very success of the project may be compromised. A recent assessment of the programme indicated: "Where once the enemy was the blackfly, today it is deforestation, erosion, and extensive cultivation. Only if West Africa's governments step in to assist and regulate new settlement will these lands be saved from depletion, degradation and perhaps even eventual abandonment once again."^49
However, even though the long-term objective of OCP has been to turn the previously oncho-affected valleys into habitable areas where people can safely live and work, the programme had not originally foreseen the large-scale in-migration into the oncho-freed valleys that took place following the control of the disease. It had also not foreseen the potential shock waves of this uncontrolled in-migration and their adverse socio-economic and environmental consequences. As a result, OCP had not incorporated resettlement policies and implementation mechanisms at the national or at the regional levels as part of the programme.
This explains why data and information on demographic trends is incomplete, particularly with regard to the influx of immigrants that have already occupied a substantial part of the oncho-freed valleys. There is no comprehensive socio-economic inventory on the inhabitants of the valleys, such as baseline data on their composition and origin; on the percentage of native peoples vis-a-vis immigrants; and on the type of land/tenure agreements concluded between native owners and immigrants, which are indispensable to the sustainable development of the valleys. Similarly, data and information on the occupancy rate of oncho-freed land, the pressures being exerted on resettled land, and land carrying capacity in relation to the agro-pastoral potential of the valleys for sustainable exploitation is scanty.
A situation analysis on the resettlement of the oncho-freed valleys is presently being planned to investigate: the socio-economic characteristics of the populations that have resettled the land; the types of settlements already established; socio-cultural conditions and constraints; already established commercial networks; income sources of different groups of farmers; and migrant links with their areas of origin and families. FAO is now the lead executing agency for the sustainable socio-economic development of natural resources in the oncho-freed valleys and is preparing a Plan of Action for proposals regarding a series of local and limited sustainable development projects. FAO's initial support includes the preparation of a demographic study and a socio-economic survey, in collaboration with National Research Institutes.^50
The sustainability of land/tenure arrangements and settlement policies can also not be considered in isolation from gender factors. Migration to the oncho-freed valleys has involved considerable changes in farming and in lifestyle for the migrants. Most migrants have moved to new agro-ecological zone, new farming systems, crops and farming practices, a new socio-cultural environment and different tenure arrangements. For this reason, new settlements, as is the case with the West African oncho-freed valleys, present a unique opportunity to promote land tenure arrangements that protect the rights and interests of both men and women farmers.
Principles for the Sustainable: Settlement of the Oncho-Freed Valleys
- Introduce land tenure regulations that take into account customary tenure systems and that ensure secure land tenure and women's and young people's access to land and natural resources.
- Ensure: that women's rights of access to and control over land are not lost in the settlement. process.
Source: Committee of Sponsoring Agencies, OCP The Challenges of Success, 1994, p. 14
(^4 Gender and Sustainable Settlement in West Africa's Oncho-Freed Valleys)
As seen in Module II, women tend to have more limited access to land and to security of tenure than men in their respective socio-cultural context. New land settlements can help re-shape gender relations by modifying traditional land tenure arrangements, as men cannot claim traditional or customary rights to land. This is because in new settlements, former land tenure patterns which had previously often favoured men in terms of land access, land benefits, etc. no longer apply. This essentially means that constraints to women's access to land are absent in the context of new settlements, providing an opportunity to enhance women's socio-economic and socio-cultural status by facilitating changes in women's legal and institutional relationship to the land.
In particular, two components need to be addressed:
i) the need to change settlement/tenure arrangements and related legislation and institutional arrangements in order to allocate land to men and women on an equal basis and to ensure equal user rights and security; and
ii) the need for legal literacy to inform men and women of legislative changes and, particularly of women's land rights. Supportive measures would also be necessary to change male and female perceptions on rights to the new plots.
The Onchocerciasis Control Programme case study demonstrates how what was originally designed as a purely medical programme with some agricultural components evolved into a considerably more complex multi-sectoral operation where demographic issues, and particularly migration, assumed a central role. It also shows that land settlement policies cannot be designed in isolation from demographic issues. In fact, the case study strongly makes the case for a systems approach to land/tenure, population and gender issues by illustrating the shortcomings of vertical approaches to development programmes. In particular, OCP shows how neglecting demographic variables can have adverse repercussion on the sustainability of land/tenure arrangements as well as on food production and security. in addition, the programme can be used as a pilot exercise to investigate the potential catalytic role that migration can play in re-shaping gender relations through land tenure policies that can
ensure security of tenure for both men and women, thereby contributing to the success and sustainability of the overall programme.
"A requisite for successful land settlement is secure tenure to land and water resources as defined by both the settler and host populations." Such statements would be more gender-responsive if clarified with explicit clauses referring to gender, i.e. "as defined by both male and female, settler and host populations." Without specifying the need for secure land tenure for both men and women, gender neutrality is unlikely to result in practice.
Quote from Settlement and Development in the River Blindness Control done: Case Study Burkina Faso, World Bank Technical Paper 200, 1993,: p. 38
(^5 Gender-Responsive Land Tenure Arrangements)
Main policy issues
The demographic context of agricultural and rural development programmed (including land/tenure and farming systems programmes) needs to be recognized as an important variable that can play a critical role to their success and sustainability. As such, it needs to be incorporated in existing programmes and policies.
Migration can play a catalytic role in promoting changes in gender relations and in enhancing men's and women's access to productive resources. Improving the socio" economic status of women, in particular, is, in turn, likely to contribute to changes in fertility/mortality trends. To facilitate such changes in gender relations and promote more equitable access to productive resources, and particularly land, innovative land tenure arrangements and appropriate supporting measures need to be devised and enforced.
Rural-to-urban male migration makes heavy demands on all family members, but especially on women who are left behind in rural areas to shoulder the responsibility of agricultural production and food security. Labour shortages due to male out migration may mean that women often have to face: i) tighter time schedules and patterns of time use and human energy inputs required in agricultural and home production as well as an increased number of tasks and management of productive resources; and ii) local norms which perpetuate their inferior socio-economic status.
The impact of changing gender roles on the farm household resulting from male or female rural-to-urban migration needs to be better understood and documented. In particular, the differential impact between male and female migration, labour profile adjustments and corresponding changes in cropping patterns and demographic strategies need to be further investigated. For instance, the introduction of new technology and resulting changes in farming systems need to be considered in the context of seasonal labour migration (male/female, temporary/permanent) and of the increased labour burdens they may entail for women.
The growing incidence in female-headed households that is being observed in many developing countries needs to be reflected in agriculture, land tenure and population policies and programmes. In particular, changes in land tenure systems as a result of the wide prevalence of female-headed households also need to be assessed in terms of their implications for agricultural and population policies. The out-migration of women from rural areas and its potential impact on subsistence production and food security need to be investigated.
Research needs
To address these policy issues, the following areas have been identified as starting points for research:
- the impact of migration-induced changes on the gender division of labour and the household labour profile;
- the impact of rural mechanization on the displacement of male, female and youth labour from rural areas;^51
- the significance of migrant contributions to agricultural investment and the resulting impact on farming systems and the repercussions on gender (division of labour, status, etc.);
- the consequences of migration-induced gaps in the agricultural and rural labour force [including the shrinking and ageing of the labour force) on production, food security and sustainability;
- accurate information and data on migrants, by gender and age, geographical and social origin, pre-migration livelihood conditions, skills, education, etc., fertility/mortality trends; in particular, the characteristics, trends and effects of temporary mobility on fertility and mortality need to be established by gender, age, and type of household; and
- guidelines on gender-responsive land settlement policies and tenure arrangements that can allocate equal access to land and security of tenure to men and women migrants.
Endnotes
1. Zoran Roca, "Urbanization and Rural Women: Impact of Rural-to-Urban Migration," FAO, 1993, p. 1. For a comprehensive discussion of the problems in defining migration, see Richard E. Bilsborrow and UN Secretariat, "Internal Female Migration and Development: An Overview," in Internal Migration of Women in Developing Countries: Proceedings of the UN Expert Meeting on the Feminization of Internal Migration, Mexico, 22-25 October 1991, UN, New York, 1993, pp. 1-2.
2. Roca, ibid.
3. For a comprehensive introduction to the subject of female migration in developing countries see Internal Migration of Women in Developing Countries: Proceedings of the United Nations Expert Meeting on the Feminization of Internal Migration, Mexico, 22-25 October 1991, UN, New York, 1993, and particularly Graeme J. Hugo's "Migrant Women in Developing Countries," pp. 47-77.
4. National Perspectives on Population and Development: A Synthesis of 168 National Reports Prepared for the International Conference on Population and Development, 1995, p. 93.
5. Ogden, P. E., Migration and Geographical Change, Cambridge University Press, 1984, cited in Zoran Roca, Urbanization and Rural Women, op. cit. p. 2.
6. Hugo, 1993, op. cit., p. 63.
7. M. d. L. A. Crummett. "The Women's Movement". Ceres, 1992, No. 137, cited in ibid.
8. Condition de la femme et population: le cas de l'Afrique francophone, United Nations, Vienna, 1992, p. 54.
9. Migration and Urbanization in Asia and the Pacific: Inter-relationships with Socio-Economic Development and Evolving Policy Issues, United Nations, 1993, p. 15.
10. ESCAP, "Urbanization Patterns and Problems into the 21st Century in Asia and the Pacific, Migration and Urbanization in Asia and the Pacific, op. cit., p. 19.
11. Marts Tienda and Karen Booth, "Migration, Gender and Social Change: A Review and Reformulation.' 1988, cited in Bilsborrow et al., 1994, op. cit., p. 12.
12. J.C. Kroll, Contribution méthodologique à l'étude du développement agricole en sciences sociales, Synthèses. Notes et Débats, Laboratoire de Recherches de la Chaire de Sciences Economiques de l'ENSSAA, Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, Dijon, 1985, No. 2.
13. Carol Colfer, "On Circular Migration: From the Distaff Side,' in Guy Standing (ad.), Labour Circulation and the Labour Process, cited in Hugo, 1994, op. cit., p. 67.
14. Philippe Fargues, "Subsistence Crop Deficit and Family Structure in sub-Saharan Africa, Population Institut National d'Etudes Démographiques (English Selection), Vol. 2, 1990, p. 55.
15. H. Ware and D. Lucas, 'Women Left Behind: The Changing Division of Labour and its Effects on Agricultural Production,' 1988, cited in Condition de la Femme et Population: Le Cas de l'Afrique Francophone, United Nations, Vienna, 1992, p. 69.
16. Final Mission Report, Farming Systems in the Dry Zone, Myanmar, Agricultural Development and Environmental Rehabilitation in the Dry Zone Project, July 1995, p. A1.30.
17. Ingrid Palmer, The Impact of Male Out-Migration on Women in Farming. Women's Roles & Gender Differences in Development: Cases for Planners. Kumarian Press, West Hartford, 1985, cited in Roca, 1993, op. cit., p. 3.
18. FAO, 'Women and Population in Agricultural and Rural Development in Sub-Saharan Africa," Women in Agricultural Development No.5, 1992 and Crummett, 1992, op. cit., cited in ibid.
19. FAO, 1992c. Rural Women in Latin America - Rural Development, Access to Land, Migration and Legislation, op. cit., cited in Roca, 1993, op. cit., p. 4.
20. Palmer, 1985, op. cit., cited in Roca, 1993, op. cit., p. 4.
21. S. Selvaratnam, 'Consequences of Population Change at the National Level: The Asian Context," Proceedings of the Regional Seminar on Consequences of Population Change in Asia, Studies on Consequences of Population Chance in Asia: Comparative Findings, Thailand, 7-10 April 1992. p. 72.
22. This excludes countries which have reached their potential population-supporting capacity. Fargues, 1989, op. cit., p. 58.
23. Other factors include the substitution of cash crops for subsistence crops and schooling of children. See Fargues, 1989, op. cit., p. 58.
24. Derek Byerlee, 'Rural-Urban Migration in Africa," cited in Theodore D. Fuller, "Rural-to-Urban Population Redistribution,' in L. A. Peter Gosling and Linda Y.C. Lim (eds.), Population Redistribution: Patterns. Policies and Prospects, UNFPA, Policy Development Studies, No. 2, 1979, p. 31.
25. Fargues, op. cit., p. 66.
26. L. Trager, Migration and Remittances: Urban income and rural households in the Philippines, 1984, in Hugo, Migration and Rural-Urban Linkages in the ESCAP Region,- 1993, op. cit., p. 108.
27. FAO, Intraregional Labour Mobility and Agricultural Development in the Near East: Phenomenon, Impact and Policy Implications. FAO Economic and Social Development Paper 94, 1990.
28. Roca, 1993, op. cit., p. 4.
29. A. Ahmad, "Choice and the Small Farmer in Baling, Kedah, Peninsular Malaysia". in J. Hirst, J. Overton, B. Allen and Y.J. Byron, (ads.), Small-scale Agriculture. Canberra: Commonwealth Geographical Bureau, 1988.
30. FAO, Women and Population in Agricultural and Rural Development in Sub-Saharan Africa. Women in Agricultural Development No.5, 1992.
31. Palmer, 1985, cited in Roca, 1993, op. cit., p.5.
32. Migration and the Family, UN, Vienna, Occasional Paper Series, No. 14, 1994, p. 9.
33. FAO, Rural Women: The Closing Link Between Population and Environment, Discussion Note at the Expert Group Meeting on Population and Women, Gaborone, Botswana, 1992, cited in Roca 'Urbanization and Rural Women: The Impact of Rural-to-Urban Migration,' 1993, p. 6.
34. FAO, Rural Women in Latin America - Rural Development, Access to Land, Migration and Legislation, 1992, cited in ibid., p. 6.
35. Kossoudji, S. and Mueller, E.1983. The Economic and Demographic Status of Female-Headed Households in Rural Botswana. Economic Development and Cultural Change. No.4, in Roca, 1993, op. cit., p.7.
36. Penporn Tirasawat, 'The Impact of Migration on Conditions at the Origin: A study on selected villages in Thailand," 1985, cited in Philip Guest, 'Consequences of Population Change at the Household Level.' Proceedings of the Regional Seminar on Consequences of Population Chance in Asia, op. cit., p. 110.
37. Graeme Hugo, 'Migrant Women in Developing Countries.' Paper presented at the UN Expert Group on the Feminization of Internal Migration, Mexico' 1991, cited in Philip Guest, 'Consequences of Population Change at the Household Level," in Proceedings of the Regional Seminar on Consequences of Population hangs in Asia, Studies on Consequences of Population Chance in Asia: Comparative Findings, Thailand, 7-10 1992, p. 110.
38. Roca, 1994, op. cit., p. 6.
39. Kossoudji and Mueller, 1983, op. cit.. In Namibia, according to one observer, some female-headed households farm only half to one-third of their arable land due to lack of labour and inputs. See Namibia National Report to the Fourth World Conference on Women, Office of the President, Department of Women Affairs, November 1994, p. 38.
40. Jiggins, 1985, cited in Roca, 1994, op. cit., p.6.
41. Jacques du Guerny, Migration and Rural Development, FAO, 1978, pp. 36-37.
42. Hugo argues that there has been 'a convergence between urban and rural lifestyles, in the economic, social and demographic charcteristics of urban and rural populations, in the types of services available in urban and rural areas and in the levels of personal mobility of rural and urban populations," in 'Migration and Urban Rural Linkages in the ESCAP region.' 1993, op cit., p. 92.
43. Côte d'lvoire, Enquête permanente auprès des ménaces 1985, Abidjan, 1986, cited in Fargues, 1989, OD. cit., p. 64.
44. Ibid. p. 65.
45. Ibid.. pp. 65-66. The quote would read better if it were slightly rephrased: "The competition... either encourage the farmers to produce staple foodstuffs or dissuade them...'
46. Zoran Roca, "Rural Development, the Environment and Migration," Background Note to the Expert Group Meeting on Population Distribution and Migration, Bolivia January 1993, pp. 7-9.
47. The programme covers Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d'lvoire, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo) and is supported by 23 donor agencies, including the World Bank, WHO, UNDP, and others.
48. The Challenges of Success: Land Settlement and Environmental Chance in the Onchocerciasis Control Programme Area, Committee of Sponsoring Agencies, OCP, 1994, p. 1.
49. ibid.
50. FAO, Lettre d'accord pour la réalization d'un étude des capacités de charge démographique dans les pays du programme de contrôle de l'onchocercose pour une occupation optimale des terres sous contrôle, 1994, pp. 1-2.
51. Migration and Urbanization in Asia and the Pacific: Inter-relationships with Socio-Economic Development and Evolving Policy Issues, United Nations, 1993, p. 15.
<section>5</section>
Module V: Gender, population, farming systems & land tenure: Main policy issues
A. Key policy issues
Vertical versus holistic approaches to gender, population & agriculture/rural development.
Case study: Planning for community forestry and population issues -- Thailand. INT/90/P40
Gender bias and stereotypes
Population, gender and land tenure issues
Population, gender and farming systems issues
B. Recommendations
1. Conduct field research on the linkages between gender, population and agriculture/rural development
2. Merge agricultural censuses and demographic surveys
3. Regionalize existing modules on gender, population, farming systems and land tenure
4. Hold an expert consultation of gender, population, land tenure and farming systems specialists
Endnotes
Module V: Gender, population, farming systems & land tenure: Main policy issues
(Topouzis/du Guerny, SDWP, November 1995)
A. Key policy issues
Vertical versus holistic approaches to gender, population & agriculture/rural development.
As seen in modules l-IV, gender, population and agriculture/rural development issues tend to be perceived along vertical lines -- conceptually as well as programmatically -- often in isolation from one another. This leads either to the neglect of linkages between these areas or to simplistic generalizations and deterministic relationships between related variables (as seen in Module II).
For example, to argue that population growth is the main cause of poverty and environmental degradation is to overlook the linkages between these problems, such as the wider gender and social inequalities, unequal land tenure patterns, power relations, etc. Rural women, in their efforts to satisfy the basic needs of their families and lacking alternative means of employment or access to capital, are frequently pushed to overexploit resources. This is largely due to gender inequality, and, in particular, to the fact that resource access and land tenure systems tend to favour men.
The experience of the Philippines illustrates some of the long-run consequences of relatively high population growth. It has become a densely populated country, not only in the fertile lowlands but also in the much more fragile uplands. Economic growth, although moderately rapid, has failed to provide enough mew jobs to shrink the reservoir of impoverished rural households that feeds the stream of upland migration. A family planning program to witch the government has not been firmly committed has yet to reach most poor and rural households. Yet, population policy is only one determinant of the negative effects of population growth on the environment. Economic policies that failed to reduce the burden of poverty, and land tenure policies that provided secure right on public forest lands only in the form of shout-term leases to a few large-scale timber concessionaires have been at least as important.
Source: Word Resource Institute, Population Growth, Poverty, and Environmental Stress: Frontier Migration in the Philippines and Costa Rica, October 1992, p. 12
"Tenurial policies are population policies when they allow uncontrolled land use in frontier areas, thus inviting large-scale migration," has argued a recent study conducted by the World Resources Institute on Population Growth, Poverty and Environmental Stress. "Economic policies that depress real wages and employment also have significant demographic consequences. Similarly, failure to address rapid population growth should be regarded as a policy with massive long-run consequences. "
However, tenurial, agricultural and economic policies are rarely inherently population- and/or gender-neutral. In other words, a concerted effort is needed to develop a holistic approach which incorporates population and gender factors into agricultural/rural development issues, where appropriate. The first step in this process is to identify the linkages between agriculture/rural development, population and gender. Modules l-IV have attempted to delineate some of these linkages, focusing on land tenure and farming systems. Rudimentary working conceptual frameworks and/or broad guidelines on how to incorporate population and gender issues in agriculture and rural development have also been proposed.
Acknowledging the linkages between population, gender and agricultural/rural development issues, however, is not enough. The Thailand case study below shows that population variables should not translate into mere social or demographic information and data, as is generally the tendency, as this does not result in the integration of demographic issues in agricultural policies and programmes. Population data should be used as an analytical tool to enhance our understanding of the relationship between population, gender and rural development over time and to harmonize population with agricultural policies.
A holistic approach to gender, population and rural development by definition needs to encompass a gender dimension, to address the needs, interests and constraints of both men and women (see Module I). The Onchocerciasis Control Programme examined in Module IV shows that migration deeply transforms the relationship between people who have relocated and the land, since those installed in new settlement areas do not own the land they cultivate. Under these circumstances, women's socio-cultural and economic dependence on their husbands, arising from the fact that men had formerly entrusted part of the land they owned to their wives, has no longer a raison d'étre. Module IV argued that if advantage is deliberately taken of the changed relationship between migrants vis-à-vis the land and of its socio-cultural and economic implications, this could facilitate women's access to and control over land.
Case study: Planning for community forestry and population issues -- Thailand. INT/90/P40
INT/90/P40, an on-going project funded by UNFPA and executed by FAO's Community Forestry Unit (FONP), examines in detail the relevance and significance of population issues in community forestry planning. The project has identified key linkages between community forestry and population, including policy issues and training needs and opportunities for community forestry training programmes. A brief summary of the project findings will help to illustrate how similar exercises in the areas of gender, population and land tenure and farming systems can help integrate linkages into mainstream policies and programmes.
Although population pressure and deforestation are quite pronounced in Thailand, existing literature is heavily focused on deforestation; community forestry and its organization; conflicts between communities, forestry officials and capitalists; and how the conflicts are, or should be, solved. Studies on significant population variables -- such as geographic distribution, population composition (e.g. age and sex), family formation, rural-urban density, migration streams, growth rates, age structure, dependency ratio and other socio-economic characteristics -- and their impact on land use, forestry and deforestation are rare.
Current forest/environmental research considers population only in terms of population size, growth and density. Even here, differences of opinion exist as to what is the actual causal relationship between population and deforestation. This controversy, moreover, limits the ability to incorporate population variables into forestry policies, plans and programmes.^1
(^1 For a discussion of Panayotou's and Sungsuwan's econometric function for defining forest cover and deforestation, see "Population Issues Relevant to Community Forestry Planning: Thailand,- INT190/P40, p.)
The causal link between population and environment in Thailand today is clouded further by a lack of attention to basic population data. Though data on some variables have been collected -- such as age structure, population size, migration, income and occupational distribution, and community organization -- they are only collected to give a descriptive profile of the communities or areas under study and are not used as analytical tools for understanding the relationships between population, deforestation and environmental degradation, especially over time.
In forestry and environmental planning, population variables should not be looked at as social or demographic profile information only, though this has been the case for Thailand thus far. In fact, this approach largely explains why population variables are absent from forestry training programmes as well as policy-making and planning. Rather, they should be able to indicate linkages (both direct and indirect) between those variables and land and forestry use, as well as whether or not they affect land and forest degradation, to what extent over time, and how. In effect, what studies of population and community forestry need most is a dynamic time series approach to understand the actual interaction between population variables and community forestry, and thereby integrate basic population data into forestry use planning. This type of approach does not exist at present and current assessments are as a result limited, as they only look at a "snapshot" in time and not how that
picture has developed over time.
For example, changes in community and household demographic variables (growth, size, age-sex composition) should be studied over time in relation to land use and deforestation to determine whether or not population pressure changes are actually influencing environmental stability at present versus in the past. Moreover, it is often assumed that population growth is one major determinant of environmental degradation, and that reducing population growth rates by launching more effective development programmes aimed at rural poverty alleviation is one effective measure against population growth. In Thailand's case, however, the population growth rate has declined significantly over time due to an effective national family planning programme. What is now the real issue is that the number of births added each year (which amounts to over half a million) is still a problem for national, social and economic development planning, particularly in terms of preserving the environment
and natural resources.
Family formation is another important population consideration. It includes such aspects as age at marriage, post-nuptial residence, age at having first and second children, family planning, inheritance patterns which should be investigated in relation to land tenure, land fragmentation, migration as well as land and forest use. For instance, while large families may have been the norm in the past, contributing to the population-environment pressure process, today the family is changing toward a more nuclear structure. This may reduce pressure on the environment, especially under conditions where some, or most, family members out-migrate at a certain age.
Migration needs to be examined in terms of the relationship between migration, land, forestry use, and degradation, particularly over time and with regard to gender and occupational alternatives. Migration can serve both positive and negative purposes with regard to community forestry conservation and an accurate understanding of each of its dimensions is crucial.
Gender roles are also important as they give indications as to:
a) who is utilising what environmental resources and for what purposes;
b) how these patterns have changed over time; and
c) who can best serve as community forestry conservationists.
For instance, in community forests in Northern Thailand, the traditional pattern included a clear-cut division of labour between men and women. Women were responsible for child care, obtaining and preparing foods in and around the village, obtaining water and firewood and collecting forest products for sale. Men were responsible for gathering foods (animals, plants) deep in the forest, clearing the land, ploughing and harrowing rice fields, tending cattle and livestock, cutting trees and constructing houses, basket weaving, as well as selling forest products. Today, however, this relatively rigid traditional division of labour pattern has broken down. With the advent of a cash economy, men's and women's roles have become more flexible since more human resources are needed. As a result, gender roles have become diversified in order that all the required tasks be done. In relation to the land, for instance, men and women now share work more equitably, and men are also
assisting in child care.
Finally, ethnicity, especially with regard to gender roles and division of labour, is another important population variable which must be studied in connection to land use and conservation. Two cases in point are Northern Thailand's largest hilltribe ethnic groups, the Karen and the Lawa. These groups are known to conserve the environment. Women make the fire breakers when clearing new land and are involved in maintaining water resources in the community. Women also take part in community forestry projects which are becoming more widespread among the hilltribes. At the household level, the women plant vegetables, herbs, and spices in the rice fields for family consumption. Although women have not formed a formal forest conservation group in hilltribe communities with regard to environmental conservation, they are the ones who directly use and benefit from natural resources.
Therefore, traditional population variables associated with the environment (e.g. geographic distribution, rural-urban density, growth rates) are not the only relevant or critical variables that must be considered in assessing problems related to deforestation and pressure on forestry resources. Additional factors (such as ethnicity and family formation mentioned above) are also important considerations that need to be integrated into training programmes for forestry officials, in order to promote better landuse planning and more sustainable management and use of forest and tree resources.
To conclude, although some population issues have been explored in research projects related to community forestry, they have been primarily used to compile descriptive profiles of communities for background information purposes. They have not been used as analytical tools in community forestry planning. Thus, in the future, INT/90/P40^3 recommends that training programmes improve the capacities of foresters and demographers to facilitate local people in developing their own forest land management plans, by integrating some of the following population components:^4
1. Population Structure.
Main thrusts/objectives: To provide analytical information on population size, age and sex composition in relation to land and forestry use. Age and sex structure elements are core components of all demographic processes -- fertility, mortality, migration, etc. -- and accordingly, have a direct relationship to rates of natural increase and overall increase or decrease in a community or other large social grouping. Age and sex structure also determines the proportion of men and women in the labour force and the dependency ratio which is also important for understanding past, present and future settlement patterns and their population composition/characteristics.
2. Fertility, Mortality, Migration
Main thrusts/objectives: To provide analytical information on births, spacing, familiar size, family planning accessibility, contraceptive method use, ability to choose whet, to have and when to stop childbearing. To provide analytical information on mortality, which includes rates, differentials and causes. To enhance the understanding of foresters, other government officials, policy-makers, etc. of the inter-relationships between population movement and land/forest use.
3. Family Structure, Formation and Inheritance Patterns
Major thrusts/objectives: To examine the relationship between family structure (i.e. types, status and roles, division of labour, family formation, family developmental cycle and inheritance patterns), and land/forest use. Family structure is dynamic and is shaped by population change due to changes in fertility, mortality and migration. Coupled with inheritance rules, these aspects have had a tremendous impact on land use patterns, land fragmentation and forest use.
The case study of project INT/90/P40 shows how 'population' issues are relevant to community forestry planning. Similar exercises on Population, Gender and Farming Systems and Population, Gender and Land Tenure, could help to document and substantiate some of issues raised in Modules II, III and IV with "hard" supporting data. Action-oriented research into these linkages and concrete programme recommendations will enable the integration of this holistic approach in FAO regular programme activities and budgets and in Member States' development plans and programmes.
Gender bias and stereotypes
Modules l-IV have shown how gender bias and stereotyping are major stumbling blocks to the adoption of more equitable and holistic policies. Gender bias and stereotyping permeate development terminology and are at the core of widely held assumptions, including the following:
- that economic development, including agricultural and population policies, are gender neutral;
- that farmers are "male" while their wives are mere assistants to their husbands. It is usually taken for granted that the male farmer is the head of household, the decision-maker, and thus the target group of agricultural policies, programmes and services;
- that the farm household consists of husband, wife and children sharing common interests and working towards common goals and that within households, the burdens and benefits of poverty and wealth are distributed equally regardless of gender;
- that most migrants are men and that female migration is associational rather than economic in motive; etc.
Part of the reason for gender stereotyping is the lack of data and empirical evidence on the differential roles, contributions and constraints of men and women farmers. Any further work, therefore, on the linkages between gender, population, farming systems and land tenure should include gender-dissagregated data collection and analysis to provide policy-makers with evidence that will help break down these stereotypes and redress gender bias.
Population, gender and land tenure issues
Module II on Gender, Fertility/Mortality and Land Tenure showed how differing household demographic conditions demand differing land and tenure arrangements, and, similarly, how certain land and tenure arrangements are better suited to certain types of household demographic situations. While emphasizing the specificity of each context, the module proposed a more holistic approach to the relationship between fertility/mortality and land tenure. It was seen how the capacity of a household to make an appropriate land or tenure response depends on three conditions: land access, security and sustainability. Men's and women's constraints to these three conditions and the likely impact of these constraints on household demographic characteristics and strategies were examined. The module raised the issue of the need to develop broad guidelines in order to help policy-makers design optimal tenure arrangements for different types of households. The need to review the traditional
gender focus on land ownership, given the fact that security of tenure emerged as a far more important issue for women (and men) than ownership, was also underscored.
Module IV on Gender, Migration, Farming Systems and Land Tenure, used the Onchocerciasis Control Programme as a case study to illustrate the linkages between rural-to-rural migration, gender and tend settlement. The case study clearly delineated how a population component -- in this case, rural-to-rural migration -- can be a critical factor to the success and sustainability of a 'non-population programme.' It also showed that the gender dimension of a population variable (rural-to-rural migration) can be used to enhance land tenure conditions.
Population, gender and farming systems issues
Module III showed how growing population pressure on increasingly degraded land, male out-migration, and socio-economic changes are transforming the traditional pattern of intra-household rights and obligations and the very role of women in agriculture. At the same time, levels of time and human energy inputs required in women's farm- and home-based productive and reproductive chores are increasing. In this context, having a large number of children continues to be a major asset and source of immediate and long-term economic and social security for rural women. In developing regions, this is reflected in the high value placed on child labour and in the absence of labour-saving home and farm technologies and of social safety nets.
The module further indicated that a critical area which needs to be addressed is the limited appreciation of the gender and other relationships within and between rural households, of the access to resources that different members have at their disposal, of the constraints under which different household members operate, and of the complexity of the farming systems that they practice. This calls for the need for gender-dissagregated data and gender-responsive methodologies in farming systems research, including data linking agriculture and population. The increasing incidence o, female-headed households (either through male out-migration or through polygyny) also needs to be addressed in farming systems research and in the design and introduction of new technologies.
It was also shown that there is some evidence linking partial breast-feeding and early weaning with women's increasing involvement in subsistence activities (just as changes in land tenure and farming techniques may have a profound impact on women's farm work and ability to breast-feed).5 Additional research is needed into how and to what degree the pressures on women's time at certain points of the agricultural cycle may lead to curtailment of breast-feeding and corresponding demographic effects and the likely impact of different types of agricultural innovation on breast-feeding. The module also raised the need to quantify, document and incorporate the economic contributions of children by gender into programmes and projects. Finally, the impact of AlDS-related mortality on farming systems and rural livelihoods was examined within a gender perspective, pointing to the need for population and agricultural programmes alike to design responses that take into account the
linkages between gender, food security and HIV/AIDS.
B. Recommendations
1. Conduct field research on the linkages between gender, population and agriculture/rural development
Field projects similar to INT/90/P40: Population Issues Relevant to Community Forestry Planning, on gender, population and farming systems/land tenure could help elucidate key policy issues with supporting data and empirical information. This would:
a) make visible the linkages between gender, population and farming systems and land tenure;
b) show the relevance of these linkages in a specific programme or project; and
c) help propose concrete policy recommendations.
2. Merge agricultural censuses and demographic surveys
An important step in the process of translating the need for a more holistic approach into practice would be to merge agricultural censuses with demographic surveys. At present, the Demographic and Health Surveys are usually conducted in isolation from agricultural censuses. Agricultural censuses undertaken jointly with demographic surveys could be initially carried out and tested on a pilot basis. This would make both sets of surveys more effective, while facilitating the articulation of population, gender, agricultural and other linkages.
3. Regionalize existing modules on gender, population, farming systems and land tenure
Given time and space constraints, modules l-IV on gender, population and rural development are general and global in scope. As a result, and given the variety of land tenure and farming systems, and demographic conditions and priorities of different regions, oversimplification of the issues at stake has been to some extent unavoidable. The next step in identifying policy-relevant linkages between these variables would be to make them region-specific and to find ways of incorporating them into regional and national population and agricultural policies and programmes.
4. Hold an expert consultation of gender, population, land tenure and farming systems specialists
An expert consultation of population, farming systems, land tenure and gender specialists could:
a) set up a policy and action-oriented research programme on the issues and linkages identified in these modules;
b) deliberate on the recommendations proposed in this module and work out the modalities of operationalizing these recommendations;
c) develop a methodology to help harmonize policies and programmes in the areas of population, gender and agricultural/rural development; and
d) organize a subsequent meeting of population and agricultural policy makers to discuss and disseminate the findings of the expert group meeting.
Endnotes
1. M.C. Cruz, C. A. Meyer, R. Repetto and R. Woodward, Population Growth. Poverty, and Environmental Stress: Frontier Migration in the Philippines and Costa Rica, World Resources Institute, October 1992, p. 12.
2. The case study is based on the Draft Population Issues Relevant to Community Forestry Planning: Country Profile Thailand, by Bencha Yoddumnem-Attig, George A. Attig, Tirapong Suntipop, and Kriangsak Rojkureestein, 1995.
3. ibid.
4. For a complete list of project recommendations, see Draft Population Issues Relevant to Community Forestry Planning: Country Profile Thailand, op. cit., 1995, pp. 19-26.
5. Christine Oppong, Relationships between Wombats Work and Demographic Behavior, 1991 and Ingrid Palmer, Gender and Population in the Adjustment of African Economies: Planning for Chance, 1991, cited in C. Oppong, "Introduction," in C. Oppong and Aderanti Adepoju (eds.), Gender. Work and Population in Sub-Saharan Africa, ILO, London, 1994, p. 14.
<section>e</section>
Purpose and scope of the modules on gender, population and rural development
Purpose and scope of the modules on gender, population and rural development
This set of five modules on Gender, Population and Rural Development were prepared under the guidance of Jacques du Guerny, Chief, Population Programme Service (SDWP), Division of Women and People's Participation in Development (SOW), Sustainable Development Department, by Daphne Topouzis, consultant.
The modules analyze in detail two institutional factors that underpin gender, population and rural development issues: farming systems and land tenure. In particular, the modules delineate how gender issues in farming systems and land tenure interface with fertility, mortality and migration. The significance of these institutional factors lies in that they provide a link between population variables and the big-physical environment.
The purpose of this set-of modules is to stimulate discussion among gender, population, farming systems and land tenure specialists on the need for a systems approach to gender, rural development and population issues. The objective of this exercise is to identify:
a) key linkages between farming systems and land tenure on the one hand and fertility, mortality and migration on the other;
b) main policy issues; and
c) research needs in the policy areas identified above.
A brief synopsis of the five modules follows below:
Module l: The Population Parameters of Rural Development recalls issues and problems in current approaches to the role of gender and population in rural development. The significance of a systems approach is highlighted and some key issues raised in Modules Il-V are introduced.
Module II analyzes the linkages between Gender, Fertility/Mortality & Land Tenure and their implications for tenure systems, focusing on land access, security and sustainability.
Module lII explores the linkages between Gender, Fertility/Mortality and Farming Systems, focusing on the impact of these linkages on farming systems and on farm households. FAO projects RAF/94/T01 (Technical Support Services) and RAF/91/004 (both funded by UNDP) and TCP/UGA/2256 (Technical Cooperation Programme, funded by FAO) on the impact of AlDS-related mortality on farming systems and rural families in East Africa are used as case studies.
Module IV focuses on the linkages between Gender, Rural-to-Urban Migration and Farming Systems and Gender, Rural-to-Rural Migration and Land Tenure, and their implications for farm households. The Onchocerciasis Control Programme in West Africa (funded by a consortium of donors) is used as a case study for gender, rural-to-rural migration and land tenure.
Module V synthesizes the findings from the five modules, examines the policy implications in detail and defines possible areas of intervention as well as major areas of operational research needed in gender, population and rural development. Thailand INT/90/P40: Population Issues Relevant to Community Forestry Planning (funded by UNFPA) is used as a case study.
(November 1995)
