<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
The following case study explores the lessons learned at the nexus of agricultural planning, community participation, and gender concerns during the implementation of two inter-linked projects aimed at improving livestock production in Afghanistan from 1994 - 1997. The two projects are the "Animal Health and Livestock Production Programme in Afghanistan (AFG/93/004)"^1 and "Promotion of Farmers' Participation through the Implementation of Animal Health and Production Improvement Modules (AHPIM) in Afghanistan (TCP/AFG/4553)".
^1The new project phase continues under UNDP-funded "Sustainable Livestock Development for Food Security (AFG/96/007). Also AHPIM= PIHAM.
This case study is one of a series of background papers being prepared for a "Workshop on Gender and Participation in Agricultural Development Planning - Harvesting Best Practices" to be held in Rome in December of 1997. The Workshop will provide the opportunity to bring together nationals from a number of countries where FAO has tried to assist institutions and communities to support planning processes which are participatory and that address the different needs and priorities of rural women and men. The objectives of this workshop are to:
 compare and share experiences from different countries and thereby build capacity among institutions and organisations working in the agricultural sector to use participatory and gender sensitive approaches in agricultural planning;
 from this shared experience, potentially develop a framework or model for gender-responsive participatory agricultural development planning;
 share what was learned from this field experience with interested FAO technical divisions and explore linkages with complementary FAO programmes, such as the Special Programme for Food Security (SPSF) and the Socio-Economic and Gender Analysis Programme (SEAGA).
It is hoped that this case study will be of interest to others working on programmes and projects particularly those in Afghanistan - which seek effective ways to include rural women, their experience and their priorities in agricultural planning processes in a context where their participation and mobility have been severely restricted for the past year or so.
<title>Gender and participation in agricultural development planning: lessons from Afghanistan</title>
<section>1</section>
Abbreviations and acronyms
Abbreviations and acronyms
AHPIM
Animal Health and Production Improvement Module
BVW
Basic Veterinary Worker
CTA
Chief Technical Adviser
EU
European Union
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
IP
Implementing Partner
LID
Livestock in Development
M1..5
Module 1,2,3,4,5 - PIHAM
NGO
Non- Governmental Organisation
OPS
United Nations Office for Project Services
PIHAM
Reconfigured acronym "AHPIM" in concordance with local needs
PRA
Participatory Rural Appraisal
RP
Replication Phase
TOT
Training of Trainers
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNV
United Nations Volunteer
VFU
Veterinary Field Unit
WP
Women's Program
<section>2</section>
I. Introduction
I. Introduction
"One day, there were two children in a village talking to one another. 'Who are those people? Are they doctors? ' 'No, they are not. They are PIHAM people. ' 'What is PIHAM?' 'It is the programme of these people. It means they are continuously coming and going, coming and going'^i
This case study talks about the opportunities that can be created as an agricultural development project moves increasingly towards "bottom-up" participatory processes of needs identification, causal analysis, problem-solving, and monitoring. At the same time it indicates that even a handful of gender-responsive participatory appraisal tools, used effectively in training, has the potential to positively alter planning processes and project implementation. It is the story of one project's experiences with participatory approaches and the implications they had -- not only for the villager/technician relationship, but also for the project management and staff in terms of planning and monitoring -- that is recounted here.
In 1994, UNDP amalgamated two separate livestock/veterinary projects in Afghanistan under the execution of FAO. The subsequent project, "Animal Health and Livestock Production Programme in Afghanistan (AFG/93/004) moved from a prior focus of rehabilitation to one of sustainable agricultural development and emphasised the active participation of the community in the development process. Activities included animal health and veterinary services; introduction of improved fodder and nutrition, and breeding and poultry development. These activities supported the rebuilding of Afghanistan's self-reliance and production capacities to produce livestock and livestock products backed by self-supporting veterinary services.
The livestock project recognised the need for all objectives to benefit both rural women and men and to involve women directly in the implementation of activities. However, for socio-cultural reasons, the Women's Programme of the project has to a great extent conducted its activities apart from the more "mainstream" project activities. More recently, political reasons have forced an even greater gender-differentiated implementation of activities -- training women and men together is now impossible within the borders of Afghanistan. In Taliban-controlled areas, women are generally prevented from going to offices, making both training and monitoring difficult. However, in terms of approach, the "women's" and "men's" activities have come closer to one another, exchanging lessons and experiences to strengthen each "programme".
In response to the need for more participatory approaches to implementation in the livestock project, FAO developed a sub-project entitled "Promotion of Farmers' Participation Through the Implementation of Animal Health and Production Improvement Modules (AHPIM) in Afghanistan (TCP/AFG/4553)"^ii in 1995. This project was founded on a generic programme developed by FAO and was based on the experiences of using participatory approaches elsewhere in Asia.^iii Project staff, together with consultants from Livestock in Development (LID), undertook a concentrated process of methodology modification, field-testing, and replication, to arrive at an appropriate participatory approach for use in Afghanistan. Thus PIHAM^iv was born.
Through a process of participatory training and fieldwork that aimed to change the attitudes of male and female project staff, particularly in the Veterinary Field Units (VFUs), towards farmers and increase their capacity to use participatory assessment and monitoring tools, the project and its sub-activities took a positive turn. Neither the project nor the approach were specifically labelled "gender-responsive". However, the introduction of PIHAM to the livestock project highlighted the gender-differentiated roles and responsibilities in livestock management, and thus the importance of considering gender disaggregated information in problem-solving and monitoring.
The participatory approaches used not only improved staff responses to farmers' needs, but importantly highlighted, perhaps for the first time, the magnitude to which rural women are involved in livestock production systems. This in turn had implications for the kind of information that was gathered. Project staff recognised that without the inclusion of both women* and men's knowledge about their animals, effective responses to livestock production constraints were unlikely.
This case study looks at the lessons learned during the introduction of PIHAM and its impact on the overall livestock project and the Women's Programme component. In order to set the stage and understand the project's efforts to be more participatory and gender-responsive, the following section provides some background on the sociopolitical situation in Afghanistan as well as the difficult "gender" context in which this effort, together with all other rehabilitation and development efforts, have struggled to work. Section three discusses how the projects were set up. This followed by a brief description of how the projects were implemented in the field. As in the other studies in this series, the fifth section of the paper analyses the lessons learned from implementation, especially the strengths and weaknesses of the approaches used in terms of six "challenges" that were inherent to or emerged during the process: the entry point, i.e. determining where to start and the
implications that had for how to structure and support the process.
 the tools and methods that were used and how they worked in terms of learning about and documenting gender issues in agriculture and facilitating the participation of men and women in agricultural development planning.
 gender information, i.e. a brief analysis of the major findings from the GA/PRA and the impact this new information had.
 capacity building, i.e. whose capacities were enhanced and what strategies and methods worked best to accomplish that task.
 linkages, i.e. how did the projects promote linkages with on-going planning processes.
 institutionalisation, i.e. what changes did or should take place in order to create a more enabling environment for gender-responsive, participatory approaches to agricultural development planning.
The case study finally proposes considerations for those wishing to support gender-responsive participatory processes in agricultural planning, particularly in situations where it is difficult for both female and male technical staff to meet directly with rural women It points to the fact that the knowledge and experience, as well as the needs and priorities of different household/community members must somehow be incorporated in planning. Otherwise, gender, and other socio-economically differentiated barriers to planning processes can have significantly negative consequences for the overall effectiveness of livestock interventions -- from the grassroots level up to the policy level.
The preparation of this case study does not constitute a formal evaluation. Rather, it is a "story" of lessons learned, based on a review of project documentation and discussions with project staff in July 1997. Part of the case study team travelled to Jalalabad and surrounding villages to observe an in-process PIHAM training session for male initiators, and to visit rural women who have been working with project staff using PIHAM approaches to monitor changes in their livestock production.
<section>3</section>
II. Background on Afghanistan
Historical context
The contribution of livestock to development in Afghanistan
Gender issues in Afghanistan
II. Background on Afghanistan
"It is... important to continue to focus on interventions that rebuild mechanisms for people's participation in rehabilitation and development and which provide an incentive to disengage from conflict;...for people to meet peacefully and discuss points of common interest rather than issues that divide; and to ensure that the concerns of the most disadvantaged are adequately taken care of: "^v
Historical context
With its infrastructure and social capital gravely diminished and its governance systems fractured, Afghanistan remains a country in crisis. The loss of jobs and export earnings, together with a lack of national economic management and revenue generation capacities, has crippled the formal national economy. Almost twenty years of war have led to the spiralling reduction in the country's social and economic status.^vi In 1996, UNDP's Human Development Report placed Afghanistan 169 out of 175 countries in the Human Development Index.^vii
Before the war began, Afghanistan had been classed as one of the world's least developed countries. However in 1978, it was self-sufficient in grain for the first time since the early 1900s.^viii Roads, dams, and formal irrigation systems were being developed to support large-scale agriculture; and a network of government training institutions, departments, and offices supported small-holder farmers.
In 1992, the war reached a climax, leaving about one third of the population (6 million people) either internally displaced or in refugee camps outside the country. Significant reductions in agricultural production left the country in dire need of food and other assistance. Agricultural systems had been devastated; infrastructure had deteriorated, and government extension services were drastically reduced.
Over the years, however, due to the efforts of several United Nations agencies and other donors (particularly European Union) and NGO-supported activities, agricultural production has started to make a recovery. By 1995, these efforts had achieved great results. Between two and three million refugees returned to their farms, the country's food supply increased, and much of the farm land was back in production.
A formal government no longer functions in Afghanistan. In its absence, the UN provides a sense of direction in the reconstruction and development of the country. The lack of a central government has created several constraints to rehabilitating the country's capacities. However, opportunities have been grasped wherever, and whenever possible. Most notably, development organizations and others have worked directly with communities and NGOs to plan and implement activities. Still, the lack of infrastructure and extension services continues to frustrate efforts to institutionalise lessons reamed.
The contribution of livestock to development in Afghanistan
At least three quarters of the population live in rural areas, and about 85 per cent are estimated to depend on agriculture for their livelihood. It makes sense then, that agricultural development, including livestock development, can have a profound influence on developing peace and stability in Afghanistan. The basic ingredients for the development of livestock production are still present in the country -- land, water, adapted indigenous breeds, and hard working and enterprising women and men farmers.
It is estimated that about eight million hectares of agricultural land are cultivated each year in Afghanistan, a third of which is rainfed, the rest under irrigation. The country is characterised by 11 agro-ecological zones, with five percent covering irrigated areas^ix.
The potential social and economic contribution of livestock to agricultural development, household food security and income generation in Afghanistan is vast. Livestock production has always been an integral part of smallholder farming systems throughout the country, providing food, farm power, income, wool, Karakal pelts, and leather. Currently, livestock production contributes to the following^x:
 a source of regular income, however small, through sale of milk eggs, small stock and services;
 employment opportunities in areas where family labour may have little or no other opportunity;
 opportunities for on-farm "value added" processing and downstream marketing of animal products;
 a "buffer" or stabilising effect using risk aversion through combinations of different crops and animal species at the farm level;
 a viable utilisation of marginal areas that have few, if any, alternative uses;
 short-term assets that can be readily liquidated, especially smaller species such as sheep, goats and fowl, for the purchase of food, agricultural inputs, the payment of school fees, and social obligations;
 Ionger-term capital reserve;
 source of protein and important micro-nutrients;
 manure as fuel and building material;
 inputs for crop production: draught animal power, manure, working capital; and finally,
 transport services.
Gender issues in Afghanistan
According to an earlier UN report^xi, life expectancy and literacy rates of Afghan women are among the lowest in the world. Years of conflict and the resulting massive displacement of the Afghan population disrupted family structures and further increased the burden of women^2.
^2It is estimated that there are more than a million widows in Afghanistan.
For "religious and cultural reasons", many Afghan women were historically denied access to education and employment outside the home.^xii More recently, Afghan women have further been denied access to education and employment by Taliban authorities, despite the efforts of UN organisation to convince local authorities to "reverse these discriminatory policies." Afghanistan is a signatory to both the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women and the Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights and has ratified the latter. Yet, recent political developments have further eroded the overall situation of women in Afghanistan in terms of mobility and access to services. The Secretary General of the UN^xiii recently noted that in cities under Taliban control, women's situation has worsened.
The recent restrictions on women have adversely affected the ability of the UN and other donors active in rehabilitation and development efforts in Afghanistan to deliver their programmes to those in need. This rings true to the rural population and to the negative implications of these restrictions for the agricultural sector, where women are so very active.
Over the past year, Taliban decisions have made it increasingly difficult for women to work outside the home, and for others to work with women. This can have serious implications for livestock production efforts. If women are not " present", their knowledge and experience cannot contribute to solving livestock problems. It is important to remember, however, that the extent to which Taliban restrictions affect women differs from region to region and even between urban and rural areas. Also in more general terms, some observers have noted cases whereby the Taliban authorities have had to back down in the face of strong popular protest, particularly in rural areas.^xiv
The restricted movement of women in Afghanistan has added constraints to UN-based (and other) planners trying to respond to development needs in areas already pressured by years of conflict. The question of how to most effectively collect and integrate socio-economic and gender-disaggregated information from village households in order to most adequately plan livestock interventions in communities and beyond has become increasingly difficult to answer. Restrictions on women's movement have made it all but impossible for Afghan women to work outside the home, other than in the human health sector. This has tested the capacities of agricultural planners, including veterinarians and livestock production specialists, to most effectively plan and implement agricultural programmes.
At the time of writing this case study, the UN Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, at the request of the Secretary General, had established an inter-agency group to assess the situation in Afghanistan. Ironically, efforts to bar women's "public" participation in Afghanistan has in some way heightened the visibility of women in the eyes of those operating within the UN/donor community, perhaps more so than in other countries.
<section>4</section>
III. Project design
Animal health and livestock production programme in Afghanistan (AGF/93/004)
Animal health and production improvement module - PIHAM (TCP/AFG/4553)
III. Project design
"I understand this is a good programme. If a minister writes a programme while sitting behind the table it will not be implemented, but if if is designed in the field, if will be implemented "^xv
Animal health and livestock production programme in Afghanistan (AGF/93/004)
Almost all government institutions in Afghanistan, including the Veterinary Department, had effectively ceased functioning as a result of the war. In mid-1994, UNDP amalgamated two livestock programmes and established a single FAO executed programme, "Animal Health and Livestock Production Programme in Afghanistan (AFG/93/004) ".^3 The aim of the project was to "restore and improve the productive capacity of the national livestock composite owned by smallholder farmers and nomadic and semi-nomadic pastoralists."
^3FAO had a "sister" project to the livestock programme, entitled, "Integrated Crops and Food Production in Afghanistan (AFG/94/002)". This project has recently begun a new phase.
The project identified rural women as a key beneficiary group and recognised their capacities as animal production and health "specialists". In turn, it considered development activities that were deemed "appropriate" for their participation. The operation of Veterinary Field Units (VFUs) by women was seen to be unrealistic given their restricted movement in the districts. However, the project felt that women farmers could act as Basic Veterinary Workers (BVWs) in their village, supporting disease investigation and diagnosis and possibly earn a supplementary income. BVW training for women attempted to "avoid old pattern(s)"of only men talking to men about the problems of rehabilitation, and to involve women in animal health and livestock production activities."^xvi
The project set training targets of 60-80 additional paravets and 200-250 Basic Veterinary Workers, including at least 75 women. Poultry breeding farms, hatcheries, and chicken rearing facilities were to be established to facilitate, among other things, the hand out of two month old chicks to women participating in poultry management training. The BVW training together with the poultry management courses were collectively referred to as "the Women's Programme".
Animal health and production improvement module - PIHAM (TCP/AFG/4553)
Generally speaking, the delivery of animal health services in Afghanistan had improved through FAO and other UN, bilateral, and NGO assistance using a package of animal health services against "an historically accepted repertoire of animal diseases"^xvii It is said that mortality was reduced in young (26%) and adult (43%) animals.^xviii However, one study suggested that the relative impact on mortality of vaccinations versus parasite prevention versus clinical treatment had not been considered.^xix The project assumed that anti-parasite treatments accounted for the majority of benefits. In addition, it was thought that poor animal management and nutrition as well as reproductive inefficiency and neo-natal mortality posed considerable constraints to improving livestock productivity.^xx If this were the case, the project extension services would have to change their approach.
Additionally, the livestock project identified several constraints to self-sustaining Veterinary Field Units. The greatest constraint was felt to be the poor relationship between the veterinary staff and the farmers. Poor VFU-farrner relationships not only limited the ability of veterinarians to work effectively on a cost-recovery basis, but also hindered attempts to improve overall small-holder livestock production. To some extent, it appeared that veterinary staff were not aware of the livestock problems faced by farmers^xxi. There was clearly the need for a training programme, previously omitted from the project, to promote the principles of farmers' participation in identifying their own needs and local decision-making, as well as in building closer farmer-veterinary staff relationships.
The project looked to examples elsewhere in Asia for possible appropriate methodologies for changing its extension approach. As a result, AHPIM (later changed to PIHAM) was adapted and tested for use in Afghanistan.
Diagram 1: Foundations or "Pillars" of PIHAM
PIHAM is a herd health and production programme that aims to improve the quality and delivery of livestock services in Afghanistan.^xxii It promotes the use of participatory approaches that are based on gaining greater understanding of, and formulating appropriate responses to, farmers' identified needs. Through this approach, it facilitates the process of identification of animal health and husbandry constraints, the planning and implementation of interventions, and the monitoring of results by farmers and local veterinary teams.
The participatory approaches used in PIHAM are developed on three foundations, or "pillars" (see Diagram 1 above). One of the key strengths of PIHAM is the recognition of the need to maintain continuous contact between farmer and VFU staff to build farmer confidence and facilitate the collection of information essential for responding to the needs of farmers. From other experiences, it was recognised that as the relationship between the two improves, so does the potential to respond to the problems identified by farmers.
Since its inception, PIHAM has acted as one of the key "vehicles for change" for the livestock project and its sub-activities, including the Women* Programme, driving the processes of exchange, reflection, analysis, and correction. Through the encouragement of participatory methodologies, it has created a "safe space" necessary for all project staff from the lowest to highest levels to discuss problems and share successes, both across horizontal and vertical organisational levels.
<section>5</section>
IV. Project implementation
IV. Project implementation
The purpose of this section is to describe the events that took place during the implementation of the overall project and in the Women's Programme component that led to significant changes in the way interventions were planned and implemented. The process of implementation was a move away from a more top-down, centrist approach to one based on the identified needs of communities and grassroots workers. The project's introduction of more participatory training, information gathering and monitoring methodologies through PIHAM had clear impacts for VFU and project staff in terms of highlighting farmers' roles in, and knowledge of, livestock production. Most importantly, this change of approach was instrumental in bringing to the attention of both project staff and to villagers themselves, the critical role which women play in the management of livestock.
While the overall project considered both rural women and men as beneficiaries, for the most part activities were organised and conducted along gender-disaggregated lines. This was earlier due to the overall socio-cultural conditions, but more recently, due to the political decisions in Afghanistan. However, while activities were conducted separately, key events occurred that drew them closer together in terms of approach. This provided the opportunity for greater discussion of the different roles and responsibilities, as well as the different knowledge of rural women and men in livestock production systems.
Women's Programme Initiated: In 1995, the project prioritised the training of rural women under the National Assistant Manager, Training of Rural Women (TRW) who was supported by a female United Nations Volunteer (UNV). Compared to other project activities, the Women's Programme was conducted on a smaller scale in terms of villagers reached, due in part to the limited number of staff. The team developed and planned month-long Basic Veterinary Worker training courses for women, provided field support to women Veterinary Workers, and developed other training and participatory opportunities for women in the context of the overall programme. The content of the BVW training was the same as that for male BVWs. In late 1996, the FAO Women's Programme conducted week-long poultry production and animal husbandry training continuing from earlier UN efforts. In 1997, the Women's Programme lost the UNV, but gained two women initiators from the PIHAM programme, bringing the staff to
three.
Development of PIHAM: When the livestock project was initially designed, the absence of technical assistance to promote stronger veterinary staff-farmer relationships as well as farmer participation in needs identification and decision-making was identified. While project staff had had some exposure to participatory methodologies, they were not necessarily using these optimally in their work with farmers. In response, PIHAM was developed and introduced as a FAO Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) project (TCP/AFG/4553) in 1996 to reorient the interaction between livestock owners and community animal health workers associated with the project.
PIHAM Pilot Phase - Need for Women trainees identified: The pilot phase for PIHAM was conducted between March 1996 and January 1997. During the pilot phase, twelve initiators, both veterinarians and agriculturalists, were trained to implement and make modifications to PIHAM. In the initial stages of PIHAM, the livestock project identified ten male trainees, or "initiators" in PIHAM terms, from Veterinary Field Units and the old government extension service to participate in the first PIHAM training. However, while conducting the first PIHAM module, the initiators and project management recognised the need to train women to "complete the circle" of information essential to providing better services to communities. Two weeks into the first module, two women "initiators" joined PIHAM.
PIHAM Pilot Phase - Modules 1-5 Conducted: Over the duration of the pilot phase, the women and men initiators undertook training in participatory appraisal and monitoring approaches. They also carried out field work with farmers in six locations. The training session broke down into five modules followed by fieldwork and monitoring and evaluation (reflection and correction).
Module 1: Situation Awareness
Module 2: Monitoring Key Indicators
Module 3: Analysis of Key Indicators, identification of problems
Module 4: Cause of problems, finding solutions, feedback
Module 5: Impact of PIHAM, evaluation of the pilot phase
Modification of Women's Programme Poultry/Husbandry: The involvement of women veterinary staff in the PIHAM training had a positive impact on the Women's Programme, particularly in raising the capacity of female staff to use participatory appraisal and monitoring approaches. After the training, they began to modify course training material, making it much more participatory and practical, and so more meaningful to illiterate village women. Staff also subsequently modified the content of the poultry training course to focus on the use of materials and feeds that were inexpensive and available locally. The process of revision continues to date, changing according to needs identified with village women.
One-day workshop on PIHAM for UN agencies working in Afghanistan: In March, 1997 the FAO livestock project held a one-day workshop for other UN agencies working in Afghanistan. At the workshop, FAO shared the experiences of using the PIHAM approach and the participatory methodologies associated with it. This was a key event for raising the awareness elsewhere of the need for participatory responses to rehabilitation and development challenges.^4
4 All UN agencies working in Afghanistan are well aware of the need to incorporate gender-responsive approaches in their work. To what extent they are able to is another matter.
Two-day workshop to review Women's Programme: In early 1997, as the ever-increasing restrictions on women's mobility began to affect the project, a two day workshop was held between the PIHAM trainer, the three female staff of the Women's Programme, and two management-level staff. The workshop was held to review the existing objectives and activities, identify major issues affecting the Programme, and plan and focus activities over the short term, in preparation for an overall programme review proposed for October/November, 1997.
Over the short term it was felt that it would be important for the two new female staff (ex-PIHAM) to familiarise themselves with the existing programme and to identify areas for modification. It was also seen as an opportune moment for PIHAM's participatory approaches to feed into the Women's Programme. In follow-up to what was reamed from the PIHAM training, the team agreed that the programme should begin the process of identifying specific needs for (rural) women concerning livestock services. It was felt that a participatory assessment should identify to what extent the Basic Veterinary Worker training and poultry training met the specific needs of women farmers and also highlight areas needing attention.
Training of Trainers/Replication Phase: PIHAM has now moved into its Replication Phase where the original initiators, fresh from their Training of Trainers course, are now training other male VFU staff throughout the country in PIHAM approaches. The Training of Trainers course covered the principles of adult learning, participatory training techniques, lesson planning, and course organisation. Unfortunately, for the time being, women can no longer train together with men within Afghanistan's borders. However, the livestock project has planned to train another 610 women initiators separately later in 1997, so that they can continue to work with rural women to identify their livestock needs and constraints, and monitor changes in livestock production.
Table 1: Summary Of Key Events Leading To Change
WOMEN'S PROGRAMME
PIHAM
UNDP amalgamated 2 separate animal health projects under FAO implementation - AFG/93/004
Mid 1994
FAO Women's Programme initiated
May 1995
village-based surveys
Poultry Training
Dec. 1996 to - ongoing
PIHAM trainees selected (10 men)
January 1996
PIHAM Module 1^5 (M1)/field work/rnonitoring
March
2 women join PIHAM training, then Women's Programme (WP), (3 women trained altogether)
2 women selected (2nd week of course), join PIHAM
March-April
Modified WP from PIHAM
M2/field work/monitoring
May - July
Designed/conducted revised Poultry Training
M3/field work/monitoring
August - September
M4/field work/monitoring
September - October
M5 (Evaluation of PIHAM - Plan for Replication Phase)/fieldwork/monitoring
January - February 1997
1-day workshop - UN agencies
March
Two-day workshop to review Women's Programme- Islamabad
29-30 April 97
Training of Trainers, M1,2; Lesson plan modified - Replication phase; PIHAM Trainees become Trainers; Trainers select vets for new Trainees
March - April
PIHAM Replication phase - M1
April 1997 (to February 1998)
Trainers select vet for Trainees; PIHAM (RP - M 1) 4 regions, N. E, S. SE
April - June 1997
RP - M2, fieldwork, monitoring
July 1997
Identify women PIHAM trainees; TOT women PIHAM (livestock & poultry)
planned August/September 1997
Review progress of women's programme
planned September/October 1997
Modifications to women's programme to be implemented during pilot phase covering one year
planned October 1997 - September 199P
^5Note Ml, M2, M3, M4, M5 refer to Modules 1-5 PIHAM
<section>6</section>
V. Lessons learned
Entry point
Tools and methods
Information on different roles and responsibilities
Capacity building
Linkages and institutionalisation
V. Lessons learned
The following section looks at the lessons learned through project implementation vis a vis what did and did not work in terms of both community participation in general, and the participation of village women and women trainers/initiators. It highlights those areas that helped improve project planning processes at all levels in terms of raising the level of participation of rural men and women in needs identification, constraints analysis, diagnosis, and problem solving related to their livestock.
It also highlights those constraints that hindered effective participation, particularly of women, both at the village level and at the project staff level. As already noted, recent Taliban restrictions on women's mobility have posed great constraints to village women in conducting their daily activities. They have also hampered the efforts of projects wanting to employ and work with women. These restrictions increasingly frustrate UN (and other) efforts to ensure the participation of women as actors and beneficiaries, and subsequently effective implementation of all rehabilitation and development interventions in Afghanistan.
Overall, it can be said that through the introduction of a consistent participatory approach both with veterinary and other project staff, and with women and men villagers, actors at all levels have come to recognise the important role which rural women play in livestock management and health. It is important to keep in mind, in measuring the lessons learned, that neither the overall project nor its components were, or are "gender projects" per se. The project was intended to "restore and improve the productive capacity of the national livestock composite owned by smallholder farmers and nomadic and semi-nomadic pastoralists. " However, project staff at all levels recognised that such a goal could not be met without the involvement of both women and men farmers as well as women and men initiators.
Entry point
Early on, the identification and planning of activities both in the overall FAO livestock project and in the Women's Programme in particular tended to come from a more central base. While this is clearly an overly simplistic description of project decision-making processes, it gives a general sense of the decision-making patterns. However, according to project management, wherever possible, they tried to incorporate community-based needs identified during their field visits in overall planning processes.^xxiii
While some field-level staff had experience using participatory approaches to their work others did not. The lack of a consistent participatory approach to needs identification and planning hindered the building of relationships between Veterinary Field Unit staff, Women's Programme trainers, and farmers. Approaches were based, to a great extent, on the transfer of skills and knowledge as well as service support from the project to farmers. For the most part, staff talked to village men and women, not with them. While some discussion may have been held with villagers, it is questionable to what extent they truly participated in the decision-making processes related to project implementation.
Given socio-cultural and more recent political decisions to increase women's seclusion, it might have been easier for the project to direct its interventions only to male villagers through male staff However, project management and staff have realised that such a male-centric approach could not, by itself, improve small-holder livestock production in Afghanistan. Without women's participation, and at the very least, their knowledge about livestock management, any proposed solutions would not be sustainable over the long term.
With the introduction of the PIHAM methodology several changes were visible, both in the overall livestock project, and in the Women's Programme. Perhaps most dramatic was the changed attitudes of staff at all levels to women and men farmers, for whom they were supposed to be working. In the past, many of the decisions were made by project staff. With the introduction of PIHAM, a greater number of decisions are now being made by staff in conjunction with women and men villagers based on their identification of the problems, needs, and possible solutions.^6 This in turn is feeding into the overall planning processes, even at the highest level of the project.
^6PIHAM, however, is not yet operating in all areas of the country where the overall livestock project is active. a consistent approach to working with farmers to monitor, with them, changes in animal production. The lack of participatory monitoring approaches was felt to be a great constraint to improving livestock production.
It could be said that the overall livestock project has, since 1994, gradually evolved to decision-making processes that resemble more of a "cyclical" rather than "bottom-up" or "top-down" model. PIHAM has the potential to move these processes to a point where decisions can feed from the farmer to planner, and back in a continuous repeating loop.
Lessons Learned: Transforming a project using more participatory approaches can support the recognition and validation of both women and men* different roles and responsibilities in, and knowledge of agricultural production systems. Involving different actors - both male and female, rich and poor - in decision-making (identifying problems, analysing causes, proposing solutions, and monitoring changes in production), can improve overall planning processes.
Tools and methods
Before the introduction of PIHAM, both the Women's Programme and the overall livestock project implemented an "acceptable repertoire" of services focused on improved livestock production throughout Afghanistan. While some veterinarians and agriculturalists attached to the project had limited experience with participatory methodologies, there was no overall consistent participatory approach for working with women and men farmers. To paraphrase the views of senior management and agreed by many of the project staff, "Veterinarians waited in their offices for farmers to come to them". In early PIHAM exercises, initiators themselves noted that veterinarians' attitudes to farmers were ones of superiority. They gave little recognition to either women or men farmers' knowledge of their own animals or their capacity to identify potential causes and suggest appropriate solutions. Nor was there
Using a "banking model"^7 approach, the Women's Programme delivered a series of skills related to animal production and poultry management to rural women. According to the WP trainers, "there was no participation" of women farmers. Nor was there a participatory assessment of women farmers' present livestock management skills, nor an assessment of their particular livestock (or other) needs. The Women's Programme monitored activities using a formal interview form.^xxiv
^7In the field of adult learning," banking model" refers to a one-way system of learning whereby the 'pupil' is lectured to by the 'teacher'.
Similarly, the overall livestock project (which worked primarily via male staff to male farmer for reasons already noted), also applied a "banking model" delivery of services. Veterinary Field Unit staff did not necessarily understand, or even recognise, the need to sit with farmers on an ongoing basis to work together on disease diagnosis and patterns, and identification of possible appropriate solutions.
The PIHAM training, conducted by consultants from Livestock in Development (U.K.), was first conducted for 10 male "initiators" in 1995. Adult learning and PRA approaches were used in combination to highlight the importance of listening to, respecting, and learning from farmers, and finding appropriate solutions with them. The participatory approaches used include:
- group discussion
- pair discussion
- problem ranking
- general discussion - questions and answers
- problem picture
- labour analysis
- practical skill lessons
- seasonal calendars
- "sitting point exercise"
- life status ranking
- skills ranking
- participatory monitoring (see sample reporting forms in Diagram 2)
Through their practice of participatory appraisal and monitoring in the field and in the classroom, participants (including project management) realised how essential it was to have women trainees participate with them. They realised that it was women who can often best provide the diagnosis for a sick animal through their intimate knowledge and observation on a daily basis. The addition of two women initiators to the initial PIHAM training, and their subsequent addition to the Women's' Programme, led to a revision of methodologies in that programme as well.
Diagram 2 - Two examples of PIHAM participatory reporting forms used by women and men farmers to monitor changes in their livestock
Several reporting forms have been developed under PIHAM for use by women and men farmers to assist in their own processes of monitoring changes in livestock production. The fop form is used to record births; farmers fill in a circle to record the birth of each calf.
The bottom form is used to monitor the sale of livestock; farmers mark the sale of a calf, a cow, or a bull. Other forms are also used in monitoring livestock mortality and acquisition. Forms are also used for goats and sheep. If has been suggested that similar forms to monitor women's poultry would also be useful.
In early 1997, project staff visited 35 households in the Jalalabad area that had been trained in poultry management using the pre-PIHAM methods. They discovered that women had not built any chicken houses as the training had hoped. However, PIHAM provided the tools of analysis to enable the Women's Programme staff to modify the poultry training course based on inputs and feedback from women villagers Staff decided to find ways to ensure that the course is more participatory and practical, and so more meaningful to illiterate women. They also recognised the need to promote the use of local feedstuffs and construction materials. In reviewing the women's BVW activities, which are temporarily suspended, staff felt training should be reviewed in terms of content and methodology and that it should be more participatory and practical. ^xxv
The women trainers thus clearly recognised the importance of using participatory methodologies in their own programme, both in identifying the livestock management concerns of village women, as well as finding appropriate solutions to problems. The previous "banking model/lecture" format began slowly to evolve into a learning process both for the village women and the project staff. Their relationship has changed. Staff now have more respect for rural women's knowledge, and are actively integrating it in planning out the subsequent activities. Staff realise the need to include all members of the household in constraint analysis and problem solving related to livestock production.
Lessons Learned:
 Using participatory appraisal approaches can lead to a revelation, by villagers themselves, as well as by project staff of the important roles which different household members play in different aspects of agricultural production.
 It is important to make training as relevant as possible to real life situations, i.e. need to address the particular needs of different household members
 Socio-cultural contexts are not static-they are constantly changing depending on the socio-political and economic contexts Tools and methodologies should be flexible enough to meet the changing needs and priorities of farm household members. For example, with current Taliban restrictions on women * mobility, training methods and modules have had to change in order to continue to respond to women's, as well as men * needs and priorities
 Tools must be modified to meet the socio-political context if necessary, e.g. in cases where a country is in conflict, "mapping" may not be a suitable exercise. Rather, using a "sitting point" exercise where the villagers work outwards from where they sit, explaining important features, etc. may be more appropriate.
 The discomfort of certain household members to some PRA exercises may show more about the socio-cultural/socio-economic context, access to and control over resources, etc. For example, women in a village insisted that their husbands' names be used in the wealth-ranking exercise, their reason being that "their husbands would not like it if women's names were used regarding discussions of 'wealth "'.
 Undertaking PRA exercises with Afghan women farmers is far more time-consuming given their restricted mobility. While men can meet in groups, it is often necessary for female project staff to meet women in their house. In some areas, this means that only a few women can be met compared to the number of men. If projects are serious about working with women farmers and using female staff they must plan for extra costs - both in terms of time resources Patience is also required with female staff in this difficult situation.
Information on different roles and responsibilities
Various PRA exercises undertaken within the context of the initial PIHAM training sessions as well as those under the replication phase highlight the fact that livestock and other related agricultural production activities are, to a great extent, differentiated. Recognition of the different roles and responsibilities both along gender and age lines, as well as along lines of socio-economic status and ability is critical to ensuring more effective planning of livestock interventions and developing appropriate solutions.
Participants in the initial training exercises highlighted the importance of talking to the family member who knows most about the animals, and noted that this is not necessarily the (male) head of household. They also indicated that any (male) head of household, while not necessarily the person implementing the solution, needs to be completely informed in order to approve any suggested changes in husbandry.
The main findings from the participatory appraisal exercises conducted under PIHAM^8 showed the following:
^8 These findings cannot be said to be country-wide.
 Women and men generally have different roles in livestock production. Women typically are responsible for milking (children also). They take care of the new born and sick animals and are critical in diagnosis. Women (and older children) are responsible for those activities closest to the house itself i.e. cleaning, cooking, and caring for the children. Men may be responsible for ensuring that animals are properly watered and fed, i.e. they are typically responsible for grazing, watering.
 Most of the final household decision-making is done by men (if they are present).
 The socio-economic status (wealth) and ability ranking of a farm household seems to have a positive correlation with women and men farmers' capacity to manage their animals and implement appropriate solutions.
 Both men and women are capable of using the participatory monitoring forms provided by the project to monitor changes in their livestock production.
Lesson Learned: Women have an important role to play in participatory livestock management and monitoring and can influence their husbands (or other male household members) to change their livestock practices.
Diagram 3 - Examples of PIHAM PRA Tools Used In Project (A)
Diagram 3 - Examples of PIHAM PRA Tools Used In Project (B)
Capacity building
Although introduced to support the move to self-sustaining Veterinary Field Units throughout project areas in Afghanistan, PIHAM strengthened capacities at several different levels -- from farmer to field staff, and beyond to project management. In particular, it supported vertical capacity building processes through:
 pilot phase training of selected male and female field-level staff in PRA methods and participatory livestock monitoring approaches for use with client farmers;
 training a core group of trainers (TOT) in the basics of adult education and participatory learning approaches. This group is now qualified to train other Veterinary Field Unit staff in participatory livestock production monitoring and other PRA approaches for use with client farmers.
 replication of PIHAM training for other Veterinary Field Unit staff.
 introduction of PIHAM approaches and analyses to the project's Women's Programme (through pilot phase training of female initiators). planned expansion of training for women staff in PIHAM.
 sensitization of project management and other project staff of the need to incorporate participatory planning approaches.
Importantly, horizontal capacity building was supported amongst VFU staff (and to some degree, between male and female staff) from various areas of the country through training together and sharing experiences and lessons learned. Women and men farmers themselves gained enormous capacity, particularly in terms of trusting their own abilities to recognise and resolve livestock production constraints themselves, or with the support of Veterinary Field Unit staff. PIHAM provided space for both women and men farmers to validate both their own knowledge of livestock management and to recognise the roles and responsibilities, as well as the contributions, of other family members.
The specific capacities strengthened at levels associated with, and outside the livestock project, through the introduction of participatory, and subsequently, gender-aware methodologies, are summarised below (see Table 2). These are based on discussions with project staff specifically associated with monitoring the implementation and impact of PIHAM training and the Women's Programme.
While the capacities of the male and female staff were strengthened, several problems remain in terms of continuing support to the professional women on staff, and to the women farmers involved in the activities of the Women's Programme. Because of restrictions on women's mobility in Taliban-controlled areas, women staff can no longer enter government or other (i.e. project/FAO) offices or travel in project vehicles. It is also difficult for male staff to visit women farmers. Thus, the issue of professional support to, and monitoring of, the Women's Programme remains problematic. Senior project management, most of whom are male, cannot monitor female staff while they work with rural women and thus cannot correct problems or identify areas requiring attention.
Table 2 - Capacities Built at Each Level After the Introduction of PIHAM
ACTOR
CAPACITIES BUILT
VILLAGE WOMEN
Exchange of experience between women farmers; women realised responsibility of keeping livestock, e.g. mating time; increased ability to record/monitor changes (reporting forms); could record disease patterns and see vaccination time (seasonal calendars); learned importance of talking to experienced women, also that they had a bigger role in livestock management than they thought (labour analysis); were able to identify many causes of problems; solutions based on resources at hand; easier, cheaper, more effective (input/output charts).
VILLAGE MEN
Learned how much women are involved in livestock (labour analysis, seasonal calendars, etc.) and the importance of discussing with them the problems, finding diagnosis, etc. (discuss with wife); relationship between villagers/staff improved; (see also above under village women for similar capacities gained).
PIHAM INITIATORS^9
Attitude, behaviours changed towards farmer ("no longer proud"); learned how to talk with people and listen; learned how to give others a chance to talk; worked now from the bottom-up rather than top-down; learned that farmers have important knowledge (all through adult learning methods and PRA methods - listening exercises, role plays, etc.)
VFUs
Overall improved capacity to understand importance of participatory approaches; learned from initiators (through staff discussions, sharing).
PROJECT MANAGEMENT/STAFF^10
Participatory training skills for key project management (participation in initial training modules); use participatory methods for monitoring and project design (transfer of skills from PIHAM training, e.g. Women's Programme revisions); learned from mistakes and can work with trainers to correct; planning capacity improved overall (through improved understanding of community needs through direct contact and continuous monitoring of PIHAM Pilot and Replication phases); recognise that without the involvement of women, key livestock information is incomplete (through participating in early PIHAM training and analysis).
NGOs
Through exchange related to PIHAM processes, became more aware of the farming systems in their area as well as elsewhere; could provide modifications to training (manuals).
UN AGENCIES IN AFGHANISTAN
Through sharing of PIHAM experiences with other UN agencies, awareness raised of importance of community participation in planning; future potential for sharing of methods with other projects/programmes.
^9 includes both men and women initiators trained to date
^10 includes to varying extent - CTA; National Assistant Manager, Livestock Production; National Manager, AHS;
Linkages and institutionalisation
'Do not make any promises and you must follow up' (Woman PIHAM trainee's observation)
The use of the PIHAM approach facilitated the broader awareness raising of two key issues that have the potential to change planning processes throughout the project in terms of gender and participation:
 the recognition by project staff at all levels of the need for women's participation both at the village level and on staff; and,
 the recognition of the need to introduce participatory approaches to needs identification and training development in the Women's Programme.
Exactly how this awareness was raised was discussed under previous sections of Lessons Learned. While to some extent, project management may have already been aware of these important "revelations", it appears that PIHAM has started to facilitate a broader internalisation of them at all levels (refer back to Table 2 for levels) - from farmer through Veterinary Field Unit staff and Women's Programme trainers up to project staff. More importantly, it has introduced a consistent participatory approach, i.e. the "how to" that is important for the collection of comparable data throughout project areas and for the sharing of experiences within and between all levels.
Diagram 4: Flow of PIHAM Linkages
n.b. PIHAM raised the awareness of the need for participatory approaches in the Women's Programme and the need for participatory approaches that recognised gender-differentiated knowledge and experience in the overall project.
In fact, it seems to have led to a linking of approaches (see Diagram 4 above) between many Veterinary Field Unit activities, where the current focus is on creating better farmer-technician relationships and the Women's Programme, which is focused on village-level training in animal health and management.
At the village level, measuring the extent to which women and men farmers have increased communication between themselves regarding livestock management will require closer monitoring over time. It is clear that men farmers, through participating in labour analysis exercises, realise that women play very important roles in livestock management and health care. As noted earlier, it is difficult for project management, all of whom are men, to monitor women staff while they conduct their work with village women. For the time being, it seems that male staff at all levels cannot meet directly with rural women to discuss issues and concerns. Likewise for female staff with rural men in most areas. It is therefore critical that female staff and male staff continuously share experiences and findings from the field.
In the absence of a functioning national infrastructure, the project has no direct links to agricultural or other ministries. It does, however, work with ex-government and NGO extensionists to institutionalise participatory approaches with them. In using PIHAM's participatory approaches, gender issues are also raised, particularly through such tools as labour analysis and input/output charts.
As a consistent participatory approach begins to spread out to other VETERINARY FIELD UNIT staff throughout the country, and as the Women's Programme grows, comparative socio-economic and technical information on livestock management and production constraints should become available. The wider use of life status ranking, skill ranking, and labour analysis together with participatory livestock monitoring will lead to a better understanding of the socio-economic, gender, and technical factors in livestock production systems across a number of socio-cultural groups in Afghanistan. This will, in turn, support the improved planning of veterinary and livestock services at an levels.
When the time comes to re-establish national infrastructures, participatory approaches highlighting socio-economic, gender and technical information will, to some extent, already have been "institutionalized" with animal health and production services. As more quantitative and qualitative information is gathered over the next few years through working with women and men farmers, the greater the likelihood that the development of any future agricultural/livestock policy^11 will respond more effectively to the needs and priorities of rural communities.
^11 policy in the sense of future UN/donor planning, or with future national and regional government policy. any level, from the grassroots to policy, to fully institutionalise approaches that are both "gender-responsive and participatory".
Until that time comes, the UN and its various agencies, donors, and NGOs will continue to play a major role in giving "policy direction" and planning interventions. Awareness-raising workshops such as that conducted by FAO for other agencies is one way to provide opportunities for cross-sectoral exchange of experiences -- both in terms of supporting women's participation in rehabilitation and development interventions, and in using participatory approaches to planning. However, until restrictions on women's mobility and access to services are lifted, it will be difficult at Lesson Learned: Internalisation can lead to institutionalisation. While some project staff or even management may already recognise the need for change, participatory' approaches can facilitate the broader internalisation of issues and concerns across various levels that is so essential to institutionalising a "different, perhaps more effective way of doing things".
<section>7</section>
VI. Conclusions
Annex 1: Map - PIHAM working areas in Afghanistan
Annex 2: Afghanistan agriculture in brief^xxvi
Annex 3: Summary of critical socio-economic aspects ^xxxi
VI. Conclusions
Both the overall FAO livestock project and the Women's Programme gained from the introduction of PIHAM's participatory appraisal and monitoring approaches. Both male project staff and male villagers recognised the important contributions of women to livestock management. They subsequently revised both their training and their field-level activities to reflect and incorporate this new-found "gender" awareness. Women's Programme staff set out to revise their own programme more in line with PIHAM's participatory approaches to needs identification and problem solving.
The following very practical advice is provided for those wishing to support gender-responsive, participatory planning processes, particularly in Afghanistan and other countries (or areas) with similar socio-cultural contexts.
 Project planning and strategies must be flexible enough to respond to changing situations.. This is important at all levels, from field level, through project management, and up to the donor level.
 Recognise that project activities may be more costly and time-consuming. Plan accordingly (project document, budget, workplans, etc). To include women both at the technical level and at the village level is potentially more costly due to several constraints, i.e. having to talk to women in each household rather than in a village group setting as for men. Also, women may be required to have a male relative travel with them, or they may have to travel in pairs, therefore travel may be more costly. Training for female and male project staff may have to be held separately. This must also be considered in drawing up a budget and allocating staff/consultancy time. Also, participatory approaches, in and of themselves, can be more time-consuming and more costly over the short-term, but the long-term benefits are worth the effort.
 Ensure that women initiators/village workers carry clear messages from village women back to central planners, project headquarters. This should include noting any other needs/priorities/concerns identified by women, e.g. women's lack of access to resources and inputs so that planning process can specifically respond to those needs (possibly different from men's).
 "Harmonise planning needs of the community" - Need for regular dialogue between female and male staff at an levels (both horizontal and vertical). Regular staff sessions should be conducted (between male and female staff, not just female staff and project management) to share experiences and lessons learned from working with both women and men farmers and to identify issues that need to be addressed by the "other".
Annex 1: Map - PIHAM working areas in Afghanistan
Map - PIHAM working areas in Afghanistan
Annex 2: Afghanistan agriculture in brief^xxvi
Brief statistical data on Afghanistan are set out below. Varied Sources and time periods have been used for the data.^xxvii Care should therefore be taken in making comparisons between periods. (Note: gender-disaggregated information was not provided in Source)
1. Population
Estimated population
3.05 million (979 Government census)
7.64 million (990 Unidata population project estimate)
8-20 million (996 unofficial UN estimates)
It is estimated that 70-80 percent of the total population are engaged in agriculture.
2. Land Use ^xxviii
Land area by form of land use(as at 1972)
Area (ha)
percent
Area
percent
irrigated land orchards cereal crops
x 2/year
x 1/year
Sub-total irrigated land
Rainfed crop land (total area, only 20-25 per cent cropped each year)
Forest area
Rangeland and other
Total land area
3. Production of Principal Crops ^xxix
Crop
Gov't Stats 1976
Estimated 1996
Area '000 ha
Productivity kg/ha
Area '000 ha
Productivity kg/ha
Wheat
Barley
Maize
Rice
Cotton
Sugarcane
Sugarbeet
Fruit orchards including citrus
Vegetables
4. Livestock Numbers ^xxx (000's)
Livestock class
1967 T
1981 T
1991 T
Cattle
Sheep
Goats
Horses
Donkeys
Camels
Annex 3: Summary of critical socio-economic aspects ^xxxi
The following table summarises some of the most critical aspects in the social, economic, institutional and environmental context of Afghanistan:
Governance and Social Stability
 Disruption and isolation of civil society and its traditional structures which used to form the basis of community resilience, self-reliance and self-help.
Women/Gender
 In Taliban-controlled areas, women's mobility severely restricted. Affecting all sectors in both rural and urban areas.
Food Security and Nutrition
 Food production per capita still substantially lower than in 1979.
 Livestock production severely affected by conflict and disease.
 Chronic malnutrition and dietary imbalances in parts of Afghanistan.
Education
 School currently suspended for girls; women unable to teach in Taliban-controlled areas.^12
^12 This information added from recent discussions.
 Only 13 percent of adult females and 44 percent of adult males are literate.
 From 3,500 primary schools in 1978, to 600 in 1990.
Refugee Return
 Since 1978, up to 6 million Afghans have fled from armed conflict, finding refuge in neighbouring countries; nearly half of them have returned and many more are now in the process of returning.
 Another 2 million people are internally displaced.
De-mining
 Ten million unexploded mines across the country.
 An estimated 10 people per day are killed or maimed by landmines.
Health
 One of the highest rates of infant mortality (165 per 1,000 live births), child mortality (257 per 1,000) and maternal mortality (640 per 100,000 live births) in the world.
 3 to 4 percent of the population are disabled.
Shelter
Over 1 million houses need rebuilding.
<section>8</section>
Endnotes
Endnotes
^i Story recounted by K. Iles PIHAM Training - from Workshop Report, Module 5, January 1997.
^ii This case study does not talk about the details of the PIHAM approach to Herd Health and Production Programme. Rather, it speaks of the participatory, and subsequent gender-responsive approaches that arose from the introduction of PIHAM to the overall livestock project and the Women's Programme. For those interested in gaing fuller knowledge of the PIHAM approach, please refer to Holden, S.J., Bazeley, K.J., Ashley, S.D., and Bazeley, P.B.S. Animal Health and Production Improvement Module (AHPIM): an Approach to Designing and Implementing Herd Health and Production Programmes in Developing Countries. FAO, Rome, January 1 995.
^iiiPersonal communication, Mr. T. Barker, CTA AFG/96/007 26 August, 1997.
^iv The name of the programme was originally AHPIM, but due to the pronunciation, the word, "aphim" sounded too much like "apheen" or opium. The initiators who originally took the training under the project staff suggested the change in name to a more suitable "piham" PIHAM. "Piham", in Persian means "continuous". This was very meaningfull in the context of the veterinary services programme, because if the veterinary staff do not have continuous contact with the fanners, they are not able to collect information according to the need of the farmer.
^v Htun, U Nay. Foreword. Afghanistan PEA CE Initiative (1997-1999), UNDP, 1997.
^vi UNDP. Programme Setting: Afghanistan PEACE Initiative (1997-1999), Islamabad, 1997.
^vii UNDP. Human Development Report, 1996,New York 1996.
^viii Afghanistan Agricultural Strategy. FAO, Rome January 1997.
^ix ibid.
^x Livestock Development for Food Security, Afghanistan PEACE Initiative (1997- 999), Chapter 6, UNDP, Islamabad, 1997.
^xi Progress Report: Women in Development (WID) Fund for Afghanistan. UNOCHA, November 1995.
^xii The question of cultural and religious interpretation/determination is the subject of discussion for many social sciences - from anthropology to sociology to feminist studies. Suffice it to say here, "culture" is not static; rather it is dynamic and everchanging. Likewise, religion - whether it be Roman Catholicism, Buddhism, or Islam can be and often is interpreted in different ways, by different groups of people (and indeed, individuals) in different regions of the world, and even different parts of one country. The statement in favour of "cultural determinism or religious interpretation" is subject to valid criticism and depends on "who" is interpreting, and "who" is observing.
^xiii Letter to Heads of UN Agencies active in Afghanistan, July, 1997.
^xiv Personal communication, D. Ward, Technical Officer AGAH, FAO, 25 August, 1997.
^xv Farmer's comment on PIHAM noted in Iles, Karen. Workshop Report for Module Five of PIHAM, FAO, Rome, January 1997.
^xvi Project Document, AFG/93/004. FAO, Rome.
^xvii Noted in Afghanistan Agricultural Strategy. FAO, Rome January, 1997.
^xviii The Dutch Committee for Afghanistan surveyed 700 farmers in selected villages in 1992 using EPI-INFO (Epidemiological Programme of the Center for Disease Control, Atlanta/WHO, Geneva).
^xix Noted in Afghanistan Agricultural Strategy. FAO, Rome January, 1997.
^xx Promotion of Farmers' Participation through the Implementation of Animal Health and Production Improvement Modules (AHPIM) in Afghanistan. FAO Project Document (TCP/AFG/4553), 1995.
^xxi Iles, K. Terminal Statement for the Pilot Phase of PIHAM: Animal Health and Production Improvement Module (AHPIM: LOCAL). Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN, Islamabad, January, 1997.
^xxii Holden S.J., Bazeley K.J., Ashley, S.D. and Bazely, P.B.S. 1995. See endnote iii.
^xxiii T. Barker, Personal communication, 26 August, 1997.
^xxiv From discussions with Women's Programme staff, July 1997.
^xxv K. Iles, Progress Report on Planning Workshop for the Women's Programme, FAO Islamabad, March 1997.
^xxvi Afghanistan Agricultural Strategy. FAO, Rome January 1997.
^xxvii Due to 20 years of conflict, it has been difficult, both on the part of past governments, and others (UN included) to collect reliable and continuous information and statistics.
^xxviii Source: FAO land Use Statistics 1972.
^xxix Source: 1976 data. First Seven Year Economic and Social Development Plan (1976-83), Ministry of Planning, Kabul 1355 (March 1976).
1966 Data. FAO Integrated Crop Programme estimates.
^xxx Livestock Production Report. Afghanistan Agricultural Strategy. FAO, Rome January 1997.
^xxxi Chapter 1, Programme Setting. Afghanistan PEACE Initiative (1997-99). UNDP, Islamabad, 1997.
