<title>Rural women in fishing communities: an overview of CIRDAP action research programme experiences in selected CIRDAP member countries</title>
<section>1</section>
Country experiences
Country experiences
INTRODUCTION
In the backdrop of the existing small-scale fisheries development scenario in the selected CMCs, this section reveals the country-specific situation of the Action Research Project for RUWFIC in the participating CMCs. In particular, impact of the CIRDAP project including the credit component on income and poverty situation and organizational activities have been highlighted. Constraints faced during the implementation of the Action Research Project in different participating CMCs, is also being reviewed as part of action research learning experiences.
INDONESIA
The agricultural development policy of Indonesia has been based on three specific integrated development approaches which are commonly being referred as 'Trimatra' (three policies). These are:
(1) an integrated development of the farm and the farming business by using all available resources efficiently in order to improve the welfare of the farm and fisherfolk families;
(2) a vertical and horizontal integration of the production of various agricultural commodities to achieve a balanced increase of commodities production and varieties; and
(3) integrated development of agricultural areas within the respective regions taking into account the regional potentials for sectoral as well as territorial development.
Several programmes for the development of women's economic activities in rural areas have been implemented. The first project was carried out in 1978 under the programme called the "Crash Programme for the Improvement of Families Welfares . In 1979 this programme was incorporated into the third-five-year development plan as an integrated programme for the development of women's activities in the rural agricultural and fisheries communities. The implementation of the programme for fisherfolk communities actually started in 1980 under the project called the "development of women's role in the rural communities".
There were approximately 859 fisherfolk women groups and fisheries communities throughout the country. Each group consisted of 20-25 members and the group's leader was elected by the members. The formation of the group was initiated by the fisherfolk women under the supervision of Field Extension Workers (PPLs). The project covered wide range of activities such as fish handling/processing, net making/fixing, sails making/fixing, fish marketing, family health/sanitation, family planning, handicraft, and farming.
ClRDAP's action research project on RUWFIC in Indonesia implemented in six different areas of Rural Extension Centres (RECs) in the districts of East Lombok, West Lombok and Central Lombok of West Nusa Tenggara province (Map-l).
The Agency for Agricultural Education, Training and Extension (AAETE) implemented the action programme in Indonesia. AAETE conducted a baseline survey for selecting the beneficiary groups in July 1985. In so doing, three factors were considered essential in selecting the survey sites: (i) coastal communities in which people were most likely to engage in fishing activities, (ii) potentials for successful income generating projects in which women could be involved, and (iii) the poverty level of the communities (poverty level in Indonesia has been defined at the rupiah amount equivalent to 320 kilograms of rice per capita per year).
A total number of 119 women beneficiaries were selected in eight groups from eight villages of the three districts. The survey data showed that per capita income of the selected beneficiary households was below the poverty level. Some problems of the fisherwomen as identified in the survey were: lack of credit facilities, uncertain source of fish stocks, low prices of their catch and limited marketing arrangements and outlets. Paucity of hygienic water, lack of health facilities, unsatisfactory transportation and poor infrastructures were also mentioned as additional problems.
The achievements of the action research project may be highlighted from the fact that the information on socio-economic and demographic situation of women in the sample fishing communities, and their developmental needs were collected and analyzed. Rural women were imparted training in skill development in fish preservation and processing as well as in credit, public health, child care, cooperative management and participation in community development. More importantly, participatory group approaches involving women in fishing communities characterized these achievements.
Based on the 'before-after' analysis, per capita income of the beneficiaries under the project was observed to have increased by 139 per cent with a corresponding surplus in their household budget.
'Credit', which is a major component of the CIRDAP action research project proved to be of great help to the project beneficiaries. Profit earned from their undertakings was utilized for working capital and additional operational support.
The action research project implemented in Indonesia was a "success", particularly in augmenting household income and raising the level of participation in organizational and group activities on the part of the women in fishing communities.
MAP- 1 LOCATION OF PROJECT VILLAGES: INDONESIA
PROBLEM/CONSTRAINTS
(1) The need for avoidance of duplication of activities with other programmes;
(2) Importance of involving the fisherwomen in economic activities other than fisheries; and
(3) The need for imparting increased training to the fisherwomen facilitating their full involvement in a variety of activities in the action programrne. The philosophy of the action programme was also to help the fisherwomen to help themselves in utilizing the delivery system to get access to the existing training facilities.
RECOMMENDATIONS
(1) In respect to the contribution made by the action programme in policy and methodology for agriculture extension work amongst the rural poor (explicitly fisherfolk families who live below the poverty level), in-country workshops as well as field workshops were found to be extremely useful. Through such forums, it was possible to create community awareness of the problem for the rural poor and thereby introducing a redirection in the extension methodology. Field workshop methodology and group production plan were found to be extremely useful instruments for the fishery extension systems in Indonesia.
(2) Formation of groups of fisherfolk women as a first required step was very useful in the whole process of income generating activities.
(3) To improve and strengthen the action programme at the field level, some recommendations might be summed up as follows:
 agricultural field extension worker (PPLs) should work as group organizer and should be responsible for day-to-day implementation of the programme with special emphasis on the development of managerial and technical skills for the fisherfolk women groups.
 the chief of rural extension center along with his staff should work as the coordinator of the implementation in the field to harmonize, guide, supervise and ensure coordination and cooperation in the implementation of the programme.
 executive committee of district as well as Provincial Level Agricultural Extension Coordination Forum (Forum Koordinasi Penyulahan Pertanian/FKPP II and I should function to direct, guide, supervise, and ensure coordination and cooperation in the implementation of the action programme.
 executive committee of the national commission on Agricultural Extension (Komisi Penyuluhan Pertanian National/KPPN) should function to provide policy guidance to the action programme and ensure coordination and cooperation with all concerned agencies in connection with the implementation of the action programme.
 the agriculture information center in Mataram, West Nusa Tenggara should be further strengthened in providing extension materials both printed media as well as audio-visual aids to the fishing communities.
 the fisherfolk women group should develop group production plans.
 the fisherfolk women group should be encouraged to save and plan/fund their own productive/income generating activities.
 the fisherfolk women group should not be required to provide physical collateral against any credit received. The formation of Group Production Plan (GPP) and group guarantee should serve as collateral.
 the fisherfolk women group should be guided, motivated and inspired to take advantage of any other sources of capital assistance with the condition that this will be treated as credit and dealt with accordingly.
 each GPP should be appraised by a loan approval committee (TPKP) headed by Senior Extension Worker (PPM) and represented by the Bank of Pembangunan Daerah and relevant support agencies.
 the fisherfolk women are individually not organized to receive services and supplies from government and non-government sources. Therefore, guiding them through groups to improve their conditions has been found to be the most appropriate strategy. Through groups they plan and successfully implement their activities at the very grassroots levels.
PHILIPPINES
In the Philippines, the National Council on Integrated Area Development (NACIAD) was entrusted with the responsibility to implement and coordinate the project with assistance from the municipal officers, Department of Agriculture (DA) as well as the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR).
The action programme covered three fishing villages in the municipality of Looc, province of Romblon (Map. 2). These were: Barangay Agojo, Barangay Punta and Barangay Tuguis. The initial pilot projects implemented were mostly on fish processing and preservation. These projects were deemed most appropriate for the fishing communities due to the abundance of fish catch, especially during the peak seasons.
The number of rural women beneficiaries in the project reached a total of 62 (from the original 25 at the start of project implementation in 1986).
PARTICIPATORY APPROACH
The participatory approach was predominantly utilized in this action programme where the women beneficiaries were involved in all the phases of the programme. In particular, they were involved in the data gathering and the data analysis phases as they assisted the National Council on Integrated Area Development (NACIAD) Project Coordinator and the Field Extension workers, either as spokespersons or as information disseminators. They also played a major role in the monitoring and evaluation stages of the project.
The participation of local residents and beneficiaries during the various phases of the survey and data collection provided an entry point towards a participatory action research program in the fishing community. The beneficiaries were directly involved in the exercise of monitoring and evaluation by providing their respective reactions/reports on their shortcomings and preparing a comparative analysis of their socio-economic conditions before and during the introduction of the programme.
In such a participatory development approach, the joint efforts of the NACIAD, the cooperating agencies, the target clientele and the whole community were greatly emphasized. The spirit of close cooperation was also enhanced.
PROBLEMS AND CONSTRAINTS ENCOUNTERED
(1) Formal implementation of the projects began only in May 1986 when the first batch of the loan was released to the borrowers. This was mainly due to two reasons: one involved some institutional and systematic problems which NACIAD encountered in the first stages of the project preparation; and the other was related to the design of the action programme, with CIRDAP requiring the participating institution to raise a risk cum-guarantee fund for the credit loans for the beneficiaries.
(2) Unfavourable weather conditions occurring frequently in the project area also contributed to the delay in the implementation of the project.
MAP - 2 LOCACTION OF PROJECT VILLAGES: PHILIPPINES
(3) The inaccessibility of the project villages was similarly considered as a serious problem.
(4) Communications from CIRDAP to NACIAD and those received from the project area were also quite delayed. Processing and preparation of reports were therefore, adversely affected.
OUTPUT OF THE PROGRAMME
(1) The most "tangible" and direct benefit resulting from the action programme was in terms of the income generating activities accorded to the women beneficiaries. Through the credit assistance, the rural women were able to undertake a number of fisheries activities and contribute to their family income from the profits yielded out of their loan.
(2) The beneficiaries acquired skills, particularly in the area of fish preservation/processing, buying and selling.
(3) Additionally, the rural women obtained through formal means (e.g. by way of the planning workshops and training programmes) and informal means (e.g. through interaction with the ACIAD project coordinator and the cooperating agencies staff), insights on community development and information, knowledge on issues on health and sanitation, education and fund-raising activities.
(4) Several "tangible" socio-economic benefits, as well as some "intangible" or "indirect" benefits were generated. This was particularly true in terms of the target women having yielded some influence on the other members of the village not directly benefitted by the programme.
(5) The participating groups of women, having gained a better socio-economic status, found it easier to share their own experiences and learnings with the rest of the community. They thus motivated others to participate in the action programme.
RECOMMENDATIONS
(1) The lessons learned from the project emphasized the need for applying "participatory approach among the target beneficiaries.(2) The beneficiaries had an active role to play when they themselves conceptualized the projects and identified the most pressing problems or needs of their own communities.
(3) In light of the socio-economic impact of the action programme, it was recommended that the policy-makers in Philippines, consider the developmental approach/strategy of the programme in other projects of the government.
(4) The replicability of the action programme in other fishing villages, or in other government development projects would depend much on the follow-up activities in the
Barangays of Agojo, Punta and Tuguis.
(5) The government, after some time, must follow up on the women's activities.
SRI LANKA
Development of the fisheries sector is a high priority of the Government of Sri Lanka. The principal objectives of the fisheries development in Sri Lanka are as follows:
(1) increase the production of fish and thereby increase the per capita consumption of fish;
(2) improve the social and economic conditions of the fishermen; and
(3) maximize employment opportunities in the fisheries sector
The Welfare Division of the Ministry of Fisheries was designated as the implementing agency for the action research project in Sri Lanka. Three villages were selected for the project, namely, Thaldeka (Puttalam district) Mankuliya (Gampaha district), and Paiyagala in North Kalutara district (Map-3). A total of 30 women were selected as target beneficiaries who were not active panics in actual fishing operations but played important role in marketing and processing of fish. These women groups participated in various stages of the project implementation such as conduct and analysis of baseline survey, skills training, refresher courses and on-the-job training and project monitoring.
Through the Seed Fund established out of the CIRDAP grant, the women beneficiaries at Paiyagala North and Thaildeka were able to start processing of Maldive fish and fish drying while those in Mankuliya preferred sale of fresh fish and fish drying, these being the most appropriate enterprises on account of abundance of fish stocks in these fishing villages. Management of the Seed Fund was the responsibility of the Fisheries Social Development Organization (FSDO) officials while close supervision over utilization of loans was exercised by the District Fisheries Extension Officers and Fisheries Social Development Assistants.
MAP - 3 LOCATIONS OF PROJECT VILLAGES: SRI LANKA
POVERTY ALLEVIATION OF SMALL SCALE FISHING COMMUNITIES
A number of priority measures for the alleviation of poverty among small scale fishing communities include:
(a) Survey of fishing households: a survey of fishing households in the coastal and inland fishing areas should be undertaken with a view to make an assessment of the living conditions of the fishing families. The results of this survey could be used in formulating new schemes of state assistance, especially in providing welfare facilities to this sector
(b) Role of fisherwomen in fishing communities: a survey was to be undertaken to make an assessment of the present role of the fisherwomen in relation to fishing and related activities. It is proposed to formulate specific projects to provide additional employment opportunities depending on their capabilities and provide state supportive schemes in this direction.
(c) Utilization of fishing boats and fishing gear: substantial investments have been made by the private as well as the state sector during the recent years for the introduction of mechanized fishing boats and fishing gear to the coastal fisheries sector in Sri Lanka. As there were no records of the level of fishing effort in relation to the utilization of the coastal fishing fleet, a survey could be carried out in order to develop a basis for future expansion of the fishing fleet.
(d) Evaluation of the welfare measures provided by the Ministry of Fisheries: It is recommended that an evaluation of the Welfare Schemes provided by the Ministry of
Fisheries to the fishing communities be undertaken in order to make an assessment of the impact of the welfare facilities already provided by the Ministry of Fisheries.
(e) Survey on nutritional needs: it was proposed to carry out a survey of fishing households to determine the nutritional levels of fishing families and to identify the nutritional needs of these communities with a view to formulate suitable small scale projects to improve their nutritional status.
(f) Provision of basic amenities: provision of basic amenities to the fishing population has been considered by the Ministry of Fisheries as an important measure to uplift their living conditions. Due to insufficient funds with the government, it is recommended that additional funds from foreign assistance was needed.
SMALL SCALE FISHERIES IN SRI LANKA
There is no single definition to define small scale or artisanal fisheries. Small scale fisheries operations are undertaken in both marine and inland waters and include fish farming. It depends on the scale of operation, the type of technology used, the degree of capital intensity, employment generation and the nature of ownership. In small scale fisheries, the boats are owner operated using comparatively low capital and employing traditional methods fishing. The artisanal fisheries are usually characterized by irregular catch rates, limited fishing range and instability of income levels. Small scale fisheries typically consists of a single unit, owned or hired by a fisherman/fisherwoman or a fishing family.
It is estimated that small scale fishermen represent over 90% of the fishing population in Sri Lanka.
Although contribution by the small scale fisherfolk in fish production is substantial, majority of them live at subsistence level mainly due to lack of access to institutional credit facilities for their economic activities and lack of management skills. The unpredictable catches, low earnings are some of the key issues that require urgent attention. Lack of savings habits among fishermen was another reason for the generally poor status of the small scale fishing communities.
The relative poverty level of small scale fishemen has been defined and measured not only by comparison to the national average level of income but also more significantly in relation to incomes and amenities of similar socio-economic groups, such as, farmers, other rural dwellers and urban workers. It has been found that most of the fishing communities live at subsistence level.
PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION OF FISH
It is estimated that nearly 85% of the fish produced in Sri Lanka is consumed in the wet form while a substantial proportion of the balance is converted to dried fish. Very little processing and freezing of fish is done at present, this being limited to a few species which are mainly exported.
With the liberalization of imports in 1977, the imports of fish and fish products have been increased. This especially included canned fish and dried fish. Fish production, imports and exports of fish and the availability of fish for local consumption from 1977 upto 1981 are as follows:
Production
(in tons)
Fish supply
Per capita consumption (lbs)
Imports
Exports
Source: Ministry of Fisheries Government of
Sri Lanka, 1988
MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION
The Marketing of fish in Sri Lanka is predominantly handled by the private sector. Most traders have close ties with the boat owners/fishermen and make their purchases at the beaches. The fish is then packed in ice and transported (by lorry or rail) to consumer/sales centres. Substantial quantities of fish are brought to the wholesale fish market in Colombo where it is sold by commission agents. Several Fisheries Cooperative Societies have also set up their own marketing and distribution network. In addition, Ceylon Fisheries Corporation (CFC) is also actively engaged in the marketing and distribution of fish. The CFC has set up fish purchasing centres in important fish producing areas and has its own retail outlets, a number of cold rooms, fish on ice stores and a fleet of refrigerated and insulated trucks. The Corporation maintains a buffer stock of fish in order to stabilize fish prices for both the consumer and producer.
INCOME GENERATING ACTIVITIES
In order to improve the incomes of fishing families, it was felt that income generating activities with financial support by the government, or foreign donor agencies was necessary. Further, projects should not be confined only to fishing related activities, but also to other small scale non-farm activities such as, coir making, ready-made garments, mat making etc., using the local raw materials. In order to strengthen the skills, both in management and technology, necessary training courses should be conducted.
STRENGTHENING OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES IN FISHING VILLAGES - TRAINING NEEDS
It is proposed to strengthen the implementation capacity of the social development activities through the Fisheries Social Development Organizations in the fishing villages. Community leaders will have to be trained to carry out multipurpose activities under social and economic development prograrnmes.
The target groups were:
(a) pre-school teachers;
(b) district fisheries extension officers, social development assistants and fisheries inspectors; and
(c) Leaders of the Fisheries Social Development Organizations.
PROBLEMS/CONSTRAINTS
A number of constraints affected the degree of involvement and participation of the beneficiaries. These included the status of women, low literacy rate, lack of integration and coordination of social component into the project. It was also highlighted that the fisheries development officials and the women leaders needed training on basic project management and book-keeping.
From project experience, the participatory approach was found to be effective in attracting fisherwomen in undertaking activities in fishing villages. More fisherwomen were interested to undertake viable fisheries projects and enhance family income. In view of this, there was a proposal to expand the action project to ten more villages.
VIETNAM
The International Cooperation Department of the Ministry of Agriculture provided guidance to the National Sea Products Exports Corporation (SEAPRODEX) in implementing the action programme in Vietnam. The Vietnam Government's high priority was assigned to developing shrimp production. As a result, generous government loans were provided on long-term basis (3-5 years) and with very low interest through cooperatives. CIRDAP credit funds were disbursed through the women-member cooperatives under the administration of a special steering committee set up for this purpose.
Two villages, Tamgiang and Vienantay from the Namean district of Minhhai Province were selected for the (MAP-4) survey. SEAPRODEX completed the baseline data collection which showed that out of a population of 6.403 at Tamgiang, 35 percent were males and 65 percent females, children comprised one-fourth of the total population. Of the 935 households, 384 were engaged fully in fish catching. One-third of the total fishing households operated in one cooperative (6 families with 55 members) and 16 production groups (88 families with 607 members) while the rest operated privately.
FISHERY DEVELOPMENT AS PART OF INTEGRATED RURAL DEVELOPMENT POLICY IN VIETNAM
The Government Agriculture Development Programme for the Mekong delta area in general and for Minh Hai province in particular, give priority to three major objectives:
(1) develop agriculture including animal breeding and cultivation (e.g. high productivity rice species, cultivation of fruits and industrial plants such as coconut tree, different kinds of beans pine-apples, etc.);
(2) ensure optimum development of forestry resources in an integrated approach; and
(3) develop animal breeding, mainly poultry and husbandry (e.g. pigs, ducks, etc.).
MAP - 4 LOCATION OF PROJECT VILLAGES: VIETNAM
In the initial years of its national reconstruction and development, the fishery industry of Vietnam experienced considerable difficulties. In 1974, Vietnam became one of the leading fish producing countries having annual production of 1 million tons.
During the post war reconstruction era, fishery industry in Vietnam again confronted serious difficulties and consequently the production reduced to 300,000 tons. Beginning 1980, the industry started to regain its momentum. In 1986, production increased to record high of 700,000 tons. A target of I million tons of fish and shrimp was set in 1990 (70% shrimp, 20% squid and 10% aquatic varieties). Serious attention was given on the processing of marine products so as to increase the volume of processed frozen products.
Improved transportation, preservation and processing, storage, port facilities and other support inputs have been emphasized in order to increase export and marketing of fish and fish products in Vietnam.
Fishery industry in Vietnam has attributed to three important contributions towards the economic development programmes (I986-199O period) of the country. These are:
 general development programmes
 consumer goods development programmes
 export products development programmes
Following 1980, the Ministry of Fisheries and SEAPRODEX undertook series of programmes to revitalize the fishery industry. These programmes included:
 resource survey and research
 aquaculture development
 scientific-technical investment (e.g. catching, preservation processing and consuming).
ROLE OF WOMEN IN THE FISHERY VILLAGES
In the overall development programmes of the government, the issue as to how the socioeconomic condition of the women could be improved, received serious consideration in almost all sectors: scientific, technical, administration management, and especially in health and education. However, due to various constraints such as inadequate physical facilities, shortage of finance, lack of proper transportation, communication, etc., much needed fishery action programmes could not expand in Vietnam involving women prior to launching of RUWFIC with assistance from CIRDAP.
In most fishery villages in Vietnam, women play an important role in socio-economic development activities. Primarily, their work largely center around the household (e.g. cooking, looking after children, and housekeeping). They also actively take part in different production oriented fields such as aquaculture, marine products processing, net repairing, handicraft items making, etc. CIRDAP Action Research Programme in Vietnam gave special priority to include the widowed women of war victims to participate in the action programme.
PROBLEMS IN PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION
 Serious difficulties were experienced in communication and transportation systems. Located far away from HMC city (more than 400 Km.), and due to the poor communication facilities, there have been many obstacles in effective programme implementations.
 How to secure ecological balance between mangrove forests and shrimp culture areas as they compete with each other in two different directions, became a problem. Such imbalances often cause unfavorable effects on ecology, climate, productivity and on people.
 There existed a large number of widow families in the villages under poor living conditions. As a consequence, with the limited fund from CIRDAP, only the war widowed women families could be selected as beneficiaries.
 Although shrimp culture has long been a traditional and important socio-economic activity, yet, as the initial investment required massive funds for forest clearance, earth excavation and pond digging etc., became a major bottleneck.
 Nam Can women's level of education was very low and the servicing and infrastructure were poor. Therefore, it became necessary to have a comprehensive investment relating to socio-cultural-economic aspects requiring a large amount of fund.
CONCLUSION
The action programme for rural fishing communities was carried out in Nam Can was the first of its kind in Vietnam. Therefore, it gained strong support and interest from different quarters and from local authorities.
As part of action project learning experiences, the problems/ constraints experienced during the implementation of the project were reported. These included poor communication and transportation facilities, undetermined ecological effects of shrimp culture and low literacy rates.
The project helped more than 70 families totalling over 300 individuals. It had favourable impact on the social and cultural life of the fishing families. In view of this, the project was considered to be replicable in other areas with larger numbers of poor window families.
<section>2</section>
Major issues and recommendations
Major issues and recommendations
ISSUES
Social development programmes are considered to be successful to the extent that they produce the results intended by planners and policy makers. Thus, in retrospect, the immediate issues for deliberation, is to review whether the objectives of the action research project have been met. And, if not, what measures are to be taken to improve it. For this purpose, four areas of concern have been identified from the RUWFIC objectives. These are:
1. Participatory Model: this concept refers to (a) survey methodology and (b) evaluation and monitoring including "phasing-out responsibilities" of action research project with the active involvement of the target beneficiaries (Chart-l).
At the in-country implementing agency (IA) level, the survey activities include selecting the survey (project) sites, identifying the target beneficiaries, designing the survey questionnaires and schedules, training the interviewers and the target beneficiaries - all these leading to organizing and implementing the data collection in the first phase and implementing the income-generating projects (IGPs), and other operational requirements of the action research project in the succeeding phase.
The evaluation process starts with a socio-economic survey aimed at determining whether the objectives of the project have been achieved from the perspectives of both the overall project and the target beneficiaries. In the process of evaluation, the project planners/implementors and the target beneficiaries are expected to jointly identify the achievements/performances and problems of the project. The evaluation also helps work out follow-up action both for immediate and long-term needs of the target beneficiaries.
2. Non-Economic Role/Activities: Rural women have always been confined to their ascriptive role in the interior. However, it is now generally recognized that their preoccupation cannot confine them only to purely home-maker's functions. Wide involvement in non-economic or socio-cultural activities can be employed to make women a meaningful member of their family, community and society.
3. strengthening Women's Knowledge and Skills: Group Linkages and Access to Support Services: (a) Government policies and programmes should be re-examined in order that they explicitly recognize the specific needs of rural women in fishing communities. Issues that demand attention are:
CHART-1: SYNTHESIS OF CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK OF CIRDAP ACTION RESEARCH PROJECT DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
 opportunities for knowledge and acquisition through appropriate training to increase their efficiency;
 effective utilization of necessary support and extension services including credit and marketing facilities primarily intended for them;
 providing rural women with viable economic organizations to institutionalize and sustain their role in the development programmes;
 recognition of the important contribution of the rural women in the development of their household and the fishing community;
 sensitization of different disciplines, donor agencies and the overall scientific community including the national development agencies to monitoring of the impact of policies and programmes on rural women in fishing communities;
 concerned national agencies should organize trainers and training programme for those engaged in imparting new skills and technological knowledge to rural women in fishing communities for both economic and non-economic activities/roles;
 National government should coordinate with CIRDAP in documentation and information dissemination activities and on relevant research on rural women in fishing communities. National government may also designate correspondents to facilitate the sharing of information within the region.
4. Extension/Replication of the Project: The extension/replication of the action research project is premised on the viability and validity of the model in the context of other CMCs. The results have been claimed by in-country project coordinators to be encouraging enough in the first phase both from the standpoint of the project coordinators and the target beneficiaries. However, the pilot projects were implemented only in limited number of villages and the expansion of the project in some more areas/villages required a positive 'show-window' as model for replication. Thus, the existing pilot villages along with other adjacent or similar villages have to be resurveyed for "before and after" and "with and without" indepth analysis.
The provision of more training establishment of the desired IGPs in identified areas as well as the generation of revolving capital from any relevant sources would facilitate the successful expansion and replication of the project.
The human resource development approach among the field workers, local leaders and the target beneficiaries have proved to be extremely useful in the context of RUWFIC's participatory development process. As part of the training and equipping them more effectively, the field workers, target beneficiaries and the local leaders must be given refresher courses and new training courses on relevant technologies.
There should also be an overall plan to develop the required services and infrastructural facilities of the fishing community. Other viable projects should also be encouraged to help the socio-cultural and economic growth of the overall community.
RECOMMENDATIONS
It is realized that the project had, by and large, been able to achieve the set objectives. The need for such action research project for rural women in fishing communities was reaffirmed by all the participating countries in the project. There was need for extending the time and coverage of the project at the country level. Recommendations of the project could be grouped into two categories: one that required the attention of the participating CMCs; and (b) other by CIRDAP.
ATTENTION OF CMCS
(1) The importance of the project, particularly its role in enlisting the direct participation of fisherwomen in development activities was recognized. The project strategies should also be reflected in the overall national policies and programmes of the government.
(2) Greater attention should be given to the training components Village seminars, workshops and training programmes for the fisherwomen should be periodically followed up.
(3) The success of this type of action research projects would largely depend upon the inter agency coordination and the development of strong support services/policies. The project should be supported by the various agencies working at the community level and such efforts should be sustained by an appropriate coordinating council.
(4) Recognizing the crucial catalytic role of "Seed Money" in the implementation of the project and appreciating the difficulty in mobilizing resources from CMCs and disadvantaged rural communities at the initial stages, it is felt that the donor agencies should provide necessary financial backstopping to advance the on-going activities and expand the project in other villages/communities.
(5) As the income Generating Projects (IGPs) formulated and implemented under the project produced tangible results, therefore, additional IGPs should be supported with improved technologies in order to foster greater financial gain.
(6) The fisherwomen should be able to formulate and implement not only the fisheries related activities but also other "non-fishery" related IGPs. Such action research project should also take up health, nutrition, and children education, and other social services oriented programmes.
(7) The action research project activities among the rural women in fishing communities should also focus other aspects such as the environmental protection and promotion of the cultural participation of the fishing communities.
(8) Special emphasis should be on the aspects of monitoring, evaluation and documentation. Monitoring and evaluation activities should be continuously accomplished through participatory method. Institutional mechanism at the village level helps to monitor and evaluate project activities.
(9) The long-se, m success of any community action programme may attribute to the existing local level organizations and their supports. Therefore, greater participation of these organizations as well as the non-government organizations (NGOs), should be continued and encouraged.
ATTENTION OF CIRDAP
(1) The action research project should be supported by CIRDAP for additional period in order to sustain the momentum generated during its first phase. Such support would enable ClRDAP/CMCs to continue the monitoring and evaluation activities of the existing projects and multi-location testing with a view to determining the possibilities of its nation-wide replication.
(2) Regional experience sharing is important. A programme may be devised which could facilitate a continuous sharing of experiences and information on the development of fisheries and the fishing communities among CMCs through different forums and consultation meetings. Documentation of success stories relating to action research project on fishing communities, particularly, the fisherwomen should be made and disseminated through the CMCs.
(3) Close supervision of activities by both the Link Institution and relevant professional staff of CIRDAP is important. Such supervision through occasional visits to the project sites is helpful in effective project implementation exercises.
(4) The important role of donor countries and agencies in promoting the participation of fisherwomen in development activities and improving the quality of life in the fishing communities is recognized. CIRDAP project activities in fishing communities should be supported by the donor countries and agencies in its efforts to expand action research activities/experiences on RUWFIC in other CMCs.
<section>3</section>
Bibliography
Bibliography
Asian NGO Coalition for Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (ANGOC). 1989. Small-Scale Fisheries Development in Southeast Asia, Manila, Philippines.
Asian Productivity Organization (APO). 1989. Fish Marketing in Asia and the Pacific Report of a Study Mission. APO, Tokyo, Japan.
BARC/CIRDAP. 1987. BARC-CIRDAP Workshop on Socio-economic Aspects of Fishing Community in Bangladesh and its Role in Rural Development, Dhaka, Bangladesh, 10-11 June 1987.
CIRDAP. 1987. Rural Women in Fishing Communities: A Consultation Report of CIRDAP Action Programme
CIRDAP. 1988. Rural Women in Fishing Communities. Report of the Expert Consultation held in Manila, Philippines, 25-28 January 1988.
CIRDAP. 1988. Integrated Farming System in Asia. Based on the Report of the Regional Workshop on Integrated Crop, Livestock and Fish Farming System, 18-21 July 1988, Bangkok, Thailand.
CIRDAP. 1984. People's Participation in Rural Development: An Overview of South and Southeast Asian Experiences, Comilla, Bangladesh.
CIRDAP. 1986. Socio-economic Impact of New Fishing Technologies on Traditional Fishing Communities in Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
FAO. 1986. Strategy for Fisheries Management and Development, FAO, Rome, Italy.
FAO. 1984. Report of the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development, 27 June - 6 July 1984, Rome, Italy.
FAO-RAPA. 1989. Selected Indicators of Food and Agriculture, Development in Asia-Pacific Region, 1978-88, FAO-RAPA, Bangkok, Thailand, Publication No. 1989/7.
Maclean J. L. and Dizon, L. B. et. al. 1987. ICLARM Report: 1986. ICLARM, Manila, Philippines.
Ministry of Agriculture, Agency for Agricultural Education, Training and Extension, Jakarta, Indonesia. 1988. Indonesian Country Report on the Mid-term Consultation, 11-14 August 1986, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Ministry of Fisheries, Government of Sri Lanka. 1988. Small-Scale Fisheries Development in Sri Lanka: Country Report for Expert Consultation on Rural Women in Fishing Communities (RUWFIC), 25-28 January 1988, Manila, Philippines.
National Council on Integrated Area Development (NACIAD). 1988. The Philippines Country Paper on the Action Research for Rural Women in Fishing Communities, 25-28 January 1988, Manila, Philippines.
Nuruzzaman, A.K.M. 1990. Perspectives on Fisheries Development in Bangladesh, BARC, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Nuruzzaman, A. K. M. 1993. Cluster of Ideas and Action for Fisheries Development in Bangladesh. Fish Publishers, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Pullin, R.S.V. 1989. Third-World Aquaculture and the Environment. Naga, Diversity, NAGA, the ICLARM Quarterly, January 1990, p.5-8.
Panayotou, T. et. al. 1985. Small-Scale Fisheries in Asia: Socio Economic Analysis and Policy. International Development Research Centre (IDRC), Ottawa, Canada.
Sea Products Export Corporation (SEAPRODEX). 1988. Vietnam Country Report on the Mid-term Consultation, 11-14 August 1988, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
World Bank. 1993. World Development Report 1993, New York, Oxford University Press.
<section>e</section>
Introduction
Introduction
BACKGROUND
The focus of national and international assistance is increasingly directed towards small-scale fisheries vis-a-vis the production from small-scale fisheries. It is devoted almost entirely to domestic consumption and represents about half the world supply of fish for consumption. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in the World Fisheries Conference in 1984 drafted the "World Charter for Fisheries", embodying the consensus prevailing on the best courses for the management and development of the fisheries sector. In its charter for determining the special role and needs of small-scale fisheries and rural fishing and fish farming communities, the Conference enacted several important principles and guidelines when establishing policies and implementation programmes for the development of small-scale fisheries and aquaculture:
 since the problems of rural fishing and fish-farming communities are not related solely to fish production, the development of this sector can often be best approached within the context of Integrated rural development. The principles adopted by the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development should therefore find wide application in small-scale fisheries and aquaculture development.
 as a rule, the interest of the national economy may demand simultaneous and harmonized development of both small-scale and industrial fisheries. There is a need for a well defined overall strategy, based on economic, social, biological and other factors, clarifying the role to be played by each type of fisheries.
 special attention should be given to the choice of objectives vis-a-vis small-scale fisheries development as it will not be possible simultaneously to seek to improve the incomes of the fishermen and to increase employment opportunities when stocks are in danger of over exploitation.
 in planning for the development of small-scale fisheries, due considerations should be given to the needs for and provision of shore facilities, adequate marketing and distribution infrastructure, services and financing.
 the reduction of post-harvest losses through improved handling, processing, transport and distribution systems should be given high priority as it will make an important contribution to the betterment of the small-scale fisheries sector.
 education and training and other fortes of social investment should be made an essential part of small-scale fisheries development. More extension workers should be trained within cooperatives and small-scale fishing communities, in particular in fisheries technology, social welfare and community development and in the management and operation of small-scale enterprises and organizations. The link between extension and practical research should be strengthened. Due consideration should be given to the special role of small-scale fisheries in the economies of island States where they are often the major source of employment and foreign exchange earnings.
 active participation of small-scale fishing communities in the planning and formulation of development activities should be encouraged so as to ensure their successful implementation. To achieve these aims, it would be useful to provide such participation in some countries through coordinating bodies such as councils or unions of cooperatives.
 fisheries development programmes should recognize that women play an important role in fishing communities, both in trading and processing, and provision should be made for enhancing that role.
 the cooperation and participation of fishermen is necessary to ensure the success of small-scale fisheries management schemes. Fishermen's organizations should be considered as a channel through which management decisions can become operative and technical/financial assistance delivered.
 to ensure the well-being of small-scale fishermen on a sustained basis, it may be necessary in many cases to secure supplementary or alternative sources of income and employment for fishermen so as to reduce pressure on limited fishery resources, possibly by engaging in aquaculture.
 the adaptation and modification of locally developed methods and equipment for use in small-scale fisheries should be carefully considered before directly transferring technologies developed elsewhere, especially the introduction of capital-intensive technology.
 attention should be given to make credit facilities available for small-scale fishermen on terms and conditions equating with their generally weak economic positions and special needs.
 governments should ensure, through their fisheries department, planning ministries and other agencies concerned, that the interests of small-scale fisheries are given due considerations in plans concerning water and land use.
 new and better methods of evaluating small-scale fisheries activities should be devised, taking into consideration not only technical and economic but also less easily measurable factors such as amenities of life, health, education and communications.
 optimum resource utilization and upgrading the socio-econornic status of the fishermen require a proper definition of small-scale fisheries, taking into account the technical means and methods utilized, spheres of action and the specific system of enterprise involved.
 vessel safety is a very important factor to keep in mind for small-scale fisheries. In absence or lack of proper crew training, life-saving facilities and on-board communications, and the incorrect use of gear are frequent causes of accidents and must be eliminated.
 training programmes must provide for instruction in the best fishing techniques for catching existing species and for the distribution of fishing charts indicating the location of fishing grounds. Top priority in training should be accorded to fishing communities. Training should be adjusted to the renewal of the fleet and to the characteristics of the new types of vessels, so as to improve both yields and safety and ensure a rational utilization of the exclusive economic zones.
 the developing countries should plan their aquaculture bearing in mind their national potential and opportunities for the exchange of programrnes, knowledge, experience, technical assistance and training, through the mechanisms of regional cooperation.
Prior to the World Fisheries Conference, in 1979, the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD) laid special emphasis on the role of women in rural development activities and underscored the need for initiating appropriate prograrnmes for their economic and social upliftment. In line with WCARRD recommendations, development of disadvantaged social groups with special focus on women became one of the priority areas of ClRDAP's action research programme activities. On the basis of the information gathered from the review of literature, women groups in fishing communities in different parts of the Asia-Pacific region were identified as one of the most disadvantaged groups that did not receive adequate attention and were by and large alienated from the mainstream of national rural development programrnes. While these social groups needed immediate attention, it was also recognized that there was significant information gap on women in traditional fishing
communities. In view of this, pilot scale projects combined with information collection was thought to be the best strategy to approach the problem.
FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT IN THE THIRD WORLD COUNTRIES
The production-oriented and capital intensive technologies employed by international assistance programmes and equally shared by national policy makers primarily in their desire to increase export earnings often generate negative impact on employment, nutrition, changing values, ethics, resource use rights and policy implications in many of the third world countries.
The conventional wisdom of providing more effective technologies to shift the production function does not consider the basic questions of resource availability and allocation and other interdependencies. In the context of fisheries, an open access resource and competition among sectors resembles a "zero-sum game" where technological advantage favours the minority and limits the ability of the majority to earn adequate income, employment and food.
The same conventional wisdom rarely considers local community values and the impact of technological innovation on community social structures. Broadly, to become effective and legitimate, an innovation must be locally-relevant, locally-specific and rooted to the community's resources and needs.
On the basis of the above premise, CIRDAP launched the Action Research Project on Rural Women in Fishing Communities (RUWFIC) in four selected CIRDAP Member Countries (CMCs), namely, Indonesia, Philippines, Sri Lanka and Vietnam. With financial assistance from the Government of Japan along with technical assistance provided by FAO, the project was launched in 1984.
PROJECT OBJECTIVES
The action research project on RUWFIC entailed two long-term objectives: first, to help rural women and their families in fishing communities improve their living and working conditions by providing required inputs and services to help meet their basic needs on the basis of collection of relevant data and information on their role and activities in community development; and second, to enhance the participation of rural women in development efforts by involving them in decision making and in implementing those decisions.
The "short-term" or ''immediate" objectives of RUWFIC were to:
(a) develop a model of participatory data collection on women's role and activities in fishing communities as a basis for planning, monitoring and evaluation for eventual replication in other fishing communities;
(b) assist participating member countries in establishing pilot projects for promoting traditional income-generating activities for women, especially in the fields of fish processing and utilization of fish, marketing, fish farming or breeding as deemed appropriate in the country settings;
(c) help strengthen linkages of women's groups and their access to support services that were available in their respective communities; and
(d) assist rural women in undertaking economically viable income generating activities.
The programme was operationalized through: (i) conducting socio-economic surveys to construct a primary data base on households and the activities of women in the selected villages; (ii) formation of target groups based on the collected data; (iii) providing on-the-job training of women participants; (iv) organizing village seminars and in-country workshops; (v) identification of potential leaders of women's groups; and (vi) monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the project.
