<title>FAO's Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
FAO has a mission to communicate. At the very heart of its mandate is the role of collecting, interpreting and, above all, communicating information related to food, agriculture, forestry, fisheries and sustainable rural development. Moreover, the effectiveness and credibility of the Organization as a policy-making forum and unique, multilingual centre of excellence, knowledge and technical expertise depends to a considerable degree on its ability to communicate.
As we approach the new millennium, our increasingly globalized world seems more than ever divided between those suffering from information overload and the millions of others with little or no access to information. The challenge to FAO, therefore, is to ensure that its information and corporate messages reach its targeted audiences and partners, using the new communication tools and technologies in the most cost-effective way.
To meet this challenge, I have approved FAO's first Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy. The result of a long and intensive process of consultation throughout the Organization, the Policy provides a timely blueprint for managing FAO's diverse communication resources and needs. Its cardinal principles - participatory planning, corporate focus and decentralized implementation - provide the framework for coordination and cooperation among all units of the Organization in this most important endeavour.
The Policy seeks to create a communication culture, based on a shared foundation of knowledge in which FAO staff become informed and convinced partners in its communication efforts. And by fostering positive dialogue with potential partners - governments, technical experts, opinion leaders, the media and civil society - the Policy aims to harness the necessary support and resources to fulfil the Organization's mandate. Securing the collaboration of these partners will not only enable FAO to convey key messages more extensively and convincingly, but also to present a more human face in the campaign against hunger and poverty.
I am pleased to note that implementation of the Policy is already well under way. A new Corporate Communication Committee has been established to coordinate implementation of the Policy and to review and monitor the development of departmental communication and publishing plans. Furthermore, in my proposals to the FAO governing bodies regarding FAO's Strategic Framework 2000-2015, I have highlighted communication as an integral part of the Organization's programmes and as a core strategy for achieving its goals.
Communication inevitably shapes the public profile of FAO. I am confident that the Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy will create a supportive, proactive environment, firmly establishing the Oganization's credibility as a responsive technical organization and effectively relaying its mission as the leading global advocate of food security.
Jacques Diouf
Director-General
FAO
<section>2</section>
A mission to communicate
FAO'S MANDATE
Communication lies at the core of FAO's mandate. In the words of its Constitution:
"1. The Organization shall collect, analyse, interpret and disseminate information relating to nutrition, food and agriculture...."
"2. The Organization shall promote and, where appropriate, shall recommend national and international action with respect to:
* scientific, technological, social and economic research relating to nutrition, food and agriculture;
* the improvement of education and administration relating to nutrition, food and agriculture, and the spread of public knowledge of nutritional and agricultural science and practice ...".
(FAO Constitution Article I, paras 1-2)
FAO's ability to fulfil this mandate depends on the effectiveness and quality of:
* internal communication among FAO staff that enhances the quality of their work and enables them to interact effectively with people outside the Organization on the basis of a shared foundation of knowledge and commitment;
* technical communication between FAO experts and their counterparts in government, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and research and academic institutions;
* advocacy and public communication, aimed at creating a greater understanding of, and building up support for, FAO, especially among decision-makers and potential partners; and
* development support communication, aimed at delivering to rural populations the information they need to participate fully in development.
FAO has a need to communicate general messages related to its overall mandate as well as specific messages directed towards particular audiences or related to the priorities of the Organization. Delivering these messages effectively involves dialogue and a genuine exchange of information and views with FAO's constituency and key interlocutors such as the media, NGOs and national and community leaders. Taking all these dimensions into account, communication should involve everyone at FAO, although roles and responsibilities may differ. An effective communication policy and strategy depends on a clear understanding of these various responsibilities and a coordinated approach to meeting them.
FAILURE OF THE AD HOC APPROACH TO COMMUNICATION
In the past, FAO operated without a corporate communication policy, relying instead on what seemed to be a pragmatic division of labour and responsibilities. As a result, responsibility for information and communication became fragmented and some key audiences were seriously neglected. In other instances, channels for effective communication were never established or were allowed to atrophy. Most serious of all, the Organization failed to enlist its own staff as informed and convinced partners in its communication efforts.
Communication and information activities frequently lacked focus and coordination. No mechanism existed for defining key corporate messages or for informing and educating staff about them. Technical departments planned and budgeted for technical and related publications but not for other information needs. At the same time, the Information Division, the focal point for professional expertise in information and communication, prepared its programme without reference to the technical departments' priorities other than those set out in the Programme of Work and Budget and its own perception of information requirements.
Recognizing and responding to the need to improve the focus and effectiveness of communication activities, the Director-General requested the Department of General Affairs and Information (GI) to prepare a corporate communication policy and strategy in consultation with all FAO departments and decentralized structures.
IMAGE AND TARGET AUDIENCES
The Organization faces image problems that can only be addressed effectively in the context of a corporate policy. Commonly cited problems include perceptions that:
* FAO is better known and more appreciated in developing countries than in industrialized countries;
* the Organization's structure and management are criticized more often than its technical work;
* some specific departments and programmes are viewed with scepticism or hostility by NGOs or other key sectors.
For the most part, it is impossible for FAO, with its limited resources and essentially technical mandate, to reach the broad general public directly. The Organization must therefore take advantage of the multiplier effect and focus its communication efforts on potential partners and strategic target groups. These target audiences include:
* Government policy- and decision-makers: senior officials who determine policy and levels of funding in the areas of food, agriculture and rural development.
* Government counterparts: professionals in government ministries whose briefs overlap with FAO's mandate in areas such as agriculture, forestry, fisheries, rural development and the environment.
* Technical counterparts: scientists, researchers, economists, policy analysts and other technical experts working in fields related to FAO's mandate.
* Non-governmental organizations: both an influential audience and potential partners in communication activities relating to FAO's mandate.
* Specialist media: technical journals and other specialized information outlets essential for communication with technical counterparts as well as with journalists and educators whose interests touch on areas of concern to FAO.
* Mass media: both print (newspapers and magazines) and electronic media (television, radio and the Internet), which provide access to priority audiences as well as to the general public.
How these audiences are approached will differ according to their location (e.g. developed or developing countries), communication needs and available capacities. The overall success of the Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy will depend entirely on the ability of the Organization to reach key audiences in all member countries, using the most appropriate and effective tools for each audience.
FAO is committed to the multilingual presentation of information. In fact, this approach represents one of the most important communication advantages of the Organization and is intrinsic to its communication objectives. The Corporate Communication Plan will allow FAO to build on its expertise in the preparation of multilingual materials, including information disseminated via computer networks and other electronic media.
FAO's Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy is aimed at identifying priorities and opportunities as well as ways to reach and interact with defined target groups in a planned, coordinated fashion. The Policy rests on the conviction that success depends on more communication, not less, and that the Organization is best served by opening more and better channels for the exchange of information and ideas with its key partners and audiences.
<section>3</section>
The policy framework
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of FAO's Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy derive directly from the Organization's functions: as a unique source of information and advice on food, agriculture (including forestry and fisheries) and rural development - the normative role; and as a provider of technical assistance to member countries - the operational role. These basic roles are reflected in four primary communication objectives:
* to increase the priority given in national and international development policies and initiatives to the agricultural and rural sector and the availability of food for all;
* to sharpen the focus and improve the effectiveness of support for agricultural and rural development policies and programmes;
* to enhance the status and recognition of the Organization as a multilingual centre of excellence - a unique and essential repository of information and ideas related to sustainable agriculture, forestry, fisheries and rural development;
* to present FAO as a dynamic, action-oriented organization that has a real impact on the alleviation of hunger, rural poverty and the problems of agriculture, forestry and fisheries, particularly in developing nations and those in transition.
With reference to particular audiences, the main objectives are:
* to build up support for FAO, particularly among donor countries, as an Organization that delivers value for money and is a cost-effective partner in the battle against hunger, rural poverty and environmental degradation;
* to enhance awareness and appreciation of FAO among influential media, both as a source of authoritative information on topics related to its mandate and as a guide to important and interesting issues in development;
* to strengthen recognition of FAO as a focal point for information and ideas among technical experts working in fields related to the Organization's mandate;
* to promote the perception of FAO as an open, multidisciplinary, responsive partner in dialogue and action.
With reference to the programme priorities of the Organization, the main objective is:
* to increase understanding, particularly among relevant target audiences, of the conditions and analyses that shape FAO's priority programmes and of actions taken to implement them.
Fulfilling these objectives implies commitment to one other fundamental aim of FAO's Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy:
* to build on FAO's strength in multilingual publishing and extend it to new media and technologies.
CONCEPTUAL APPROACH
FAO's Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy provides the framework for coordination and cooperation while also encouraging participatory, decentralized planning and implementation. It hinges on a process of planning and collaboration that draws on all units within the Organization and encompasses all communication activities.
In particular, the Policy addresses the profound changes introduced by new communication tools and technologies. These tools provide the opportunity to decentralize the production and distribution of information, devolving these functions to the originators of information in other departments and the decentralized structures. It recognizes that, in the absence of a corporate approach, this potential for decentralization could also erode both the quality of FAO information materials and the consistency of their messages.
The Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy enables each unit, irrespective of its location in the world:
* to contribute to the formulation of a corporate communication plan, identifying core messages, audiences and activities;
* to communicate directly with those audiences for whom it is the most effective counterpart;
* to draw on the full range of communication expertise and technology available within the Organization for advice and support.
At the same time, participants in this Organization-wide process are required:
* to operate within the framework of the Corporate Communication Plan, to incorporate its messages into their own activities where appropriate, and to refrain from engaging in activities that conflict with or distract from these messages;
* to review plans for all communication activities and products with a multidisciplinary group of communication professionals in order to evaluate objectives and determine the most cost-effective strategies for achieving them;
* to adhere to procedures designed to ensure the high quality of materials issued in the name of the Organization.
The Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy has three key elements: participatory planning, corporate focus and decentralized implementation.
Participatory planning
The planning process is:
* participatory: communication plans developed at the divisional and departmental level provide inputs to the overall Corporate Communication Plan;
* comprehensive: the full range of communication activities are covered, including advocacy and technical publications (both print and electronic), public information materials, meetings, speaking engagements and media initiatives;
* cooperative: it draws on the skills of communication professionals to meet the specific needs of the various departments and decentralized structures within a framework of priorities set in the Organization's Programme of Work and Budget.
Corporate focus
Two basic managerial components help guarantee the corporate focus:
* coordination: major components of communication activities are multidisciplinary and multimedia campaigns that focus on specific objectives, provide key messages and concentrate on target audiences;
* review and quality control: procedures avoid fragmentation of the Organization's image, prevent the dissemination of conflicting messages and enable all participants to function as effective partners.
Decentralized implementation
The preparation and distribution of information is more closely under the control of originators and those responsible for its dissemination:
* communication professionals are responsible for providing guidance and support and for maintenance of the information infrastructure;
* technical professionals are responsible for activities directed towards their peers and counterparts.
<section>4</section>
Responsibilities and planning
SHARED CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY
The Department of General Affairs and Information (GI) is custodian of the Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy and the focal point for preparation of the Corporate Communication Plan. GI is responsible for developing quantitative indicators to evaluate progress made in implementing the Policy within an established time frame. It is also responsible for monitoring the implementation of, and revisions to, the Corporate Communication Plan and servicing the Corporate Communication Committee (CCC), which replaces the Committee for Publications. That Committee's role and terms of reference are broadened to include coordinating the production of all information products, overseeing the communication planning process and approving Departmental/Regional Communication and Publishing Plans and related budgets. The Assistant Director-General of GI advises the Director-General, Assistant Directors-General of other departments and regional, subregional and country FAO
Representatives (FAORs) on all matters relating to GI's mandate and activities.
The division of responsibility for communication activities within the Organization derives essentially from the traditional distinction made between technical and public information. Broadly speaking, technical information represents a distillation of data and analysis that is generally of interest and value to a specialist audience, including specialist NGOs, whereas public information is aimed at non-technical audiences such as the media, non-specialist NGOs and the general public. On this basis, the Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy identifies the following key actors in the formulation and delivery of its content:
Director-General and Office of the Director-General
The Director-General, or an individual designated by the Director-General, is the official spokesperson of the Organization on all matters of policy. The Director-General holds primary responsibility for institutional communication with Member Governments and for statements of policy. Within the context of the participatory planning process, the Director-General sets priorities for corporate messages and activities.
Department of General Affairs and Information
The Department of General Affairs and Information is responsible for the Organization's public information, promotional and public relations activities as well as for the management of the World Agricultural Information Centre (WAICENT). The Department also provides a wide range of information support services as well as conference services.
The Information Division provides advice and, as resources permit, support for the communication activities of all other FAO units. It prepares and produces information materials designed for a general audience, including advocacy publications, videos, CD-ROMs, material for presentations, displays and exhibits. It also provides guidance and support in the preparation and production of information materials of a technical nature. The Information Division ensures that FAO publications and periodicals meet professional and commercial standards and reflect a consistent, identifiable corporate image. It also maintains a distribution list and is responsible for the promotion of sales and the Organization's effectiveness as a major academic/technical publisher.
The Library and Documentation Systems Division is responsible for the management and development of WAICENT at the corporate level in cooperation with the technical divisions that are responsible for the generation and validity of the data. As part of this managerial and operational role, it has overall responsibility for definitions, codes and classifications adopted in all working systems that generate information of corporate value. It is also responsible for ensuring quality and consistency in the presentation of information disseminated through electronic networks.
The Conference, Council and Protocol Affairs Division is responsible for the management of all meeting rooms and provides a complete conference service that covers protocol, documentation, translation and interpretation, messenger and related services and multimedia and related facilities. It advises and assists technical divisions as well as decentralized offices and units in the preparation and operation of conferences and meetings.
A multidisciplinary team of staff from GI provides expertise in planning communication campaigns encompassing all media and information channels, including printed and electronic publications, television and radio, the press, WAICENT and the Internet, presentations, displays and exhibits. The team helps evaluate communication needs and identify the most effective combination of activities and products to meet them. It can also assist in preparing a plan and budget for implementation and advise on internal or external specialists to perform the work.
Regional, Subregional and Country Offices
The mandate of FAO's decentralized structures encompasses all communication activities within their geographical areas of responsibility. They maintain regular communication with national governments, local technical counterparts, NGOs and the media, and are responsible for presenting the key messages of FAO's corporate communication campaign as well as for distributing information materials supplied by headquarters to the intended audiences. They may also produce locally targeted information materials or repackage information provided by headquarters in order to address local needs and audiences. They maintain libraries that serve as sources of FAO information. FAORs' plans for communication activities, prepared in consultation with the Regional Information Officer (the Information Division's focal point in the region), serve as an important input to the regional and departmental communication plans. FAORs also provide input to regional and corporate distribution lists to
assist in targeting information effectively.
Technical Departments
Technical departments hold the primary responsibility for communication with their counterparts in government, non-governmental and intergovernmental organizations, technical and academic institutions, and commerce. This responsibility extends to the content of technical publications, contributions to journals (print or electronic), information distributed over the Internet and other computer networks, and participation in technical meetings. Guidelines exist for the presentation of such material and assistance is available from the Organization's editorial and design specialists.
In the area of development support communication, primary responsibility rests with the specialists in the Research, Extension and Training Division of the Sustainable Development Department.
When public information activities touch on topics within technical departments' field of technical competence, the departments are responsible for briefing communication professionals, providing the most authoritative FAO data and analysis available, along with information about relevant policies, programmes and projects. They also review public information products and clear their content for technical accuracy prior to publication and distribution.
PREPARATION OF COMMUNICATION PLANS
The planning and review procedures that are built into the Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy are designed to focus communication activities and strengthen cooperation in their implementation. Key elements in these procedures include:
Incorporation of communication activities in the Medium-term Plan and the biennial Programme of Work and Budget
The Organization's main policy and programme priorities are defined in its Medium-term Plan, while implementation is detailed and costed in its Programme of Work and Budget. Corporate communication priorities and the outcome of planning exercises should be reflected in the process, as they are essential to the dialogue through which the governing bodies chart the course of FAO.
Major communication objectives of an enduring nature need to be presented in the Medium-term Plan. More specific communication campaigns and priorities are described and budgeted in the Programme of Work and Budget. The annual planning exercise, outlined in the following section, is designed to assist in the preparation of these elements by providing justifications and costings for the communication activities to be carried out by the departments and decentralized structures.
Preparation of annual plans
Budgeted communication plans are required at the corporate, departmental, divisional, regional and national levels. Their preparation, as foreseen in the Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy, offers an opportunity for units to put forward their needs in consultation with communication specialists as follows:
* Technical units and decentralized structures identify items in the programmes that merit or require communication activities. They also identify potential audiences who could be particularly interested in them or are important to their success. These are drawn together in departmental proposals.
* Each departmental proposal is reviewed by a team of communication specialists who, in consultation with the appropriate technical officers, evaluate the opportunities and needs and help develop strategies and budgets to address them.
* A parallel process takes place in the regional and subregional offices under the guidance of the Regional Information Officers, assisted by communication specialists at headquarters.
* The final step is for a costed plan to be drawn up for each department and region to serve as the basic document for the detailed implementation of their own specific communication activities.
The departmental and regional plans provide the primary inputs for the overall Corporate Communication Plan, which will be prepared by communication specialists in the light of priorities established by senior management. The planning process provides an opportunity for the Organization to think ahead and take the initiative, rather than respond to events on an ad hoc basis, i.e. to be proactive rather than reactive. It also makes the consultation and support services of the communication professionals available to all units and decentralized structures on the basis of corporate and departmental priorities.
The planning process depends on, and contributes to, an improved exchange of information within the Organization. This improved internal communication and dialogue, in turn, provides staff in technical departments and decentralized structures with the shared knowledge that they need to make a meaningful contribution to the definition and implementation of corporate priorities.
Interim planning
An annual communication plan cannot anticipate all the events, opportunities and needs that may arise during the course of a year. Flexibility must be retained for the opportunistic "riding" of external events. The Corporate Communication Committee, which is serviced by GI, periodically reviews implementation of the Corporate Communication Plan and makes amendments or additions to it. At the request of technical departments or decentralized structures, a team of communication specialists can be convened to help plan and implement an effective and comprehensive communication response to unexpected events.
EVALUATION OF COMMUNICATION ACTIVITIES
Periodic evaluation of the effectiveness of communication activities in projecting defined messages to target audiences is an essential input to the planning process, but quantifying the impact that specific information activities have on a broad audience can be difficult, expensive and ultimately unrewarding. However, the strategy of targeted communication activities envisioned in FAO's Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy, whereby key individuals or institutions may be identified by name, leads to useful evaluations of the impact achieved by an information campaign.
In some cases, the target audiences can be counted in the hundreds or thousands of individuals, and occasional qualitative surveys of such compact, well-defined groups are both affordable and highly desirable. Surveys should be aimed at key audiences such as government policy- and decision-makers, influential journalists and news media executives, and NGO representatives. They should focus on the "background" level of understanding and support for the Organization's priority activities and concerns as well as on the effectiveness of corporate communication campaigns in heightening awareness.
Less formal evaluation is also possible by FAO staff in the course of their day-to-day work. They can maintain regular contact with a representative sample of the Organization's key target audiences, providing feedback on the impact of particular communication activities. As part of the participatory planning process, FAO staff in technical departments, decentralized structures and communication units should gather responses to FAO's communication activities and information materials among those target audiences with whom they are in regular contact. Although far from statistically valid, a synthesis of these reactions can contribute to a qualitative evaluation that will prove useful in planning future activities directed towards specific audiences.
<section>5</section>
Individual responsibilities
PARTICIPATION: THE KEY TO IMPLEMENTATION
The FAO Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy encourages staff to participate in discussion and debate in their fields of expertise as a way of enhancing both their own knowledge and the standing of the Organization as a centre of excellence. Rules and procedures pertaining to contributions to technical journals, participation in meetings and related matters should facilitate and encourage such activities, while providing mechanisms to safeguard the reputation of both the individual and the Organization for technical accuracy and quality.
PUBLICATION IN PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL JOURNALS
Specialist journals, whether published in printed or electronic form, represent an essential way of participating in ongoing debates among peers. As an expression of its commitment to functioning as a centre of excellence, FAO encourages staff to contribute to such specialized media using the following procedure:
* officers inform their supervisors of invitations or proposals to submit papers - unless specific reasons can be cited to deny permission, such proposals should normally be approved;
* prior to final submission, papers should be circulated for peer review to appropriate individuals within the Organization to ensure that they meet high professional standards, particularly with regard to the accuracy and consistency of data;
* articles and papers should be published with a standard disclaimer indicating that they "represent the views of the author(s), and not necessarily those of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations".
When necessary, technical officers may call on the specialized communication skills and resources of the information units for advice and assistance, for example in the conceptualization, structure, visual presentation and promotion of their information materials.
CREDIT FOR AUTHORS AND EDITORS
FAO should include individual or group credits in its own publications and should encourage staff members to attach their name, their affiliation with the Organization and the standard disclaimer (cited in para. 4.2) to material published outside FAO. Such a policy of duly crediting staff members for their work not only contributes to the quality of published work by heightening their sense of personal responsibility but also assists in the recruitment and retention of top-level individuals.
PARTICIPATION IN MEETINGS
As with publications, participation in professional and technical meetings of peer groups strengthens both the capacity of staff and the perception of FAO as a centre of excellence. With the approval of their supervisors, officers are encouraged to attend and present papers at such meetings. By the same token, it is recognized that participation in meetings is a legitimate and important function.
COPYRIGHT
FAO holds a vast repository of information, collected from its member countries to be stored, collated, analysed and disseminated for their benefit. Drawing on this wealth of information, FAO produces a wide variety of information materials intended for diverse audiences. In most cases, it is in the best interests of the Organization and its member countries to distribute these information materials as widely as possible. Therefore, copyright is applied primarily to protect the intellectual property of the Organization. The use of FAO's information, including the reproduction of material from its publications, is not only permitted but positively encouraged in the educational and non-profit sectors. In all cases, FAO must be cited as the source of the information.
CONTACTS WITH THE MEDIA
The content and tone of media coverage frequently reflect the first contact a journalist makes with the Organization. If the response appears suspicious, defensive or ill-informed, the image of the Organization suffers. Under the Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy, technical experts are encouraged to respond to the media within the areas of their competence and to cultivate relations with specialist journalists as appropriate.
The Director-General is the spokesperson for the Organization on all matters of policy. He may, at his discretion, delegate this role to another senior staff member.
Media officers within the Information Division have the general responsibility for fostering good relations with the international and national press corps in Rome and other industrialized countries. A similar responsibility is entrusted to Regional Information Officers in their respective duty stations. All media and information officers pursue a proactive strategy aimed at enhancing the reputation of the Organization by securing the publication and broadcasting of stories on FAO's activities.
Media officers should be the first point of contact for all media inquiries. They are authorized to respond to routine inquiries and may be identified either as "an FAO spokesperson" or by name and title. Queries on sensitive issues are referred to the Director of the Information Division, who may, in turn, consult the Office of the Director-General.
In the case of technical inquiries, media officers at headquarters and in the regional offices identify appropriate technical officers and put them in direct contact with the journalist concerned. Subsequent contacts between journalists and technical officers do not require media officers as intermediaries, and technical staff are encouraged to become regular expert sources of information for journalists. However, the Information Division as well as the individual's Division Director should be kept informed of such contacts.
Direct contact between journalists and technical officers can include the simple supply of information as well as on-the-record interviews (including radio and television). In all cases, officers should be careful to confine themselves to their area of knowledge and expertise and avoid comment on broader political issues. (The booklet entitled The Media Interview prepared by the Information Division, gives clear guidance and advice in this area.) If in doubt, technical officers should consult the Information Division.
If technical officers receive new queries directly, they should respond within their area of expertise and knowledge. If the inquiry goes beyond this, they should refer the caller to a media officer. In all cases, they should inform the Information Division and their Division Director.
FAO technical staff who are based or travelling in the field should observe the same procedures as staff at headquarters and confine their discussions with the media to their particular areas of knowledge and expertise. At the same time, they should bear in mind the need to secure the widest possible dissemination of information about FAO's field projects and programmes.
Resident FAO Representatives in FAO Regional, Subregional and Country Offices are encouraged to promote the image of the Organization in their areas of responsibility by fostering good relations with the media and providing as much information as possible about FAO's activities. (The booklet entitled Media Guide for FAO Representatives prepared by the Information Division, gives clear guidance and advice in this area.)
<section>6</section>
Implementation
MESSAGES AND THEIR FORMULATION
In any given period, FAO presents a variety of messages to a variety of audiences. Some central messages can be regarded as "perennials". They relate directly to the Organization's basic mandate and form part of almost every information campaign that it conducts. They include, for example, reminders of FAO's advocacy for:
* food as a basic human right and the goal of global food security or "food for all";
* the central role of agriculture and the rural sector in developing countries in achieving food security and sustainable development.
Other key messages reflect Organization-wide priorities at a particular time, such as a major programme initiative, an important international conference or the results of a seminal study. These messages apply to the entire Organization but, to be delivered effectively, they may need to be tailored and packaged to reflect specific local conditions and concerns.
Finally, there are messages that relate primarily to the policies and activities of a particular department. Since the information and communication needs of FAO's technical departments and decentralized structures differ widely, each must be responsible for developing its own plan within the framework of the overall Corporate Communication Plan, drawing as required on the communication expertise and resources of GI.
Responsibility for the formulation of key messages, which are central to any corporate communication plan, lies primarily with the units responsible for delivering them. Technical departments and decentralized structures should formulate messages directed at issues or audiences of specific concern to them, whereas corporate messages, based on priorities established by senior management, should be formulated through the corporate planning process.
COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES AND ACTIVITIES
Strategies for achieving FAO's objectives change according to shifts in priorities, resources and technologies as well as in the objectives themselves. The communication strategies and activities cited in the following paragraphs are indicative of the approaches that could be employed within the framework of the Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy. They can be divided into three general groups:
* internally focused activities, involving FAO staff;
* externally directed activities, usually carried out by FAO staff in concert with or assisted by third parties;
* activities depending primarily on third parties.
Internally focused activities
i) Strengthening internal communication and dialogue
The Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy relies on a decentralized, participatory process to generate a programme that initiates actions and anticipates (or even creates) events, rather than merely reacting to them. These communication initiatives focus on priority issues and audiences at the organizational, departmental or regional level. Keeping staff informed and encouraging dialogue within the Organization enhances the effectiveness of staff as partners in the corporate communication effort. Tools for achieving this "culture of communication" include internal newsletters, the FAO computer network and Office Information Service, open discussions and round tables on matters of interest and concern, and a participatory approach to management.
ii) Promoting the partnership between technical and communication professionals
All units of FAO, both at headquarters and in the decentralized structures, play an important role in communication and should consider themselves part of a collective effort to promote understanding of, and support for, the work of the Organization. Within this partnership, the communication specialists have the skills, technical resources and experience to provide essential advice and support to other units.
In addition to the annual planning exercise, the information opportunities and needs of the technical departments are assessed on a regular basis, mainly through a "beat officer" system, which assigns individual media officers to cover a particular department. The system has a priority in the Information Division and is reinforced by the designation of "focal points" in technical divisions and departments who serve as the beat officers' first point of reference.
iii) Enhancing the capacity of technical departments and units to deliver information
To enable technical departments to deploy the most effective communication tools, ranging from a photocopied newsletter to a World Wide Web server, advice and support are given for the full spectrum of technical options involved in information delivery. Working in multidisciplinary teams, the units responsible for communication planning, editing, design and technology analyse the needs of technical departments and assist in developing and implementing plans to address them.
In addition, technical departments and programmes are encouraged to consult the Information Division in order to evaluate the potential for producing information materials aimed at influential non-specialists, such as NGOs. Consideration is also given to developing "user-friendly" newsletters and other publications, with particular attention paid to possibilities for electronic distribution.
With adequate advance notice and planning, duty travel by the Director-General and other senior staff members provides an important opportunity to meet face to face with key audiences. Senior officers are urged to inform both FAO staff in countries they intend to visit and the Information Division about their travel plans and to allow time for meetings and speaking engagements as well as media briefings and interviews.
Externally directed activities
i) Targeting strategic audiences
FAO's communication plans focus on selected target groups: decision- and policy-makers in government; technical peers in fields related to the work of the Organization; NGOs and the private sector with interests in FAO's fields of concern; and media representatives. Even within these sectors, efforts are concentrated selectively on the most influential groups and individuals. Defining the target audience for each communication campaign and identifying the best ways to reach it are an important part of the planning process. In this context it is important to build up and maintain FAO's mailing lists. These include special lists maintained by technical divisions as well as public information and media lists.
ii) Concentrating on priority issues, using a campaign approach whenever feasible
FAO cannot hope to communicate extensively and effectively about all its activities and concerns simultaneously. Technical communication is maintained at all times, but corporate communication activities centre on a limited number of defined priorities as identified through the participatory planning process.
The campaign approach multiplies the impact of messages by delivering them through different media to selected audiences that influence each other. It also reduces the time and cost of supporting materials, since language and images can often be re-used in several different products. Lobbying or advocacy, whether by FAO staff or contracted specialists, may be required to help achieve campaign objectives.
The media component of campaigns involves identifying and concentrating on the media representatives and outlets that reach key people in the target audiences while also setting the agenda for other media outlets. Where feasible, media officers work directly with these influential members of the media, providing information that meets their needs and reinforces FAO's value as an information provider.
iii) Concentrating activities in strategically important countries
FAO's responsibilities to its member countries require a global communication programme that responds to differing needs and interests, particularly in the areas of institutional and technical communication. Advocacy communication, however, may require information efforts to be concentrated in countries where support is strategically important.
In many industrialized countries, both political and financial support for intergovernmental organizations appear to be at risk: a sustained campaign is required to mobilize understanding and support for FAO policies and programmes among decision-makers and influential NGOs and media in these countries.
iv) Enhancing the credibility of FAO
While information campaigns highlight successful approaches and projects, they also acknowledge any difficulties or criticisms. Being open to criticism and willing to admit mistakes helps to build up and maintain credibility and confidence among partners and communication target groups. Communication activities that allow an exchange of criticism and response, such as round-table meetings and workshops, enhance the credibility of the Organization.
v) Highlighting the human dimension of FAO's activities
To gain public support, it is important to present an image of FAO and its partners as teams of people dedicated to combating hunger and rural poverty, and not as impersonal institutions. Communication products highlighting the contributions of individuals, both FAO staff and partners, to Organizational accomplishments will help present the "human face" of technical and emergency assistance.
vi) Increasing awareness of field activities
The best way to present FAO as an effective, action-oriented organization is to increase awareness of successful field programmes and projects. Coverage of field activities gives the Organization and its priorities a human face, translating aggregate statistics about food security or people's participation back into their component parts - human beings struggling to feed their families and fulfil their hopes.
Field activities can underscore the ties between information, ideas and tangible steps to combat poverty and hunger, between the Organization's normative and operational activities, and between FAO as a centre of excellence and as a development agency.
vii) Providing background materials for the media
Most media outlets prefer to develop their own "stories" and are reluctant to make direct use of news releases or features, although these may well trigger their interest in a particular story. As a result, considerable emphasis is given to distributing background material (such as booklets or fact sheets) and "raw material" (such as interesting data or video footage) as well as the finished news product.
viii) Informing Permanent Representations on key programmes
In addition to the regular meetings of the Organization, special briefings are organized from time to time to keep Permanent Representations informed of key programmes and achievements.
ix) Retaining the flexibility to "ride events" and respond to crisis situations
The Organization cannot unilaterally determine the agenda of its key audiences. The media, in particular, tend to be drawn to dramatic events and to focus on specific issues for only short periods. While adhering to its planned communication programme, FAO must have the flexibility to "ride events", highlighting the relevance of FAO's constituency and programmes to headline events or issues of the moment. The media specialists hold primary responsibility for recognizing and evaluating such opportunities and then coordinating the corporate response in close collaboration with technical staff.
In addition to capitalizing on opportunities, FAO must also be able to respond quickly and decisively to potentially damaging media attention. This requires key staff, primarily the communication specialists, to be trained in identifying and handling negative media inquiries, limiting damage and, whenever possible, turning such situations to the advantage of the Organization.
Activities depending primarily on third-party support
i) Packaging information for particular audiences and regions
A "one size fits all" approach to communication usually fails to fit everyone's specific needs. Information materials need to be adapted to improve the relevance of FAO's messages to different target audiences, drawing on the experience of those individual staff members or units who communicate regularly with them.
ii) Consolidating and enhancing communication with NGOs
To extend its communication outreach, FAO is strengthening partnerships with NGOs that have an important role in distributing information and lobbying both governments and media. A framework for close collaboration in communication with NGOs is being developed, focusing on a wide range of activities designed to mobilize public support for the activities of FAO, particularly in the area of food security.
iii) Supporting World Food Day and Food for All initiatives in member countries
The annual observance of World Food Day provides an important focus for relaunching the "Food for All" campaign each year, at the same time underscoring FAO's role as leader of the campaign, both by supporting celebratory events and initiatives in member countries and by coordinating and supporting related transboundary initiatives such as TeleFood, Word Food Day concerts and the Appeal against World Hunger. In due course, October should become universally recognized as the annual "Food for All" month.
IMPLEMENTATION AND COORDINATION PARTNERS
i) Internal partners
Essential partners in implementing FAO's communication policies and strategies are its staff. The Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy provides the foundation for a strong working partnership, uniting senior management, technical departments, decentralized structures and communication specialists.
ii) Intergovernmental organizations
In certain areas, such as preparations for major conferences and international expositions, FAO works closely with other agencies in the UN system through the Joint United Nations Information Committee (JUNIC). Presenting the UN system as a cooperative partnership among agencies with specialized skills and resources increases support both for the individual agencies and for the system as a whole. Where programmes and priorities coincide, joint campaigns multiply the impact of communication efforts. Increased cooperation with other Rome-based UN agencies through the sharing of information resources and expertise reduces costs and increases the impact of activities.
iii) Bilateral development agencies
FAO's communication objectives frequently overlap with those of bilateral development agencies, particularly those of countries that finance projects through FAO Trust Funds. Cooperation in the production of information materials and campaigns helps build up donors' support to trust fund projects.
iv) NGOs, particularly advocacy NGOs
NGOs perform certain information activities that FAO rarely undertakes, such as lobbying legislators, government officers and the media. As a result, they help set the agenda of the debate on major issues and communicate directly with many of FAO's key target audiences. These activities enhance their value as potential partners in communication activities. FAO is tapping this potential through its cooperation with NGOs, including the preparation of information materials designed for an NGO audience, contributions to NGO media and collaboration in the production of information materials.
v) International networks
FAO coordinates two international agricultural information networks, AGRIS and CARIS, which are the result of a voluntary, cooperative partnership of national, regional and international centres. All partners share the responsibility of collecting and entering the information produced in their country or organization and of disseminating and promoting the common outputs. These and other international networks increase the flow of information both to and from FAO, and enhance the Organization's capacity as a central source of information in its fields of competence.
vi) National and regional networks
In recent years, numerous national and regional networks dealing with specific issues such as agriculture, rural development and the environment have emerged as important channels for communication. FAO is developing links with these networks, which are potentially valuable partners for communicating with key target audiences such as technical peers and NGOs.
vii) Educators
In the past, the prohibitive cost of producing large quantities of information material has limited FAO's access both to teachers and to the classroom. However, the situation is changing with the advent of the Internet and electronic publishing, which provide wide access to information material and, in large part, switch the cost of reproduction from the originator to the user. In the context of corporate campaigns concentrated on particular issues and countries, educators and students can now be targeted more effectively.
viii) Media and commercial publishers
FAO's storehouse of knowledge and information includes a substantial amount of material of interest to the media, particularly the electronic media, and commercial publishers. Copublication and coproduction (of videos, for example) are used by FAO to retain significant control over the information content of the products, while benefiting from the financial resources and the production and distribution capacities of commercial media and publishing enterprises.
ix) Private sector
Collaboration with the private sector, including agricultural firms and food companies, is increasing as FAO seeks new partnerships to implement its programmes. In many areas, the Organization works closely with the private sector, and mutually beneficial communication activities are being undertaken with due attention to the sensitivities of key target audiences.
