<title>Forest Energy Forum N. 04. Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter</title>
<section>1</section>
Logo EDITORIAL
The new Director of the Forest Products Division, Dr Wulf Killmann, took up his duties in January 1999. We are honoured that Dr Killmann has accepted our invitation to write the editorial for this issue.
The 14th Session of the Committee on Forestry (COFO) was held in Rome from 1 to 5 March 1999. COFO has been convened every two years since 1971 to review FAO's forestry work programmes and their implementation, as well as to guide the FAO Council. More than 400 representatives from 130 countries discussed forestry issues of international relevance. Needless to say, Sustainable Forest Management and Forest Fires were both high on the agenda, as were FAO's Outlook Studies.
An important issue that was brought up, however, was that of fuelwood supply, with a number of countries making it a special point in their country presentations. The need to gather more information on fuelwood was even mentioned in COFO's report (under item 18) to the FAO Council. In addition, one of COFO's side meetings was dedicated to "Opportunities for the forest sector within the Kyoto Protocol".
In time for COFO, FAO's report State of the World's Forests 1999 (SOFO 1999) was published in the Organization's five official languages. SOFO gives an overview of recent changes in forest cover, trends in forest management, developments in forest policy and international initiatives. Within the context of developments in the supply and demand of forest products, the importance of fuelwood and charcoal as sources for household energy is pointed out [see under Special Features for more information on SOFO].
Tree
This issue of Forest Energy Forum focuses on carbon sequestration and substitution. In fact, the subject is becoming so important that we have decided to dedicate a special section to it [see Forests branch off ... into carbon sequestration and substitution]. We also supply you with news on stoves, biodiesel and our Wood Energy Information System (WEIS). Our Country Compass travels the world on the forest energy footpath, and we give you the latest literature which might be of interest.
As most of you know, Rome is full of fora (the Latin word forum means public space), all of them at least 2 000 years old, and in ruins. This, though, is your forum, young and still under construction.
It is your platform to exchange ideas, views, and experiences on forest energy. We are glad and proud to function as facilitators to maintain this forum for the participation of all our readers.
We thank you all for your keen interest and are looking forward to your response.
Wulf Killmann
FOR INFORMATION ON ANY ASPECT OF WOOD ENERGY OR FUELWOOD, PLEASE CONTACT:
M.A. Trossero
Senior Forestry Officer (Wood Energy)
Wood and Non-Wood Products
Utilization Branch
Forest Products Division
Forestry Department
FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy.
Tel.: (+39 06) 57054175
Fax: (+39 06) 57055618
E-mail: miguel.trossero@fao.org
http://www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/forestry.htm
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>2</section>
Logo SPECIAL FEATURES
State of the world's forests - contribution of woodfuels to the energy sector
Much of the wood harvested worldwide each year is used for energy production. Of the estimated 3 350 million m^3 of wood harvested in 1995, about 2 100 million m^3, or 63 percent, were used as woodfuels. While, in developed countries, only 33 percent of the wood produced was used for energy purposes, in developing countries woodfuels accounted for 81 percent (91 percent in Africa, 82 percent in Asia and 70 percent in Latin America) of the wood harvested. The figures illustrate the importance of woodfuels in total wood production and their relevance for the forestry sector.
Woodfuels remain significant sources of energy in developing countries, especially in the rural and domestic sectors. In recent years, however, they have been attracting attention as environmentally friendly modern energy carriers. Changes in energy policies have favoured the development of wood energy systems, and new biomass energy technologies are improving the economic feasibility of wood energy, particularly in countries which are heavily forested and have well-established wood processing industries. The environmental costs of fossil fuels are also making woodfuels more attractive.
Role of woodfuels in the forest and energy sectors
Woodfuels consist of fuelwood, charcoal and black liquor (a by-product of pulp and paper). The Table shows the consumption of different woodfuel types by region and provides a picture of forestry's contribution to the energy sector.
Woodfuels account for an estimated 7 percent of the world's total energy supply. In developing countries, however, where fuelwood is a major source of fuel for household use, the average share of woodfuels in total energy use is 15 percent. In 34 developing countries, fuelwood and charcoal supply more than 70 percent of national energy demand. Woodfuels constitute the major source of energy for most countries of sub-Saharan Africa, Central America and continental Southeast Asia. While fuelwood is the predominant form of wood energy used in rural areas of developing countries, charcoal remains a significant source of energy for many African, Asian and Latin American countries, mainly for urban households.
Woodfuels account for only 2 percent of total energy use in developed countries. This figure, however, conceals great differences in use at national and subnational levels. For example, in Europe, relatively small quantities of woodfuels are used in the United Kingdom, Belgium and Germany, while large amounts are consumed in the densely forested countries of Finland, Sweden and Austria. In Finland, wood energy supplies an estimated 17 percent of the national energy demand. Black liquor accounts for a high proportion of the total woodfuels used in most developed countries, where it is used by large pulp and paper industries to meet their needs for heat and power.
Consumption of woodfuels and share of woodfuels in total energy use in 1995
Regions
Woodfuels (106 m3 equivalent)
Fuelwood Charcoal Black liquor Woodfuels' share in total energy use (%)
Developing countries total 1 533 131 34 15
Africa 445 72 3 35
Asia: developing 859 25 12 12
Oceania: developing 6 0 0 52
Latin America1 and Caribbean 223 34 19 12
Developed countries total 187 6 228 2
Europe, Israel and Turkey 56 2 51 3
Former USSR2 32 0 8 1
Canada and United States 96 4 146 3
Australia, New Zealand and Japan 3 0 23 1
World total 1 720 137 262 7
[Source: FAO-WEIS. For more details on these figures refer to the Web site:
www-data.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/energy/feforum.htm]
[1 Including Mexico, and all Central American and South American countries.]
[2 Including Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan.]
Recent developments in wood energy
Woodfuel consumption in developing countries has increased steadily with the growth in population, although woodfuels' share in national energy balances of these countries has progressively diminished as a result of the increased use of fossil fuel such as oil, coal and gas.
Similarly, fossil fuels have continued to fulfil most of the increased demand for energy in the majority of developed countries.
Actions by many countries to deregulate, liberalize and privatize energy markets over the last two decades, however, have stimulated competition between energy suppliers and have presented new opportunities for other, non-fossil fuel, energy sources. Some countries have also raised taxes on fossil fuels, resulting in decreased use of these fuels and, in some cases, increased use of other energy sources. In addition, woodfuels are becoming considerably more cost-competitive as energy sources with the development and adoption of new technologies for their production, transport, handling and storage; more efficient combustion devices; and improved systems for planning, management and organization of wood energy systems. In Sweden, for example, the price of energy generated with fossil fuels doubled between 1980 and 1997, whereas that of wood energy remained stable. This was due to the combined effect of increased cost efficiency of wood energy generation and increased taxes on
fossil fuels which made them less attractive financially.
Several countries are changing their energy policies to encourage expanded use of wood energy. The recently adopted White Paper by the Commission of the European Communities gives special attention to bioenergy (including both woodfuels and agricultural energy crops) and constitutes a framework for the future development of renewable energy within the 16 European Union countries.
In 1994, the Finnish Government established objectives for the promotion of wood energy with the aim of increasing their use by 25 percent from the current level by the year 2005. Similar initiatives are being adopted in other countries. In Denmark, 50 percent of households are on district heating fuelled by biofuels. The Netherlands have launched a special investment programme for the promotion of power and heating plants using woody biomass as fuel.
The Canadian Forest Service began an initiative in 1995 to facilitate the introduction of bioenergy (mainly wood energy) for power generation in the remote "First Nations Communities" in northern Canada. The purpose was not only to provide more energy to these isolated areas but also to create employment and foster self-reliance of the indigenous communities.
Several successful bioenergy programmes have been established in developing countries. Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia have recently launched wood energy initiatives with the support of an economic cooperation programme between the Economic Commission and the ASEAN countries (the EC-ASEAN COGEN Programme). A private company in Chile, Chilgener, has been supplying industries with energy generated from woody wastes since 1992. In Nicaragua, two sugar mills have diversified their sugar production with electricity generated with bagasse (during the sugar-cane production season) and fuelwood (when bagasse is unavailable) derived from eucalyptus plantations (see Box on p. 4). Both mills sell this energy to the national power grid. A similar project is under way in Honduras.
BIOELECTRICITY IN NICARAGUA
Following the trend of most energy sectors of Latin America, Nicaragua has passed an energy law with new rules for the participation of the private sector in the generation, transmission and distribution of electricity. San Antonio and Victoria de Julio are two sugar mills which have taken advantage of this new law and are supplying about 27 megawatts equivalent (MWe) of electricity to the national grid using bagasse as a main fuel (during the sugar-cane season) and fuelwood (off-season) derived from more than 6 000 ha of eucalyptus plantations.
San Antonio is the largest sugar mill in Nicaragua. It has a contract with the government to supply bioelectricity using bagasse and fuelwood. The first eucalyptus plantations were established in the area of the sugar-cane plantations. Additional plantations have since been established on rented lands. Some of the fuelwood is being produced by local farmers, who have long-term contracts with the mill, which guarantees a price for the wood. By 1996, over 2 600 ha of fuelwood plantations had been established.
Victoria de Julio, the second largest sugar mill in Nicaragua, started operating in 1985. It has a generation capacity of 12 MWe electricity using bagasse and fuelwood and has ambitious expansion plans. The concept of electricity as a second product was integrated into the original design of the plant. The sugar-cane plantations have a circular configuration as they are irrigated by a circular pivot system. Eucalyptus is planted on the land between the circular sugar-cane plantations and now totals about 4 000 ha.
An economic study concluded that electricity generation in Nicaraguan sugar mills using these biofuels is not only technically feasible but appears to be competitive at the current selling price of 5.7 ¢/kWh against 6.8 ¢/kWh for fuel oil. In addition, 73 percent of the income derived from the energy generated with eucalyptus remains in the Nicaraguan economy, compared with 14 to 30 percent in the case of electricity produced with fuel oil. In terms of employment generation, eucalyptus provides three times more jobs than does fuel oil.
Source: FAO. 1997. La generación de electricidad a partir de eucalipto y bagazo en ingenios azucareros de Nicaragua, by R. van den Broek. Final report. Rome.
Potential for wood energy development in the future
Woodfuels are expected to continue to play an important role for some time to come as a traditional source of energy in developing countries, particularly among low-income sectors of the populations.Fuelwood and charcoal will also continue to be burnt in limited quantities by households and small industries for specialized uses in developed countries. Recent policy changes and experiences with bioenergy programmes in several countries, however, indicate that woodfuels are becoming more attractive to countries as a modern, renewable energy source. They have the potential to become more competitive with fossil fuels under certain situations, both for economic reasons (e.g. as locally available and inexpensive sources of energy from fast-growing fuelwood plantations, thinnings from timber plantations, residues from forest industries, etc.) and for environmental reasons (e.g. related to efforts to mitigate global warming). The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) has recognized the potential role of woodfuels as part of the substitution strategy to reduce emissions of CO[2] from fossil fuels. The Kyoto Protocol of UNFCCC, if ratified, has the potential to play a catalytic role in the further development of wood energy.
STATUS OF INFORMATION ON WOODFUELS AND EFFORTS TO IMPROVE THE SITUATION
There are major weaknesses and gaps in information on woodfuels, which make planning for current woodfuel production and use and modelling future wood energy scenarios problematic. Lack of good-quality data on woodfuel production and flows makes it difficult to address crucial issues on woodfuel supply, trade, use and substitution. These problems stem from methodologies and weak national capabilities in woodfuel data collection, compilation and presentation. The use of different terms, definitions and units for data also make it extremely hard to exchange and compare information available from different agencies at the national and international levels. Various regional and international organizations (including FAO, the International Energy Agency, the Asian Institute of Technology, the Organización Latinoamericana de la Energía and the European Statistical Office) collect and disseminate data on fuelwood and charcoal production and use. In order to enable comparison of
national and international statistics on woodfuels, FAO, in conjunction with other relevant agencies, is now working on the development of unified wood energy terminology and conversion factors. This, combined with on-going efforts to strengthen national capabilities in collection and analysis of woodfuel data, should improve the quality and availability of information on woodfuels.
Increased consideration of woodfuels is likely to be given by both the forest and the energy sectors in the future in response to these recent developments. Improved planning will depend in part on a sound information base but, at present, the global information on woodfuels is extremely weak (see Box below). Continued efforts at improving information collection and analysis will be essential, as will be further assessment of the relative costs and benefits of woodfuels, fossil fuels and alternative sources of fuels as economic conditions and environmental commitments evolve. (Source: State of the World's Forests 1999 [SOFO].)
An electronic copy of SOFO 1999 is available on FAO's Web site (www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/forestry.htm). A printed copy of the (priced) publication may be ordered from: FAO, Sales and Marketing Group, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: (+39) 06 57053360;
e-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
For more information, please contact: Ms S. Braatz, Forest Sector Analyst/SOFO Coordinator, Forestry Planning and Statistics Branch, Forestry Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
E-mail: Susan.Braatz@fao.org
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>3</section>
FORESTS BRANCH OFF ...
into carbon sequestration and substitution
Bioenergy and the kyoto protocol
Following are some comments from one of our readers on bioenergy and the Kyoto Protocol.
The International Energy Agency Task 25 position paper on bioenergy, presented at the recent UNFCCC climate negotiations in Buenos Aires, Argentina, attempts to refocus attention towards bioenergy as a CO[2] mitigation option rather than sinks. Quotations are taken from that paper.
"Long-term and sustainable reductions of CO[2] emissions through land-based activities will to a large extent have to come from the use of wood for bioenergy and products." At the government level, understanding the complex issues clearly and completely is necessary in order to formulate productive strategies that support the UNFCCC objective to stabilize atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases at a level that avoids dangerous anthropogenic (human-induced) interference with the climate system.
The UNFCCC Kyoto Protocol does not discriminate between measures reducing fossil fuel consumption ("whose combustion is by far the main source of anthropogenic greenhouse gases") and carbon sinks, as strategies for CO[2] mitigation. It must be understood that atmospheric CO[2 ]from biotic sources (e.g. burning trees) is part of the closed biogeochemical cycle, and can be sequestered again (e.g. growing trees), so is quite distinct from fossil greenhouse CO[2].
Fossil-sourced CO[2 ]is additional to biogeochemically sourced CO[2], is not part of the closed cycle and therefore cannot be validly compensated for by carbon sequestration (e.g. trees). A fossil reservoir, a permanent carbon reservoir, becomes a permanent source of CO[2 ]if exploited. Recognizing this and accounting for fossil carbon separately from cycled biomass carbon will provide the incentive for immediate fossil energy substitution with bioenergy, a far more important strategy than carbon sinks.
Carbon sinks are actually counterproductive in this respect because the price margin between biomass and fossil fuels remains a deficit - fossil fuels are cheaper. The problem is that under the Kyoto Protocol the forest biomass, as a reservoir, is of equivalent value (per tonne of carbon) to fossil emissions. It is less expensive to plant forest sinks and reservoirs (and trade the carbon content for fossil emissions) than it is to use biomass for energy instead of fossil fuels (unless fossil energy pricing is artificially increased by the amount of this margin).
Furthermore, as the value of tradable carbon certificates resulting from forests covered by the Kyoto Protocol increases because of demand (resulting from excessive fossil emissions), this price margin deficit remains since, although fossil emissions become more expensive, forest reservoirs also become more valuable. Thus the status quo remains; it will always be cheaper to plant the tree as a carbon sink, trade the carbon content and use fossil energy rather than to use it for renewable energy.
About 20 percent of global CO[2] emissions coming from deforestation and forest fires are at present within the biogeochemical cycle being re-absorbed by a surplus growth increment. "The difference between the annual growth increment and actual harvest from the world's forests is believed to be substantial", but only because excessive past deforestation has allowed forest regeneration now. All part of a closed cycle. However, the energy component has not been and is not being captured. Trees and other combustible biomass can be utilized for energy to offset fossil fuel consumption and permanent CO[2] sources can be replaced by temporary cyclical sources.
The UNFCCC global policy priorities could be for involved nations to negotiate least-cost renewable energy measures that fully include fossil externalities, first, by endeavouring not to deplete further biotic carbon stocks; second, by utilizing for energy all available biomass, while maintaining stock equilibrium (and ecosystems) by growing and harvesting biomass, and utilizing ALL waste immediately, e.g. decomposable forestry residues, municipal solid waste, landfill gas and disposed wood products. The emphasis here is that it is better to capture the energy component of ALL biomass that would otherwise rot or burn as waste as contributing directly to the accountable national fossil CO[2] reduction inventory. Not a difficult proposition to implement, but effective in reducing fossil emissions, which is on the right track. And third, by negotiating and setting realistic fossil reduction commitments (amounting to the energy component of available biomass plus other available
equivalent least-cost renewable energy options).
Wood products are presented in the IEA paper as carbon sinks that can be used for energy at the end of their lifetime within a net accounting framework (under the Kyoto Protocol). Accounting for biomass (CO[2] flow and stock change) seems so pointless when the biogeochemical equation is cyclical and closed. It is fossil source accounting that is relevant. Permanent sources that the global community must address now for the future. Why not keep national fossil CO[2] (reduction) inventories for the rest of the world and leave biotic carbon inventories the business of that nation? If they choose to deplete their resource (harvest for wood), the wood is still a carbon "sink" until it is eventually burnt for energy (under the above policies).
Meanwhile, internal politics (under the commitments made) determine whether the forests get replanted, an economic decision based on energy and wood value, and a sustainable land-use policy as negotiated. Restoration of forest carbon reservoirs can take place at any later date without difficulty (by replanting trees or natural regeneration) and the deficit is only short term. At least permanent fossil emissions are addressed.
Article 3.3 of the Kyoto Protocol appears to give an unfair advantage to countries such as New Zealand which, before 1990, harvested a significant proportion of their natural forest estate and are now planting trees to offset fossil fuel CO[2], when really we are only sequestering carbon previously released on harvest of the natural forest. Part of the same cycle: the biogeochemical cycle. Forest sinks provide no long-term carbon benefits unless all corresponding forest-related sources are utilized for their energy component - including the huge quantities of waste wood (branches and tree heads) that are piled up and burnt, wood products that have reached the end of their useful life, cellulose, cardboard, paper components of municipal solid waste and methane ("representing a potential for about 40 percent of present energy use"). Pastures planted in trees now were once in trees until cleared and burnt and are therefore Kyoto Protocol forests resulting from reforestation,
not afforestation. A desert planted in trees using irrigation could be called afforestation and, therefore, a carbon sink ... .
Historical emissions are easy to ignore now, under the Kyoto Protocol, but are in fact part of the same closed cycle as our proposed sinks, and baseline years can be used to distort biological CO[2] source and sink accounting equity, resulting in least-cost policies with an unfair economic advantage.
Oil companies and governments taking advantage of this low-cost "mitigation" option (afforestation since 1990) will continue with existing fossil fuel exploitation, while being seen to be countering "net greenhouse gases".
The long-term effect of this will be the ridiculous economic situation of having to maintain maximum capacity carbon reservoirs worldwide in perpetuity because of the continued permanent fossil emissions, when politics only deal with the short and medium term. With this status quo remaining on fossil fuel exploitation, what will happen to renewable energy? It is obvious that we should plant forests for future wood products and bioenergy, not as CO[2] (mostly fossil emission) sinks! It is the fossil reservoirs that should be maintained in perpetuity! (Contributed by: Mr Dean Satchell, Forester, R.D. 1 Kamo, Northland, New Zealand; e-mail: dsatch@igrin.co.nz)
Carbon sequestration advisers
EcoSecurities Ltd is a specialist company in the Greenhouse Gas (GHG) mitigation market. It provides unique services in this new market by combining scientific, policy and financial structuring skills within one single organization. Its partners were involved in two of the world's first carbon offset projects, designed the world's first carbon offset verification service and have worked with a variety of organizations in the public and private sectors worldwide.
CARBON TRADING
At the Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit in 1992, a framework was agreed for countries to reduce global greenhouse gas emission. This was in due course made legally binding by the adoption of the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in December 1997. In this agreement, industrialized countries and countries with economies in transition (Annex I countries) agreed to binding commitments to reduce their emissions of greenhouse gases by 2008-2012, with an average of 5.2 percent below 1990 levels.
The Kyoto Protocol provides three flexibility mechanisms to help countries meet these targets:
· An emissions trading system, allowing the international transfer of national allotments of emission permits: a country that exceeds its emission reduction target can sell the excess to one that does not.
· Joint implementation (JI): the creation of emissions reduction units derived from investments between parties in Annex I countries.
· The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM): this allows for the creation of Certified Emission Reductions through investment in developing countries, regulated by a newly formed authority.
The criteria for these mechanisms are not yet finalized but are likely to include many activities that result in avoided emissions from forestry, energy efficiency and fossil fuel substitution.
Source: Ecosecurities Press Release, March 1999.
EcoSecurities has offices in Oxford, United Kingdom, Los Angeles, United States and Perth, Australia, as well as representations in Brazil and the Netherlands.
EcoSecurities Ltd has acted as carbon sequestration advisers to Australian Plantation Timber Ltd (APT) for its 1999 forestry investment fund. In 1998, APT's fund raised $A 20 million, and it is expected that prospectus-based forestry funds in Australia will raise even higher amounts in 1999. This project is in harmony with Australia's objectives to reduce its GHG emissions and to increase forest cover in the country. This represents one of the first investment funds that have taken account of the carbon dioxide emission and sequestration potential of their activities.
EcoSecurities is also working with other organizations engaged in carbon sequestration and emission-reduction activities, with a view to maximizing the environmental benefits of their forestry or renewable energy operations.
The forests of the Asia-Pacific region are not the only carbon sinks but their value is enhanced owing to their role in global biodiversity conservation.
Source: RWEDP Field Document No. 53, Carbon dioxide offset investment in the Asia-Pacific forestry sector: opportunities and constraints.
EcoSecurities' Managing Director Pedro Moura Costa commented: "This represents a major step in the recognition that activities that either emit or sequester carbon dioxide may respectively have a value or a cost. In order to make a fully appraised investment decision, investors in projects and companies have a right to know what the future carbon obligations or benefits might be. We anticipate that this practice will become widely adopted. By taking early action to demonstrate the intent of projects to sequester carbon and to quantify it, we believe carbon credits generated from these funds will have greater value and eligibility in a future trading regime. This adds value to shareholders and makes products more competitive." (Source: EcoSecurities press release, March 1999.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Paul Soffe, Consultant, EcoSecurities Ltd, Delawarr House, 45 Raleigh Park Road, Oxford OX2 9AZ, UK.
Fax: (+44) 1865 251438;
e-mail: paul@ecosecurities.com or news@ecosecurities.com;
www.ecosecurities.com
Climate change: ancient co[2] levels correlate with climate
According to the Associated Press, "Carbon dioxide levels in the Earth's atmosphere fluctuated after the Ice Age, helping to warm the climate and trigger the spread of deserts," a new study suggests. The findings "raise questions about whether the Earth is headed for rapid and drastic climate changes in the twenty-first century."
The study, published in the journal Nature, says that levels of carbon dioxide (CO[2]) rose and fell by small amounts between 11 000 and 1 000 years ago, in a pattern that correlated with droughts and the spread of deserts in Africa and Asia. But the changes over the last few thousand years were "tiny and slow compared with what humans are doing", said glaciologist Richard Alley of Pennsylvania State University, who did not participate in the study. Concerns about rising greenhouse gas emissions from power plants, factories and motor vehicles have spawned UN-brokered agreements to restrain such emissions.
The study, by researchers from the University of Bern in Switzerland and the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, California, is based on analysis of ice cores drilled from glaciers in Antarctica (Joseph Verrengia, AP/Boston Globe, 11 March). (Source: UN Foundation News, 11 March 1999.)
Comercio de carbono
En el Encuentro sobre el Comercio de Carbono y Desarrollo Forestal Sostenible, llevado a cabo en Buenos Aires durante el mes de septiembre se avaló el papel de los bosques en la mitigación del efecto invernadero y las oportunidades que la Convención sobre Cambios Climáticos ofrece para el desarrollo forestal sustentable.
La convención identifica como relevante la gestación sustentable de los bosques en su papel de sumideros y depósitos de gases como efecto invernadero, pues el 20 por ciento de las emisiones globales de gases proviene del sector forestal. Las posibilidades de incrementar la captación de carbono mediante reforestación, regeneración y crecimiento de los bosques y de mantener un nivel de carbono fijo en áreas protegidas, son opciones reales para contribuir con la reducción de los cambios climáticos.
A través de nuevos mecanismos financieros, en proceso de desarrollo, la fijación de carbono se está convirtiendo en una fuente de recursos para el sector forestal en algunos países del mundo. Cerca de 350 millones de dólares EE.UU. están destinados a proyectos de secuestro de carbono en el mercado mundial. (Fuente: Sociedade Brasileira de Silvicultura, octubre de 1998.)
Emissions: new world bank fund to promote joint action
This year the World Bank will launch a pioneering effort to promote international public-private cooperation in the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.
The Prototype Carbon Fund, which is to be launched in September or October, will finance projects to curb emissions in developing countries with the help of governments and private companies in developed countries, according to Ken Newcombe, the project's manager. Newcombe announced the fund at a press conference in Tokyo. Norway, Finland, Sweden and the Netherlands have decided to participate in the project together with 13 corporations and business organizations.
The project is one of the first concrete efforts to implement a controversial provision of the UN treaty on global warming. Under the Kyoto Protocol, developed countries have agreed to cut their emissions by a collective 5.2 percent below 1990 levels between 2008 and 2012. A Clean Development Mechanism would enable a developed country to invest in an emissions-reduction project in a developing country and claim some of those reductions as their own.
The idea is to encourage technology transfer and lower the overall costs of reducing emissions. But sceptics say the emphasis should be on reducing emissions in the industrial countries. (Source: UN Foundation News, 11 March 1999.)
Estrategia forestal centroamericana para la mitigación de carbono
Fase preparatoria
La creciente preocupación sobre los efectos del cambio climático global ha motivado numerosas iniciativas de investigación, establecimiento de políticas y desarrollo de proyectos innovativos alrededor del mundo.
El Protocolo de Kyoto (PK), al mismo tiempo que establece compromisos de limitación de emisiones para los países industrializados, ha definido mecanismos de cooperación -tales como el Mecanismo para un desarrollo limpio (MDL)- que permiten alcanzar dichas reducciones de emisiones y/o el secuestro de carbono mediante actividades de proyecto llevadas a cabo conjuntamente entre estos países y los países en desarrollo, con el requisito de impulsar simultáneamente el desarrollo sostenible de estos últimos. Los gobiernos Latinoamericanos, a través de sus Ministros del Ambiente, han manifestado un fuerte interés en impulsar estos mecanismos para hacerlos operativos en el menor tiempo posible y de la forma más eficiente e involucrando a través de ello a las instituciones existentes a nivel nacional, regional e internacional. Uno de los fuertes condicionantes existentes para lograr este objetivo es la limitada capacidad institucional para diseñar, ejecutar, y monitorear los
proyectos, en gran parte de los países menos desarrollados, por lo cual para impulsar el MDL deben promoverse «actividades facilitadoras», entre las cuales se destaca el reforzamiento de la capacidad (pública y privada) de los países para formular y gestionar proyectos de mitigación.
Restoring degraded forests can increase carbon storage
by about 120 tonnes/ha.
Source: RWEDP Field Document No. 53, Carbon dioxide offset investment in the Asia-Pacific forestry sector: opportunities and constraints.
En este contexto, la Comisión Centroamericana de Ambiente y Desarrollo (CCAD) ha solicitado asistencia a la FAO para el diseño e implementación de un programa que contribuya al modelo de una Estrategia de Manejo Forestal Sostenible para la Mitigación de Carbono en la Región Centroamericana.
A tal efecto la FAO ha preparado un doumento de proyecto que será lanzado como fase preparatoria de dicho programa, que aborda el diseño de un marco institucional para la gestión de proyectos de mitigación de carbono -incluyendo las bases para un programa y la estrategia regional, la identificación de las potencialidades regionales para la implementación de proyectos de mitigación de carbono en el sector de cambio en el uso de la tierra y actividades forestales (LUCF) (véase artículo abajo), y también el inicio de una mejora en la capacidad regional para la identificación, formulación, evaluación y selección de proyectos de mitigación de carbono. Dicho proyecto que tendrá una duración inicial en su fase preparatoria de 12 meses, cubrirá los siguientes países: Belice, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua y Panamá.
Para más información, dirigirse al Sr. Miguel Trossero en la dirección indicada en la primera página.
Fao and ifad cooperate on carbon sequestration through land-use change and forestry (lucf) activities
On 15 April 1999, FAO and IFAD held a technical consultation in Rome on the Prevention of Land Degradation, the Enhancement of Carbon Sequestration and the Conservation of Biodiversity through Land Use Change and Sustainable Land Management.
The invaluable contribution of several top-level experts to the discussion made the workshop a success. The meeting provided an excellent opportunity to collaborate in the implementation of an FAO/IFAD programme which aims to:
· field-test technical and policy options to promote incentives that could increase the adoption of land management practices by providing additional income to poor communities and enhancing their food security, with the initial focus on Latin America and the Caribbean; and
· develop regional and national programmes using the synergies between the Convention to Combat Desertification (CCD), the Convention on Biodiversity (CBD) and the Convention on Climate Change (CCC)-Kyoto Protocol.
For more information, please contact: Mr Miguel Trossero at the address given on the first page.
Forests, carbon storage and the missing ingredient
Reforestation is an attractive option to counter increased CO[2] in the atmosphere. The threat of potentially devastating changes in global climate can no longer be ignored. Not only has burning fossil fuels increased loads of CO[2] to the atmosphere, but rampant deforestation is destroying the terrestrial ecosphere's primary carbon sink.
A new method of forest irrigation using wastewater could allow us to achieve the spectacular yields that irrigation and fertilizers have provided for agriculture, while eliminating pollution of our surface waters, and thus providing one of the most potent means for reducing CO[2] buildups in our atmosphere.
Conventional treatment of sewage waste is a substantial producer of greenhouse gases. Fossil fuels are burnt to generate electricity for pumping and aerating modern sewage treatment plants. Nearly 15 million tonnes of CO[2] are released each year in the United States alone to power these plants. And the reason these plants exist is to oxidize bacterially organic waste into more CO[2]. In total, conventional wastewater treatment in the United States releases over 50 million tonnes of CO[2] annually to the atmosphere.
What is critical, however, is not how much CO[2] we release through wastewater treatment, but rather how much CO[2] we would remove from the atmosphere if we changed our wastewater treatment technology. The new irrigation method mentioned is a device called an "ecochamber" which delivers semi-treated wastewater directly to the roots of trees safely underground. Since the water never reaches the surface, conventional aeration and disinfection is unnecessary. The valuable nutrients are not used to grow noxious bacterial sludge; instead, the water and nutrients go to create valuable wood products.
Using this technology the United States could grow more than 2 million ha of forest with the water now being treated aerobically. Some 460 billion board feet of timber could be grown each year. When expressed as CO[2] removed from the atmosphere, these trees would sequester almost 700 million tonnes of CO[2] annually. By adding the 50 million tonnes no longer being released by conventional wastewater treatment, CO[2] emissions could be reduced by almost 15 percent by just this single technological change.
The developing world needs wastewater infrastructure. The developed world might pay for such technology in the form of wastewater forests that could become banks where a new form of "carbo-dollar" could be deposited. (Contributed by: Dr Daniel E. Wickham, IOS Corporation, 408 Heather Lane, Sebastopol, CA 95472, USA; fax: (+1) 707 874 1713; e-mail: ios@interx.net)
Mafla exporta carbón vegetal
La Mannesmann Florestal (Mafla), empresa brasileña productora de carbón vegetal del grupo siderúrgico Mannesmann, venderá carbón para la cocción de carnes asadas en el exigente mercado europeo. La empresa acaba de firmar un contrato con una distribuidora británica Chartan-Aldred, del grupo CPL, y este año espera exportar 10 mil toneladas de carbón doméstico en Europa. «Queremos abrir nuevas alternativas para la generación de ingresos en la empresa, debido a la reciente desvalorización cambiaria del real, nuestro producto es muy competitivo», dijo Marco Antônio Castello Branco, Gerente Técnico de Mafla. En el mercado europeo un consumidor paga aproximadamente 800 dólares EE.UU. la tonelada de carbón vegetal para uso doméstico, mientras que en Brasil, el valor de una cantidad equivalente del producto mencionado es apenas 300 dólares EE.UU. Con una facturación anual de 28 millones de reales, la Mafla produce cerca de 300 mil toneladas de carbón vegetal al año.
De este total, 200 mil toneladas son consumidas por los altos hornos de la Siderurgia Mannesmann, productora de tubos de acero instalada en Belo Horizonte. El resto (unas 100 mil toneladas ) son vendidas en el mercado nacional.
La Mafla recorrió un arduo camino antes de ser habilitada a exportar carbón vegetal a Europa. Por sugerencia de Chartan-Aldred, la empresa inició en septiembre de 1997, un proceso de evaluación y certificación de las características ambientales de sus combustibles forestales provenientes de 127 mil hectáreas de bosques de Eucaliptos que la empresa posee en 16 municipios del Estado. Para este fin contó con la asistencia de la Forest Stewardship Council, FSC (Conselho de Manejo Florestal), una ONG de origen inglesa. La autorización fue concedida en enero de este año y en la actualidad «tenemos la mayor área reforestada certificada del mundo. Esto significa que el carbón vegetal de Mafla está siendo producido dentro de las tres normas básicas del FSC: respeto del medioambiente, beneficios sociales y viabilidad económica de la materia prima.»
La empresa también está negociando un contrato de comercialización con una red de supermercados británicos la «Tesco». El mercado europeo de carbón para carnes asadas es de 600 mil toneladas al año. De este total, unas 400 mil toneladas son producidas en Europa.
La apertura de nuevos mercados por parte de Mafla en Europa es parte de la estrategia orientada a incrementar la participación de productos alternativos en los ingresos de la empresa, reduciendo su dependencia de la siderurgia.
En el marco de esta estrategia, la empresa lanzó, en diciembre pasado, en el mercado interno brasileño un carbón vegetal denominado «Pestico» para la realización de carnes asadas. El objetivo final es comercializar 10 mil toneladas al año de este nuevo producto.
Entre los usos no siderúrgicos, la Mafla también vende carbón activado, utilizado en la industria química y sanitaria; postes; troncos tratados; madera descortezada y madera para muebles. (Fuente: Brasil, Gazeta Mercantil, 18 de marzo de 1999.)
Puits de carbone en amazonie
Pro-Natura International et l'Office national des forêts ont conçu et vont réaliser pour Peugeot un grand puits de carbone en Amazonie.
En janvier 1998, Pro-Natura a approché Peugeot pour proposer à ce constructeur automobile de participer à la lutte contre l'effet de serre en créant un grand puits de carbone. Neuf mois plus tard, le président de Peugeot SA annonçait à la presse sa décision d'investir 65 millions de francs dans cette opération pilote qui fait de sa société un pionnier de la lutte contre l'effet de serre. La collaboration de Pro-Natura ONG franco-brésilienne avec un organisme de réputation internationale comme l'Office national des forêts a emporté la décision de Peugeot. Ce puits de carbone, d'une capacité totale de 2 millions de tonnes de carbone, sera réalisé au Brésil, au nord de l'Etat du Mato Grosso, dans le contexte du projet Juruena de Pro-Natura.
En reforestant dans les tropiques pour «éponger» le CO[2] de l'atmosphère, ce puits de carbone va contribuer à la protection des forêts tropicales et à l'amélioration du niveau de vie des populations locales. Ce triple enjeu de lutte contre l'effet de serre, de protection de la forêt tropicale et d'amélioration du sort des populations correspond aux objectifs sociaux-environnementaux de Pro-Natura International.
En même temps, cette action conjointe de l'industrie et d'une association d'environnement sur un problème aussi important que l'effet de serre entre dans la politique de Pro-Natura: continuer à faire tomber le «mur de Berlin» entre industriels et environnementalistes pour l'avenir de notre planète. En effet, les défis majeurs du XXI^e siècle seront des défis d`ordre environnemental dont dépend le sort de milliards d'êtres humains. Seule l'industrie peut - en faisant cette révolution culturelle et en entraînant les hommes politiques à sa suite dans cette voie de préservation de l'avenir -inverser le cours des choses en réparant ce que plus d'un siècle d'industrialisation aveugle a compromis. (Source: Lettre d'information, Automne 1998, Pro-Natura International.)
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: Pro-Natura International, 51 rue d'Anjou, 75008 Paris, France.
Télécopie: (+33) 1 49 24 15 66;
mél.: pro10@calva.net
Reunión sobre la contribución forestal para combatir el cambio climático
El Protocolo de Kyoto (PK) reconoce las actividades de secuestro o reducción de emisiones de carbono asociadas con los cambios de uso del suelo y las actividades forestales y constituyen una de las opciones existentes para regular las emisiones antrópicas de gas con efecto invernáculo que modifican la composición atmosférica, permitiendo por lo tanto mitigar los efectos potenciales del calentamiento global. Las negociaciones en curso permiten esperar en la posibilidad de que aquellos países que se han comprometido a reducir sus emisiones de gas con efecto invernáculo (países del anexo I) puedan acreditar dicha reducción a partir de la ejecución doméstica de actividades forestales y de cambio en el uso del suelo que a su vez intensifiquen el secuestro y almacenamiento de carbono en sumideros naturales o que lleven a la reducción de emisiones de gas.
A tal efecto, el PK prevé mecanismos de flexibilidad mediante los cuales las actividades de secuestro o reducción de emisiones pueden desarrollarse en colaboración con otros países.
El PK introdujo tres instrumentos que prveen flexibilidad a los países en el cumplimiento de sus compromisos de reducción de emisiones de carbono a través de intercambios internacionales de créditos, que son: CE: Comercio de emisiones (emission trading) e IC: Implementación conjunta (joint implementation).
Por lo tanto, estos mecanismos crean un mercado internacional de mitigación en el cual los países pueden intercambiar sus emisiones -CE- o adquirir créditos de reducción mediante la realización de actividades fuera de sus territorios -IC y MDL: Mecanismos para un desarollo limpio.
El flujo potencial de inversión que puede movilizarse en los próximos años a través de proyectos de cooperación internacional hacia los países en vías de desarrollo es de aproximadamente 7 500 millones de dólares EE.UU. anuales.
Las alternativas de fijación de carbono mediante proyectos que hacen al uso del suelo -particularmente los forestales- presentan posibilidades muy alentadoras.
Lamentablemente, aún existen muchos interrogantes sobre los aspectos políticos, técnicos y económicos de estas cuestiones, el debate político internacional se pregunta cómo hacer algo, qué se puede hacer, cuándo se debe hacer y a qué costo? Estos interrogantes se pueden resumir de la siguiente manera:
¿Habrá suficientes incentivos para frenar los niveles actuales de deforestación y si ese es el caso habrá fondos suficientes para manejar mejor los bosques, las plantaciones existentes y plantar más árboles?
¿Qué sucederá con los niveles actuales de incendios forestales?
¿Qué repercusión tendrán sobre las industrias forestales convencionales y qué nuevas actividades deberían promoverse para favorecer las inversiones en el sector?
¿Servirán las convenciones en negociación para promover mas empleos y mejores salarios a los campesinos de las áreas rurales?
¿Si es así qué cambios de políticas y qué reformas de las instituciones son necesarios para que tales aspectos se materialicen?
Esta reunión tendrá lugar en Tegucigalpa, Honduras del 29 de junio al 2 de julio de 1999 y será una excelente oportunidad para discutir detalles sobre estos interrogantes e iniciar el esbozo de propuestas de acción.
Para más información, dirigirse a Sr. M.A. Trossero y/o Sr. L.S. Botero, Departamento de Montes, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, Roma 00100, Italia.
Fax: (+39) 06 52255618;
correo electrónico: miguel.trossero@fao.org o Luis.Botero@fao.org
Situación actual del proceso de la convención en el marco del cambio climático
Los próximos pasos
Gran parte de los aspectos de diseño y ejecución de los mecanismos operativos de la Convención en el Marco del Cambio Climático (CMCC) y el Protocolo de Kyoto (PK) están aún por definirse. Su elaboración detallada y puesta en marcha efectiva dependerá de la rapidez con que pueda implementarse el «Plan de Acción de Buenos Aires», acordado por las partes en la reciente COP-4.
La cuarta conferencia de las partes celebrada en Buenos Aires, Argentina, del 2 al 13 de noviembre de 1998, constituyó un importante eslabón en el avance de la Convención. Aunque no se llegó a un acuerdo tan trascendental como en el PK, la COP-4 confirmó la intención y voluntad de los países de progresar hacia la implementación del protocolo. Hasta el 13/11/98 sesenta países habían firmado el PK.
La COP-4 adoptó el Plan de Acción de Buenos Aires, que incluye la resolución de las partes de demostrar un progreso sustancial sobre: el mecanismo financiero de la CMCC; el desarrollo y transferencia de tecnología; la implementación de los Artículos 4.8 y 4.9 de la CMCC, como así también los Artículos 2.3 y 3.14 del PK; la continuidad de las actividades implementadas conjuntamente (AIC); los mecanismos (de flexibilidad) del PK; y la preparación de la COP/MOP-1. Al mismo tiempo, emitió decisiones sobre otros aspectos, entre los cuales sólo presenta interés para el presente análisis las correspondientes al sector LUCF.
Se acordó además que el Fondo para el Medio Ambiente Mundial (GEF) -reestructurado- actuará como mecanismo financiero de la Convención y se efectuaron avances en las discusiones de los temas de transferencia de tecnología y financiamiento. La COP-4 decidió continuar con la fase piloto de AIC en el último año de su existencia, proponiendo iniciar una evaluación formal de la misma y emitir una decisión final sobre sus resultados antes del fin del siglo. Sin embargo, no se definió si los proyectos de mitigación que se hubieran iniciado bajo la fase iloto de AIC podrían ser reconocidos en el futuro dentro de los mecanismos establecidos por el PK. En la conferencia se alcanzó uno de los principales objetivos planteados para la reunión, que era llegar a un acuerdo sobre plazos límites para la negociación de los términos de implementación del Protocolo. El grupo denominado «sombrilla» (Integrado por Japón, EE.UU., Suiza, Canadá, Australia, Noruega y Nueva Zelandia y la Federación
de Rusia) mostró un gran interés en acelerar la elaboración de los lineamientos y principios de los mecanismos del PK. Un grupo mayoritario de países latinoamericanos planteó su interés en que el MDL se diseñara con prioridad sobre los otros mecanismos, deseo que se vio incorporado en una iniciativa para analizar el establecimiento de una «fase interina» del MDL.. El actual programa de trabajo le da prioridad al MDL y exige a la COP tomar una decisión final sobre los tres mecanismos para la COP-6, que se celebrará en el año 2000.
En relación a la inclusión de los proyectos LUCF en el MDL, la decisión oficial fue la de aplazar las discusiones hasta que se obtengan los resultados del Informe Especial que se solicitó al Panel Intergubernamental de Cambio Climático (IPCC), y que estará listo a mediados del año 2000. Esta decisión, conjuntamente con la de completar el detalle del MDL para finales del 2000, implica que se podrán incorporar los resultados del Informe del IPCC dentro del diseño del mecanismo, evitando de esa forma que deba iniciarse interinamente con una restricción hacia los proyectos forestales.
Es importante destacar que la Decisión 9/CP.4 resalta la importancia de lograr una amplia participación de las Partes, especialmente los países en desarrollo, en el trabajo del Órgano Subsidiario de Asesoramiento Científico y Tecnológico (SBSTA) sobre la temática LUCF. Al respecto, el SBSTA organizará un taller con anterioridad a su décima reunión -planificada para el 31 de mayo hasta el 11 de junio de 1999 en Bonn, Alemania- con el fin de considerar los aspectos relacionados a las metodologías e incertidumbres, la investigación y las necesidades de información. A tal efecto, la COP-4 convocó a las partes a enviar propuestas sobre los temas a ser considerados en este taller.
La inserción de las actividades LUCF en los mecanismos del PK fue ampliamente debatida en sesiones informales organizadas por las ONG, con el resultado de esclarecer los diferentes aspectos que eran cuestionados y lograr un significativo avance en el consenso de la conveniencia de su inclusión. Por ejemplo, el World Resources Institute (WRI) realizó eventos especiales focalizados en las recientes publicaciones de la institución sobre aspectos de LUCF.
Un último aspecto de la COP-4 digno de destacar es el importante interés mostrado por las industrias. Por primera vez en una sesión internacional de esta envergadura, hubo una fuerte presencia de grandes industrias que, en su mayoría, han tomado una decisión que involucrase resueltamente el proceso de mitigación del cambio climático y de invertir en el desarrollo de tecnologías y proyectos.
El próximo paso importante en el proceso de la CMCC sería la entrada en vigor del Protocolo de Kyoto, en caso de ser ratificado por 55 países que representarían el 55 por ciento de las emisiones globales de carbono. La COP-5 se realizará, posiblemente en Jordania o Marruecos, del 25 de octubre al 5 de noviembre de 1999, la COP-6 del 16 al 27 de octubre de 2000 y la COP-7 del 29 de octubre al 9 de noviembre de 2001.
La puesta en marcha del MDL
Como ya se ha mencionado, la mayoría de los países de la región tienen gran interés en que el MDL se implemente lo antes posible. Luego de la COP-4 el programa de trabajo le ha dado prioridad al MDL sobre los otros mecanismos, proponiendo una «fase interina» y exigiendo a la COP tomar una decisión final para la COP-6. A través de ello, la comunidad internacional se ha impuesto un término de dos años para diseñar los mecanismos que harán posible el cumplimiento de las reducciones acordadas en el PK. Los próximos 24 meses serán, por lo tanto, de intenso trabajo dedicado a la presentación de esquemas e ideas para el diseño del mecanismo y a la conciliación de las diferentes visiones. (Fuente: Resumen extraido del documento preparado por FAO: El Protocolo de Kyoto y el Mecanismo para un Desarrollo Limpio. Nuevas posibilidades para el sector forestal de América Latina y El Caribe.)
Warming could damage the ecosystem
A pair of op-ed page pieces in American newspapers this week called attention to the warming trend being seen in Antarctica.
As climatologists have predicted, the latest data show that global warming is occurring most rapidly at the poles, causing "huge pieces of the [Antarctic] ice shelf" to break off, writes author and documentary producer David Helvarg in a New York Times Op-Ed. While average global temperatures have warmed by 1°F over the last century, the Antarctic peninsula has seen a jump of more than 5° in the past 50 years, including a 10° jump in the winter months. And scientists now think the Western Antarctic Ice Sheet could "experience a sudden meltdown", which would raise global sea levels by more than 15 feet [nearly 5 m] over the next century. That, in turn, would kill off krill, which could "wreck much of the Antarctic system" that depends on the tiny creatures for food.
Lana Pollack, president of the Michigan Environmental Council, wrote in a Detroit News Op-Ed: "While considerable research is necessary before one could responsibly predict the fate of this ice sheet, it is irresponsible to deny the scientifically established facts already associated with the build-up of atmospheric greenhouse gases from the burning of fossil fuels and the associated global warming". (Source: UN Foundation News, 11 March 1999.)
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>4</section>
logo NEWS AND NOTES
Asian institute of technology energy program
The Asian Institute of Technology (AIT) was established in 1959 as an autonomous postgraduate international institute to help meet the growing need for advanced engineering education in Asia. The Energy Program, established in 1979, has so far produced more than 500 graduates.
The fields of study covered include Energy Economics and Planning (EEP), Energy Technology (ET) and Electric Power Systems Management (EPSM).
The master's degree programme starts in January each year; the deadline for application is 1 May for those seeking financial assistance and 15 October for those not requiring AIT financial support. In addition, a programme funded by the European Union can offer scholarships to European applicants for master's degree programmes.
For more information, please contact: Coordinator, Energy Program, Asian Institute of Technology, PO Box 4, Klong Luang, Pathumthani 12120, Thailand.
Fax: (+66) 2 524 5439;
e-mail: epcoord@ait.ac.th;
www.ait.ac.th
Wood is a more sustainable energy source than fossil fuels.
David South, Auburn University, Australia.
Battle in the greenhouse
Can a small NGO match a huge multinational? Yes, in terms of reducing greenhouse gas emissions a small local NGO can achieve as much as a huge multinational energy company. Take the following example.
In the Lao People's Democratic Republic, woodfuel is widely used for cooking. However, most households use open fires because proper stoves are still lacking. A local NGO, the Participatory Development Training Center (PADEC), is now introducing improved wood and charcoal stoves at a rate of 15 000 units a year. The improved stove saves at least 30 percent of the woodfuel compared with an open fire. In addition to the advantages for the users, fuel saving implies reduced emission of greenhouse gases for the planet earth.
As a comparison, consider the case of solar energy. Photovoltaics is being promoted worldwide as an alternative to fossil fuels. In Europe, a new production facility for solar panels is being established by one of the world's biggest oil companies. The production capacity will be 10 MW per year, which is considered large. The use of solar energy implies avoiding emission of greenhouse gases, which is widely advertised and recognized.
To make a quick estimate comparing the credit of the two greenhouse players:
An open fire for cooking has a power of about 3 kW. Saving one third of the fuel means saving 1 kW. Hence, 15 000 stoves save 15 000 kW, which is 15 MW. The open fires are normally kept live for about eight hours a day, which means the "plant factor" of this facility is 1/3. Therefore, the actual saving in terms of greenhouse gas emissions is equivalent to 1/3 times 15 MW, which is 5 MW. As regards the solar panels, when they are indeed used to substitute for electricity from fossil fuels, their "plant factor" is at the most 1/2. That means the saving of greenhouse gases is equivalent to 1/2 times 10 MW, which is also 5 MW.
The quick estimate shows that both the small NGO and the big multinational save the equivalent of 5 MW in terms of greenhouse gas emission. Anyone can try to make more accurate estimates, specify which greenhouse gases are actually being saved or substituted, point to the different side benefits, or evaluate the needs of the beneficiaries, etc. for the two cases. But the point here is that the tiny NGO plays in the same league as the huge multinational!
The choice is not wood or solar. The choice is both. The use of woodfuel is still growing on a sustainable basis. Photovoltaics is growing faster, but with present growth rates it will take another 30 years before it matches wood in terms of energy quantity in the world. For the time being, cooking with solar electricity is one thousand times more expensive than with wood.
There are about 3 billion woodfuel users in the world. Not even half of them have proper stoves. They are generally poor. Assisting them means applying cost-effective greenhouse measures at the same time. (Contributed by: Mr W.S. Hulscher, RWEDP, Bangkok, Thailand.)
Biodiesel
The Jatropha System: an integrated approach to supply energy and create income for rural development
Central hypothesis. The Jatropha System creates a positive reciprocity between energy production and environment/food production, i. e. the more energy Jatropha hedges produce, the more food crops are protected from animals and erosion. Additional income is also created, mainly for women.
In many tropical and subtropical countries, the plant Jatropha curcas is grown as a living fence to protect gardens and fields against animals because it is not eaten by them. But the economic potential of this plant is not known.
Exploiting this plant, the Jatropha System promotes four main aspects of development which combine to help assure a sustainable way of life for village farmers:
· Renewable energy
· Erosion control and soil improvement
· Promotion of women
· Rural income generation
Renewable energy. In the rural areas in Mali, Lister-type engines are used to drive grain mills and water pumps. These inexpensive precombustion chamber diesel engines of Indian origin require only small adaptation to be able to run on pure Jatropha oil, thus eliminating the need for petrol entirely. The lubrication oil may also be substituted by Jatropha oil.
Erosion control. Jatropha "living fences" in Mali not only control unwanted animal access to the fields and gardens, but also reduce wind erosion and, if planted parallel to slopes to fix small earth or stone dams, help control water erosion. The plant's roots grow close to the ground surface, anchoring the soil like miniature dykes. These dykes effectively slow surface runoff during intensive downpours.
Promotion of women. Traditionally, rural women used Jatropha curcas for local medicine and for soap production. The traditional soap-making process is very labour-intensive, producing small amounts of relatively poor-quality soap. When Jatropha oil is used, either alone or in combination with other local plant oils, such as shea butter, larger amounts of a more refined soap are produced. The women can easily sell this soap in local markets and nearby towns, increasing their possibilities of earning income with local resources. Details of the economy of soap production with the means of the Bielenberg hand press are shown in the Jatropha Internet site (http://jatropha.org).
Rural income generation. By promoting the integrated utilization of the Jatropha plant, the Jatropha System can provide direct financial benefits to the rural economy. An average village with 15 km of Jatropha hedges may harvest 12 tonnes of seeds. These may generate US$1 800 of cash income when the oil is extracted and the product's press-cake, oil and sediment are sold.
An entrepreneur who buys the seeds for soap production and hires people for the production can earn US$1 430, while the village receives US$2 200 for seeds and labour.
If these figures are extrapolated to Jatropha plantations, a profit in the range of cotton farming is within reach. Because of its economic value, rural people are planting new Jatropha hedges on a large scale. (Contributed by: Mr Reinhard K. Henning.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Reinhard K. Henning, Baganí GbR, Rothkreuz 11, D-88138 Weissensberg, Germany.
Fax: (+49) 8389 984 128;
e-mail: Reinhard@Henning.com;
http://Reinhard.Henning.com or
http://jatropha.org
Cars fill up on coconut oil
Imagine going to fill up your car with petrol and seeing that the tank is being filled with coconut oil. This is what could happen in the future thanks to Mikaele Dreu, a student at Bolton University, United Kingdom, who has managed to develop a method that transforms coconut oil into engine fuel. And all this without the large amount of toxic substances that are produced with the present extraction method. "At the moment," says Dreu, who is a native of Fiji, "coconut oil can be used with diesel engines, but with improved technology it will also be possible to use it with petrol engines. In addition, coconut oil costs less than other propellants." The drawback is that it can only be used in the tropics: coconut oil solidifies at 15°C and therefore cannot be used in colder climates. (Source: La Repubblica.)
Burning of biomass (and carbonizing sawdust)
Myriad industries produce natural waste material which is of little economic value in its raw state. Compacting the biowaste into small burnable logs (SunLogs) adds value to a useful resource. Cree Industries is setting up manufacturing facilities on Indian Reservation land in Canada to produce small portable "compaction" machines, which compact (any dry) biowaste, such as sawdust, rice husks, hemp hurds, olive pits, straw, charcoal dust and nut shells, into compressed logs 11 cm in diameter, at 1 tonne/m^3. These logs are ideal for burning and should go a long way towards helping people everywhere burn their biowaste instead of cutting down trees. There is a substantial amount of this biowaste available for use as a fuel source. (Based on: correspondence with Mr John Olsen.)
For more information, please contact: Mr John Olsen, President, Cree Industries, 200-100 Park Royal South, West Vancouver, British Columbia V7T 1A2, Canada.
Fax: (+1) 604 533 4950;
e-mail: cree@dowco.com
Charcoal production
A request was made on the "Stoves" network e-mail list for information on equipment capable of producing approximately 5 tonnes of charcoal per day. The following reply was received.
Our company (Enecon Pty Ltd) has the licence to charcoal technology developed by CSIRO (which is the major government research organization in Australia). This technology is aimed at large-scale production of charcoal via fluidized beds. The intention is twofold. First, to make charcoal for cooking or metallurgical use and, second, to make charcoal as a feedstock for CSIRO-designed equipment to manufacture activated carbon.
CSIRO technology aims at maximizing capture of the 60 percent of energy that is normally lost during charcoal manufacture. Volatiles and controlled amounts of fixed carbon are combusted and heating coils are used to recover energy, for example, via hot oil or as steam for process use or running a turbine. To our knowledge, this is the most energy-efficient, large-scale charcoal technology available.
CSIRO has developed this technology over several years and has successfully built and operated two pilot-scale plants. Enecon and CSIRO are now engaged in two separate studies looking at large-scale charcoal production in Australia. This will include costing of full-scale plants capable of between 1 500 and 12 000 tonnes of charcoal per year.
Enecon is also trying to "track down" simpler, smaller charcoal equipment that is mobile and can therefore be moved into and around forests to avoid high wood transport costs. (Source: e-mail from Colin Stucley, "Stoves" network e-mail list: stoves@crest.org)
For more information, please contact:
Mr Colin Stucley, Managing Director, Enecon Pty Ltd, 210 Canterbury Rd, Canterbury, Victoria 3126, Australia.
Fax: (+61) 3 9888 6744;
e-mail: enecon@ozemail.com.au
Global fibre supply model
FAO has recently published a Global Fibre Supply Model (GFSM). GFSM is an outlook study depicting industrial fibre supply scenarios based on resource availability and the present political environment. CD-ROMs in English, French and Spanish are available and permit the user to enter his or her own resource data and thus work with the model.
For more information, please contact:
Mr Olman Serrano, Chief, Wood and Non-Wood Products Utilization Branch, Forest Products Division, Forestry Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: (+39) 06 52255618;
e-mail: olman.serrano@fao.org
Leap: international version
A new version of the Long-range Energy Alternatives Planning model (LEAP) is now available which allows for translation of the model into any language.
To enhance the capabilities in wood energy planning, the FAO Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia (RWEDP) organizes several training activities for its member countries, such as national training workshops and case studies. RWEDP has adopted LEAP as a tool that can be used for wood energy planning,
LEAP is a general planning model; however, it is also appropriate for wood energy planning because it includes a biomass module that can be used to assess wood and other biomass resources. It covers the whole energy flow from resources through transformation to consumption and has a flexible data structure that allows for analysis even when limited data are available. Furthermore, it is user-friendly and can be run on a simple PC.
Case studies on wood energy planning are now being conducted, jointly by national energy and forestry agencies, in several countries (Cambodia, China, the Philippines, Sri Lanka and Viet Nam). These case studies serve as on-the-job training on wood energy planning and aim to identify particular problems and aspects in each of the countries. LEAP is being used as a framework and tool for data analysis and scenario development. At the beginning of each case study, RWEDP organized an intensive training course on the use of LEAP for wood energy planning for a small group of people who work on the case study.
RWEDP noticed that some participants had difficulty working with LEAP because of their limited knowledge of English, since LEAP uses English as the working language. Therefore, RWEDP supported the development of a new version of LEAP that can be translated and used in any other language. This new version is now available on the Web site of the developers of LEAP, the Stockholm Environment Institute in Boston (www.seib.org/leap). It is accompanied by a translation utility needed to translate the menus and guidelines for translating help files. After installing both the new version of LEAP and the translation utility, the user can translate the menu items. The translation can then be copied to other computers. A partial translation into Chinese is already available. Users are encouraged to share their translations with other users. (Contributed by: Mr Wim Hulscher, Chief Technical Adviser, RWEDP, Bangkok, Thailand.)
[Please see Forest Energy Forum No. 1 for more information on LEAP.]
Le charbon de bois - toujours d'actualité pour le traitement des eaux
Le charbon de bois, produit principal de la pyrolyse du bois, parallèlement à ses utilisations énergétiques (domestiques partout dans le monde ou industrielles comme dans le secteur sidérurgique brésilien) trouve encore aujourd'hui des applications dans le domaine environnemental comme agent de dépollution. Les corps poreux en général absorbent les gaz, certains corps dissous et les solvants. Le charbon de bois jouit de cette propriété au plus haut degré.
La capacité d'adsorption du charbon de bois est connue depuis fort longtemps et a été mise à profit dans des nombreux domaines, notamment pour l'épuration des eaux (filtres familiaux, assainissement de puits) out des gaz (masques). Cette capacité est déterminée par la surface de sites réceptifs sur les parois des vaisseaux du bois carbonisé. En technique de carbonisation traditionnelle, la surface et l'accessibilité de ces sites sont réduits par de nombreuses impuretés. On a donc recherché les moyens «d'activer» les charbons pour augmenter leur capacité d'adsorption.
La fabrication de charbon actif présente d'assez grandes difficultés si l'on veut obtenir des produits très efficaces et de qualité constante.
Disposant dans le monde d'une grande diversité de produits et sous-produits agricoles et forestiers, on cherche à obtenir le meilleur charbon par le choix de la matière première et l'optimisation des conditions de la pyrolyse.
Les techniques actuelles permettent d'espérer des surfaces spécifiques de l'ordre de 300 à 400 m^2 par gramme de charbon (compte tenu du fait qu'un charbon actif industriel se situe généralement aux environs de 900 m^2/g). Le CIRAD-Forêt s'emploie actuellement à la mise au point de traitements simples et relativement peu onéreux pour obtenir des charbons actifs compétitifs, produits localement.
Une nouvelle filière pourrait ainsi se développer dans de nombreux pays confrontés aux périls modernes de la pollution des eaux par les industries et au recyclage des eaux urbaines résiduaires. (Source: Le Flamboyant n^o 42, juin 1997.)
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: le Laboratoire Energie-Environnment du CIRAD-Forêt, Maison de la Technologie, BP 5035, 34032 Montpellier cedex 1, France.
Palm sugar
The palm sugar industry provides an income for a large number of households in Southeast Asia. For Cambodia, the dry zone of Myanmar and southern Thailand, the households are estimated at 30 000, 15 000 and 5 000, respectively, indicating the importance of this industry for the region. The energy costs form an important part of total production costs (up to 76 percent) and the use of more efficient palm sugar stoves will decrease these costs, thereby having a positive influence on the economic situation of those households.
The Regional Wood Energy Development Programme (RWEDP), with support from the Prince of Songkhla University (PSU) in Hat Yai, southern Thailand, organized a palm sugar study tour in this area from 22 to 26 February 1999. This study tour was attended by participants from various organizations active in this field in Cambodia, Myanmar and Thailand. There were representatives from the Cambodia Fuelwood Saving Project (CFSP), the Participatory Natural Resource Management Project of Cambodia and the FAO/UNDP Dry Zone Micro-Income Project of Myanmar. All the participants were active in the palm sugar industry in their home country, making it a good base for extensive discussions and exchange of information.
Since 1984, the Department of Agricultural Development of PSU has undertaken research within the palm sugar industry in southern Thailand. In 1990, this was followed up by a palm sugar stove programme in which more than 50 technicians were trained and an estimated 70 percent of the disseminated improved palm sugar stoves were believed to be adopted. Difficulties which were encountered during this programme were of a personal (adoption of new technology, farmer-technician relationship) as well as of a technical nature (material used for construction of the stove). The programme provided for a small subsidy in the form of the material costs for the chimney and a number of bricks. This programme was discussed with the participants of the study tour. One point of discussion was whether, and to what extent, subsidies should be included in improved stove programmes. The stove programme supported by CFSP only provides the transport costs of the materials necessary for building the
stove, while the stove programme in Myanmar mainly invests in promotional activities related to improved stoves. It would appear that this aspect of a stove programme is area-specific.
Field visits were undertaken to a number of palm sugar businesses in southern Thailand, giving the participants a chance to compare the situation of the palm sugar industry in that area with their local situation. The participants from Cambodia noticed a number of similarities with respect to the structure of the palm sugar stoves, while the main difference encountered by the participant from Myanmar was the number of pans of the stove, which tends to be three in Myanmar compared with one or two in Cambodia and Thailand. This scale of production is mainly influenced by the number of palm trees that can be utilized by the farmer for the production of palm sugar. The energy costs, being the main production costs, also tend to differ significantly in the different countries. The field visits were complemented with practical work at the training centre in the same area, where an improved palm sugar stove was constructed by the participants. (Contributed by: Mr Bert van der Plas,
RWEDP, Bangkok, Thailand.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Bert van der Plas, APO Information Systems, RWEDP, c/o RAP, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: (+66) 2 280 0760;
e-mail: RWEDP@fao.org
Stoves
Charcoal-making stoves
The following request for information was made on the "Stoves" network
e-mail list.
There is an opportunity to help a group of 19 sophomore engineering students in a design class at Colorado School of Mines, working under "stoves" member Professor Bob Knecht. Their topic is limited to charcoal-making stoves with the aim of developing geometries that will improve stove stability (safety) and make final quenching easier and safer (after pyrolysis is complete).
Any suggestions for new ideas will be passed on. Does anyone have an interest in a particular application (for a restaurant, oven, bakery, etc.)? Or a particular food (rice, potatoes, etc.)? Or a particular combination of power and energy requirements (1 kW maximum [or minimum]? 5 kWh maximum?, etc.)? The geometries should be small enough for testing easily, but should still have a practical application.
I am suggesting some groups might try a single "fuel can" inside a more rigid (safer) "tall combustion cylinder" that extends all the way to the ground - but I am not sure this will give good flame holding. Has anyone tried this geometry yet?
This is a great chance to pass on any "lessons learned" on the charcoal-making stove topic. Some that come to mind are:
· using dry fuel;
· using "right" diameter fuel - neither
too small nor too large;
· tight packing of the fuel;
· tight primary air control;
· need to avoid wind influence.
For more information, please contact: Dr Ronal W. Larson, 21547 Mountsfield Dr., Golden, CO 80401, USA.
Fax: (+1) 303 526 9629;
e-mail: larcon@sni.net
Estufas mejoradas
La difusión y adopción de estufas mejoradas suele ser difícil por varias causas:
a) los usuarios no tienen (o no perciben) la necesidad de ahorrar leña;
b) el diseño de la estufa no se acomoda a las particularidades locales (tamaño y forma de las panelas, intensidad de liberación de calor, tamaño y forma de la leña disponible);
c) deterioro más o menos rápido de algunos elementos constructivos (chimeneas, reguladores de tiro, bocas de fuego y hornallas); y
d) falta de capacitación del usuario real en su uso y mantenimiento.
Las causas más frecuentes son la a) y b). Para evitar fracasos en la difusión y adopción es conveniente investigar primero si los usuarios necesitan ahorrar leña y si lo saben. Luego conviene ensayar si el ahorro de leña logrado en condiciones reales de operación es suficiente incentivo para compensar el costo adicional de construcción y mantenimiento del fogón mejorado, la preparación de la leña, y la pérdida de algunas ventajas del fogón tradicional (humos como repelente de insectos, iluminación en el caso de fuegos abiertos, etc.). O si existen otras ventajas (más limpieza, menos accidentes, cocina más bonita, etc.) que compensen los mayores costos y esfuerzos asociados al fogón mejorado.
Siguen citas de dos textos que resumen una reciente revisión de varios programas de difusión de estufas mejoradas en Honduras.
Estudio sobre programas de fogones mejorados en Honduras. La evaluación de los programas de fogones mejorados, realizada por una ONG local con apoyo metodológico del proyecto, ha recolectado una importante información sobre el desempeño de cinco programas, concluyendo que han tenido un escaso impacto sobre el nivel del consumo de leña entre los beneficiarios y una cobertura muy reducida. No hay evidencias de un proceso de difusión espontánea o de apropiación efectiva de las tecnologías promovidas, aunque la diversidad de modelos encontrados y el hecho de que la mayoría de los tipos tradicionales son de construcción cerrada sugieren que ya existe un grado importante de mejoramiento en los fogones tradicionales.
Llama la atención el costo relativamente alto de los programas, que oscilan alrededor de los 200 $EE.UU. por cada estufa construida, aunque el costo de los materiales no suele exceder los 30 $EE.UU. Esto parece deberse a lo altos costos de administración y asistencia técnica y al pequeño número de fogones construidos por cada uno.
El estudio recomendó reorientar estos programas hacia la población urbana, donde la leña es adquirida por compra, y en especial donde se la utiliza para fines comerciales, prestando particular atención a la motivación y capacitación de los usuarios en la construcción, mantenimiento y operación de los fogones.
El impacto de los programas de fogones mejorados sobre el consumo de leña. En cuanto al impacto de los programas sobre el consumo de leña, no se pudo evidenciar que los modelos introducidos induzcan a un ahorro de combustible. Hay que enfatizar que muchos de los proyectos de promoción de los fogones han trabajado el tema como parte de componentes de mejoramiento de las condiciones ambientales del hogar campesino, sin que el ahorro de leña haya sido planteado como un objetivo primordial. Respecto del ahorro de leña se puede evidenciar que para conseguir niveles de ahorro de leña significativos, se deben combinar tres factores:
· un buen diseño y una buena realización técnica de artefacto;
· una buena aceptación (apropiación) del modelo y del programa de promoción por parte de las usuarias; y
· la realización de cambios en las prácticas de cocina y en la actitud frente al recurso leña. (Fuente: Enrique Riegelhaupt, Red Internet en Bioenergía: bioenergia@sdnnic.org.ni)
Shell international renewables
In October 1997, the Shell Group launched Shell International Renewables (SIR) as a fifth core business alongside its existing Exploration and Production, Gas & Coal, Chemicals and Oil Products businesses. The Shell Group, which believes that renewable energy could contribute as much as half of the world's total energy demand by 2050, intends to invest up to US$500 million in a global renewable energy business over the next five years. SIR will concentrate initially on developing commercial energy opportunities in biomass and solar.
The world population is expected to double by the year 2100. Therefore, the annual demand for wood for energy, and other uses, will increase and could double (to more than 7 billion m^3 per year).
To provide plantation wood for people in the future, support the planting of trees on pastureland.
Setting a goal of converting 8 million ha of pastureland per year for the next 55 years would increase tree plantations to about 5 percent of the world's land base.
Source: www.zpg.org/
The biomass business will use the Shell Group's forestry experience to produce woodfuels as well as advanced technologies to convert biomass into electricity and heat. A number of biomass energy projects are now being developed in various countries, focusing on developing power plants up to 100 MW that use biomass and energy crops as fuel.
The company has been in solar cell (photovoltaics) production for more than 20 years, with manufacturing units in the Netherlands, Japan and (shortly) Germany. The business aim of Shell Solar is to develop commercial opportunities in grid supply, rural electrification, autonomous systems and consumer products.
Opportunities in other renewable energies, such as wind, are also being pursued.
For more information, please contact: Ms Judy Everett (SIR Corporate PA), Shell Centre, London SE1 7NA, UK.
Fax: (+44) 171 934 5252;
e-mail: Judy.M.Everett@SI.shell.com;
www.shell-renewables.com
Shell and biomass
Shell companies will only obtain the biomass feedstock from sustainably grown sources, that is, where the harvested biomass is continuously replaced by new biomass in an environmentally and socially responsible manner. These sources may be from dedicated plantations or as residues of harvesting and processing operations. Shell will not use biomass derived from native forests. Conversion efficiencies can be increased if the biomass is first gasified and then (depending on the process) the gas or bio-oil is used to fuel a gas turbine equipped with waste heat recovery. The challenge is to ensure that the equipment can produce electricity and heat reliably and in a cost-effective manner. Trials are already in progress in Uruguay and Chile and there is close collaboration between Shell and various international experts and institutions. Shell also has its own forest research centre at East Malling in the United Kingdom. In parallel, state-of-the-art technologies to convert
biomass more efficiently into electricity and heat are also being identified, tested and further developed.
Over the last 18 years, Shell has developed experience in growing trees for pulpwood and sawn timber and its current area of plantations is 129 000 ha. Shell Forestry is among the world leaders in tree improvement and large-scale tree production. (Source: Thomas B. Reed, "Stoves" network
e-mail list.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Thomas B. Reed, Biomass Energy Foundation, 1810 Smith Rd, Golden,
CO 80401, USA.
Fax: (+1) 303 278 0560;
e-mail: reedtb@compuserve.com
Regional wood energy development programme in asia (rwedp)
RWEDP is a long-term programme implemented by FAO and funded by the Netherlands Government. The present phase of the programme links 16 countries in Asia, all of which are major wood energy users. In fact, consumption of woodfuels is still increasing in Asia, as it is elsewhere in the world. In industrialized countries this trend is mainly the result of deliberate government policies, whereas in Asia the trend is largely an autonomous one. In most parts of Asia, wood energy is used on a sustainable basis. The applications are still mainly traditional, although increasingly improved technologies are spreading, as are modern applications.
Wood energy in Asia still faces various problems, partly owing to a general lack of adequate technologies in domestic applications as well as in the institutional, commercial and industrial sectors. Other problems are associated with optimizing the production and trade of woodfuel resources because, in the forestry sector, woodfuel is generally considered to be a by-product, whereas in the agricultural sector it is not considered a product at all (at least not in agricultural statistics). This is notwithstanding the fact that the annual economic value of woodfuels in RWEDP member countries is equivalent to some US$30 billion. However, because most "stakeholders" are rural and the urban poor, no concentrated cash flows are associated with woodfuels. A general problematic aspect of wood energy is the weakness of data, which complicates planning and policy-making.
In the last six months, RWEDP has focused on the implementation of a variety of national activities, ranging from case studies and training in wood energy data collection and planning to courses in woodfuel resource management, reviewing woodfuel markets and trade, hands-on training of trainers for introducing improved cooking stoves, translating manuals into local languages and analysing the important gender aspects of wood energy.
In these activities, RWEDP collaborates with government departments in its member countries, national institutes, local NGOs and (other) international organizations. It is encouraging to observe the progress made over the years in various aspects of wood energy development. The most tangible examples are in energy conservation. A recent case is from the Lao People's Democratic Republic where a local NGO has successfully introduced 15 000 improved charcoal stoves in one year, after a training programme assisted and sponsored by RWEDP. Another example is from the Red River Delta in Viet Nam, which is a rice-growing area. Government agencies, jointly with the Women's Union and with advice from RWEDP, are now introducing improved stoves for rice straw fuel. Before, the available straw lasted only nine months per year and the farmers had to buy woodfuel or coal for the remaining months. With the improved stoves, the straw meets the household energy needs year round. In addition,
the improved stoves provide a much safer and healthier kitchen environment. It is not surprising that the farmers are keen to buy the new stoves. Other, less tangible, examples of progress in wood energy development are improved skills and sound policies with regard to wood energy in member countries. (Contributed by: W.S. Hulscher, RWEDP, Bangkok, Thailand.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Wim Hulscher, Chief Technical Adviser, RWEDP-GCP/RAS/154/NET, c/o RAP, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: (+66) 2 280 0760;
e-mail: RWEDP@fao.org;
www.rwedp.org
[Please see Forest Energy Forum No. 2 for more information on RWEDP.]
Wood energy information system (weis)
Experience in implementation
During the last few months, considerable progress has been made in the preparation and improvement of our Wood Energy Information System (WEIS). Statistical data from more than 100 countries from different regions (OECD, Latin America, the Caribbean, Asia and Africa) have been incorporated.
The data were principally extracted from the FAOSTAT database, and those of other organizations and agencies (IEA, ENDA/IEPE, OLADE), as well as from the statistical information institution in each country studied. All agencies contacted collaborated, providing a significant advance in the quality of woodfuel data.
There were many difficulties in organizing WEIS, the most important of which was selecting the adequate format to be adopted for the compilation and presentation of all the data collected. It was realized that the system being used at present by FAOSTAT was not adequate to show the actual dendro-energetic system and to present all of the data available. Other organizations' formats were examined, but none of them fitted.
For this reason, we decided to prepare a new format (in accordance with the diagram on the following page), incorporating the most interesting aspects of previous surveys. However, for this format to function properly, it was necessary to take into consideration the terminology and concept developed by FAO's Unified Wood Energy Terminology (UWET) [presented in Forest Energy Forum No. 3].
For the new format, we defined adequate tables and suitable programmes covering data collection and available information.
The different kinds of statistical data for "woodfuel", "resources", "product" used for data compilation and presentation are called: "fuelwood, "charcoal, "black liquor and other (in FAOSTAT, the names used are "items" or "single commodities").
This information is segregated into production, consumption or final demand, transformation losses (resulting from the transformation of fuelwood into charcoal), import and export, which form the group "woodfuel commodities" (see diagram). In FAOSTAT, they belong to the large group "elements" or "commodity group".
Depending on the origin of the "supply source" of the woodfuel, the following classifications have been made: direct woodfuel, indirect woodfuel and recovered woodfuel which, together with "the end users" and "woodfuel commodities", make up the group "elements".
It is important to note that the terms "woodfuel" or "derived fuel from wood" represent all of the fuelwood derived from forest species, but do not include all the means of obtaining fuel from the forest ecosystem. We therefore use the term "woodfuel" to describe all the fuel types which, although deriving from forests, do not have a lignocellulosic origin, for example, biodiesel.
The end users were classified into the following sectors: "industrial", "commercial" and "residence"; however, one special group was kept for "power and heat energy from woodfuel".
Another difficulty that we found was the diversity of the existing data resulting from the different reporting systems within each country. We therefore adopted one data series for each country which best reflected the existing dendro-energetic situation.
These data are shown under the generic title "Best estimates", which covers data obtained from our regional Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow (WETT) studies. The data were properly verified and examined for every country and then added where missing.
The data collected belong principally to the period 1980-1997 and are used in WETT in order to facilitate data interpretation.
Another disadvantage encountered was the diversity of the units used in presenting the data from each country and NGO. This led to the preparation of UWET. It was decided to use the Joule as the energy unit for international use and to operate between different items, elements and data sectors (FAOSTAT lists the different units and conversion factors).
To solve these problems and to prepare the regional studies (WETT + WEIS) took more time than was foreseen. To date, we have covered four regions, three of which are available for consultation: OECD, Asia and Africa, while Latin America is at present only available in tables and not as definitive information.
WEIS will soon be available through the Forest Energy Forum home page. In order to consult the Web pages of FAOSTAT and WAICENT, the area, year, item and element to be consulted must be selected. The data can be presented in groups or disaggregated. (Contributed by: Ms Sandra Rivero, Consultant, Wood Energy Programme, Forest Products Division, Forestry Department, FAO.)
Wood energy today for tomorrow - africa (wett africa)
The third document in our WETT series, Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow - Africa (WETT Africa): analysis of its role and the data quality issues, is now ready and has been sent for printing and distribution. Mr Samir Amous has made an extraordinary effort to prepare this document, which is nearly 200 pages long and is full of statistical data on woodfuels from the most relevant sources of information, such as FAOSTAT, IEA, ESMAP, ENDA and national databases. This document has been made possible thanks to the contribution of many colleagues, not only from FAO's Forestry Department, but also from IEA, ENDA and the African countries involved. These data are now being incorporated into WEIS [see Ms Sandra Rivero's article above on this subject].
The following paragraphs have been extracted from the Executive Summary in order to give our readers a brief description of the role played by woodfuels in Africa.
According to the best estimates available, African woodfuel consumption reached 623 million m^3 in 1994; thus Africa has the highest per caput woodfuel consumption (0.89 m^3 per year) than any other continent (e.g. Asia has 0.3 m^3 per caput per year).
All African countries, except for the five North African countries and South Africa, still rely heavily on wood for meeting their basic energy needs. In the different African regions, the woodfuel share ranges from 61 to 86 percent of primary energy consumption, the greater part (74 to 97 percent) being consumed by households. The management of woodfuel resources and demand should be a major issue in the energy planning processes in Africa.
On the other hand, woodfuel consumption is a principal contributor to total wood removals in Africa, around 92 percent of total African wood consumption, and to greenhouse gas emissions. Woodfuel use is, therefore, a major local and global environmental issue in Africa, and it should be fully integrated into the continent`s forestry planning and environmental protection processes.
In addition, woodfuels play an important social and economic role in almost all countries. They represent a significant economic value in many African countries, reaching roughly US$6 billion for the whole of Africa, in which the charcoal monetary contribution would exceed US$1 billion.
While fuelwood used to account for a considerable part of total woodfuel consumption, social and economic mutations associated with the urbanization process will lead to a significant shift from fuelwood to charcoal, increasing the energy, environmental, economic and social role in Africa in the future.
Despite the important interactions of wood energy with development, environment and social welfare, there have only been a few attempts in Africa to include woodfuels as a basic sector in the planning process, which is seriously hampered by the scarcity, limited scope and low quality of the existing data.
The assessment of the various woodfuel data sources in Africa led to the following main conclusions:
· The FAO database is the only source of data that includes almost all the African countries (except for six minor consuming countries) and provides continuous time series for each country. However, the FAO database presents estimated figures rather than actual ones and does not provide any detailed sectorial figures.
· The IEA database presents individual data for only 23 countries, and provides roughly global estimates for the 31 other countries under "Other Africa". In addition, sectorial consumption of woodfuels is only available for 1995 and 1996, while the data for the remaining years are presented under an aggregated form (Aggregate Primary Supply of Combustible Renewable and Waste).
· The ESMAP documents considered data for 39 countries out of 55, with various quality levels, and generally reported only one reference year rather than a historical series.
· The ENDA/IEPE documents reported data for only 28 countries, and only one reference year. In addition, no detailed sectorial consumption figures were provided.
· The "Other National" and "International" sources of data that were identified provided various levels of detail, consistency and accuracy. Unfortunately, these sources focused on the demand side of the woodfuel issues, neglecting the supply side, and did not generally make any indication as to the origin, quality, or even the estimation approach of the data, making it difficult to undertake any adequate assessment.
This exercise shows that great progress has been made in the work of Mr Amous. However, improving knowledge of woodfuel demand and supply, as well as its economic and social role, should be undertaken in the future, particularly through a durable and systematic data collection, compilation and analysis process, under a unified approach and with the involvement of the major international organizations concerned. These processes might be established in four different directions:
· improve national capabilities for a more efficient data collection process;
· prepare clear guidelines for woodfuel surveys;
· improve data quality and fill data gaps through the implementation of field surveys using an adequate methodology and surveying approach; and
· carry out area-based woodfuel flow studies to improve the understanding of wood energy systems and to make them more environmentally sustainable.
For more information, please contact: Mr Miguel Trossero at the address given on the first page.
Woodfuel - guidelines for data verification and collection
Woody fuels are a key component of current energy use in many countries. For instance, many countries in Africa rely on wood energy. According to current figures from FAOSTAT, woodfuels represent about 89 percent of African forest removals and, particularly for tropical Africa, account for more than 75 percent of energy demand. However, in general, the data available are scarce and poorly defined, and the existing information is scattered in national agencies.
The present institutional capacity to verify, check, collect, analyse, interpret, store and present woodfuel information is very weak in most African countries. Moreover, the methodologies available for the implementation of woodfuel surveys need to be improved. Therefore, simple and concise guidelines need to be prepared to verify, review and/or collect data regarding the different operation units of consumption, production and trade of woodfuels.
FAO's Wood Energy Group is actively working on this subject. Guidelines are being prepared for the verification of existing woodfuel data regarding the different aspects of the wood energy system and data are being collected to fill the multiple data gaps in most wood energy databases. The guidelines will also provide instructions for the interpretation, collation and presentation of woodfuel data.
All guidelines will be prepared in line with the Unified Wood Energy Terminology (UWET) and the Wood Energy Programme tables for data accounting.
For more information, please contact: Mr Miguel Trossero at the address given on the first page.
WORLD FOOD DAY 1999
The World Food Day/TeleFood theme for this year is
"Youth against hunger"
"Les jeunes contre la faim"
"La juventud contra el hambre"
Wri millennium assessment
The World Resources Institute (WRI) is currently working on a Millennium Assessment of the state of the World's Ecosystems, defined in terms of their capacity to provide the goods and services humans need. One of the goods to be covered is energy.
In the chapter dedicated to forest products, there will be a special item on the analysis of woodfuel issues.
For more information, please contact: Ms Emily Matthews, Senior Associate, World Resources Institute, 1709 New York Avenue N.W. Washington,
DC 20006, USA.
E-mail: reip1@wri.org; or
Mr Adrian Whiteman, Forestry Officer (Sector Studies), FONS, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: (+39) 06 57055514;
e-mail: adrian.whiteman@fao.org
[More details on the specific items presented in this report will be given in a future issue of Forest Energy Forum.]
And have you heard about ...
iea bioenergy news ?
IEA Bioenergy is an international collaborative agreement set up in 1978 by the International Energy Agency (IEA) to improve international cooperation and information exchange between national bioenergy RD&D programmes. IEA Bioenergy aims to realize the use of environmentally sound and cost-competitive bioenergy on a sustainable basis in order to provide a substantial contribution to meeting future energy demands.
IEA Bioenergy News is issued every six months (June and December) and has recently acquired a new look. Its revamped format can be seen on the new Web page at the following address: www.forestresearch.cri.nz/ieabioenergy/home.htm
For more information, please contact: Mr Justin Ford-Robertson, Editor,
IEA Bioenergy News, Forest Research, Private Bag 3020, Rotorua,
New Zealand.
Fax: (+64) 7 347 5332;
e-mail: bioenergy.news@fri.cri.nz
[Please see Forest Energy Forum No. 2 for more information on IEA.]
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>5</section>
logo FOCUS ON ... NEPAL
Hills leasehold forestry for the poor
A completely new approach to managing forest lands and addressing poverty through forest management by groups of people living below the poverty line is being developed by the Hills Leasehold Forestry and Forage Development Project in Nepal for which the Government of the Netherlands and IFAD provide external funding. The project aims to improve the living conditions of the poor and simultaneously to rehabilitate lands in the hills of Nepal by handing over degraded land to small groups through a lease agreement with a maximum duration of 40 years. Under this agreement, the groups have exclusive user rights on the basis of a management plan.
The project started in early 1993 in two districts of the Central Development Region of Nepal. At present the project is operating in ten districts of the Central and Western Development Regions. It is the first attempt to bring together the Department of Forest and Livestock services in a joint operation, and the Agricultural Development Bank of Nepal is one of the project partners and provides credit for livestock and income generation. The project is also undertaking research to address the problem of the degraded lands through the Nepal Agricultural Research Council (NARC). Special emphasis is given in the project to include small and marginal farmers, the landless, women and ethnic groups such as Magar, Thami, Praja and Tamang.
By the end of July 1998, the project had formed 959 leasehold groups involving 6 424 households out of which 1 626 are female members. The groups have received 4 268 ha of forest lands on which 445 forest nurseries have been established by the beneficiaries, producing 5.5 million seedlings for planting on the leased and on private land. About 36 860 kg of forage seeds have been sown on the leased land and 57 332 fruit-tree saplings have been planted by the farmers. Vegetable seeds, rhizomes, cardamom, bamboo and herbal plants have been provided to the leaseholders. A total of 305 977 animals were provided as well as animal health services. A sum of NRs 10 771 million was disbursed as loans to the leasehold group members for livestock, land development and other income-generating activities. Under the village infrastructure development programme, construction of culverts, maintenance of foot trails, operation of small drinking-water projects and renovation of schools have
been carried out.
This project has come a long way in institutionalizing the leasehold forestry programme in Nepal. Consequently, overgrazed areas surrounding villages, shifting cultivation areas and forest encroachment areas are being successfully protected and developed through small farmer groups. Similarly, district line agencies are able to implement the project activities on their own. Income generation from the leased land in the form of more forage production, fuelwood and forage seed production has already been noticed. Together with the village infrastructure development programme, the community has started to feel the benefits of the leasehold forestry programme. Pilot work on the integration of community and leasehold forestry has shown that both activities can be simultaneously implemented in the area. (Contributed by: Mr J.K. Tamrakar.)
For more information, please contact: Mr J.K. Tamrakar, Project Coordinator, Hills Leasehold Forestry and Forage Development Project, Babarmahal, Kathmandu, Nepal.
Fax: (+977) 1 242640;
e-mail: hlffdp@wlink.com.np
Integration of jatropha system in nepal
In Nepal, the fuel system is inefficient and costly at all stages - import, transport, conversion and end use. Most of the funds allocated are drained into either electricity generation or importing commercial fuels. Taking into consideration the availability of diesel and the distribution system in the hills and mountains, the Research Centre for Applied Science and Technology (RECAST) has launched a new programme on biodiesel development in rural areas with support from the Department of International Development/British Council, the British Embassy in Nepal, University College Northampton and Oxford Brookes University, United Kingdom.
A great diversity of non-conventional oil-bearing flora grows on marginal land and is one such renewable resource - currently wasted - but which could be utilized at the village level for energy by small-scale industry and agriculture. Exploration and utilization of this renewable resource is now receiving much attention at various levels within the country. In this regard, there is special interest in evaluating the physic nut (Jatropha curcas L.), and other wild oil-bearing flora, as engine fuels with a view to developing a small engine capable of running on a wide range of indigenous oils to power a robust, small-scale, roving oil-expelling unit in energy-scarce regions. A pilot/demonstration plant will be used to monitor and evaluate the socio-economic, environmental and technical impacts of introducing the technology.
Since the plant is grown on marginal and semi-arid land, as well as being cultivated as a fence in the mid hills with a tropical climate, it enhances rather than competes with the growth of crops for food production. Ricinus communis shows potential for higher altitudes. The economic viability of fuel-producing systems is strongly dependent on the local costs of seed collection and fossil fuels and revenues from oil products and processed by-products. Thus, massive plantings of physic nuts are planned in the community forests, as a mix crop, and in the buffer zones. This will enhance income-generating activities in rural areas and the income would be spread over a much larger number of households. Opportunities would also arise for work in soap production. On a larger scale, the plantation and use of plant oil as a source of energy will balance CO[2] levels and minimize global warming and the greenhouse effect. (Contributed by: Mr K.M. Sulpya.)
For more information, please contact: Mr K.M. Sulpya and Dr Mick Boswell, Research Centre for Applied Science and Technology (RECAST), Tribhuvan University, Kirtipur, Kathmandu, Nepal.
Fax: (+977) 1 331964;
e-mail: sulpya@wdn.wlink.com.np
[Please see Forest Energy Forum No. 1 for more information on Jatropha curcas.]
Green energy mission/nepal
The Green Energy Mission (GEM)/Nepal is an NGO which is committed to building national capability on green energy research and development. Among its activities are the:
· commercial utilization of natural/cultivated plants/plant parts to produce energy in various forms, including: plant oil as an edible oil and as an alternative to fossil fuel; green manure/biofertilizer as an alternative to chemical fertilizers; and botanical pesticides as alternatives to chemical pesticides;
· institutional development of green energy research and development in the region;
· improvement of the biodiversity and environment in Nepal and the region; and
· plant science tourism for research, practical training and education.
GEM/Nepal also publishes the Green Energy Newsletter, a biannual bulletin on its activities.
For more information, please contact: Dr Gyan L. Shrestha, President, Green Energy Mission/Nepal, PO Box 10647, Kathmandu 2, Nepal.
Fax: (+977) 1 410857;
e-mail: quickcom@ccsl.com.np
Icimod and forest energy
The International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) was established in 1983 with the dual mandate of contributing to poverty alleviation and environmental conservation in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan region (HKH) - a region consisting of all or parts of Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India, Myanmar, Nepal and Pakistan. From its inception, ICIMOD recognized that energy derived from the forest does, and will continue to, play a very important role in meeting the domestic needs of local people in mountain areas as well as having a potential for agroprocessing and other income-generating activities. Within the HKH region, fuelwood contributes more than 80 percent of total energy use in Nepal and Bhutan, 66 percent in India, 52 percent in Pakistan and 29 percent in China. There is increasing evidence that the region is suffering from a severe imbalance between demand and supply, owing to a low level of efficiency in the use of woodfuel, lack of appropriate
management practices and institutional mechanisms to harvest and share fuelwood from the forests, lack of alternative options and an overall lack of acknowledgement of, and attention to, the contribution of forest energy in national and decentralized energy planning. Among those who suffer most from these imbalances are the women and children who, in most mountain societies, are responsible for collecting fuelwood.
ICIMOD addresses these issues from the overall perspective of integrated mountain development and focuses in particular on the following.
Governance and participation in the management of common property resources. The realization is emerging in both traditional societies and in government institutions that innovative policies and institutional mechanisms can contribute significantly to the sustainability of forest management and the equitable sharing of its benefits. ICIMOD has facilitated the formation of networks and other mechanisms to act as fora of social learning, advocacy and information sharing. The Federation of Community Forestry Users' Groups in Nepal (FECOFUN), for example, is a unique structure representing more than 6 000 forestry user groups throughout Nepal and, thereby, providing a powerful voice for local people's needs to benefit from community forestry.
At the regional level, ICIMOD facilitated the formation of the
Himalayan Grassroots' Women in Natural Resources' Management Network (HIMAWANTI) to empower women's forestry user groups so that they could be heard in national and international policy dialogues.
Development of sustainable renewable energy systems. ICIMOD has developed a strategy and framework for decentralized and community-based energy planning and management which takes into account the location-specific advantages and disadvantages of such renewable energy technologies as biomass (including wood energy), mini- and micro-hydropower and solar and wind. Together with FAO's Regional Wood Energy Development Programme, ICIMOD organized, for example, a Regional Workshop on Stoves Used for Space Heating and Cooking, which was instrumental in bringing about recognition of the heating needs of mountain communities that tend to be neglected in overall energy planning frameworks.
Further reference information can be obtained from the following ICIMOD documents:
· Bhatia, A., 1997. Power, equity, gender, and conflicts in common property resources in the HKH. Kathmandu, ICIMOD.
· ICIMOD, 1996. Community forestry: the language of life. Report of the First Regional Community Forestry Users' Group Workshop, organized by ICIMOD and FAO's Forest, Trees and People Programme, Nepal. Kathmandu, ICIMOD.
· ICIMOD, 1998. Renewable energy technologies: opportunities for mountain communities. Newsletter No. 30. Kathmandu, ICIMOD.
· Rijal, K., ed., 1999. Energy use in mountain areas: trends and patterns in China, India, Nepal and Pakistan. Kathmandu, ICIMOD.
For more information, please contact: ICIMOD, PO Box 3326, Kathmandu, Nepal.
Fax: (+977) 1 524509;
e-mail: sangeeta@icimod.org.np or pelinck@icimod.org.np;
www.icimod.org.sg/general/brochure.htm;
www.icimod.org.sg/
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>6</section>
logo COUNTRY COMPASS
Canada
Last year's ice storm which hit the Canadian provinces of Ontario and Quebec has "fuelled" great interest in stoves as a heat source. In fact, the Hearth Products Association of Canada, with support from Environment Canada and the Ontario Ministry of Environment, launched the Eastern Ontario Great Wood Stove Changeout on 8 January 1999, the anniversary of the ice storm.
The response has been surprisingly strong. The core of the changeout is discounts offered by stove retailers and manufacturers to encourage people to trade in their old conventional stoves for new clean-burning EPA certified models. The old stoves are destroyed, so they are removed from the airshed thus reducing pollution, and the new stoves are far more efficient, so less wood is consumed from then on. But the big surprise was how many people turned out on cold, dark winter evenings to attend Woodstove Workshops to hear what responsible wood heating is all about. (Source: E-mail exchange between John Olsen and John Gulland, "Stoves" network e-mail list.)
For more information on the Changeout project, visit: www.wood-heat.com/change1.htm; and on the workshops: www.wood-heat.com/workshop.htm
NSERC-EU agreement
In 1996, Canada (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council [NSERC]) and the European Union (EU) signed an agreement that provides reciprocal access to science and technology programmes. This gives Canadian researchers the opportunity to join at least two European partners in research projects under Research and Technology Development (RTD) framework programmes. The agreement covers the establishment of joint research projects, the shared use of facilities, exchange visits by researchers and information exchange and related activities.
Under the terms of this agreement, Canadian participants must secure their own funding. The advantages to Canada are the leverage of funding, strengthening of Canadian research through participation in leading-edge international research projects, involvement in the development of technologies that conform to the EU's technical standards and access to intellectual property generated in the course of the research. The agreement contains an annex on the management, allocation and exercise of intellectual property rights.
Canadian researchers can use NSERC grants to collaborate with European partners under the European Union's RTD programmes. NSERC programmes provide considerable flexibility to grantees regarding the uses to which grant funds may be put. In addition, the NSERC Research Partnerships Program permits foreign partners to participate in the project.
The possibility is now being explored of establishing collaboration (joint proposal under the fifth framework programme) in the areas of basic and/or applied wood drying between the Wood Drying Laboratory at the UBC-Department of Wood Science and a group of European universities and/or research centres under the NSERC-EU agreement.
The Wood Drying Laboratory is interested in topics related to improving the conventional and radio-frequency/vacuum (RF/V) drying of thin and thick lumber (softwoods and hardwoods) for producing a superior product with less energy consumption and in shorter drying times. Drying modelling of the above processes and understanding the wood-water relationships are also parts of our general research interests. They have a well-organized wood-drying laboratory. Their equipment includes a computer-controlled laboratory size (6 m^3) conventional kiln, a laboratory size (0.25 m^3) computerized RF/V dryer and access to a new commercial size (30 m^3) RF/V dryer. (Source: Wood Science Internet discussion list.)
For more information, please contact:
Dr Stavros Avramidis, Professor, Department of Wood Science, University of British Columbia, 4028-2424 Main Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T1Z4, Canada.
Fax: (+1) 604 8229104;
e-mail: stavros@interchange.ubc.ca;
www.wood.ubc.ca
China
Biomass gasification project
Henan is one of the larger agricultural provinces in China. According to statistics, more than 45 million tonnes of agricultural residues are yielded annually in Henan. In order to save energy and improve the environment, the Henan Energy Research Institute has developed a biomass gasification technology.
The following illustrates where and how the project has made progress.
Phase 1. The downdraft, fixed-bed gasifier was developed first. The gasifier can utilize various types of agricultural and forest residues, such as corn cobs and stalks and timber mill waste. The output of a series of gasifiers is rated at 12-150 Nm^3 per hour, which need 6-75 kg feedstocks per hour. Systematic tests have shown the heat value of the producer gas to be about 5 000-5 250 kJ/Nm^3 and the energy efficiency of the gasifier reaches about 72 percent.
Taking into account user acceptance, the gasifiers are a simple structure made from steel plating, with a diameter ranging from 30 to 80 cm and a height of about 120-210 cm.
The gasifiers are mainly used for supplying heat to industrial equipment, such as wood dryers and boilers, and to households for cooking. Although there are no difficulties for users, the dissemination of the gasifiers is proceeding slowly at present owing to the lack of awareness of the energy conservation aspect, and the relatively higher investment. It is hoped that the new technology will gradually be accepted by the public.
In practice, it has been found that the fixed-bed gasifier has some shortcomings; for instance, its limited suitability for the lower-density biomass feedstocks, such as wheat straw, rice straw and grass, and the lower heat value and higher tar content of the producer gas. In order to enlarge the suitability of the gasifier and improve gas properties, a second stage was initiated with the research and development of the fluidized-bed gasifier.
Phase 2. In 1998, the design was completed of a fluidized-bed gasifier system (output of 120 Nm^3/h) with two waste heat exchangers for preheating air and supplying hot water. The gasifier was required to obtain producer gas with a higher heat value (5 500 kJ/ Nm^3) through its special structure, its use of preheated air and controlling the air equivalent ratio; moreover, the energy efficiency of the system will reach 74 percent by recovering the waste heat, and the tar in the producer gas will be reduced by cracking at a higher temperature.
The gasifier, which is 80 cm in diameter and 350 cm high, is capable of supplying gas to satisfy the cooking requirements of 100 households. Since the capital cost is a very important factor for dissemination, more attention has been paid to simplifying the structure.
At the end of 1998, another cooperative project was sponsored by the Henan Science and Technology Commission of China and Iowa State University (ISU) of the United States. This project aims to obtain a producer gas with a high heat value and to promote biomass gasification technology through the research and development of ISU's ballasted biomass gasification technology and the Chinese integrated auxiliary equipment system.
ISU's gasifier uses an arrangement of high-temperature phase-changing material to store heat during the combustion phase. The latent heat is then released to support the pyrolysis phase of the cycle. The gas is produced only during the pyrolysis phase in the absence of air and the flue gas during the combustion phase is exhausted out, so that the gas heat value is much higher (14 200-16 600kJ/Nm^3) than that of normal biomass producer gas.
In Henan Province, professors and engineers from several institutions are carrying out research and developing the system, including both the ISU's gasifier and the Chinese auxiliary equipment consisting of a steam generator, cleaner, waste heat exchanger, etc. The capacity of the whole system is required to supply producer gas for the cooking requirements of 100-150 village households.
At present, the project is running smoothly. During 1999, it is hoped that the manufacture, installation and demonstration test of the system in a village in Henan Province will be completed through the close collaboration of the Chinese and American technicians. (Contributed by: Ms Yang Hongxiu, Energy Research Institute of Henan Academy of Sciences, 29 Huayuan Road, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
Fax: (+86) 371 5717871;
e-mail: yhxy@public2.zz.ha.cn)
Cuba
La dendroenergía, una alternativa para el desarrollo energético sostenible en Cuba
Se ha aprobado recientemente el proyecto de dos años de duración, dentro del marco del Programa de Cooperación Técnica de la FAO. El proyecto tiene como objetivo principal elevar la participación de la dendroenergía en el balance energético nacional, para lo cual se requiere:
· Iniciar las tareas para la planificación e implementación de sistemas dendroenergéticos optimizados a fin de incrementar la oferta de recursos bioenergeticos (leña, carbón y otros) y reducir el consumo mediante un uso más eficiente de los mismos, especialmente en zonas con problemas serios de abastecimiento de combustibles leñosos.
· Realizar los estudios de base para promover la sustitución de combustibles convencionales en actividades industriales por combustibles derivados de la biomasa forestal y asistir a las agencias especializadas en la materialización de dichas iniciativas.
· Dotar al país con las herramientas metodológicas y capacitar los recursos humanos necesarios para la planificación y organización de sistemas sostenibles y eficientes de producción, abastecimiento y uso de combustibles a partir de la biomasa forestal.
· Asistir en la finalización de los estudios, evaluaciones y revisiones de un conjunto de disposiciones reglamentarias de la Ley Forestal.
Si bien el proyecto contempla tres objetivos principales con sus actividades para el logro de los mismos, este proyecto dará especial atención a las soluciones para resolver los problemas urgentes de leña y carbón para ciertas comunidades rurales alejadas de los centros de producción.
Las soluciones a estos problemas contempla un conjunto de actividades de apoyo a los campesinos de las áreas. En la medida de lo posible, dichas soluciones serán ejecutadas en estrecha colaboración con otras actividades existentes de apoyo a los campesinos, o por ser desarrolladas por el país como podrían ser las futuras actividades a desarrollar en el marco del Programa especial para la seguridad alimentaria.
Este proyecto intenta a su vez estudiar, examinar y evaluar soluciones viables y aceptables para la sustitución de petróleo importado por biomasa en el sector industrial y proponer programas de inversión para ejecutar dichas iniciativas con el apoyo de inversionistas internos y externos. Además este proyecto preparará y formulará proyectos de seguimiento para ser financiados por el PNUD y otras agencias de financiamiento internacional.
Para más información, dirigirse al Sr. Miguel Trossero en la dirección indicada en la primera página.
Germany
Forests in Focus
A series of international fora focusing on global forests issues aims at achieving consensus among relevant interest groups on tools and concepts for the sustainable development of the world's forests. The Forests in Focus project (carried out within the framework of the World Forum on Forests, an official project of the World Exposition EXPO 2000 Hannover) adds operative recommendations for solving environmental problems concerning forests to current political negotiations and scientific meetings in the field of forestry. The fora act as an agent between politics, economics, science and the public and provide condensed up-to-date knowledge as well as agreed proposals for action appropriate to target groups. Thus, Forests in Focus supports the local implementation of guidelines on forest management and enforces the forest-related parts of the Agenda 21 process.
The World Exposition EXPO 2000 Hannover promotes the concept of sustainable development as agreed upon in Agenda 21 at UNCED 1992 in Rio de Janeiro. EXPO 2000 includes various worldwide decentralized projects. One of these, World Forum on Forests, has been initiated by authorities of the district Soltau-Fallingbostel, northern Germany, the Association for the Protection of Forests and Woodlands (SDW), the Forestry Commission of Lower Saxony and the Alfred Toepfer Academy for Nature Conservation (NNA).
The project includes various activities and projects demonstrating sustainable management and use of forests to local people and international visitors (reforestation of degraded heathland, redevelopment of former military areas, environmentally sound wooden buildings, wood energy, use of non-timber products, management of a nature reserve and tourism, etc.).
Within this frame, Forests in Focus forms the professional backbone. The fora address institutions and social parties concerned with forests, particularly those which: are directly connected to forests; play an active role in forest management; and are affected by forest management.
The fora want to qualify relevant social parties to participate efficiently in decision-making on forest issues, thus promoting worldwide implementation of the Agenda 21 recommendations.
The dialogue process will consist of: a) making existing knowledge accessible (dissemination, orientation, explanation); b) achieving agreement within society (communication, understanding, integration); and
c) raising responsibility and assisting realization of action plans (inspiration, encouragement).
Between January 1998 and 2000, seven fora will take place in Schneverdingen, northern Germany. With respect to the multiple functions of forests, the fora focus from different positions on a worldwide sustainable coexistence of both humans and
forests:
· Forests and Energy. To what extent can forests contribute to the world's future energy supply?
· Biodiversity - Treasures in the Forests. Does sustainable development of forests guarantee biodiversity?
· Forests and Atmosphere - Water - Soil. How far is forest management able to influence climate change, soil degradation and shortage of drinking-water?
· Forests - Source of Raw Material. How is forest use serving its conservation and sustainable development?
· Forest Management and Nature Conservation. Which kinds of strategy for conservation and for management guarantee a sustainable coexistence of humankind and forest?
· Forests and Culture. Which cultural conditions ensure sustainable forest development?
· Forest and Society. How can society take over its responsibility for the forest?
The final event will be the presentation of the results at EXPO 2000 Hannover.
For more information, please contact: Alfred Toepfer Academy for Nature Conservation (NNA), Hof Möhr, D-29640 Schneverdingen, Germany.
Fax: (+49) 5199 989-46;
e-mail: forests.in.focus@oln.comlink.apc.org; or
naturschutzakademie-nna@t-online.de;
www.forests.in.focus.comlink.apc.org/general.htm
Morocco
The Special Energy Programme in Morocco, which is supported by the German Government, aims to improve provision of energy in rural regions and, at the same time, save resources by decreasing consumption of fuelwood. Since 1988, several studies were performed on energy demand, the possibilities for fuel saving and the potential for the use and spread of renewable energies. Energy and forestry experts used education campaigns and workshops to mobilize the population. Meanwhile, there are 100 biogas plants operating in the southern part of Morocco. Fuelwood-saving stoves were developed, tested and sold in cooperation with women from the High Atlas region. Through the development and introduction of improved boilers, fuelwood consumption of traditional steam baths could be reduced by up to 50 percent.
URBAN CONSUMPTION OF BIOMASS IN MOROCCO
Sector
Consumption (tonnes/years) Percentage
Households 381 000 30.0
Steam baths (hammams) 430 00 33.7
Public bakery oven (ferranes) 406 000 31.8
Steam pressing shops/dry cleaners 32 000 2.5
Other establishments 25 000 30.0
Total urban establishments 1 274 000 100.0
[Souce: Boiling Poimt, No. 41]
Nicaragua
Proyecto biomasa
Introducción. El Proyecto biomasa inició en la Universidad Nacional de Ingenería (UNI), en el Depto de Biomasa del DINOT, con una cooperación financiera y técnica del Gobierno de Austria en 1988, realizando la coordinación y la asesoría técnica la empresa Sucher y Holzer.
El objetivo principal del proyecto ha sido investigar y desarrollar las potencialidades de los recursos biomásicos nacionales para la producción de combustible líquido y gaseoso, así como también desarrollar aplicaciones tecnológicas para el tratamiento de desechos agroindustriales y domésticos que mejoren y protejan el medio ambiente.
A lo largo de estos años se han venido desarrollando áreas con proyectos específicos de investigación y desarrollo tecnológico, siendo estas actualmente: cultivos energéticos, maquinaria, compost, tratamiento de aguas residuales, biogas y laboratorio.
Cultivos energéticos. Esta área ha concentrado su desarrollo en las investigaciones de cultivos agrícolas que puedan ser explotados como fuente energética que sustituya combustible fósiles. Durante la fase inicial del proyecto se investigó el aprovechamiento del Jicaro y de la Higuerilla, dado que había antecedentes de investigaciones nacionales en el área, paralelamente se iniciaron las investigaciones con el cultivo del tempate, el cual se constituye en la principal línea de investigación del Proyecto biomasa.
Se tienen resultados de las investigaciones en tempate como el manejo de preparación de tierra, el manejo de la siembra, el control de maleza y de las afectaciones y control de algunas plagas del cultivo. Se realizaron las determinaciones del potencial del cultivo así como las características físicos, químicas de los diferentes productos obtenidos del tempate.
El cultivo se ha llevado a una escala de 1 200 ha sembradas en áreas de cultivo como producción y se tienen, pequeñas áreas como reservas genéticas y para fines de investigación.
Se desarrolló a escala de laboratorio la tecnología para la extracción y transterificación de la semilla de tempate y posteriormente se ensayó a escala de planta piloto la tecnología. Hasta la fecha se ha dimensionado una planta industrial que fue instalada en el mes de febrero de 1997 para la obtención de 3 000 t/anuales de combustible.
La realización de las investigaciones en este sector han sido llevadas a cabo en el involucramiento y coordinación con otras instancias nacionales como la Universidad Nacional de Nicaragua (UNAN León), Petronic, diferentes áreas de la UNI, instituciones y laboratorios europeos, ect. El núcleo mas importante a nivel nacional, después de la UNI, ha sido el que se ha creado en la UNAN León que ha trabajado en investigaciones de malezas, densidad de plantaciones, polinización, plagas, enfermedades y su propagación. Como una presentación preliminar de las investigaciones realizadas se realizó en Nicaragua el Congreso Internacional Jatropha 97.
Durante 1998 el Proyecto tempate, que comprende el área agrícola e industrial, está en una fase de transición que permitirá superar los actuales problemas de baja atención al cultivo y por ende baja productividad así como una nueva ubicación institucional en el Gobierno de Nicaragua. La prioridad de la transición es mantener la vigencia del objetivo estratégico nacional del proyecto en el sector energético.
Se iniciaron investigaciones en otros productos y subproductos del tempate y del marango, con el objetivo de determinar las potencialidades de estas plantas en otros campos como el farmacéutico, veterinario, agrícola, nutritivo.
Se ha investigado entre otras plantas de forma integral el uso del árbol de marango (Moringa oleifera) por las siguientes características:
· alto contenido de proteínas en hojas, ramas y tallos;
· contenido de proteínas en el fruto;
· porcentaje de aceite en la semilla;
· contenido de polielectrolitos (polipeptidos) en la semilla;
· presencia de una hormona vegetal en las hojas.
El marango se utiliza como forraje para ganados, para suministro de hormona para aumentar la productividad en los cultivos anuales, forestales y ornamentales y para el suministro de energía proveniente de la combustión de sus fibras y de la fermentación de los azúcares que contiene la planta para la producción de alcohol.
De hecho las actividades en Moringa oleifera han constituido la segunda actividad importante de investigaciones en biomasa. Se han realizado y están en marcha investigaciones sobre la utilización de este árbol. Los reportes técnicos han sido publicados en la revista Nexo de la UNI y a partir de sus resultados se han elaborados informes técnicos sobre la utilización en escala industrial.
Maquinaria. Este sector ha trabajado en el desarrollo de los equipos para la extracción y procesamiento del aceite de tempate. Los resultados obtenidos han permitido diseñar, fabricar, especificar y validar los equipos necesarios para el proceso de la planta industrial, realizándose ensayos a escala de laboratorio y planta piloto. Se desarrollaron algunos equipos para la fertilización de la plantas de tempate.
Se continua en el proceso de validación de los equipos y en el mejoramiento de los equipos para el despulpe del fruto de tempate.
Se dio asistencia técnica para el montaje de la planta industrial de procesamiento de tempate. Hasta la fecha se ha entrenado al personal en la operación de los equipos y se continua brindando esta asistencia. Dada la poca disponibilidad de materia prima de tempate se ha ensayado y preparado la adaptación de las instalaciones para el procesamiento de grano de soya.
En los meses de septiembre, octubre y noviembre de 1998 se están haciendo modificaciones en la prensa de la planta industrial para realizar un ensayo de extracción en condiciones supercríticas de aceite y destoxificación de la torta de la semilla de tempate. Este ensayo a nivel de laboratorio y de planta piloto dio bueno resultados.
Compost. La tecnología desarrollada en este sector ha permitido la instalación de una planta de tratamiento de los residuos orgánicos de la Ciudad de Masaya, que permite disminuir la contaminación vía la conversión en abono orgánico de la basura. Esto se realizo a través de un convenio con la Alcaldía de Masaya.
El proyecto de compostaje ha permitido desarrollar y probar toda la tecnología del compostaje en una escala mediana, involucrando acciones desde la recolección de la basura hasta la comercialización del abono orgánico.
Para este último propósito, se formó una empresa que maneja todo el proceso, en conjunto con la Alcaldía de Masaya y con una participación de la UNI. Se ha concluido que técnicamente es posible el compostaje pero no sostenible económicamente en las actuales condiciones, debido al no pago por parte de la población del servicio de recolección y principalmente por la falta de mercado para el compost, dada la poca tradición de su uso por los agricultores. La capacidad de producción es de 400 quintales por día.
La actividades de producción y comercialización del compost han alcanzado un equilibrio económico y es prioritario aumentar las ventas y mantener una presencia constante del producto en el mercado para que los clientes ya establecidos tengan confianza en que serán suplidos continuamente.
Tratamiento de aguas residuales y biogas. Esta área ha trabajado en la investigación y aplicación de tecnologías que disminuyan o eliminen la contaminación ocasionadas en cuerpos de agua por residuos o desechos vertidos por industria o ciudades, teniendo como objetivo la protección del medio ambiente, la protección de los recursos acuáticos, ríos, lagunas y aguas subterráneas.
Se realizaron asistencias y aplicaciones técnicas a diferentes industrias nacionales que vertían residuos sin tratamiento, como jabonerías, aceiteras, curtidurías, ingenios azucareros, rastros municipales e industriales. Se ha participado en la elaboración de la Ley ambiental Nacional, un sector de la asesoría ambiental principal del Ministerio del ambiente siendo de referencia nacional en los análisis y caracterizaciones de vertidos para la industria.
Se han realizado estudios y evaluaciones de las lagunas de oxidación de las ciudades de Masaya y León. En la ciudad de Masaya se ha realizado un estudio completo para el establecimiento de una nueva red de alcantarillado sanitario y de un nuevo sistema de tratamiento, los estudios serán la base para un posible proyecto que podría ser financiado por la cooperación del Gobierno de Japón.
En las lagunas de oxidación de la Ciudad de Masaya, se han realizado experimentos con floculantes naturales que permitan la eliminación de las algas en los efluentes de las lagunas de oxidación
Como parte del programa de investigaciones en biogas, se realizó la construcción de los sistemas de tratamiento de las aguas residuales de los mataderos municipales de Masaya y Chinandega y el diseño y planificación para el matadero municipal de León y de Carnic.
Se ha realizado el proyecto piloto del «biofiltro masaya», construido en el primer semestre del año 1996 por la Cooperación Austríaca -Proyecto BIOMASA y el Instituto Nicaragüense de Acueductos y Alcantarillado, como contraparte del proyecto, con el objetivo principal de introducir este concepto de tratamiento de aguas residuales, hasta la fecha poco conocido, en los países de América Latina. Hasta la fecha se planificado la construcción de dos en la ciudad de León y de cinco en la República del Salvador. Esta tecnología de tratamiento permite aplicar conceptos económicos de rentabilidad en el área de tratamiento de aguas domesticas.
Laboratorio. El área de laboratorio cumple con dos funciones principales, primero realizar y desarrollar los ensayos que se requieren para las investigaciones en cultivos energéticos, tratamiento de agua, biogas y extracción de hormonas del marango. En estos ensayos se desarrollan los procesos que serán aplicados a escala piloto o bien se suministran los productos obtenidos a través del proceso desarrollado para realizar otros ensayos. La segunda función, es la de realizar análisis químicos, físicos y biológicos necesarios en las diferentes áreas de trabajo del Proyecto biomasa.
Entre los procesos que se han desarrollado se encuentran, entre otros, el proceso de transesterificación del aceite de tempate, la extracción de hormona del tempate y del marango, la extracción y concentración del polielectrolito del marango, el funcionamiento y operación de reactores experimentales para biogas con diferentes desechos líquidos de origen agroindustrial.
Se está investigando la producción de jabones transparentes a partir de aceite de tempate que permitan aumentar el rendimiento económico de las operaciones de la Planta Industrial de procesamiento de tempate.
Se realizan algunos servicios externos que son demandados por usuarios que tienen una buena referencia de la calidad de análisis que se realizan en biomasa. La mayoría de las solicitudes son para análisis que permitan caracterizar o monitorear un vertido liquido o sólido de una agroindustria. Se ha iniciado una política de cobro de este servicio de manera que se pueda recuperar los costos de materiales y recursos humanos.
Se estima que con la aplicación de la Ley del Medio Ambiente, por parte del Ministerio de Recursos Naturales, se tendrá un incremento de la demanda de estos servicios y algunos, estarán acompañados con la realización de estudios de impacto ambiental.
Para más información, dirigirse a: Sr. Leonardo Mayorga Garcia, Proyecto Biomasa, Ap. postal 432, Rupap Dinot, Villa Progreso, Castado Sur, Nicaragua.
Fax: (+505) 249 09 37;
correo electrónico: biomasa@ibw.com.ni; o
Ing. Nikolaus Foidl, Project Manager, Sucher & Holz, Alberstrasse 4, A-8010, Graz, Austria.
Correo electrónico: Prolena@sdnnic.org.ni:
Fax: (+43) 316 327071.
Perú
Valorizacion energética del bosque tropical aprovechamiento leñoso
La implementación de adecuados planes de manejo forestal en bosques tropicales permite, entre otras cosas, el aprovechamiento de un mayor volumen leñoso por unidad de superficie y la implementación de nuevas alternativas productivas con las respectivas ventajas adicionales como el aumento de fuentes de trabajo para la población rural asentada en zonas aledañas a los bosques bajo manejo.
Estas nuevas alternativas productivas, complementarias al aprovechamiento mecanizado convencional, son posibles de instalarse mediante la aplicación de tecnologías intermedias apropiadas que se caracterizan por su simplicidad tecnológica, su relativa baja inversión en equipos y su adaptabilidad al manejo por parte de los campesinos.
A tal efecto, el Gobierno del Perú, implementó una serie de módulos productivos con tecnologías intermedias apropiadas dentro del plan operativo del proyecto de Manejo Forestal del Bosque Nacional Alexander von Humboldt (BNAvH).
El trabajo comenzó con el análisis y la evaluación de materias primas forestales con potencial para adecuarse a las condiciones técnicas, económicas y culturales del lugar. El análisis determinó que la magnitud de los residuos, en la mayoría de los casos, supera el 55 por ciento del volumen aprovechable. En términos generales se determinó que la cantidad de material aprovechable alcanza un promedio de 23,72 m^3/ha del volumen comercial (que incluye tocón) y un adicional de tronco y copa de 13,75 m^3/ha, lo que resulta un total de material leñoso susceptible a valorizar del orden de 37,47 m^3/ha. Los 13,75 m^3/ha, de material leñoso residual podrían ser incorporados a la economía del poblador rural mediante la instalación de módulos productivos tales como la producción de carbón.
Por ejemplo, en el caso de un módulo productivo del BNAvH de 3 559,9 ha, se obtuvieron 70 285,87 m^3 (19,7 m^3/ha), del mismo sólo se aprovecharon 533,9 ha con un volumen equivalente a 4 958,5 m^3 (9,29 m^3/ha), quedando en el bosque 93 por ciento de la madera comercial aprovechable, sin considerar el material leñoso residual.
Las principales causas de este bajo aprovechamiento se debe a:
· maderas de especies desconocidas por el mercado;
· sistemas de aprovechamiento mecanizado deficientes;
· centros de transformación primaria ineficientes;
· métodos simples de aprovechamiento y transformación de residuos leñosos inexistentes;
· lejanía de los grandes mercados.
Por tal motivo, el proyecto estableció que una manera de valorizar el material leñoso residual y los árboles con defecto, es mediante la instalación de módulos de producción de leña y carbón adaptados a la pequeña empresa rural con suficientes márgenes de rentabilidad que se logran gracias al empleo de tecnologías intermedias apropiadas de tal manera que sea atractivo para los campesinos y autosostenibles. Además los módulos productivos seleccionados están servidos por una red vial construida para la extracción mecanizada convencional para facilitar su producción a bajo costo por parte de la comunidad local.
Para más información, dirigirse a los ingenieros forestales: Luis Novoa, Guillermo Abadie y Mario Quevedo, Manuel M. Salazar 160, San Isidro, Lima 27, Perú.
Fax: (+51) 1 341545/462602;
correo electrónico: lnovoa@contradrogas.gob.pe
Philippines
Panorama of the Philippine wood energy situation
When things are viewed from afar,
as in the case of a panoramic view, sometimes the view is not too clear.
So they caution us - "not to mistake the forest for the trees, and the trees for
the forest...."
The Republic of the Philippines is located in the South China Sea, to the northeast of Malaysia. The Philippine archipelago, generally quoted to consist of 7 100 islands, has a total land area of approximately 300 000 km^2. There are three main island groups in the archipelago: the Luzon group of islands in the north, the Visayan group in central Philippines and the Mindanao and Sulu group to the south. The country is further divided into 13 regions (clusters of neighbouring island provinces) plus three other specially categorized regions, namely, the National Capital Region (NCR), the Cordillera Administrative Region (CAR) and the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM).
As regards population, the Philippines ranks as the ninth most populous country in Asia, and fourteenth in the world (Philippine Agenda 21: A National Agenda for Sustainable Development 1997). The annual population growth rate is 2.32 percent, and the average household size is 5.31; it is projected that by 2025 there will be about 128 million Filipinos (68 million in 1995).
Gross domestic product in 1993 rose to US$54 068 million and the Human Development Index was at 0.66 in 1994. Basically an agricultural economy, the Philippines has been suffering from high levels of poverty, widespread unemployment, low levels of savings and investment, massive external debts, large deficits, price distortions and indiscriminate land and ecosystem conversion.
Wood energy resources and consumption patterns. According to an officer of the Philippine Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Bayani S. Nera, the country is biomass-rich. These woodfuel resources generally come from different origins: logging residues, timber stand improvement removals, processing mills residue, forest plantations, mangrove forests, brushlands as well as other alternative sources (agroforestry farms, integrated social forestry areas, private homelots and family backyards). Likewise, alternatives to woodfuel are biomass resources such as agricultural crop residues in the form of coconut parts (shells, fronds, husks), rice husks and straw, corn cobs, sugar-cane bagasse and other agricultural wastes. These are found in large quantities and are commonly used by Filipinos.
On the other hand, a recently published 1995 Household Energy Consumption Survey (HECS, 1995) conducted by the country's National Statistics Office (NSO) and Department of Energy (DOE) reported the types of energy consumed by Filipino households. The results show that, next to electricity, kerosene, fuelwood, charcoal and biomass resources are the most popular sources of energy. As to end use, fuelwood is used mainly as cooking fuel, while charcoal is used both as cooking fuel and for traditional ironing purposes.
A closer look indicates that 8.1 million households out of 12.8 million used fuelwood together with other types of fuel in 1995. Compared with the 1989 HECS results, this is an increase of 638 households but, taken as a whole between the two time periods, the proportion registered a 3.6 percent decrease. It is interesting to note that the urban sector registered an increase while the rural counterpart reflected a decline in fuelwood use.
In general, among the lowest-income groups, three out of four households depend on fuelwood as their energy source. Among charcoal users, the trend seems to indicate that increases in income likewise tended to increase the use of charcoal.
In absolute terms, total fuelwood consumption has diminished. In 1989, an overall total of 18.3 million tonnes was recorded, compared with 14.6 million tonnes in 1995. Charcoal consumption reached 770 000 tonnes and biomass residue a figure of 2.6 million tonnes. The fact thus remains that wood-derived and biomass-residue continued to be important sources of energy in Filipino homes during the six years after the 1989 survey.
Fuelwood consumption per caput for 1995 was 327.61 kg, charcoal 28.55 kg, while biomass residue was 53.89 kg. For the most part, fuelwood and biomass residue are gathered free of charge; two out of every five households gather them from private lands. About the same number gather fuelwood from their own woodlots or farms. For households using fuelwood and biomass residue, only 5.4 percent purchased biomass residue, while only 16 percent also purchased fuelwood. Charcoal is mostly purchased; in fact, three out of four households bought charcoal and only 23.9 percent of charcoal-consuming households produced their own supply (HECS, 1995).
The main reason for using fuelwood is that food tastes better. Respondents also claimed that it provided hotter flames and that it has a lower cost than other commercial fuels. Fuelwood, however, is dirty to use.
Future trends. Reviewing the more recent literature about wood energy in the Philippines, there are a number of observations to be made. However, emerging global trends that affect the overall scenario of wood energy in this country also have to be considered. Inevitably, Les Milbrath's sustainability maxims that "everything has to go somewhere, everything is connected, and you can never do just one thing ..." must be accepted as a consequential reality.
While the country remains an LDC (least-developed country) despite its dreams of "tiger-hood" and NIC (newly industrialized country)-hood, poverty, especially in the countryside, continues to exist. It is certainly transitioning towards modernization and globalization but, like a zero sum game, the issues of unemployment, dislocation and displacement are set aside permanently rather than temporarily when the critical circumstances arise.
Fuel switching, i.e. shifting from non-conventional fuels in favour of commercial fuels, as an emerging trend has been recognized universally, the Philippines not being an exception. Yet, the factors leading to such switches remain vague for the time being. When does it happen? With a higher per caput income? With a more progressive agricultural transformation? With structural changes? Is it about economics? Is it about culture? Or, is it about education?
Hence, as more and more environmental efforts to sustain the natural resources (i.e. forests, trees, water) hover, forces against them are stronger in some regions than ever. Land conversions, the onset of climatic changes (i.e. El Niño dry spells, La Niña), impacts of the regional currency crisis, to name but a few, drive more and more households and families back to where they once belonged. Poverty-stricken, jobless, lacking education - and totally dependent upon the forces of nature. Perhaps, that is why they call it a "poverty cycle".
As far as facts and numbers are concerned, in terms of the supply and demand for wood energy in the years to come, one may consider them a "best estimate" since they vary. Some say that there will be a deficit, while others predict an oversupply. For instance, the Table below, obtained in summary from the Master Plan for Forestry Development 1990: Philippines, clearly indicates a deficit in the decade to come.
FUELWOOD SUPPLY AND DEMAND PROJECTIONS(in million m^3)
Supply 27.78 30.91 30.04 37.17
Demand 44.44 46.40 48.40 52.10
Balance (16.62) (15.49) (14.36) (14.93)
[(Sources: Master Plan for Forestry Development 1990, as recounted in Bayani S. Nera's article, National woodfuel situation, 1997.)]
In a more positive development, T. Bhattarai of the FAO-Regional Wood Energy Development Programme (RWEDP) presented a consultant's point of view. In his paper, he acknowledged variations among sources. While the Philippine Master Plan for Forestry Development showed a deficit of 15.5 million m^3 in 1990, he cited that the Philippines Household Energy Strategy (PHES) study presented a threefold sustainable woodfuel supply potential in the same year.
This is so since new non-forest areas also contribute to the supply of woodfuel sources. Such non-forest areas include scattered trees in homesteads, home gardens, farm lands, village and/or community woodlots, to name but a few. In fact, this source alone is said to contribute about 60 percent of the total woodfuel supplied in the country.
Another source, comparative statistics of all RWEDP member countries, also shows a similar positive, sustainable trend (see following Table).
WOODFUEL SUPPLY AND CONSUMPTION OUTLOOK:
COUNTRY BALANCES (in `000 tonnes)
PHILIPPINES 1994 2010
Total woodfuel consumption 23 501 30 329
Potential supply:
- sustainable woodfuel from forest land
- sustainable woodfuel from agricultural land
- waste woodfuels from deforestation
Total potentially available woodfuels 89 267 71 171
50 percent of crop-processing residues 9 821 11 535
Total potentially available biomass fuels 99 088 82 706
[(Source: Regional Study on Wood Energy Today and Tomorrow in Asia. RWEDP FD No. 50. 1997.)]
The RWEDP methodology included assumptions on land use, wood production, wood from agricultural lands and fuelwood consumption patterns from various sources. All told, it is possible that the different sources made use of different assumptions and methodologies as a basis for their projections. Whatever the differences are, and no matter what the variations are, the scenario appears to be promising. Despite the unfolding of a new era of intense information technology, many Filipino households will continue to depend upon wood-derived and biomass-residue energy sources to fulfil their cooking fuel requirements. On the supply side, sustainability efforts will continue to meet pressing demands in order to assure an efficient supply. It is virtually just a balancing act. At least, for the near future, the wood energy scenario must not stay too long in its comfort zone. (Contributed by: Prof. Elizabeth M. Remedio, Economics Department, University of San Carlos, P. del Rosario
Street, Cebu City 6000, Philippines.
E-mail: maryliz@cebu.weblinq.com)
Russian federation
Charcoal and fuel briquettes made from bark
In some cellulose-making enterprises, some of the bark and wood wastes are deposited in dumps, which results in environmental pollution. These dumps occupy a significant amount of territory. One such dump surveyed contained more than 1 million tonnes of bark. And this dump is not unique.
The material in a dump consists of 60-70 percent bark, the rest being made up of wood wastes. Raw material contains extraneous impurities, building dust, stones and metal. A representative sample of the material was dried in a laboratory and then crushed in a pounding machine. The material was then separated by sifting and the ash content of each fraction was determined (see Table).
ASH CONTENT OF DUMP MATERIAL
NO. OF SIZE
FRACTION SIZE OF
FRACTION SHARE OF
FRACTION ASH
CONTENT
1 f<1 10 38.0
2 1<f<2 10 16.0
3 2<f<10 32 8.0
4 10<f 42 1.3
Two-thirds of the total ash was in fractions 1 and 2. The ash part will decrease if separated. When the relative humidity of the bark reaches 60 percent, the bark requires drying.
A technological circuit of dump processing was developed (see Figure).
DUMP PROCESSING CIRCUIT
Fractions of bark of >5 mm are used as raw material for charcoaling and fractions of bark of <5 mm are pressed to make fuel briquettes.
The cylinder-sorting installation for the dried bark was developed by us. Installation cylinders are supplied with pyramid-shaped ledges, thus ensuring that a layer of material rises up to a sorting surface, and the sand sinks to the bottom layer and is removed.
Drying the raw material is carried out in two stages: first, mechanical squeezing to reduce humidity to 35-40 percent; and, second, drying through furnace gases obtained by burning part of the dried raw material.
Forty-six percent of the bark is used as fuel; the rest of the raw material is dried.
A project to obtain charcoal and briquettes from bark is now being developed. The economic analysis shows, however, that such a process will not only produce an ecological benefit, but also a financial one. (Contributed by: Vladimir Jagodin, Professor/Head of Department; Yury Yudkevitch, Associate Professor; Leonid Svirin, Associate Professor; and Anatoly Ivanov, Associate Professor, Department of Technology of Chemical Forest Products of St Petersburg Forest Technical Academy, St Petersburg, Russian Federation;
fax: (+7) 3133 73256; e-mail: woodcoal@mailbox.alkor.ru)
Sweden
Sweden has a well-developed and extensive net of central heating systems. About 200 out of a total of 250 communes now run district heating systems mainly based on biofuels.
In 1993 there were about 428 energy plants using woodfuel, with a boiler capacity of more than 5 MW. Approximately half of the plants are municipally owned.
The development of the bioenergy sector has also been positive from an economic and employment point of view. A number of farmers, forest owners and forest workers today receive most or part of their income from the bioenergy sector. Some 2 000 worker years are generated owing to the use of biofuels within the industry and heating plant sectors in Sweden.
The employment created from the use of biofuels in small private houses is estimated to correspond to some 3 000 full-time annual workers.
It is interesting to note that, although people in Sweden use wood to heat their homes, they could increase the GNP by exporting more pulp or paper.
One cubic metre of wood in Sweden can be used to:
· reduce imports of fossil fuel by
SKr 130 (US$16);
· increase export income by selling pulp by SKr 800 (US$98);
· increase export income by selling paper by SKr 2 000 (US$245).
(Source: Mr David South, School of Forestry, Auburn University, AL 36849-5418, USA; e-mail: safnews@igc.apc. org)
For more information, please visit the following Web sites:
www.forestindustries.se/eng/oh/11300.jpg;
www.svebio.se/environment/env6.html
United states
Maine currently ranks second only to the State of California in the extent of wood biomass use, and ranks first in the nation in the percentage of its electricity produced from wood. Wood-fired systems currently produce one fifth of the state's electricity. The biomass energy industry supports employment opportunities for nearly 3 000 Maine residents, generates $118.5 million in personal income and contributes $144 million to Maine's annual gross state product. (Source: Mr David South, School of Forestry, Auburn University, AL 36849-5418, USA.)
For more information, please visit the following Internet site:
http://solstice.crest.org/renewables/SJ/biomass/072.html
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>7</section>
Logo EVENTS OF INTEREST
Oportunidades de generación de electricidad a partir de biomasa
15 al 19 de marzo de 1999
São Paulo, Brasil
El objetivo del curso es colaborar en la formación de recursos humanos para el desarrollo de proyectos de mejora en la eficiencia para la generación de la energía a partir de biomasa en las empresas, en particular en el sector azúcar/alcohol, papel/celulosa, alimentos y otros, incluido los procesos de autoproducción, cogeneración y producción independiente de energía. Serán abordados aspectos técnicos, económicos, ambientales e institucionales, en particular dentro del ambiente regulatorio del sector eléctrico del país, con las oportunidades de negociaciones con el Protocolo de Kyoto.
Programa. Tecnologías para generar energía a partir de biomasa:
· Autoproducción y cooperación ; tecnologías disponibles comercialmente en el país: tecnologías en desarrollo; balances de energía, equipos; potencial de generación de excedentes; interconecciones como una red;
· Aspectos ambientales: ventajas de la biomasa como combustible para la generación de energía termoeléctrica; Protocolo de Kyoto; emisiones de contaminantes en procesos (fase agrícola e industrial); control de emisiones en calderas de biomasa;
· Aspecto económico-financiero: inversiones necesarias para la introducción de tecnologías mas eficientes; análisis económico-financiario; costo de la generación de electricidad;
· Aspectos institucional y regulatorio: la nueva legislación del sector eléctrico o relaciones con concesionarias; venta de excedentes a terceros; reglamentación de acceso a redes de transmisión y distribución.
(Fuente: Red Internet en bioenergía.)
Para más información, dirigirse a: CENBIO (correo electrónico: briquete@iee.usp.br).
U.S. global change research program seminar series - projected ecosystem changes for the united states under a climate warming
18 March 1999
Washington, DC, USA
What are the projected changes in ecosystems within the United States resulting from a climate warming caused by a doubling of the concentration of CO[2] in the atmosphere? Which ecosystems appear to prosper and which ecosystems appear to be negatively impacted under such a climate warming? Which regions of the United States are more likely to witness dramatic ecosystem changes, with significant social and economic consequences? How much uncertainty/confidence is there in the various ecosystem model results? (Source:
H. Gyde Lund; e-mail: gklund@worldnet.att.net)
For more information, please contact: Dr Anthony D. Socci, U.S. Global Change Research Program Office, 400 Virginia Ave. SW, Suite 750, Washington, DC 20024, USA.
Fax: (+1) 202 488 8681;
e-mail: tsocci@usgcrp.gov;
www.usgcrp.gov
Workshop on land use,
land-use change and forestry
26-28 April 1999
Indianapolis, USA
Mr L.S. Botero, Coordinator, Forest Programmes Coordination and Information Unit (FODA) of FAO's Forestry Department, travelled to Indianapolis to attend the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (SBSTA/UNFCCC) Workshop on Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry. The workshop was attended by 118 experts, including experts from 42 countries and from the following international governmental and non-governmental organizations: IFF Secretariat, UNDP, UNEP, CIFOR, WRI, IUCN, WWF, Greenpeace, Environment/Defense Fund, and other NGOs. The agenda included two main aspects:
· A progress report on the preparation of the IPCC Special Report on Land-Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LUCF).
· Presentations from experts nominated by Parties to the Kyoto Protocol. During the afternoon of the second day and the morning of the third day there were two working groups: one dealing with forestry issues and the other with agricultural issues of Article 3.4 of the Kyoto Protocol (Additional Human-induced Activities). In addition to papers made available by some of the experts, a document prepared by SBSTA was made available with the submission from Parties on Article 3.3 and 3.4 of the Kyoto Protocol, dealing mainly with methodological issues.
The presentations indicated that significant progress had been made in the preparation of the first draft of the report, which was not made available since a number of gaps and cross-chapter issues had to be completed and it was to be discussed the same week at a meeting of lead authors in Washington. The schedule for the preparation of the report is very rigid and does not allow any flexibility for delays in the review of drafts by experts reviewing individual chapters or sections and by governments. The list of reviewers is being drawn up and suggestions were invited.
Subsequent to the discussion in SBSTA in June 2000, the IPCC might have to work on revised IPCC guidelines for reporting, incorporating those aspects related to Articles 3.3 and 3.4 which may be agreed by Parties to the Kyoto Protocol.
It should be noted that the meetings of lead authors are scheduled as follows: 28-30 April in Washington; 23-25 August in Wageningen, the Netherlands; and 11-13 January 2000 (venue to be decided). (Source: Travel report of Mr L.S. Botero.)
For more information, please contact: Framework Convention on Climate Change, Climate Change Secretariat (UNFCCC), PO Box 260 124, D-53153 Bonn, Germany.
Fax: (+49) 228 815 1999;
e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de;
www.unfccc.de
International workshop on community forestry in africa - participatory forest management: a strategy for sustainable forest management in africa
26-30 April 1999
Banjul, the Gambia
This workshop was organized by the Gambian Forestry Department, in conjunction with the German Technical Agency for Cooperation (GTZ), with the close technical support of the Community Forestry Unit of FAO Forestry Department.
For more information, please contact: Mr Dominique Reeb, Gambian German Forestry Project, PO Box 504, Banjul, the Gambia.
Fax: (+220) 495 144;
e-mail: forestry.project@commit.gm; or
Dr Katherine Warner, FAO, Community Forestry Unit, Policy and Planning Division (FONP), Forestry Department, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: (+39) 06 57055514;
e-mail: Katherine.Warner@fao.org;
www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/ftpp/g-ws1e.htm (English);
www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/ftpp/g-ws1f.htm (French).
Fao advisory committee on paper and wood products
São Paulo, Brazil
27-28 April 1999
One of the papers presented at this meeting was Beyond Kyoto - the forest industry and climate change - a story worth telling, by Mr D.A. Barron, Senior Vice-President, Environment, Resources and Technology, Canadian Pulp and Paper Association. The paper can be found at: www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/acpwp/40/Barron.htm
For more information, please contact: Mr O. Serrano, Chief, Wood and Non-Wood Products Utilization Branch, Forest Products Division, Forestry Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: (+39) 06 52255618;
e-mail: olman.serrano@fao.org
The world sustainable energy fair - sustain '99
25-27 May 1999
Amsterdam, the Netherlands
The aim of Sustain '99 was to bring more than 10 000 professionals together in one place for the largest world sustainable energy event ever seen. This three-day event showcased the latest technology available and gave a glimpse of what will be emerging soon within sustainable energy. Leading companies from all over the world displayed the best and latest equipment in the fields of renewable energy, waste to energy, sustainable transport and energy efficiency.
For more information, please contact: Mr Paul Diamond, Director, European Media Marketing Ltd, PO Box 259, Bromley, BR1 1ZR, UK.
Fax: (+44) 181 289 8989;
e-mail: sustain@emml.co.uk;
www.emml.com
Reunión sobre la contribución forestal para combatir el cambio climático
29 de junio - 2 de julio de 1999
Tegucigalpa, Honduras
Para más información, dirigirse a
Sr. M.A. Trossero y/o Sr. L.S. Botero, Departamento de Montes, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, Roma 00100, Italia.
Fax: (+39) 06 52255618;
correo electrónico: miguel.trossero@fao.org o Luis.Botero@fao.org
Forum forests and
atmosphere - water - soil
2-5 July 1999
Soltau, Lüneburger Heide, Germany
The forum is organized in cooperation with the Forest Ecosystem Research Centre, University of Göttingen. In dialogue with all parties concerned, the forum will elaborate recommendations on sustaining the functions of forests as regulators in energy fluxes and matter cycles.
One of the forum's workshops, WSIII, covers the theme "Forests after the Kyoto Protocol - their potential role as sources and sinks of trace gases, particularly carbon dioxide".
For more information, please contact: Alfred Toepfer Academy for Nature Conservation (NNA), Hof Möhr, D-29640 Schneverdingen, Germany.
Fax: (+49) 5199 98946; e-mail: naturschutzakademie-nna@t-online.de or forests.in.focus@oin.comlink.apc.org;
www.forests.in.focus.comlink.apc.org
[See also under Germany in Country Compass for more information on this forum.]
Ises 1999 solar world congress
4-9 July 1999
Jerusalem, Israel
The theme of the ISES 1999 Solar World Congress, hosted by the International Solar Energy Society (ISES), is "Solar is Renewable". The congress aims to study carefully the impact of solar and renewable energy sources, as well as other environmental issues, in previous decades and for those to come. One of the many topics to be discussed will be "Biomass energy conversion".
For more information, please contact: Secretariat, ISES 1999 Solar World Congress, PO Box 50006, Tel Aviv 61500, Israel.
Fax: (+972) 3 5175674;
e-mail: ises99@kenes.com;
www.ises.org
Symposium on energy engineering in the
21st century
9-13 January 2000
China, Hong Kong SAR
This symposium is being organized by the Centre for Energy and Thermal Systems and the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
For more information, please contact the Symposium Chairman, Prof. Ping Cheng, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, China, Hong Kong SAR.
Fax: (+852) 2358 1543;
e-mail: mepcheng@ust.hk;
www-mech.ust.hk/see2000/
World renewable energy congress vi
(wrec-2000)
Brighton, UK
1-7 July 2000
The congress theme is "Renewables: the Energy for the 21st Century".
For more information, please contact: Prof. Ali Sayigh, Congress Chairman
and Director General of WREN,
147 Hilmanton, Lower Earley,
Reading RG6 4HN, UK.
Fax: (+44) 1189 611365;
e-mail: asayigh@netcomuk.co.uk;
www.wrenuk.co.uk
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>8</section>
logo PUBLICATIONS
· Draft Inventory of US Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-1997 The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has announced the availability of the Draft Inventory of US Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-1997. This report is required of the United States under its responsibilities as a Party to the Framework Convention on Climate Change, established in April 1992 by the Rio Treaty (Earth Summit). Under the Framework Convention, the United States and other developed countries agreed to submit greenhouse gas emissions reports annually to the secretariat of the Convention. (Source: H. Gyde Lund, gklund@worldnet.att.net)
For copies of the document, please contact: Climate Policy and Programs Division (2175), US EPA, 401 M St. SW, Washington, DC 20460, USA.
Fax: (+1) 202 260 6405;
www.epa.gov/globalwarming/inventory
· Residential wood combustion technology review
US-EPA's new document, Residential wood combustion technology review, by James E. Houck and Paul Tiegs, Omni Environmental Services, Inc, is available on line (http://mha-net.org/docs/rwc01.pdf). This 231-page document is in Adobe^® Acrobat^® PDF format (about 800 KB) and is recommended to anyone who is interested in the state of the art of North American stove technology and test methodology. The main report is 35 pages long (the remainder being appendixes) and, for those with an interest in the subject, is worth printing out. (Source: "Stoves" e-mail list: stoves@crest.org)
ESTIMATING BIOMASS AND BIOMASS CHANGE OF TROPICAL FORESTS. A PRIMER
FAO FORESTRY PAPER NO. 134
Climate change is one of the truly global issues of our time, and forests play an important role in it. Changes in the cover, use and management of forests produce sources and sinks of carbon dioxide which are exchanged with the biosphere. Estimation of the magnitude of these sources and sinks requires reliable estimates of the biomass density of forests. This is the background to the "primer" for estimating biomass and biomass change of tropical forests.
This publication is a practical guide for those who design forest inventories in which biomass estimation is a component. It describes the primary data and measurement requirements for assessment of biomass per hectare. As supporting material, it provides wood density data for a large number of tropical species. It also presents methods that are available for estimating biomass/ha of tropical forest using mainly existing data. Biomass/ha estimates are presented for many tropical countries using the methodologies given.
Copies of the publication may be ordered from: FAO, Sales and Marketing Group, Information Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: (+39) 06 57053360;
e-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
· Broad-search annotated bibliography on acute respiratory infections (ARI) and indoor air pollution (with emphasis on children under five in developing countries), by Daniel M. Kammen, Gemini Wahhaj and Maame Yaa Yiadom
This bibliography is now available via the Environmental Health Project (EHP) Web site (www.crosslink.net/~ehp/aribib2.htm).
In July 1997, the second International Conference on Acute Respiratory Infections was held in Canberra, Australia (http://nceph.anu.edu.au/user/rnd868/aricon.html#the), 13 years after the first held in 1984. Although the first conference included papers on environmental risk factors for acute respiratory infection (ARI), in the second there was no paper or plenary presentation on these factors in developing countries, and only one session out of 34 on the topic in developed countries. This is partly due to a perception in the ARI professional community that little progress has been made in understanding this complicated set of issues. Wishing to dispel this image, although recognizing that there is still much room for additional work, EHP has prepared a bibliography of material related to air pollution and childhood ARI in developing countries, the vast bulk of which had been published in the period between the two conferences.
The first and second ARI bibliographies are complementary. References are not repeated in the two editions; users of these resources should search both bibliographies for references and abstracts for the widest and most update search of papers on acute respiratory illness.
The first bibliography, compiled by John P. McCracken and Kirk R. Smith and published in 1997, contains 192 references pertaining to air pollution as a risk factor for acute respiratory infections. Its focus is ARI in young children in developing countries, who bear the greatest burden of ill-health from ARI worldwide and many of whom seem to have high exposure to a number of harmful air pollutants. A major purpose of the bibliography was to provide an easily accessed source of information on the relationship between ARI and air pollution to researchers and field staff in developing countries, where access to current publications may be limited. For this reason, abstracts were included whenever available. The references, dating from 1968 to 1997, were collected from several databases including Medline, Cambridge.
This second annotated bibliography contains citations and abstracts for 235 papers that relate to air pollution and environmental exposure as a risk for ARI. Like the first volume, this bibliography focuses on children and environmental health conditions in developing nations and augments the 1997 Annotated bibliography on acute respiratory infections and indoor air pollution.
The 1998 edition follows the same general format as its predecessor, with the addition of several new subject categories to reflect a wider search on the ARI exposure, dose, disease, and outcome(s) literature. The geographic categories have also been expanded to reflect some of the areas where a significant number of studies were conducted.
As in the 1997 bibliography, four principal criteria have been applied in choosing references:
· Children under five years of age
· Developing countries
· Indoor air pollution
· Confirmed acute lower respiratory infection or pneumonia
All references generally meeting at least three of these criteria were included in the 1997 edition, while references meeting two of these criteria are included in this edition. This less restrictive search is the genesis of the title "broad search+bibliography". (Source: "Stoves" list.)
Rwedp publications
WOOD ENERGY UTILIZATION AND CONVERSION
· Images of wood and biomass energy in industries in Thailand (FD 52), 1998
· Improved Stove Selection and Dissemination: Asia Regional Training of Trainers Workshop, Lombok, Indonesia (RM 42), 1998
WOOD ENERGY RESOURCES, PRODUCTION, DISTRIBUTION AND MARKETING
· Woodfuel in the Philippines - production and marketing, Baguio City, Philippines (RM 41), 1998
· Woodfuel flow study of Phnom Penh, Cambodia (FD 54), 1998
MISCELLANEOUS
· Report of the Second Regional Advisory Committee Meeting, Bangkok, Thailand (RM 39), 1998
· Carbon dioxide offset investment in the Asia-Pacific forestry sector: opportunities and constraints (FD 53), 1998
WOOD ENERGY NEWS (RWEDP NEWSLETTER)
Volumes 9 to 13 (13 issues)
· The new project, Vol. 9.1, 1994
· Regional issues, Vol. 10.1, 1995
· Gender and wood energy, Vol. 10.2, 1995
· Modern wood energy, Vol. 10.3, 1995
· Wood energy planning, Vol. 10.4, 1995
· Wood energy resources, Vol. 11.1, 1996
· Wood energy data, Vol. 11.2, 1996
· Wood energy and environment, Vol. 11.3, 1996
· Wood energy, women and health,
Vol. 12.1, 1997
· Wood energy outlook, Vol. 12.2, 1997
· The people's fuel, Vol. 13.1, 1998
· Wood energy information, Vol. 13.2, 1998
· Wood energy in China, Vol. 13.3, 1998
RWEDP's Web site contains about 50 documents published by RWEDP.
For copies of any of these publications, please contact: Mr Bert van der Plas, APO Information Systems, RWEDP, c/o RAP, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: (+66) 2 280 0760;
e-mail: RWEDP@fao.org;
www.rwedp.org
"A book should be the axe for the frozen sea inside"
Franz Kafka
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>9</section>
logo WEB SITES
FAO has completely redesigned and updated its forestry Web site
www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/forestry.htm
State of the World's Forests 1999 (SOFO)
The report, State of the World's Forests 1999, is now available on the Forestry Web site in:
English - www.fao.org/fo/sofo/sofo99/default.htm;
French - www.fao.org/fo/sofo/sofo99/debut.htm; and
Spanish - www.fao.org/fo/sofo/sofo99/inicio.htm
The Arabic and Chinese versions will be added to the site in the near future. [See under Special Features for more information on SOFO.]
Center for International Climate and Environmental Research (CICERO)
www.cicero.uio.no/cgi-bin/order/publications.cgi
This site gives a list of their publications.
IEA Bioenergy
www.forestresearch.cri.nz/ieabioenergy/home.htm
ENERBOIS
ENERBOIS-liste est un nouveau «forum de discussion électronique» sur Internet proposé par ALKAEST Conseil aux professionnels francophones intervenant dans la valorisation énergétique du bois et des ressources ligneuses:
· exploitants forestiers;
· équipementiers et fabricants de matériel d'exploitation;
· fabricants d'appareils de chauffage;
· thermiciens et bureaux d'études;
· administrations et associations de promotion du Bois Energie et des Energies renouvelables;
· organisations non gouvernementales;
· centres de compétences scientifiques et techniques, etc.
Cette liste a pour objet d'aider les professionnels du Bois Energie à:
· mieux se connaître;
· échanger des informations sur les procédés et les technologies;
· s'informer sur les nouvelles normes et réglementations nationales et communautaires;
· identifier et s'informer sur de nouveaux marchés;
· nouer des relations de partenariats scientifiques, technologiques, industriels et commerciaux.
Gratuite, cette liste de diffusion est cependant réservée aux seuls professionnels concernés afin de garantir un niveau élevé de qualité dans les échanges.
L'adhésion à la liste est un acte volontaire et il est demandé aux adhérents de respecter les règles éthiques et les procédures techniques simples proposées par ALKAEST Conseil.
Vous pouvez les consulter en ligne sur le site d'ALKAEST Conseil ainsi que les conseils pratiques à l'usage des abonnés.
Si vous souhaitez adhérer à la liste ENERBOIS-Liste, et obtenir davantage d'informations sur ses principes de fonctionnement, n'hésitez pas à consulter la page d'accueil présentant ce nouveau service d'ALKAEST Conseil (www.alkaest.com/html/Enerbois.htm).
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: M. Joël Tetard, Gérant/Directeur des Etudes, ALKAEST Conseil, 20, rue de la Libération, F92500 Rueil-Malmaison, France.
Télécopie: (+33) 1 41 96 90 71;
mél.: marketing@alkaest.com
Environment Protection Agency Global Warning Site
www.epa.gov/globalwarming
This contains information on climate change.
The Jatropha System
http://jatropha.org
An integrated approach of rural development in tropical and subtropical countries. [See also under News and Notes.]
Long-range Energy Alternatives Planning model (LEAP)
www.seib.org/leap
[See also under News and Notes.]
ICIMOD
www.icimod.org.sg
The International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) is the first international organization to make a commitment to improve the livelihood of mountain communities, helping them to live and not merely exist on the highest wonders on earth. [See also under Focus on ... Nepal.]
SYNERGY
www.cordis.lu/synergy/home.html
SYNERGY is a cooperation programme managed by the Directorate General for Energy (DGXVII) of the European Commission. It finances cooperation activities with non-European Union (EU) countries in the field of the formulation and implementation of energy policy to the mutual benefit of all parties concerned. The EU became involved in energy-related cooperation projects following the oil crises in the 1980s, with the EC International Energy Cooperation Programme, which has evolved into the present SYNERGY programme.
Wood-Science Internet discussion list
To subscribe, send the following one-line message:
<subscribe wood-science> to majordomo@interchange.ubc.ca
[Top of page][Contents]
<title>Forest Energy Forum N. 04. Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter</title>
Logo POINTS OF VIEW
FOREST ENERGY or WOOD ENERGY???
What do you think of the term FOREST energy?
Do you prefer the traditional term of WOOD energy? What do you understand by the two terms? Is there a difference?
Our definition: Forest Energy is the energy obtained from woodfuels (fuelwood, charcoal, black liquor and other) derived from woody biomass obtained from forests, woodlands and trees. Forest energy systems include all activities from production to end use (i.e. harvesting, transportation, preparation, conversion and marketing of woodfuels). Forest Energy can be used for both traditional and modern uses in rural and urban areas. We have already received one comment:
I noticed the definition of "forest energy" given in your Web site and I think it actually defines what is usually called "wood energy". Am I right? The new term may drive the point home to foresters that wood energy indeed is an important forest product. However, in Asia we would stick to the term "wood energy", because here most of it originates from non-forest land. (Wim Hulscher, RWEDP, Bangkok, Thailand)
Please write and let us have your views: forest-energy-forum@fao.org
It's agreed - our slogan for Forest Energy is:
NEED ENERGY? - PLANT A TREE
A big thank you to everybody who sent their views.
[Top of page][Contents]
<title>Forest Energy Forum N. 04. Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter</title>
<section>1</section>
logo READERS' FORUM
This space is for our readers to air their views and make their comments. So, please write to us with your ideas/views/comments and suggestions for items that you feel should be covered in future issues, at the address given in the Editorial.
Feedback on the article on the biogas microturbine featured in FEF2
Edan Prabhu has informed us that his article on the Biogas Microturbine has "generated" interest in Uganda. Below is an extract from the letter Mr Prabhu received from Ms Patience Turyareeba, Acting Leader, Forest Products Programme of the Forestry Research Institute.
We have been trying to improve efficiency in the forest industry, particularly in sawmilling, which is the major activity in forest industries in Uganda. Most sawmills are located in rural areas and only use up 25 to 40 percent of the round wood they pay for. Most sawmills, particularly those in pine and conifer plantations, are the mobile type. They all depend on diesel for energy. Even stationary sawmills connected to the national grid use diesel because of insufficient power supply from the national utility.
In 1997, we wrote a proposal on power generation from wood waste for the Forestry College but the only technology we had heard about was the gasifier. According to some information obtained from the Natural Resources Institute in the United Kingdom, this system was not considered cost-effective for a load of less than 100 kW. We have since been looking for an alternative.
We would like to know more about the microturbine generators. We believe that there are opportunities for biomass-based technologies for power generation, in the forest industry and other agroprocessing establishments. Such technologies may even be the answer to rural electrification in developing countries.
We are delighted to learn that our forum is helping in some small way.
First, well-deserved congratulations on Forest Energy Forum. Issue 3 is as good as the others and is a really valuable newsletter. It is a pity, though, about the major blunder on pages 4 and 5 regarding the forest areas needed to absorb CO[2] emissions from, and to provide fuel for, a 1 MW power station. With the same forest yields, the areas needed are more or less the same in each case: 500 ha, not an additional 500 ha each year for the CO[2] sequestration approach. (I put "more or less" because the comparison depends on the efficiency of a wood-burning versus a coal-burning power plant; with the same efficiencies the areas are the same.) (Mr Gerald Leach, London, UK)
Thank you, Mr Leach, for bringing this to our attention. The word "annual" should be deleted from the diagram on page 4 of Forest Energy Forum No. 3; the sentence should read: "A coal power plant (1 MW) in its lifetime (of approximately 30 years) requires a plantation of 500 ha of permanent forests to sequester CO[2] emissions". Please see revised slide below.
I received Forest Energy Forum issue No. 3 and have read it with great interest.
We are engaged in convincing our electricity suppliers to accept the regular operation of small power units in net [grid]. They don't want it. I would be glad to hear from you what kind of arguments we may use to convince them. What are the rules for such an operation in the United States and Europe?
We intend to promote this possibility in our state through our industry federation, FIERGS, in specific talks at workshops, etc. Our group in FIERGS takes charge of renewable energy.
We would be grateful for any help you can give us. (Eng. Paulo R. Wolff, Pôrto Alegre, Brazil)
Can any of our readers help? If so, please contact us, or Mr Wolff at the following address: Bos Wolff Cia. Ltda., Rua Indianápolis 30, 91330-060 Pôrto Alegre RS, Brazil. Fax: (+55) 51 3287085; e-mail: boswolff@portoweb.com.br
I am in receipt of the two publications: The role of wood energy in Asia and OECD and The role of wood energy in Asia [FAO Regional Studies on Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow, 1997]. The information in these books is very informative. Most of us here do not realize the extent of woodfuel used by developed countries. We think that wood is essentially a poor person's fuel. With these books I will be able to convince our people of the role of woodfuel in our future planning. (P.G. Joseph, Energy Conservation Fund, Sri Lanka)
Muchas felicidades por el boletín Forest Energy Forum que ustedes editan cada seis meses. Me parece sumamente interesante y de gran importancia su difusión. Me gustaría continuar recibiéndolo, cuál sería el trámite que debo realizar. Un cordial saludo. (Sandra Robles Gil, Comisión Nacional del Agua, México)
To put your name on our mailing list, please send your full postal address to Forest-Energy-Forum@fao.org The following is a recent exchange of e-mails on the Stoves list which we would like to share with our readers. It also led to the contribution by Prof. Yury Yudkevitch in Country Compass (Russian Federation).
"I visited the Svaliava forest chemical factory the first week of December. This factory is in the Carpathian Mountains in southwestern Ukraine. I used to visit this factory frequently many years back. Now Ukraine is a separate state, but the director of the factory asked me for advice. The factory makes large quantities of charcoal from beech and oak. In 1980, it processed 150 000 m^3 of fuelwood and obtained 15 000/20 000 tonnes/year of charcoal.
A large and efficient workshop was constructed there for processing tar and water condensate. This workshop worked well, but is now costly owing to the lack of buyers of its traditional products: a food acid, solvent for paints, etc. There is a small order for a tar impurity for making concrete. The factory's technology was an example of complete processing of the liquid products of charcoaling.
Today this factory makes 15 percent of its former volume of charcoal; it makes good activated charcoal and has wide experience in charcoaling.
The factory staff would like to have contacts in other countries, but they have limited communication methods. They have asked me to inform anyone who would like to contact them, that they can do so through me by e-mail or by fax." (Yury Yudkevitch, Russian Federation)
"I think our stoves group would enjoy hearing more about the conversion technology that is being used at this factory. Is it similar to what you have described in the past as being developed in your own laboratory? Are the pyrolysis gases vented or flared? What is the conversion efficiency by weight? I hope that your message is able to help promote their product.
Is it possible that some of the downturn in production has occurred because of the nuclear fallout following the Chernobyl accident? If contamination would have affected the trees in this part of Ukraine, would it perhaps be better to totally combust all of the biomass (probably mainly for electricity production) and depend on filtration to contain all of the radioactive residue? Have there been tests to show that both the charcoal and the chemical by-products are clean?
Or is the problem that which has recently been noted - that fossil sources are now simply cheaper? (And we have to wait a bit longer before the fossil fuel prices rise as supplies disappear?)" (Ronal W. Larson, USA)
For more information, please contact:
Prof. Yury Yudkevitch,
Department of Technology of Chemical Forest Products of St Petersburg Forest Technical Academy,
St Petersburg, Russian Federation;
fax: (+7) 3133 73256/22571;
e-mail: woodcoal@mailbox.alkor.ru;
or
Ronal W. Larson, 21547 Mountsfield Dr.
Golden, CO 80401, USA;
Fax: (+1) 303 526 9629;
e-mail: larcon@sni.net or stoves@crest.org
"Things which matter most should never be at the mercy of things that matter least"
Goethe
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>2</section>
Logo INFORMATION
FOREST ENERGY FORUM
No. 4
June 1999
If you have any material that could be included in the next issue of Forest Energy Forum for the benefit of other readers, kindly send it before 15 September 1999 to:
Forest Energy Forum - FOPW
FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy.
E-mail: Forest-Energy-Forum@fao.org
http://www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/
forestry/energy/feforum.htm
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
[Top of page][Contents]
