<title>FAO - CL 116/Report. Report of the Council of FAO</title>
<section>1</section>
INTRODUCTION - PROCEDURE OF THE SESSION
INTRODUCTION
1. The Hundred and Sixteenth Session of the Council was held in Rome from 14 to 19 June 1999 under the Chairmanship of Sjarifudin Baharsjah, Independent Chairman of the Council.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND TIMETABLE^1
2. The Council noted the Declaration of Competence and Voting Rights presented by the European Community.
3. The Council voted to delete from the Provisional Agenda the item: Arrangements for the Appointment of the Director-General. The item had been inserted on the Provisional Agenda at the request of five Members of the Council under Rule XXV.7(b) of the General Rules of the Organization (GRO).
4. The Council adopted the Agenda and Timetable for the Session. The Agenda is given in Appendix A to this Report.
ELECTION OF THREE VICE-CHAIRPERSONS, AND DESIGNATION OF THE CHAIRPERSON AND MEMBERS OF THE DRAFTING COMMITTEE^2
5. The Council elected Vice-Chairpersons for its Session: Ms Birgitte Møller Christensen (Denmark), Adnan Bashir Khan (Pakistan) and Luis A. Wagner (Paraguay).
6. The Council elected Mrs Neela Gangadharan (India) as Chairperson of the Drafting Committee with the following membership: Australia, Brazil, Cameroon, Cuba, France, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Japan, Poland, Qatar, South Africa, Thailand, United Kingdom and United States of America.
WORLD FOOD AND AGRICULTURE SITUATION
CURRENT WORLD FOOD SITUATION^3
7. The Council appreciated the Secretariat document CL 116/2 and generally concurred with its analysis of the current world food situation.
8. The Council:
a. noted with concern the very low growth in global food production in 1998; the fact that the Low-Income Food-Deficit countries saw their food production actually fall in per caput terms particularly in Africa South of the Sahara; the disappointing agricultural performances in many developing countries, and the sharp increase in inequalities in income distribution in some countries and, in some cases, the setbacks in overcoming rural poverty;
b. expressed deep concern with the large number of countries facing acute food shortages and emergency situations caused by different adverse climatic phenomena, natural disasters like cyclones, hurricanes, droughts, and floods, as well as others caused by various conflicts; and emphasized the urgent need for the international community and FAO to continue to closely monitor these situations with a view to cooperating with the countries concerned in their recovery and rehabilitation efforts;
c. reiterated, as was stated in the Declaration of the World Food Summit, and endorsed in different fora that "Food should not be used as an instrument for political and economic pressure. We affirm the importance of international cooperation and solidarity as well as the necessity of refraining from unilateral measures not in accordance with the international law and the Charter of the United Nations and that endanger food security.";
d. while recognizing the crucial importance of domestic food production for food security, stressed the equally important role of factors associated with food access, income distribution and the countries' capacity to finance food imports, and underlined the necessity for more thorough integration of information on demand and consumption trends in future Council documents;
e. stressed the importance of a stable international economic environment for food security and the need to closely monitor the financial crises and their effects on agricultural markets, economic growth, incomes and trade;
f. expressed concern about the adverse impact that falling agricultural commodity prices and deteriorating terms of trade had on food security in many developing countries for which agricultural exports represented a major source of export earnings. It also noted, however, that falling commodity prices had contributed to alleviating the food import bill of net food importing countries;
g. emphasized the need to ensure an agricultural trade environment that enabled developing countries to take full advantage of their export potential; supported FAO's work in analysing the impact of the Uruguay Round Agreements on trade liberalization, and its assistance to the developing countries in adjusting to the new trading environment and in preparing themselves for the forthcoming World Trade Organization (WTO) negotiations;
h. underlined the need for adequate technical and financial assistance to facilitate the countries' own efforts to meet their food security objectives and achieve sustainable rural development;
i. noted the importance of food aid in coping with emergency situations, and its possible contribution to development.
9. Some Members emphasized the importance they attached to the multifunctional character of agriculture for world food security. Others reiterated the fundamental role that trade liberalization played in achieving food security. The matter was further discussed under Item 12 (see paras 63 to 67 below).
REPORT OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH SESSION OF THE
COMMITTEE ON WORLD FOOD SECURITY
(ROME, 31 MAY - 3 JUNE 1999)^4
10. The Council endorsed the Report of the Twenty-fifth Session of the Committee on World Food Security (CFS), and stressed that the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Report should be taken into account in the future work of the Committee, particularly in monitoring the implementation process of the WFS Plan of Action. The Council also endorsed the transmission to ECOSOC of the Committee's Report on the Implementation of the World Food Summit Plan of Action.^5
11. The Council noted the change in approach and the use of improved indicators in the assessment of the World Food Security situation by the CFS. It stressed the importance of using indicators such as poverty indices, terms of trade, income distribution, purchasing power and other suitable quantifiable indicators to document the situation regarding access to food across countries and among different sectors of populations within countries. In this connection, the Council agreed on the necessity of developing FIVIMS as an instrument for providing data and decision-making tools for the implementation of the WFS Plan of Action at national, regional and global levels, and urged the Secretariat to give high priority to this area of work. This should be done in cooperation with all relevant international agencies.
12. The Council reaffirmed that the CFS should closely monitor the implementation of the World Food Summit, and expressed appreciation for efforts underway by the Committee for monitoring and evaluating the implementation process of the WFS Plan of Action. It welcomed the reporting format developed during the CFS which provided a basis for all future reporting on the progress of the implementation of the Plan of Action by Governments, UN Agencies and other relevant international institutions. The Council also supported the idea that CFS Sessions in even years be held after the FAO Regional Conferences, in order to take into account the conclusions of such conferences regarding the implementation of the WFS Plan of Action.
13. The Council welcomed the participation of NGOs and Civil Society in the work of CFS. It recognized the important role of Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) in contributing to the national programmes of implementation of the World Food Summit Plan of Action by mobilising resources and contributing actions for food security, and by promoting awareness of food security issues.
14. The Council reiterated the importance of a favourable macro-economic environment, a peaceful and stable political situation and appropriate sectoral policies to effectively implement the WFS Plan of Action, and urged countries to take concerted efforts in this direction. The Council underlined the need for technical and financial assistance to help developing countries in their efforts to implement the Plan of Action and to reduce the number of the undernourished and food insecure. In this connection, the Council noted the concerns expressed at the decline of overseas development assistance (ODA) to agriculture, especially in the least developed countries where capital resources were a severe constraint. The Council stressed the necessity of devising innovative and effective ways of mobilizing resources for agriculture investment and food security, including from the private sector.
15. The Council noted the support expressed for the FAO Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS) which contributed to the implementation of the WFS Plan of Action. It thanked those countries which, through the provision of funds or experts, were collaborating with FAO in the implementation of the SPFS. The Council encouraged increased collaboration to strengthen the effectiveness of the Programme. Donors were invited to assist developing countries in the establishment and operation of National Codex Alimentarius Committees. The Council endorsed the Committee's request regarding the use of languages, as set out in paragraph 26 of its Report.
16. The Council expressed interest in the Havana Declaration adopted by the IV Ibero-American Forum of Ministers of Agriculture held in Havana, 15-17 May 1999.
ACTIVITIES OF FAO AND WFP
REPORT OF THE SIXTY-SECOND SESSION OF THE
COMMITTEE ON COMMODITY PROBLEMS
(ROME, 12-15 JANUARY 1999)^6
17. The Council endorsed the Report of the Sixty-second Session of the Committee on Commodity Problems.
18. The Council reaffirmed the need for continued monitoring of the world commodity situation and longer-term prospects. In undertaking this work, it requested that attention be paid to the countries covered by the Marrakesch Decision on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the Reform Programme on Least-Developed and Net Food-Importing Developing Countries, as well as on Small Island Developing States.
19. The Council expressed support for the Programme of Work on Assessing the Effects of the Uruguay Round Agreement on Agricultural Markets, and reaffirmed the need for further analysis, particularly of the effects on food security in developing countries, in preparation for the forthcoming round of multilateral trade negotiations.
20. The Council stressed the importance of helping developing countries to prepare for the forthcoming negotiations and welcomed the "Umbrella Programme" of training on the Uruguay Round and Future Negotiations on Agriculture, as well as the Symposium to be held in Geneva in September 1999, with support from the Government of Japan. Several Members suggested that FAO provide further technical assistance to developing countries on issues related to the World Trade Organization (WTO) Agreements on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and on Technical Barriers to Trade. It was suggested that FAO devote more effort to analysing potential trade effects of issues related to biosafety and consumer protection.
21. The Council welcomed results achieved in streamlining the methods of work of the Intergovernmental Commodity Groups and endorsed continued efforts in improving the relevance of their activities, including the adaptation of their work programmes, as appropriate, to the World Food Summit Plan of Action and to changing international trade conditions and disciplines.
22. In regard to commodity development programmes financed by the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC) under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Commodity Groups, concern was expressed at the shift in the CFC's emphasis from grant to loan-financing. It was suggested that FAO, in cooperation with the CFC, should analyse the cost-effectiveness of projects and should also ensure wide dissemination of the results to Members.
23. The Council noted the establishment of the Tropical Fruits Network (TFNET) hosted by Malaysia, and the invitation extended to all FAO Members to join the Network.
REPORT OF THE FIFTEENTH SESSION OF THE
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(ROME, 25-29 JANUARY 1999)^7
24. The Council considered and adopted the Report of the Fifteenth Session of the Committee on Agriculture (COAG). It endorsed COAG's vision of better integration of technical programmes and a sharpened role for FAO in shaping international legislation and instruments that affected agriculture. The emphasis in COAG's Report on expanding partnerships, to reduce duplication and optimize use of human and financial resources, was supported. The Council recognized the need for FAO to maintain a balanced programme of work, providing technical assistance through a well-focussed, demand-driven field programme, as well as the need for providing policy advice, information exchange, and harmonized standards, in line with its normative role.
25. In particular, the Council appreciated the need for FAO to have a coherent programme on agricultural biotechnology to assist Member Nations in obtaining the full benefits of new developments while minimizing risks. FAO's role as a forum for the discussion of issues and for standard-setting, and as an `honest broker' of quality science-based information, through mechanisms such as the International Plant Protection Commission (IPPC) and Codex Alimentarius, was underscored in general, and in relation to biotechnology in particular.
26. Similarly, the Council underlined the importance of the new cross-sectoral and interdisciplinary initiatives proposed on organic agriculture and urban and peri-urban agriculture. FAO's key supporting role in organic agriculture, especially with regard to product certification and market information was acknowledged. The contribution of urban and peri-urban agriculture to food security was also recognized. FAO's increased attention to this area in collaboration with other partners was urged. Members stressed that `mainstreaming' gender issues should remain a priority within the broad range of FAO's activities. The Council also urged increased focus on the special needs for capacity-building on technical, legislative and trade-related matters, in particular in relation to the Uruguay Round and the forthcoming multilateral trade negotiations. The Council endorsed COAG's focus on information data and information systems development, including inter alia marketing and
decision support tools. Many Members also stressed the need to give increased attention to animal genetic resources.
REPORT OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SESSION OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FISHERIES
(ROME, 15-19 FEBRUARY 1999)^ 8
27. The Council expressed its appreciation for the work carried out by the Committee on Fisheries and endorsed the Report of its Twenty-third Session. It also noted that FAO had a comparative advantage in fisheries and played a key role in global fisheries issues.
28. The Council stressed the fundamental importance of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries in promoting sustainability in the fisheries sector and urged all countries to intensify their efforts to promote the effective implementation of the Code. The importance of developing indicators to evaluate implementation, and the requirement for simplified questionnaires, was agreed by the Council. The Council further stressed the need for FAO, relevant international organizations and financial institutions to continue their support to developing countries, countries in transition and Small Island Developing States, for the implementation of the Code of Conduct. The timeliness of the assistance provided to West Africa in supporting the implementation of the Code was appreciated.
29. The Council endorsed the three International Plans of Action (IPOA) for: Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries, Conservation and Management of Sharks, and Management of Fishing Capacity. The Council recognized that the three IPOAs would serve to implement important aspects of the Code of Conduct and agreed that steps should be taken, as soon as possible, to facilitate their implementation. As a first step, the Council welcomed the Technical Consultation to be held in Mexico in November 1999 concerning the Measurement and Assessment of Fishing Capacity.
30. The Council noted that illegal, unauthorized and unreported fishing (IUU), including fishing by vessels flying "flags of convenience", undermined conservation and management measures in fisheries. The Council agreed that a global approach be taken by FAO to develop a strategy to address the problem of IUU, noting that this initiative should be carried forward through the development of an IPOA within the framework of the Code of Conduct. The Council urged countries that had not yet accepted the Compliance Agreement to do so as soon as possible.
31. The importance of promoting integrated resource management, including inland capture fisheries and aquaculture, as well as the protection of inland water bodies, was underscored by the Council as a means of facilitating sustainability in these fisheries. This management would contribute to enhancing the role of these fisheries in food security and poverty alleviation and would have other social and economic benefits.
32. The Council endorsed the establishment of a COFI Sub-Committee on Aquaculture.
33. The Council recognized that eco-labelling was controversial and that FAO should continue its work in this area. The Council underscored the need to ensure that any eco-labelling scheme was transparent, voluntary, non-discriminatory and that it not be used to restrict trade. The Council recommended that FAO should contribute to the work of the World Trade Organization's Committee on Trade and Environment and other bodies to help ensure that fish trade did not compromise responsible fisheries management.
34. The Council stressed the importance of FAO intensifying its work with developing Members to strengthen capacity-building in the fisheries sector and to further strengthen regional fishery bodies.
35. The Council noted that greater consideration should be given to the development of more appropriate eco-system approaches to fisheries development and management.
36. The Council noted that a recommendation concerning the award winner for the Margarita Lizárraga Medal would be made at the Hundred and Seventeenth Session of the Council (Rome, 9-11 November 1999). It was agreed by the Council that FAO should produce a biography to underline the significance of Dr Lizárraga's contribution to the fisheries sector, particularly in promoting the Code of Conduct.
37. The Council urged that adequate resources be made available to the Fisheries Department to enable it to effectively carry out its increasing workload in accordance with the priorities of the Committee on Fisheries.
38. The Director-General was congratulated on his initiative in convening the Ministerial Meeting on Fisheries in March 1999. The Council agreed that the Rome Declaration on the Implementation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, adopted by the Meeting, would serve to promote sustainability in fisheries.
REPORT OF THE FOURTEENTH SESSION OF THE
COMMITTEE ON FORESTRY
(ROME, 1-5 MARCH 1999)^9
39. The Council considered the report of the Fourteenth Session of COFO, together with the report of the Ministerial Declaration on Forestry. The Council endorsed the COFO report, highlighting the increased importance being given to forestry matters in recent years, in line with the global policy dialogue on forests after UNCED. The Council urged that adequate resources be made available to forestry, in accordance with the global, regional and national needs of the forestry sector, and that higher prominence should be given to forestry in the FAO Strategic Framework.
40. The Council recognized that FAO had played an important role in supporting the Intergovernmental Forum on Forests (IFF) and UNCED follow-up. The Council stressed the need to assist in the intergovernmental efforts to reach a consensus on arrangements and mechanisms for the sustainable development of all types of forests, to facilitate regional processes of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management and to build national capacity for the development of national forest programmes. The Council highlighted the need for increased activities in support of: countries with low forest cover; prevention, monitoring and control of forest fires; forest resources assessment; collection and analysis of data and conducting outlook studies; and contribution of forestry to food security and to poverty alleviation.
Venue of the Twelfth World Forestry Congress^10
41. As COFO did not reach a consensus on the Host Country for the Twelfth World Forestry Congress, the Council considered submissions from Canada and Guatemala which had offered to host the Congress. The Council then elected Canada to host the Twelfth World Forestry Congress in 2003. The representative of Canada expressed appreciation to the Council for the opportunity to organize the event and confirmed that the venue would be Quebec City.
42. The Council expressed deep appreciation to both candidate countries for their interest in hosting this important event, and recognized that it had faced a difficult choice in view of the high quality of the facilities and services offered by the candidate countries.
NEGOTIATIONS ON THE INTERNATIONAL UNDERTAKING ON PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES^11
43. A report by Ambassador Fernando Gerbasi, Chairman of the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, on progress in the negotiations for the revision of the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources, that had been requested by the previous session of the Council, was read by Commission Vice-Chairman Ronald Rose (Canada). The Secretary of the Commission then introduced the Report of its Eighth Regular Session (Rome, 19-23 April 1999).
44. The Council noted with satisfaction that, in accordance with the mandate it had given to Ambassador Gerbasi at its Hundred and Fifteenth Session (Rome, 23-28 November 1998), he had convened an informal meeting of experts, in Montreux, Switzerland, in January 1999. The discussions that had taken place there had enabled him to draw up a series of Chairman's Elements, reflecting a broad consensus which the Commission decided to use as the basis for its subsequent negotiations, as well as a Composite Draft Text. Ambassador Gerbasi reported that very significant progress had been made during the Commission's last session. He believed that the necessary grounds existed to continue the negotiations, and that countries had the political will to reach a broad consensus.
45. The Council thanked Ambassador Gerbasi for his continuing efforts to bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion.
46. The Council supported the work of the Commission, and endorsed the Report of its Eighth Regular Session and its recommendations.
47. It endorsed, in particular, the high priority that had been given to completing the negotiations of the Undertaking. It fully supported the Commission's mandate for Ambassador Gerbasi to convene, in consultation with the Director-General, meetings of the Contact Group, as well as an Extraordinary Session of the Commission to adopt the final text. Both sets of meetings would be subject to the availability of funds.
48. The Council noted that extrabudgetary funds would be needed for this negotiating process, including to facilitate the participation of developing countries. It urged donors to make adequate funds available in order to move forward as rapidly as possible. During the session, one Member announced that it would be making a contribution, and another Member stated that it was considering doing so. The Council thanked both Members warmly, and encouraged other donors to come forward.
49. The Council appealed to countries to show flexibility and a spirit of compromise and to maintain and increase the momentum so that the revised Undertaking might, at the latest, be submitted to the Hundred and Nineteenth Session of the Council in November 2000. It recommended that a report on progress in the negotiations be considered by the Conference at its Thirtieth Session in November 1999.
50. The Council agreed with the high priority that had been given to convening a meeting of the Commission's Intergovernmental Technical Working Group on Animal Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, in the forthcoming biennium, in order to develop further the Global Strategy for the Management of Farm Animal Genetic Resources. In particular, the Working Group would coordinate the preparation of the first Report on the State of the World's Animal Genetic Resources, for which purpose extrabudgetary resources would be required. It urged donors to make the necessary funds available.
51. In accordance with the priorities recommended at the Commission's Eighth Session, the Council expressed the hope that the Intergovernmental Technical Working Group on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture would be able to meet in the next biennium.
52. The Council noted that the Commission, at its next regular session, would consider a report on the status of the draft Code of Conduct on Biotechnology as it Relates to Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, and the Code of Conduct for Plant Germplasm Collecting and Transfer.
WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME
Annual Report of the WFP Executive Board to ECOSOC and the FAO Council on its Activities in 1998^12
53. In approving the Report of the Executive Board, the Council expressed appreciation for the concise and informative description of the activities carried out in 1998. The Council commended the frankness and transparency that characterized the dialogue between the Executive Board and the Secretariat of WFP, and praised the open consultation processes that had taken place in such instances as the review of the Resource and Long-term Financing Policies and the Food Aid and Development Consultations. Furthermore, the Council strongly supported the programme of visits to the field by Members of the Board. The visits were noted to be beneficial in broadening the Members' understanding of WFP programmes, projects and operations and an opportunity to see, first hand, the implementation of the policies emanating from the Board.
54. The Council deeply regretted that so many WFP staff had lost their lives in the course of their duties and supported WFP's efforts to address matters of staff security, including by providing security awareness training.
55. While recognizing the increase in both the level of assistance and the number of beneficiaries reached in 1998, the Council reiterated the need to maintain a balance in resource allocation between development and emergency assistance, and called for a consultation on the strengthening of the multilateral character of the Programme. The Council noted with appreciation WFP's role in the UN Reform Process and its active collaboration with FAO and IFAD. As regards the suggestion that the Governing Bodies of the Rome-based organizations hold a joint meeting, Council Members felt that this would require further examination.
56. The Council welcomed WFP and FAO efforts to pay special attention to avoid duplication of efforts in matters of vulnerability mapping.
Amendments to the General Regulations and Rules of WFP^13
57. The Council endorsed the proposed amendments to Article XIII, paragraph 2, and Appendix B of the General Regulations of the World Food Programme and decided to transmit them to the Conference for approval (see Appendix D to this Report). In so doing, the Council expressed appreciation for the efforts of the Rome-based Working Group on Distribution of Seats in reaching a consensus position in parallel with its counterpart in New York, and praised the work of the Chairperson Mrs Laurie Tracy (USA) who skilfully led the negotiations to a fruitful conclusion.
PREPARATIONS FOR THE THIRTIETH SESSION OF THE FAO CONFERENCE^14
Arrangements for the Session and Timetable
58. The Council examined the document prepared by the Secretariat (CL 116/11) and generally endorsed the arrangements proposed. With respect to the Provisional Agenda, the Council agreed that sub-item 22.2 Introduction of the Long Term Care Insurance Scheme should be deleted since the matter was not yet ready for consideration by Conference.
59. The Council agreed to submit to the Conference for approval the Provisional Agenda as amended, the tentative Timetable and the Arrangements outlined in the draft document, and in particular recommended that
a. two Commissions be established to examine respectively Parts I and II of the Agenda;
b. the first ballot to appoint the Director-General take place on the morning of Saturday 13 November 1999;
c. the deadline for the receipt of nominations for election to the Council be set at 12.00 hours on Saturday 13 November 1999;
d. the statements of Heads of Delegation in Plenary be limited to a maximum of 5 minutes each and focus on the world food situation or on a thematic issue related to that subject;
e. the votes to elect Members of the Council, to appoint the Independent Chairman of the Council, and to decide on the budget level, be scheduled for Friday 19 November 1999.
60. The Council felt that it could not at this stage agree on the arrangements to schedule a separate meeting to permit interaction among Ministers. It requested the Joint Meeting of the Programme Committee and the Finance Committee to review the issue again under its standing item on Savings and Efficiencies in Governance. The Council recognized that it would not be possible to implement the results of the Joint Meeting review at the Thirtieth Session of the Conference in November 1999.
Deadline for Nominations for Independent Chairman of the Council
61. The Council decided to establish the deadline for the receipt of nominations for Independent Chairman of the Council, at 12.00 hours on Friday 20 August 1999.
Nomination of the Chairperson of the Conference and of the Chairpersons of the Commissions
62. The Council noted that consultations had taken place among Heads of Delegations represented at the Council Session and that there was consensus on the following designations:
- Chairperson of Conference Algeria
- Chairperson of Commission I Italy
- Chairperson of Commission II India
Following consultations by the Director-General regarding the availability of the nominated persons, the Council would make definitive nominations to the Conference for these posts.
PREPARATIONS FOR THE CONFERENCE ON THE MULTIFUNCTIONAL CHARACTER OF
AGRICULTURE AND LAND
(MAASTRICHT, NETHERLANDS, SEPTEMBER 1999)^15
63. The Council reaffirmed its strong support for the initiative taken by the Government of the Netherlands to organize an international technical conference on the multifunctional character of agriculture and land, and welcomed the technical support being provided by FAO to the process. Members recognized that this Conference would provide an important high-level technical forum for increasing international understanding of both the scope and significance of the multifunctional character of agriculture and land, and would contribute significantly to FAO's inputs to the Eighth Session of the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD). Several Members highlighted the complexity of conceptual questions surrounding the issue. Other Members underscored the important practical significance of the issue for all Member Nations.
64. The Permanent Representative of the Netherlands provided information on the preparations for the Conference, in particular on the range and level of proposed participation and the participation of NGOs throughout the process. Finally, he also supplied Members with information regarding the Partner Seminar being organized by the Government of The Netherlands, the Government of South Africa and IFAD in July 1999. The Permanent Representative and the FAO Secretariat underscored the technical nature of the Conference.
65. Members declared their interest in contributing actively to the preparatory process and to the Conference in Maastricht itself. The Council recalled the direct relationship between the initiative and UNCED and the World Food Summit, and recognized the link with FAO's responsibilities as Task Manager for reporting on Chapters 10 and 14 to the Eighth Session of the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD-8).
66. The Council noted that the Maastricht Conference would produce a brief Summary Report and a full Conference Report for wide-ranging distribution. The full Conference Report would consist of: i) an extended technical section based on the various inputs; ii) summaries of the discussions; and iii) the main findings and conclusions.
67. The Council recommended that the Summary Report be submitted to the Hundred and Seventeenth Session of the FAO Council for information and guidance, and to the Thirtieth Session of the FAO Conference for information. Finally, the Council proposed that the Hundred and Seventeenth Session of the Council be called upon to consider the status of the Summary Report submitted to the Thirtieth Session of the FAO Conference, and to decide whether, in the light of the substance of the Summary Report, the status should be upgraded to that of a document for discussion and decision.
DRAFT PLAN OF ACTION ON AGRICULTURE IN SMALL ISLAND DEVELOPING STATES^16
68. The Council noted with appreciation that the Ministerial Conference on Small Island Developing States (SIDS) had been convened by FAO in March 1999, and commended the Secretariat for its excellent work in preparing the documents and in facilitating the revision of the Draft Plan of Action on Agriculture in SIDS subsequent to the Conference. It noted that the Ministerial Declaration on Agriculture in Small Island Developing States, adopted by the Ministerial Conference, served as an introduction to the Plan of Action.
69. The Council welcomed that the Plan of Action, by focusing on the specific problems of agriculture, including fisheries and forestry, identified key actions needed to overcome food insecurity and vulnerability of SIDS within the framework of social and economic development. It underlined the importance of the five commitments contained in the Plan: adjusting to changes in the global trading environment; working towards a more intensified, diversified and sustainable agriculture; meeting fisheries' needs; ensuring sustainable management of land, water and forestry resources and environmental protection; and capacity building and institutional strengthening.
70. The Council unanimously adopted the Plan of Action on Agriculture for Small Island Developing States and requested the Director-General to submit it to the Special Session of the UN General Assembly in September 1999 for consideration in its review of the implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action.
71. The Council recommended that the implementation of the Plan of Action be accorded high priority and, in this context, appealed to international organizations and the donor community to enhance their support to SIDS Members. The Council noted with appreciation the generous offers of funding support made by several Members. It was also mentioned that effective coordination among various partners is requested in the implementation of the Plan of Action.
1 CL 116/1; CL 116/1-Add.1; CL 116/1 (a); CL 116/INF/1-Rev.1; CL 116/PV/1; CL 116/PV/9.
2 CL 116/INF/9; CL 116/PV/1; CL 116/PV/9.
3 CL 116/2; CL 116/PV/3; CL 116/PV/4; CL 116/PV/9.
4 CL 116/10; CL 116/PV/3; CL 116/PV/4; CL 116/PV/9.
5 CFS/LIM/1 "Implementation of the World Food Summit Plan of Action: Report of the Committee on World Food Security through the FAO Council to ECOSOC".
6 CL 116/6; CL 116/PV/6; CL 116/PV/9.
7 CL 116/9; CL 116/PV/6; CL 116/PV/9.
8 CL 116/7; CL 116/INF/19; CL 116/PV/7; CL 116/PV/9.
9 CL 116/8; CL 116/INF/18; CL 116/PV/7; CL 116/PV/9.
10 CL 116/8-Sup.1; CL 116/8-Sup.2; CL 116/PV/7; CL 116/PV/9.
11 CL 116/INF/8; CL 116/LIM/5; CL 116/PV/6; CL 116/PV/9.
12 CL 116/13; CL 116/PV/7; CL 116/PV/9.
13 CL 116/17; CL 116/17-Sup.1; CL 116/21; CL 116/PV/7; CL 116/PV/9.
14 CL 116/4 (paras 27-31); CL 116/11; CL 116/INF/5; CL 116/INF/9; CL 116/PV/8; CL 116/PV/9.
15 CL 116/INF/17; CL 116/PV/8; CL 116/PV/9.
16 CL 116/18; CL 116/PV/8; CL 116/PV/9.
Table of contents
<section>2</section>
PROGRAMME, BUDGETARY, FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
PROGRAMME EVALUATION REPORT 1998-99^17
72. In reviewing the Programme Evaluation Report 1998-99, the Council stressed the importance of evaluation in improving the relevance and cost-effectiveness of the Organization's programmes and operations. In particular, it highlighted the need for the integrated use of evaluation in programme planning and the budgetary process so that evaluation assessments provide feedback to management for improving programmes and also for deciding on their future.
73. The Council welcomed the Programme Evaluation Report 1998-99 as informative and useful, and agreed with the views of the Programme Committee on the several improvements made in this version, particularly in enhancing the interaction between the evaluators and programme managers and senior management as well as a greater use of external expertise, including through external peer reviews. It also endorsed the Programme Committee's observation, nonetheless, that individual programme reviews and evaluations in the report tended to be too long and descriptive, with insufficient systematic analysis of effects and impact of the programmes. The Council encouraged further efforts by the Secretariat to enhance the analytical quality of various evaluations towards this end, including a more systematic approach in the use of the assessment criteria and in the coverage of the Organization's thematic priorities, such as gender concerns.
74. The Council recognized that the introduction of strategic planning and the new programme model was expected to provide a more conducive environment for result-oriented evaluation, and noted that the Programme Committee was to review proposals for enhancing FAO's evaluation system at its September session this year. In this regard, some Members requested that the Secretariat make recommendations regarding the continuation or discontinuation of programmes based upon defined criteria.
75. The Council generally appreciated the implementation performance under the programmes covered in the Report, and endorsed the Programme Committee's views on the main conclusions and recommendations for these individual programmes.
76. On this basis, the Council agreed to transmit the Programme Evaluation Report 1998-99 to the Conference for its approval.
SUMMARY PROGRAMME OF WORK AND BUDGET 2000-2001^18
New Programming Framework
77. The Council welcomed the introduction of the new programming framework, which had been applied to all activities under Chapter 2: Technical and Economic Programmes and Major Programme 3.1: Policy Assistance. While encouraging further refinement in the full Programme of Work and Budget, it agreed that the new approach would take added significance with the development in 2000 of the Medium-Term Plan based on the Strategic Framework.
Basis of Discussion
78. The Council recognized that three scenarios were addressed in the documentation. In the first instance, the main Summary Programme of Work and Budget proposals had been framed with a Zero Real Growth (ZRG) assumption. The document also included a Real Growth option, with activities involving US$22.6 million beyond ZRG. In addition, a Zero Nominal Growth (ZNG) scenario was outlined in a Supplementary document^19, taking account of recent developments affecting cost increases for the next biennium and the impact of current Italian Lira/US$ exchange rates, as recommended by the Programme and Finance Committees at their May session. The details of this scenario would be provided in the full Programme of Work and Budget.
79. The Council noted the favourable impact of the rate of 1800 Lire to 1 US$, which had been assumed in the Supplementary document, compared to the budget rate for the present biennium of Lire 1690. This contributed to a reduction of the initial cost increase estimate of US$34.7 million to a lower figure in the range of US$10 to 15 million.
80. The Council recognized that the Director-General's proposals to accelerate the implementation of adjustments to organizational structures in the administrative and operational areas were driven by the request to present a ZNG scenario. While noting the risks associated with these proposals, it agreed that such an approach was warranted in order to protect the technical programmes of the Organization. In this regard, it welcomed the stated intention to minimize the abolition of professional posts in technical areas, as well as the idea that some of the related savings could also be applied to meet the still unmet requirements of the Council irrespective of the budget level approved by the Conference, for instance to ensure in particular, a more adequate language balance in the substantive work of FAO. Several Members requested that the Secretariat carry out an evaluation of the Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS).
81. The Council recognized that the eventual staffing implications, in particular the need to abolish posts, would lead to incremental separation and redeployment costs which could be funded by arrears payments, as was done in the present biennium. An objection was raised to a repetition of this formula for the next biennium.
Reactions to the scenarios
82. Many Members emphasized their concern with the continued erosion in real terms of the resources put at the disposal of FAO. This was having, inter alia, a deleterious impact on FAO's image, on its capacity to act as a Centre of Excellence and on staff morale. They drew attention to the significant efficiency gains achieved in the recent past despite overall resource constraints. They felt that resumption of real growth would be fully warranted and would, moreover, constitute an appropriate and timely signal in the light of the continuing problems of hunger and malnutrition experienced in various regions, the extensive requirements of the Membership and the demands placed on the Organization, particularly in the wake of the World Food Summit. Consequently, several Members said they could only consider the ZRG option as the strict minimum while others expressed a preference for the ZRG option.
83. Several Members supported the ZNG scenario, as pursued by their Governments as a general policy throughout the UN System. They stated that further savings were possible by seeking maximum efficiency and by setting priorities according to the criteria previously established by the Council, including demonstrated expertise and comparative advantage. They observed that, the minimal difference between ZRG and ZNG due to favourable exchange rate developments and new and continuing cost saving reforms in FAO made the latter option achievable without undue stress. Some Members also mentioned the persistent problem of arrears.
84. In this connection, the Council exhorted all Members in arrears to honour their commitments.
85. In addressing the substance of proposals, many Members highlighted specific activities or programmes to which they attached particular importance. The following areas in particular were stressed as meriting priority attention: assistance to countries in the context of forthcoming trade negotiations; Codex Alimentarius and the IPPC; Fisheries (in particular the Code of Conduct on Responsible Fisheries) and Forestry; FIVIMS and the GIEWS, assistance to Small Island Developing States, IPM, the SPFS, TCP, compilation and dissemination of statistics, and the role of women and gender mainstreaming.
Conclusions
86. The Council recognized that the above differing positions precluded at the present time a consensus recommendation on a budget level for the 2000-2001 biennium. Based on the more detailed information which would be available in the full Programme of Work and Budget as regarded the various scenarios, the Council invited further efforts to seek a possible consensus at the September sessions of the Programme and Finance Committees and its own next session, prior to final consideration of the Programme of Work and Budget by the Conference.
87. The Council endorsed the Director-General's proposal to bring forward the planned consolidation and integration of administrative structures within the constraint of available resources with a view to full implementation in early 2000.
88. In the development of the full Programme of Work and Budget, the Council stressed the importance of reflecting to the maximum extent possible the recommendations made and priorities identified by the Committees of the Council in their respective sectors, as well as by the Ministerial Sessions. Other paramount aspects were to maintain an appropriate balance between normative and operational activities and redress, to the extent possible, present imbalances in the use of FAO languages. It was also essential to continue to ensure full complementarity of action with all FAO partners, within and outside the UN System, in particular taking account of the ongoing stream of reforms throughout the System.
FAO STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK 2000-2015
(VERSION 3.0)^20
89. The Council welcomed the progress made in developing the Strategic Framework since the examination of Version 1.0 at its last session. It took note in particular of the contributions made by its Technical Committees (CCP, COFI, COFO and COAG) at their sessions earlier in the year, as part of the extensive consultation process foreseen for this exercise. The Council was also informed that comments received from FAO partners so far had been taken into account.
90. With the benefit of the views of the Programme and Finance Committees, the Council addressed the structure and contents of Version 3.0. It considered that Part I - Overall Strategic Framework defined guiding principles for shaping the Corporate Strategies and Strategic Objectives proposed in Part II, and while agreeing that some of the historical references could be abridged, stressed the importance of the basic mandate, as well as the results and conclusions of relevant international conferences, particularly the World Food Summit, as a foundation for guiding FAO's work in the coming fifteen years. The Council welcomed the statements of Global Goals, Values, Mission and Vision for FAO, and looked forward to their further refinement in Version 4.0, taking into account the views expressed by Council Members. Some Members expressed the need for a clearer vision statement to be included in Version 4.0.
91. The Council considered Part II the heart of the document, and supported both the Strategies to Address Members' Needs and those to Address Cross-Organizational Issues. While differing opinions were expressed on the order of presentation, the Council generally accepted the present sequence of the Strategies to Address Members' Needs. It recommended that for Version 4.0 greater focus and coherence be introduced in the presentation of the Strategies, through a consolidation of elements and clarification of comparative advantages. Some Members also supported a reduction in the number of Strategy elements. It was noted that each Strategy would involve recourse both to normative and to field activities as appropriate and feasible. In this connection, many Members emphasized the importance to developing countries of the Organization's technical cooperation activities. Stress was also placed on the need for further clarification of the role FAO would play in each Strategy,
including the nature of the partnerships envisaged, both with other UN Organizations and with non-UN and non-governmental partners. Some Members stressed the necessity for the programme-planning framework to focus on results and outcomes, and requested that a monitoring system be developed.
92. The Council welcomed the inclusion of Part III - Implementation Programme for the Strategic Framework, which had the merit inter alia of enlightening readers about the place of the Strategic Framework in the new programme-planning arrangements and related documentation. The Council requested that further attention be given to defining criteria for priority-setting considering FAO's comparative advantages. In this regard, some Members suggested that clearer links should be established between the criteria in Part III and the Strategies outlined in Part II of the document. The Council invited further refinement of these concepts in the next version of the document. These concepts should be applied within the context of the new programming approach to be used for the next Medium-Term Plan, together with successive biennial Programmes of Work and Budget.
93. In connection with the Annexes, the Council noted the list of priorities by region contained in Annex IV, Regional Perspectives, and it called to the attention of FAO Members and Regional Groups that, if Members or Groups wished to make comments and amendments, they should submit them to the Secretariat as a matter of urgency, in order to facilitate further elaboration of the Annex. As regarded the information on partnerships as given in Annex III, the Council requested that the relative role of FAO vis-à-vis its partners in the various areas for which cooperative links were envisaged, be rigorously assessed and more precisely specified.
94. In the course of discussion of this agenda item, some Members expressed interest in the proposal for an "alliance for agricultural development" in order to promote greater cooperation among the Rome-based agricultural organizations, in particular FAO, WFP and IFAD.
Conclusions
95. The Council stated that the process underway should be led by Members, demonstrating a high-level of political commitment. To this effect, it was considered fundamental that Members play a decisive role in the final stage of this process.
96. The Council fully endorsed the recommendation of the Programme and Finance Committees to make Version 4.0 as concise as possible, with supporting material to be included in a supplement to the document itself.
97. The Council stressed the need for Members to have the possibility to study the next version well ahead of the Conference, thereby enhancing the nature of the Strategic Framework as the policy document to guide the action of FAO over the longer term.
98. The Council agreed that an Executive Summary should be developed. Some Members, however, requested that a summary be available with Version 4.0.
REPORT OF THE JOINT MEETING OF THE PROGRAMME COMMITTEE AND THE FINANCE COMMITTEE
(ROME, MAY 1999)^21
Change in the Quota Distribution System of Information Products
99. The Council appreciated the review by the Committees of the issue of a reduced quota distribution system for FAO's publications, aiming at a more economical and better targeted approach, which would still meet the requirements of the Membership in an equitable manner. After discussion of various options, the Council agreed with the introduction henceforth of the following arrangements: Members would receive free of charge five copies of each publication subject to quota, unless countries specifically requested that the number be increased to ten copies. Additional copies would be available at a discount of 20 percent for developed countries and 60 percent for developing countries.
100. The Council was informed that these arrangements would not affect free distribution of publications through specialized mailing lists of various FAO units or copies made available to FAO repository libraries. In welcoming the potential savings to be achieved through these measures, the Council urged that efforts continue to be made to rationalize the distribution of documentation and publications, in the search for further economies.
Report on Decentralization^22
101. The Council welcomed the consideration of this item by the Committees, in view of the importance of the enhanced decentralization policy undertaken at the behest of its Hundred and Sixth Session (Rome, 30 May - 1 June 1994). The Council noted that the Committees had been able to discuss the respective roles of the various components of FAO decentralized structure, and endorsed the conclusions as set out in the report of the Joint Meeting.
102. The Council agreed that periodic assessments of the implementation of the above policy were warranted, given its widespread impact on the work of the Organization. It, therefore, looked forward to further consideration of the matter within the framework of the Committees, as well as in the context of its own future sessions.
Other Matters Arising Out of the Report^23
103. The Council noted with satisfaction that, under their standing item on Savings and Efficiencies in Governance, the Committees had been able to consider and endorse a Final Report on the Implementation on Conference Resolution 13/97: Review of FAO Statutory Bodies and Panels of Experts. The Council agreed to consider the comments and recommendations of the Committees on the Implications of Scheduling Separate Meetings for Ministers during Conference, in the context of its consideration of Item 11 of its Agenda (see paras 58 to 62 above).
REPORT OF THE EIGHTY-FIRST SESSION OF THE
PROGRAMME COMMITTEE
(ROME, 3 - 7 MAY 1999)^24
Review of FAO Language Policy
104. The Council welcomed the thorough consideration of this issue by the Programme Committee, following its own directives and the strong interest of Members at its last session. It noted that the Finance Committee had reached similar conclusions and welcomed the analytical document which had been submitted to both Committees.
105. The Council unanimously reaffirmed the principle of equality of FAO languages as prescribed in General Rule XLVII and its importance in ensuring the widest possible access to FAO information and the fullest participation of Member Nations in the work of FAO. While appreciating the efforts made to protect the application of this principle despite the resource constraints experienced in the recent past, the Council expressed concern at the clear signs of imbalance in the use of all FAO languages. Priority should be given to this matter in FAO so as to facilitate communication and understanding of the issues raised.
106. The Council emphasized that appropriate resources should be allocated in the Programme of Work and Budget 2000-2001 under each budget option in order to reduce the present imbalance in the use of languages of the Organization. In addition to maintaining adequate qualitative standards, quantitative improvements to equitable translation and publication of documents was also an important factor to bear in mind within the budgetary limits of the Organization.
107. The Council requested the Secretariat to submit to the Programme and Finance Committees supplementary information concerning resource allocations in support of language policy in FAO in previous biennial budgets, in the proposed PWB for 2000-2001 and in the long term to demonstrate the progressive improvement sought by the Council.
108. Among the areas specifically singled out for improvement were: essential normative activities such as Codex Alimentarius and phytosanitary standards; animal and plant genetic resources; the Sub-committee on Fish Trade of the Committee on Fisheries; WAICENT and the Organization's Website on the Internet; and activities of self-evident geographical interest, where the use of FAO languages of the most directly concerned countries was imperative to ensure their full participation.
109. The Council reaffirmed that multilingualism was one of the Organization's major assets and one that was particularly relevant to its function of disseminator of information. A key aspect was that FAO staff be required to take a more proactive attitude to ensuring more balanced use of FAO languages, which should be supported by adequate training programmes and attention to linguistic skills at the recruitment stage.
110. The Council recognized that ensuring adequate language balance was also dependent on working arrangements within the Secretariat, the appropriateness of rules to reach the objectives and suitable systems for monitoring. The importance of the linguistic capabilities of senior staff in FAO's languages and their effective use within the Secretariat was emphasized.
Other Matters Arising Out of the Report^25
111. The Council noted that the Committee had carried out its usual examination of JIU reports and documents, and took note of the items foreseen for discussion at its next and future sessions.
REPORT OF THE NINETY-FIRST (ROME, 11 JANUARY 1999) AND NINETY-SECOND (ROME, 3-7 MAY 1999) SESSIONS OF THE FINANCE COMMITTEE
Financial Position of the Organization^26
112. The Council considered the financial position of the Organization at 16 June 1999 which compared favourably with that of recent years at the same date. Fifty Member Nations had paid their current assessments in full, while a further 22 Members had made partial payment and 103 Members had made no payment towards their 1999 assessment. The Council expressed concern over the high level of arrears outstanding and while appreciating the often difficult financial situations of some countries, emphasis was nonetheless placed on the importance of all Member Nations, irrespective of size, to honour their financial obligations towards the Organization. All Member Nations were, therefore, urged to pay their contributions in full and on time in order to enable the Organization to continue to fulfil its mandate.
Budgetary Performance 1998^27
113. The Council noted that, as per established practice, the Finance Committee had considered and endorsed the annual report on 1998 budgetary performance including the projected budgetary transfers between Chapters. While regretting that these transfers would negatively affect available resources under Chapter 2 of the Programme of Work and Budget, the Council appreciated the reasons for them and accordingly endorsed the report.
Scale of Contributions 2000-2001^28
114. The Council noted that in accordance with the decision of the Eighth Session of the Conference (1955), the FAO Scale of Contributions for the years 2000-01 (Appendix E) had been derived directly from the United Nations Scale of Assessments, in this case the one in force for the year 2000, as established by General Assembly Resolution 52/215 adopted on 22 December 1997.
115. The Council accordingly discussed the following draft Resolution for adoption by the Conference:
Draft Resolution for the Conference
Scale of Contributions 2000-2001
THE CONFERENCE,
Having noted the recommendations of the Hundred and Sixteenth Session of the Council,
Confirming that as in the past, FAO should follow the United Nations Scale of Assessments subject to adaptation for the different membership of FAO,
1. Decides that the FAO Scale of Contributions for 2000-01 should be derived directly from the United Nations Scale of Assessments in force during 1999;
2. Adopts for use in 2000 and 2001 the Scale as set out in Appendix E of this Report.
116. The Council noted that the Scale of Contributions as set out in Appendix E was provisional, and would be modified at the time of the forthcoming Session of the Conference in the event of new Members being admitted to the Organization.
117. The Council noted that the largest contributor intended to negotiate the reduction of the "ceiling rate", (the maximum rate of contribution) with the UN Committee on Contributions in New York, from the current twenty-five percent to twenty-two percent. The largest contributor informed the Council that, since the UN Scale for the period 2001-2003 would not be adopted until after the FAO Conference, it would request that the Conference Resolution be amended to allow for the modification of the Scale for the year 2001. The Council noted that a similar amendment had been adopted by the Conference in 1997.
118. Concern was expressed over the possible effects of the reduction of the "ceiling rate". The Secretariat advised that a document showing a revised Scale, taking into account this change, would be presented to the Finance Committee at its September 1999 Session.
119. The Council recommended to continue the discussion at the next Session of the Council based on the outcome of deliberations to take place at the next Finance Committee.
CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL MATTERS
REPORT OF THE SIXTY-NINTH SESSION OF THE COMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL MATTERS (CCLM)
(ROME, 26-27 APRIL 1999)^29
120. The Council considered and adopted the Report of the Sixty-ninth Session of the CCLM.
Acceptance of Credentials: Practice of Selected Organizations of the UN System
121. The Council considered the Report of the CCLM on this question and, bearing in mind the following considerations:
a. The apparent desire of FAO Members as expressed in the recommendations of both the Programme and Finance Committees and the Council for more flexibility in the treatment of credentials, for speeding up the work of the Credentials Committee and for recognizing advances in technology;
b. The need to preserve the integrity of credentials and to ensure that the formal requirements as in force in all organizations of the UN system are not undermined;
recommended that the Credentials Committee adopt the following approach:
a. there should be no change to the present flexible approach of allowing delegations to be seated provisionally, even if their credentials are not fully in order pending the final report of the Credentials Committee;
b. the Credentials Committee should follow the UN practice of listing separately those Members and Associate Members whose credentials are considered as valid (list A) and those Members and Associate Members whose credentials are considered merely as information on their delegations (list B). The report submitted to the Conference, for approval, should include lists A and B, on the understanding that formal credentials of Members and Associate Members referred to in list B would be communicated to the Director-General as soon as possible;
c. list A would include only Members and Associate Members whose credentials bear the signature, or are signed on behalf of, either of the following: the Head of State, the Head of Government, the Minister of Foreign Affairs or the Minister of the Department concerned in accordance with Rule III.2 of the General Rules of the Organization.
d. list B would include Members and Associate Members whose credentials are submitted in the form of:
i. letters signed by an ambassador, chief of mission, or chargé d'affaires, which contain a phrase confirming that they are acting upon instruction from their governments;
ii. "Ordres de Mission" if specific mention is made of the current session of the Conference and if they are signed by the Minister concerned;
iii. Notes Verbales; and
iv. faxes when they are copies of the original credentials;
122. In view of the above, the Council concurred with the CCLM recommendation that the present provisions of the General Rules of the Organization regarding credentials should not be amended.
Amendments to the General Rules of the Organization:
A. Abolition of the Nominations Committee
B. Introduction of Electronic Voting
C. Voting Procedures for Elections
D. Abolition of the Technical Committees of the Conference
123. The Council endorsed the draft amendments to the General Rules of the Organization recommended by the CCLM and agreed to forward the following draft Resolution to the Conference for adoption:
Draft Resolution for the Conference
Amendments to the General Rules of the Organization
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling that the Council, at its Hundred and Fourteenth Session in November 1997, requested the Joint Meeting of the Programme and Finance Committees to review the procedures and methods of work for Conference sessions, including voting and relevant General Rules of the Organization, in order to ensure that those procedures are efficient and time effective whilst protecting the rights of individual members,
Recalling further that the Council, at its Hundred and Fifteenth Session in November 1998, in reviewing the procedures and methods of work for Conference Sessions in the light of the proposals of the Joint Meeting of the Programme and Finance Committees and the comments of the CCLM, requested the CCLM to continue its examination of the Basic Texts and to submit to the June 1999 Council draft amendments to the General Rules of the Organization to permit:
a. The abolition of the Nominations Committee and the transfer of its functions to the Council including designation of the Credentials Committee by the June Session of the Council subject to formal election by the Conference.
b. The introduction of an electronic voting system.
c. The election of Council Members by clear general consent whenever the number of candidates was equal to the number of vacancies.
d. The elimination of references to Conference Technical Committees.
Noting the recommendation of the Council, at its Hundred and Sixteenth Session in June 1999, that the General Rules of the Organization should be amended as proposed by the CCLM, at its Sixty-ninth Session in April 1999,
Adopts the following amendments to the General Rules of the Organization:
Rule VII
Nominations
The Chairman of the Conference, the Chairmen of the Commissions of the Conference, the three Vice-Chairmen of the Conference, the members of the Credentials Committee and the elected members of the General Committee, provided for by Rule X, paragraph 1 shall be nominated by the Council.
Rule VIII
Election of Chairman and Vice-Chairmen of the Conference and of the members of the Credentials and General Committees
The Conference shall, after consideration of the Report of the Council, elect:
(a) from the delegations, a Chairman and three Vice-Chairmen;
(b) from the Member Nations:
(i) the Credentials Committee, as provided in Rule III, Paragraph 3;
(ii) the seven members of the General Committee to be elected as provided in Rule X, paragraph 1.
Rule XII
Quorum and voting arrangements at meetings of Conference and Council
(c) Abstentions shall be recorded:
(i) in a vote by show of hands, only for those delegates or representatives who raise their hands in response to the Chairman's request for abstentions;
(ii) in a roll call vote, only for those delegates or representatives who reply "Abstention";
(iii) in a secret ballot, only for such ballot papers deposited in the ballot box as are either blank or marked "Abstention".
(iii bis) in a vote by electronic means, only for those delegates or representatives who indicate "abstention".
6. Voting shall be by show of hands, roll call or secret ballot.
7. (a) Subject to the provisions of paragraph 9 of this Rule, a vote by roll call shall be taken either upon request of a delegate or representative, or if a majority of two thirds is required by the Constitution or these Rules. Voting by roll call shall be conducted by calling in English alphabetical order the names of all Member Nations entitled to vote. The name of the first nation to be called shall be designated by lot drawn by the Chairman. The delegate or representative of each Member Nation shall reply "Yes", "No", or "Abstention". At the conclusion of any roll call, the name of any Member Nation whose delegate or representative failed to answer shall be called again. The vote of each Member Nation participating in any vote by roll call shall be inserted in the record of the meeting.
(b) The count and recording of votes by show of hands or by roll call shall be conducted by or under the supervision of the Conference or Council elections officer, appointed by the Director-General in accordance with the terms of paragraph 16 below.
(c) If for two successive ballots by roll call the name of the same nation is drawn, the name of another nation shall be designed by lot or lots drawn by the Chairman.
7bis. When the Conference or Council votes by electronic means, a vote without recording names shall replace a vote by show of hands and a nominal vote shall replace a roll-call. In the case of a nominal vote, the procedure of calling out the names of the members shall not be applicable unless the Conference or Council otherwise decides. The vote of each member participating in a nominal vote shall be inserted in the record.
9. (a) The appointment of the Chairman of the Council and of the Director-General, and the admission of additional Member Nations and Associate Members shall be decided by secret ballot. Other elections shall likewise be decided by secret ballot, except that in the case of an election in which there are not more candidates than vacancies the Chairman may submit to the Conference or Council that the appointment be decided by clear general consent.
(b) Any other matter shall be decided by secret ballot if the Conference or Council so determines.
Rule XV
Other committees of the Conference
1. The Conference may appoint, or authorize the appointment of, any temporary or special committee which it deems necessary. Delegates of Associate Members shall have the right to participate in the deliberations of any such committee, but shall not hold office nor have the right to vote.
2. The chairman of any committee set up under this Rule shall be elected by such committee. He shall have, in relation to meetings of the committee, the same power and duties as the Chairman of the Conference has in relation to meetings of the Conference. A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum. Decisions in the committee shall be taken by a majority of the votes cast. No member shall have more than one vote. A member of the committee who is unable to be present at any meeting may be represented by another member of his delegation. Meetings of the committee shall be held in private, unless otherwise determined by the Conference.
Rule XXIV
Functions of the Council
5. General
The Council shall:
(b) propose candidates for the office of Chairman of the Conference, the Chairmen of the Commissions of the Conference, the three Vice-Chairmen of the Conference, the members of the Credentials Committee and the elected members of the General Committee ;
Rule XLII
Arrangements for the Conference
2. Member Organizations shall not participate in the Credentials Committee or the General Committee or any other body of the Conference dealing with the internal working of the Conference as the Conference may decide.
Abolition of the Indian Ocean Fishery Commission and Merger of the Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal with the Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission
124. The Council considered the Report of the CCLM on this question and adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 1/116
Abolition of the Indian Ocean Fishery Commission and its Subsidiary Bodies
Approval of the Merger of the Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal with the Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission
THE COUNCIL,
Recalling that the Indian Ocean Fishery Commission (IOFC) was established under Article VI.1 of the FAO Constitution by Resolution 2/48 adopted by the Council at its Forty-eighth Session;
Noting that the Committee on Fisheries, at its Twenty-second Session in 1997 agreed that FAO regional fishery bodies "should be reviewed and evaluated in depth by their members on a case by case basis, taking full account of regional and membership differences in determining what measures might be taken to facilitate the strengthening of each body as appropriate";
Noting that at its Hundred and Twelfth Session in June 1997, the Council, in adopting the report of the Twenty-second Session of the Committee on Fisheries, stressed the need for effective regional fishery organizations and arrangements and agreed that FAO regional fishery bodies should be reviewed and evaluated with a view to strengthening them;
Noting the recommendation by IOFC, at its Eleventh Session, in February 1999, that IOFC be abolished;
Noting further the wishes expressed by IOFC, at its Eleventh Session, that the Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal be merged with the Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission and that the Committee for the Development and Management of the Fisheries Resources of the Gulfs and the Committee of the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Southwest Indian Ocean be established as Article XIV bodies under the FAO Constitution;
1. Hereby abolishes the Indian Ocean Fishery Commission together with all its subsidiary bodies;
2. Approves that the functions of the former Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal be absorbed by the Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission;
3. Authorizes the Director-General to convene ad hoc meetings of the members of the former Committee for the Development and Management of the Fisheries Resources of the Gulfs and the former Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Southwest Indian Ocean, as required, in order to complete the process of establishment of the new bodies envisaged and to take such interim action as may be required regarding the management of the fisheries resources of the areas covered by those former committees pending the formal establishment of the new bodies during the period preceding their formal conversion into Article XIV bodies.
INVITATIONS TO NON-MEMBER NATIONS TO ATTEND FAO SESSIONS^30
125. In accordance with paragraphs B-1 and B-2 of the "Statement of Principles relating to the Granting of Observer Status to Nations"^31, the Council agreed that the Russian Federation attend as an observer to the Hundred and Sixteenth Session of the FAO Council.
126. The Council also noted that since its Hundred and Fifteenth Session (Rome, 23 to 28 November 1998), the Director-General, on so being requested, had extended invitations to the Russian Federation to attend as an observer to the following FAO Sessions: Sixty-second Session of the Committee on Commodity Problems, Rome, 12 to 15 January 1999 (ESC-701); Fifteenth Session of the Committee on Agriculture (COAG), Rome, 25 to 29 January 1999 (COAG-701); Twenty-third Session of the Committee on Fisheries (COFI), Rome, 15 to 19 February 1999 (FI-701); Fourteenth Session of the Committee on Forestry (COFO), Rome, 1 to 5 March 1999 (FO-701); Ministerial Meeting on Sustainability Issues in Forestry: the National and International Challenges, Rome, 8 to 9 March 1999 (DG-54(FO)); Ministerial Meeting on the Implementation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, Rome, 10 to 11 March 1999 (DG-54(FI)); Thirty-third Session of the European Commission for the Control of
Foot-and-Mouth Disease (EUFMD), Rome, 7 to 9 April 1999 (AGA-701).
APPLICATION FOR MEMBERSHIP IN THE ORGANIZATION^32
127. The Council was informed of the application for membership received from the Government of Niue.
128. Pending a decision by the Conference on this application and pursuant to Rule XXV.11 of the General Rules of the Organization and paragraphs B-1, B-2 and B-5 of the "Statement of Principles relating to the Granting of Observer Status to Nations", the Council authorized the Director-General to invite Niue to participate, in an observer capacity, in appropriate Council meetings as well as regional and technical meetings of the Organization of interest to them.
OTHER MATTERS
REVISED CALENDAR OF FAO GOVERNING BODIES AND OTHER MAIN SESSIONS 1998-99^33
129. The Council approved the Revised Calendar of FAO Governing Bodies and Other Main Sessions 1998-99, as given in Appendix F to this Report, and agreed that its Hundred and Seventeenth Session be convened from 9 to 11 November 1999 at FAO Headquarters.
APPOINTMENT OF THE CHAIRPERSON AND ALTERNATE CHAIRPERSONS OF THE APPEALS COMMITTEE^34
130. In accordance with Staff Regulation 301.111, the Council appointed H.E. Siméon Aké, Ambassador of the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire to the Holy See, as the Chairperson of the Appeals Committee.
131. The Council also appointed H.E. Felipe H. Paolillo, Ambassador of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay to the Holy See and Permanent Representative to FAO, as First Alternate Chairperson of the Appeals Committee, and H.E. Francis Montanaro Mifsud, Ambassador of the Republic of Malta to FAO, as Second Alternate Chairperson of the Appeals Committee.
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF AMBASSADOR JAI KUMAR ATAL OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA (CHAIRMAN OF THE APPEALS COMMITTEE)^35
132. The Council paid tribute to the memory of His Excellency Jai Kumar Atal, formerly Ambassador of the Republic of India and Chairman of the Appeals Committee, who passed away on 31 May 1999.
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF MR C.H. MURRAY, FORMER ASSISTANT DIRECTOR-GENERAL, FORESTRY DEPARTMENT^36
133. The Council also paid tribute to the memory of Mr C.H. Murray, former Assistant Director-General, Forestry Department, who had passed away on 11 June 1999.
17 C 99/4; CL 116/14; CL 116/PV/4; CL 116/PV/9.
18 CL 116/3; CL 116/3-Sup.1; CL 116/4 (paras 14 to 21); CL 116/14 (paras 27 to 65); CL 116/16 (paras 11 to 16); CL 116/PV/2; CL 116/PV/9.
19 CL 116/3 Sup.1.
20 CL 116/4 (paras 6 to 13); CL 116/12; CL 116/14 (paras 7 to 17); CL 116/16 (paras 4 to 10); CL 116/PV/1; CL 116/PV/2; CL 116/PV/9.
21 CL 116/4 (paras 24-25); CL 116/16 (paras 45-46); CL 116/LIM/3; CL 116/PV/5; CL 116/PV/9.
22 CL 116/4 (paras 22-23); CL 116/PV/5; CL 116/PV/9.
23 CL 116/PV/5; CL 116/PV/9.
24 CL 116/14 (paras 66-72); CL 116/16 (paras 47-52); CL 116/INF/4; CL 116/PV/5; CL 116/PV/9.
25 CL 116/PV/5; CL 116/PV/9.
26 CL 116/LIM/1; CL 116/PV/6; CL 116/PV/9.
27 CL 116/16 (paras 17-22); CL 116/PV/6; CL 116/PV/9.
28 CL 116/16 (paras 29-33); CL 116/16-Sup.1; CL 116/PV/6; CL 116/PV/9.
29 CL 116/5; CL 116/PV/9.
30 CL 116/LIM/2; CL 116/PV/1; CL 116/PV/9.
31 See FAO Basic Texts, volume II, Section L (Appendix).
32 CL 116/20; CL 116/PV/8; CL 116/PV/9.
33 CL 116/19; CL 116/PV/8; CL 116/PV/9.
34 CL 116/LIM/4; CL 116/PV/8; CL 116/PV/9.
35 CL 116/PV/1; CL 116/PV/9.
36 CL 116/PV/5; CL 116/PV/9.
APPENDIX A
AGENDA FOR THE HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH
SESSION OF THE COUNCIL
I. INTRODUCTION - PROCEDURE OF THE SESSION
1. Adoption of the Agenda and Timetable
2. Election of Three Vice-Chairmen, and Designation of the Chairman and Members of the Drafting Committee
II. WORLD FOOD AND AGRICULTURE SITUATION
3. Current World Food Situation
4. Report of the 25th Session of the Committee on World Food Security (Rome, 31 May - 4 June 1999)
III. ACTIVITIES OF FAO AND WFP
5. Report of the 62nd Session of the Committee on Commodity Problems (Rome, 12-15 January 1999)
6. Report of the 15th Session of the Committee on Agriculture (Rome, 25-29 January 1999)
7. Report of the 23rd Session of the Committee on Fisheries (Rome, 15-19 February 1999)
8. Report of the 14th Session of the Committee on Forestry (Rome, 1-5 March 1999)
8.1 Venue of the Twelfth World Forestry Congress
9. Negotiations on the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources
10. World Food Programme
10.1 Annual Report of the WFP Executive Board on its Activities in 1998
10.2 Amendments to the General Regulations and Rules of WFP
11. Preparations for the 30th Session of the FAO Conference
11.1 Arrangements for the Session and Provisional Timetable
11.2 Deadline for Nominations for Independent Chairman of the Council
11.3 Nomination of the Chairman of the Conference, and of the Chairmen of the Commissions
12. Preparations for the Conference on the Multifunctional Character of Agriculture and Land (Maastricht, Netherlands, September 1999)
13. Draft Plan of Action on Agriculture in Small Island Developing States
IV. PROGRAMME, BUDGETARY, FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
14. Programme Evaluation Report 1998-99
15. Summary Programme of Work and Budget 2000-2001
16. FAO Strategic Framework 2000-2015 (Version 3.0)
17. Report of the Joint Meeting of the Programme Committee and the Finance Committee (Rome, 5 May 1999)
17.1 Change in the Quota Distribution System of Information Products
17.2 Report on Decentralization
17.3 Other Matters Arising Out of the Report
18. Report of the 81st Session of the Programme Committee (Rome, 3-7 May 1999)
18.1 Review of FAO Language Policy
18.2 Other Matters Arising Out of the Report
19. Report of the 91st (Rome, 11 January 1999) and 92nd (Rome, 3-7 May 1999) Sessions of the Finance Committee
19.1 Financial Position of the Organization
19.2 Budgetary Performance 1998
19.3 Scale of Contributions 2000-2001
V. CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL MATTERS
20. Report of the 69th Session of the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (Rome, 26-27 April 1999)
21. Other Constitutional and Legal Matters
21.1 Invitations to Non-Member Nations to Attend FAO Sessions
21.2 Application for Membership in the Organization
VI. OTHER MATTERS
22. Revised Calendar of FAO Governing Bodies and Other Main Sessions 1998-99
23. Any Other Matters
23.1 Appointment of the Chairperson and Alternate Chairpersons of the Appeals Committee
Table of contents
<section>3</section>
APPENDIX B
LIST OF DELEGATES AND OBSERVERS
LISTE DES DÉLÉGUÉS ET OBSERVATEURS
LISTA DE DELEGADOS Y OBSERVADORES
Independent Chairman
Président indépendant
Presidente Independiente
Sjarifudin BAHARSJAH
Vice-Chairpersons
Vice-président(e)s
Vice-Presidentes Birgitte MØLLER CHRISTENSEN (Denmark)
Adnan Bashir KHAN (Pakistan)
Luis A. WAGNER (Paraguay)
MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL
MEMBRES DU CONSEIL
MIEMBROS DEL CONSEJO
ARGENTINA - ARGENTINE 
Representante 
Enrique A. PAREJA
Embajador de la República Argentina en Zimbabwe
Harare 
Suplentes 
Sra. Hilda Graciela GABARDINI
Ministro
Encargado de Negocios a.i.
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma Ariel FERNÁNDEZ
Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Asesor 
Juan Carlos Roland VIGNAUD
Embajador de la República Argentina ante el Reino de Suecia
Estocolmo 
AUSTRALIA - AUSTRALIE 
Representative 
Brett HUGHES
Director (FAO Section)
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Canberra 
Alternate 
Paul ROSS
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
AUSTRIA - AUSTRICHE 
Representative 
Ms Hedwig WÖGERBAUER
Head of the Division for FAO Affairs
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Vienna 
Alternate 
Ms Natalie FEISTRITZER
Attaché (Agricultural Affairs)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
BANGLADESH 
Representative 
Ayub QUADRI
Secretary
Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock
Dhaka 
Alternates 
Muhammad ZAMIR
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mohammad MEJBAHUDDIN
Counsellor (Economic)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
BARBADOS - BARBADE 
Representative 
Lyall W. SMALL
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Bridgetown 
BRAZIL - BRÉSIL - BRASIL 
Representative 
Júlio C. GOMES dos SANTOS
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Ms Mitzi GURGEL VALENTE da COSTA
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome João Maurício CABRAL de MELLO
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Ms Virginia TONIATTI
First Secretary
Deputy Chief of the Division of Social Themes
Ministry of External Relations
Brasilia Luis GHELLER
Adviser to the Minister for Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture
Brasilia
CAMEROON - CAMEROUN - CAMERÚN
Représentant 
Aboubakary ABDOULAYE
Secretaire d'Etat pour l'agriculture
Yaoundé 
Suppléants 
Michael TABONG KIMA
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Thomas NDIVE MOKAKE
Deuxième Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
Philip MOUMIE
Secrétaire Permanent
Comité de gestion de l'assistance FAO/PAM
Yaoundé Maurice BAYEMI
Secretaire Général
Ministère de l'Elevage, des pêches et des industries animales
Yaoundé
Marc SAMANTANA
Directeur
Ministère de l'agriculture
Yaoundé Jean-Prosper TCHUIKOU
Représentant du Ministre
Ministère des relations exterieures
Yaoundé
CANADA - CANADÁ 
Representative 
Bill DOERING
Executive Director
Programs and Multilateral Affairs Division
International Markets Bureau
Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food
Ottawa 
Alternates 
Ronald ROSE
Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Yvan HARDY
Assistant Deputy Minister
Canadian Forest Service
Natural Resources Canada
Ottawa
Ms Rollande LEDUC
Deputy Director
Programs and Multilateral Affairs Division
Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food
Ottawa Jacques CARETTE
Director General
Policy, Planning and International Affairs Branch
Canadian Forest Service
Natural Resources Canada
Ottawa
David STEVENSON
Senior Adviser
Programs and Multilateral Affairs Division
Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food
Ottawa Ms Rosalie McCONNELL
Senior Policy Adviser
International Affairs
Canadian Forest Service
Natural Resources Canada
Ottawa
Ms Thi Lan HOANG
Adviser
UN Specialized Agencies and Economic Issues
Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade
Ottawa Ken MACARTNEY
Director
Environmental Relations Division
Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade
Ottawa
Ms Claude LEMIEUX
Senior Program Manager
United Nations and Commonwealth Program
Canadian International Development Agency
Ottawa Germain PARE
Environmental Relations Division
Natural Resources
Québec
CHILE - CHILI 
Representante 
Victor Manuel REBOLLEDO GONZÁLEZ
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma 
Suplentes 
Jorge NORAMBUENA
Funcionario
Dirección de Política Multilateral
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores
Santiago Humberto MOLINA REYES
Segundo Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
CHINA - CHINE 
Representative 
TANG ZHENGPING
Director-General
Department of International Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
Beijing 
Alternates 
LIANG QU
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome WANG ZHANLU
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
TANG SHENGYAO
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome SUN SHENGZHI
Third Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
CUBA 
Representante 
Juan NUIRY SÁNCHEZ
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma 
Suplentes 
Sra. Ana María NAVARRO ARRÚE
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma José António SAAVEDRA GONZÁLEZ
Especialista
Dirección de Organismos Económicos Internacionales
Ministerio para la Inversión Extranjera y la Colaboración Económica
La Habana
DENMARK - DANEMARK - DINAMARCA
Representative 
Mrs Ulla HEIDEN
Head of Section
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
Copenhagen 
Alternates 
Ms Birgitte MØLLER CHRISTENSEN
Minister Counsellor (Agriculture)
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Jorgen MÆRSK PEDERSEN
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
EGYPT - ÉGYPTE - EGIPTO
Representative 
Nehad Ibrahim ABDEL-LATIF
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Mohamed Abd El Hamid KHALIFA
Agricultural Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mrs Nahed EL ASHRY
Minister Plenipotentiary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Mrs Wafaa YOUSSEF
Director General
International Organizations and Conferences
Department of Foreign Agricultural Relations
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation
Cairo 
ERITREA - ÉRYTHRÉE 
Representative 
Fessahazion PIETROS
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternate 
Yohannes TENSUE
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
FRANCE - FRANCIA 
Représentant 
Louis DOMINICI
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de l'OAA
Rome 
Suppléants 
Alain PIERRET
Président du Comité interministériel pour l'alimentation et l'agriculture
Paris Paul LUU
Chef du bureau Afrique Méditerranée
Direction de la production et des échanges
Ministère de l'agriculture et de la pêche
Paris
Patrick PRUVOT
Secrétaire général du Comité interministériel
pour l'alimentation et l'agriculture
Paris Hervé GALLÈPE
Conseiller
Représentation permanente de la France auprès de
l'Union européenne
Bruxelles
Daniel BERTHERY
Conseiller scientifique
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de l'OAA
Rome Renaud COLLARD
Chargé de mission
Direction des Nations Unies et des organisations internationales
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Paris
GABON - GABÓN 
Représentant 
Ernest MICKALA DOUKAGA
Directeur général de l'agriculture, de l'élevage
et du développement rural
Libreville 
GERMANY - ALLEMAGNE - ALEMANIA
Representative 
Dietrich LINCKE
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Klaus GARCKE
Head of Division
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry
Bonn Hans HOLSTEIN
European Union Council Secretariat
Brussels
Harald HILDEBRAND
Deputy Head of Division
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry
Bonn Mrs Elisa CHIANALE
European Union Council Secretariat
Brussels
Carsten HAYUNGS
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mrs Felicia KOORN
European Union Council Secretariat
Brussels
GREECE - GRÈCE - GRECIA 
Representative 
Dionyssios A. KYVETOS
Second Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Mrs Catherine GUINI
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Dimitrios DADIOTIS
Consultant
Directorate of Organizations dealing with International Economic and Monetary Affairs
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Athens
HONDURAS 
Representante 
Guillermo E. ALVARADO DOWNING
Ministro de Estado en el Despacho de Agricultura y Ganadería
Secretaría de Estado en los Despachos de Agricultura y Ganadería
Tegucigalpa 
Suplentes 
José Rafael FERRARI SAGASTUME
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Sra. Graciamaria AGUERO
Asistente
Embajada de Honduras
Roma
Srta. Cristian Mengivar RODRÍGUEZ
Agregado
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma 
HUNGARY - HONGRIE - HUNGRÍA 
Representative 
László KORBULY
Deputy Head of Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Regional Development
Budapest 
Alternate 
Mrs Mariann KÓVACS
Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
INDIA - INDE 
Representative 
Bhaskar BARUA
Secretary
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
New Delhi 
Alternates 
Kalarickal P. FABIAN
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mrs Neela GANGADHARAN
Minister (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
K.M. SAHNI
Joint Secretary
Department of Food and Civil Supplies
Ministry of Food and Consumer Affairs
New Delhi Rajesh AGGARWAL
Director (International Cooperation)
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
New Delhi
INDONESIA - INDONÉSIE 
Representative 
Soendaroe RACHMAD
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Suharyo HUSEN
Director
Bureau of International Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
Jakarta I. Nyoman ARDHA
Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Paimin SUHARNO
Head of Research and Development
The National Logistics Agency (BULOG)
Jakarta Iwan Suyudhie AMRI
Official
Directorate of Economic Multilateral Cooperation
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Jakarta
Sumpeno PUTRO
Agricultural Attaché
Permanent Representation of Indonesia to the European Community
Brussels Ms Adek Triana YUDHASWARI
Third Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
IRAN, RÉPUBLIQUE ISLAMIQUE D'
IRÁN, REPÚBLICA ISLÁMICA DEL
Representative 
Abdolali SABBAGH RENANI
Deputy Minister for Agriculture in Planning and Budget
Ministry of Agriculture
Teheran 
Alternates 
Mohammad Saeed NOURI-NAEENI
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mehdi EBRAHIMI
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Hossein YOUSSEFI
Director-General
Evaluation and Money Office
Ministry of Agriculture
Teheran Mostafa JAFARI
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
ITALY - ITALIE - ITALIA 
Représentant 
Luigi M. FONTANA-GIUSTI
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome 
Suppléants 
Mme Lucia GUIDARELLI
Ministère de la santé
Rome Mme Stefania TEDESCHI
Ministère des politiques agricoles
Rome
Mme Paola PICOTTO
Ministère de la santé
Rome Mario MARINO
Ministère des politiques agricoles
Rome
Giovanni PREVITI
Ministère du trésor
Rome Marcello GORGONI
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Rome
Mme Laura di BELLO
Ministère du trésor
Rome Lorenzo RAFFI
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Rome
Gennaro PISCOPO
Ministère des politiques agricoles
Rome Fioravanti RUGGERO
Ministère du trésor
Rome
Filippo ALESSI
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Rome Patrizia PARODI
Ministère de la santé
Rome
JAPAN - JAPON - JAPÓN 
Representative 
Kazuo TANAKA
Senior Assistant
Trade and Development Issues
Developing Economies Division
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Tokyo 
Alternates 
Kazumasa SHIOYA
Deputy Director
International Cooperation Planning Division
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo Masato ITO
Minister
Embassy of Japan
Rome
Toshio UNO
Assistant Director
Developing Economics Division
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Tokyo Takanori OHASHI
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Tuyoshi TAKEMURA
Section Chief
International Cooperation Planning Division
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo Hideya YAMADA
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
CORÉE, RÉPUBLIQUE DE
COREA, REPÚBLICA DE
Representative 
CHUNG Tae-ik
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
KIM Seon-oh
Director General
Korea Food Research Institute
Seoul CHO Il-ho
Deputy Director
Multilateral Division
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Seoul
RHO Kyeong-sang
Agrocultural Attaché
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome KWON Jae-han
Third Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
KUWAIT - KOWEÏT 
Representative 
Miss Fatimah HASAN J. HAYAT
Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
MADAGASCAR 
Représentant 
Marcel Théophile RAVELOARIJAONA
Ministre de l'agriculture
Antananarivo 
Suppléants 
Georges RUPHIN
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome MONJA
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
Paul Bernard ANDRIAMORA
Directeur de Cabinet
Ministère de l'agriculture
Antananarivo 
MALAYSIA - MALAISIE - MALASIA
Representative 
Dato' ANNUAR MA' ARUF
Secretary-General
Ministry of Agriculture
Kuala Lumpur 
Alternates 
Dato' R. VENGADESAN
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Syed BAKRI RAHMAN
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Khairuddin Md. TAHIR
Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
MAURITANIA - MAURITANIE
Représentant 
Melainine OULD MOCTAR NECHE
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome 
Suppléant 
Houssein OULD SIDI ABDALLAH
Premier Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome 
MEXICO - MEXIQUE - MÉXICO 
Representante 
Mario MOYA PALENCIA
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma 
Suplentes 
José ROBLES AGUILAR
Consejero
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma Sra. Lourdes CRUZ TRINIDAD
Directora
Cooperación y Financiamiento Internacional
Dirección General de Asuntos Internacionales
Secretaría de Agricultura, Ganadería y Desarrollo Rural
México D.F.
Sra. María de los Angeles ARRIOLA AGUIRRE
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma Sra. Claudia GONZÁLEZ EGUÍA
Representación de la Secretaría de Medio Ambiente
Recursos Naturales y Pesca (SEMARNAP) de México en Italia
Representación Permanente de México ante la FAO
Roma
MOROCCO - MAROC - MARRUECOS
Représentant 
Zine El Abidine SEBTI
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome 
Suppléants 
Ahmed AFAILAL
Ministre plénipotentiaire
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome Abdellatif BERRAHO
Secrétaire général
Institut national de recherche halieutique
Casablanca
Mohamed SBITRI
Chef de la division de la coopération
Ministère de l'agriculture, du développement rural et de la pêche
Rabat Fakhr Eddine ES-SAAIDI
Conseiller des affaires étrangères
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome
NAMIBIA - NAMIBIE 
Representative 
P.W. MISIKA
Under Secretary
Department of Agriculture and Rural Development
Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development
Windhoek 
Alternates 
Johannes N. de KLERK
Director, Agricultural Research and Training
Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development
Windhoek 
NIGERIA -NIGÉRIA 
Representative 
Gabriel S. AKUNWAFOR
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Alhaji Mai M. JIR
Director
Department of Planning, Research and Statistics
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources
Abuja Onyeabo Emmanuel ONWUKEME
First Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
PAKISTAN - PAKISTÁN
Representative 
Arif AYUB
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Adnan BASHIR KHAN
Agricultural Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
PARAGUAY 
Representante 
Luis A. WAGNER
Ministro de Agricultura y Ganadería
Asunción 
Suplentes 
Oscar CABELLO SARUBBI
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Rubén OCAMPO
Asesor Jurídico
Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería
Asunción
Rául Reginaldo INCHAUSTI VALDEZ
Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma Sra. Alicia BRITEZ
Asesora de Comunicacíon
Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería
Asunción
POLAND - POLOGNE - POLONIA
Representative 
Marek GRELA
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternate 
Ms Malgorzata PIOTROWSKA
Head of Division
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Economy
Warsaw 
QATAR 
Representative 
Ahmed Ali-AL-ANSARI
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Fahad Al-MANA
Embassy of the State of Qatar
Rome Akeel HATOOR
Embassy of the State of Qatar
Rome
Jassim Al-MOHANNADI
Expert
International and Regional Agricultural Organizations
Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Agriculture
Doha 
SAUDI ARABIA, (KINGDOM OF)
ARABIE SAOUDITE (ROYAUME D')
ARABIA SAUDITA (REINO DE)
Representative 
Ahmed Suleiman AL-AQUIL
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternate 
Bandar AL-SHALHOOB
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
SENEGAL - SÉNÉGAL 
Représentant 
Robert SAGNA
Ministre d'Etat
Ministre de l'agriculture
Dakar 
Suppléants 
Mame BALLA SY
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Latsoukabe FALL
Directeur de l'agriculture
Ministère de l'agriculture
Dakar
Moussa Bocar LY
Ministre Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome Abdoukarim DIOUF
Deuxième Conseiller
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome
Mohamed El Habib LY
Directeur
Unité de politique agricole
Dakar Alioune SECK
Commissariat à la Sécurité alimentaire
Dakar
SOUTH AFRICA - AFRIQUE DU SUD - SUDÁFRICA
Representative 
B.M. MOLOPE
Chief Director
Sustainable Resource Use and Management
National Department of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Affairs
Pretoria 
Alternates 
Julian A. THOMAS
Agricultural Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Edward X. MAKAYA
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
T. BESTER
Directorate of International Relations
National Department of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Affairs
Pretoria 
SPAIN - ESPAGNE - ESPAÑA
Representante 
Francisco José Simón VILA
Director General
Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agraria
Ministerio de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid 
Suplentes 
Ignácio TRUEBA JAINAGA
Consejero
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Javier PIERNAVIEJA NIEMBRO
Agregado
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma
Rafael PONZ ASCASO
Subdirector General de Prospectiva y Coordinación de Programas
Ministerio de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid 
SYRIA - SYRIE - SIRIA
Representative 
Mohamad Walid TAWILL
Director
Agricultural and Scientific Research
Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Damascus 
Alternates 
Kosay MOUSTAFA
Attaché
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mohamed Sleiman KARBOUJ
Director
Foreign and Arab Relations Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Damascus
Hassan KATANA
Director
Agricultural Affairs Directorate
Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Damascus 
THAILAND - THAÏLANDE - TAILANDIA
Representative 
Chao TIANTONG
Minister (Agriculture)
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Ms Ratana THANOMSAKYUTH
Chief of International Organizations Sub-Division
Foreign Agricultural Relations Division
Office of the Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok Kasem PRASUTSANGCHAN
First Secretary (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Mrs Korntip RATANAKOMUT
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Division of Foreign Agricultural Relations
Office of the Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok 
UGANDA - OUGANDA
Representative 
Wilberforce KISAMBA MUGERWA
Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
Entebbe 
Alternates 
Vincent KIRABOKYAMARIA
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Martin C. KASIRYE
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Joshua MUTABAZI
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
UNITED KINGDOM - ROYAUME-UNI - REINO UNIDO
Representative 
G. Anthony BEATTIE
Minister
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternate 
Thomas J. KELLY
Second Secretary
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mrs Nicki J. CIORBA
Permanent Representation to FAO
Rome
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
ÉTATS-UNIS D'AMÉRIQUE
ESTADOS UNIDOS DE AMÉRICA
Representative 
James W. SCHROEDER
Deputy Under Secretary
Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services
Department of Agriculture
Washington, D.C. 
Alternates 
E. Michael SOUTHWICK
Deputy Assistant Secretary
Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Department of State
Washington, D.C. Mrs Prudence FOX-LEWIS
Special Assistant to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Affairs
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Department of Commerce
Washington, D.C.
James ALLEN
Deputy Director
Agricultural Development Division
Office of International Development Assistance
Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Department of State
Washington, D.C. Richard J. HUGHES
International Relations Adviser
International Cooperation and Development
Foreign Agricultural Service
Department of Agriculture
Washington, D.C.
Mrs Laurie J. TRACY
Minister Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Nicholas MAUGER
Deputy Director
Office of International Development Assistance
Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Department of State
Washington, D.C.
Mrs Vonda Kimble DELAWIE
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Jonathan PRATT
Programme Analyst
Systems Administration
Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Department of State
Washington, D.C.
E. Wayne DENNEY
International Relations Adviser
International Organization Affairs Division
Foreign Agricultural Service
Department of Agriculture
Washington, D.C. 
VENEZUELA 
Representante 
Amadeo VOLPE
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma 
Suplentes 
Eduardo Pastor SPADARO ÁLVAREZ
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma Sra. Virginia PÉREZ PÉREZ
Primer Secretario
Dirección General Sectorial de Économía y Cooperación Internacional
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores
Caracas
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY - MEMBER ORGANIZATION
COMMUNAUTÉ EUROPÉENNE - ORGANISATION MEMBRE
COMUNIDAD EUROPEA - ORGANIZACIÓN MIEMBRO
Représentant 
Mme Vilma DU MARTEAU
Ambassadeur
Représentante permanente auprès de la FAO
Rome 
Suppléants 
Hugo-Maria SCHALLY
Chef d'Unité
Relations avec les organisations internationales
Bruxelles Mme Frances-Anne HUNTER
Attaché
Représentante permanente suppléante auprès de la FAO
Rome
Andrew BYRNE
Premier Secrétaire
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome 
OBSERVERS FROM MEMBER NATIONS NOT MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL
OBSERVATEURS D'ÉTATS MEMBRES NE SIÉGEANT PAS AU CONSEIL
OBSERVADORES DE LOS ESTADOS MIEMBROS QUE NO SON MIEMBROS DEL CONSEJO
ALGERIA - ALGÉRIE - ARGELIA
Hocine MEGHAR
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Mme Hariba YAHIA-CHERIF
Conseillère
Représentante permanente adjointe auprès de la FAO
Rome
ANGOLA 
Antero Alberto ERVEDOSA ABREU
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Carlos Alberto AMARAL
Conseiller
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome
Kiala Kia MATEVA
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome 
BELGIUM - BELGIQUE - BÉLGICA
Jacques de MONTJOYE
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Mme Justine GENTILE-PEREBOOMS
Secrétaire
Représentante permanente suppléante auprès de la FAO
Rome
BOLIVIA - BOLIVIE 
Juan Ignácio SILES del VALLE
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma Sra. Marcela VARGAS QUIROZ
Segundo Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Sra. María Soledad PAREJA DELOS
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma 
BULGARIA - BULGARIE
Krassimir KOSTOV
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
BURKINA FASO 
Mme Béatrice DAMIBA
Ambassadrice
Représentante permanente auprès de la FAO
Rome André Anatole YAMEOGO
Conseiller économique
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
BURUNDI 
Salvator NTIHABOSE
Ministre de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Bujumbura Gaspard KABURA
Premier Conseiller
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome
Philippe BUNYUNGU
Conseiller au cabinet
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Bujumbura 
CAPE VERDE - CAP-VERT - CABO VERDE
Eduardo Jorge LIMA BARROS SILVA
Secrétaire
Représentant permanent suppléant auprés de la FAO
Rome 
COLOMBIA - COLOMBIE 
Carlos MARTÍNEZ SIMAHAN
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Bernardo GUTIÉRREZ ZULUAGA BOTERO
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma
CONGO, REPUBLIC OF
CONGO, RÉPUBLIQUE DU
CONGO, REPÚBLICA DEL 
Auguste-Célestin GONGARAD NKOUA
Ministre de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Brazzaville Pierre OKILI
Attaché à l'agriculture
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Brazzaville
Marie-Alphonse KANGA-OYOUELET
Directeur des études et de la planifícation
Coordonnateur National des Projets de la FAO
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Brazzaville Rufin Gabriel AMBERO
Conseiller
Chargé d'affaires a.i.
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
Nicolas OKO
Conseiller à la coopération
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Brazzaville 
COSTA RICA 
Sra. Victoria GUARDIA ÁLVAREZ de HERNÁNDEZ
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Sra. Yolanda GAGO
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
CÔTE D'IVOIRE 
Amadou OUATTARA
Ministre Délégué
Ministre de l'agriculture et des ressources animales
Abidjan Michel SIA BI SEI
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
Emmanuel K. NOUAMA
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Coulibaly LASSINA
Secrétaire général
Comité national pour l'alimentation et de le développement
Abidjan
CROATIA - CROATIE - CROACIA
Branimir CECUK
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
CYPRUS - CHYPRE - CHIPRE
Andreas ROUSHIAS
Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
CZECH REPUBLIC - RÉPUBLIQUE TCHÈQUE - REPÚBLICA CHECA
Jiri NOVAK
Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Pavel &#138;KODA
United Nations Department
Ministry of Foreign affairs
Prague
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
RÉPUBLIQUE POPULAIRE DÉMOCRATIQUE DE CORÉE
REPÚBLICA POPULAR DEMOCRÁTICA DE COREA
Kim Hung RIM
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Han Tae SONG
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Yun Su CHANG
Ambassador
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
DOMINICA - DOMINIQUE 
Mrs Hannelore A.H. BENJAMIN
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
RÉPUBLIQUE DOMINICAINE
REPÚBLICA DOMINICANA
Juan BORG GIL
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma 
ECUADOR - ÉQUATEUR
Carlos LARREA DÁVILA
Tercer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma 
EL SALVADOR 
Sra. María Eulalia JIMÉNEZ DE MOCHI ONORI
Ministro Consejero
Encargado de Negocios a.i.
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma 
ESTONIA - ESTONIE 
Mrs Elena SUETT-ASKERSTAM
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
ETHIOPIA - ETHIOPIE - ETIOPÍA
Gebrehiwot REDAI
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
FINLAND - FINLANDE - FINLANDIA
Veli-Pekka TALVELA
Director-General
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki Ms Pirkko-Liisa KYÖSTILÄ
First Secretary
Department for International Development Cooperation
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Helsinki
Ms Aulikki KAUPPILA
Counsellor
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki Ms Ulla-Maija FINSKAS
Minister Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Ms Anneli VUORINEN
Director
Department for International Development Cooperation
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Helsinki Juhani ROUHIAINEN
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
GHANA 
Mrs Aanaa Naamua ENIN
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mallam Issah SEIDU
Minister Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
GUATEMALA 
Luis Alberto CASTAÑEDA AMAYA
Viceministro de Ganadería
Ministerio de Agricultura
Ciudad de Guatemala Sra. Rita CLAVERIE de SCIOLLI
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma
Claudio CABRERA
Gerente del Instituto Nacional de Bosques
Ciudad de Guatemala Sra. Adelina VITERI FRASER
Agregado Comercial
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Sra. Josefina MORALES FIGUEROA
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma 
GUINEA - GUINÉE 
Souhaib Deen BANGOURA
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome 
HAITI - HAÏTI - HAITÍ
Mme Suze PERCY
Conseiller
Représentante permanente adjointe auprès de la FAO
Rome 
ICELAND - ISLANDE - ISLANDIA
Björn SIGURBJÖRNSSON
Secretary-General
Ministry of Agriculture
Reykjavik Jon Erlingur JONASSON
Assistant to the Minister for Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture
Reykjavik
Gudmundur HELGASON
Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Paris 
IRAQ 
Bader J. ALLAWI
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
IRELAND - IRLANDE - IRLANDA
Joseph SMALL
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Dermot FLOOD
Economics and Planning Division
Department of Agriculture and Food
Dublin
David BEEHAN
First Secretary (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
ISRAEL - ISRAËL 
Elazar COHEN
First Secretary (Economic Affairs)
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
JORDAN - JORDANIE - JORDANIA
Samir MASARWEH
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Slaiman AL ARABIAT
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
KAZAKHSTAN - KAZAJSTÁN
Barlybay SADYKOV
Second Secretary
Embassy of Kazakhstan
Rome 
KENYA 
Bob Francis JALANG'O
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Joseph Kipchirchir BOINNET
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Paul Kipsigei CHEPKWONY
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
LEBANON - LIBAN - LÍBANO
Samir EL-KHOURY
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Fadi HAJJ ALI
Secrétaire
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome
LESOTHO 
Maxwell Tieiso KHALEMA
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mrs Ines Maphutheho RANOOE
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
LIBYA - LIBYE - LIBIA
Mansour Mabruk SEGHAYER
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
LITHUANIA - LITUANIE - LITUANIA
Algirdas ZEMAITIS
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
MALTA - MALTE 
Francis MONTANARO MIFSUD
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
MAURITIUS - MAURICE - MAURICIO
Denis CANGY
Consul
Consulate of Mauritius
Rome 
MOLDOVA, REPUBLIC OF
MOLDOVA, RÉPUBLIQUE DE
MOLDOVA, REPÚBLICA DE
Viaceslav FILIP
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
MOZAMBIQUE 
Ananias Benjamin SIGAUQUE
Second Secretary
Chargé d'Affaires a.i.
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
MYANMAR 
U KYI WIN
Third Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
NETHERLANDS - PAYS-BAS - PAÍSES BAJOS
Jan BERTELING
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome W. AARNINK
Agriculture Department
Ministry of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries
The Hague
Ewald J.N. BROUWERS
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ms Catharina W. KOS
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
J.J. NEETESON
Policy Coordinator
Department of International Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries
The Hague Jacco BOS
Alternate Permanent Representative (designate)
to FAO
Rome
R. ELKHUIZEN
United Nations Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
The Hague 
NEW ZEALAND - NOUVELLE-ZÉLANDE - NUEVA ZELANDIA
Neil FRASER
Manager
International Liaison, Policy Services
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Wellington 
NICARAGUA 
Alejandro Mejía FERRETTI
Embajador
Embajada de Nicaragua
Roma 
NORWAY - NORVÈGE - NORUEGA
Per Harald GRUE
Secretary General
Ministry of Agriculture
Oslo Ms Maren BACHKE
Executive Officer
Ministry of Agriculture
Oslo
Steinar HELGEN
Assistant Director General
Ministry of Agriculture
Oslo Dag BRISEID
Minister Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Trond Jørgen GRONGSTAD
Executive Officer
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Oslo 
PANAMA - PANAMÁ 
Ismael BERNAL MAURE
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Horacio MALTEZ
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma
PERU - PÉROU - PERÚ
Sra. Ana María DEÚSTUA CARAVEDO
Embajadora
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Miguel BARRETO
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Sra. Marcela LÓPEZ BRAVO de RUIZ
Ministro
Representante Permanente Adjunta ante la FAO
Roma 
PHILIPPINES - FILIPINAS
Philippe J. LHUILLIER
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ms Maria Luisa GAVINO
Assistant Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Noel D. de LUNA
Agricultural Attaché
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
PORTUGAL 
Pedro PINTO da SILVA
Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Carlos Alberto MILHEIRIÇO de ANDRADE FONTES
Principal Adviser
Bureau for Planning of Agricultural and Food Policies
Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development and Fisheries
Lisbon
Antônio CERCA MIGUEL
Deputy Director
Bureau for Planning of Agricultural and Food Policies
Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development and Fisheries
Lisbon 
ROMANIA - ROUMANIE - RUMANIA
Ioan PAVEL
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome 
SLOVAKIA - SLOVAQUIE - ESLOVAQUIA
Lubomír MICEK
Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mrs Barbara HELLEBRANDTOVÁ
National Secretary FAO
Ministry of Agriculture
Bratislava
Ms Ingrid JÉNEZOVÁ
Director
Bratislava 
SRI LANKA 
Ranamukalage Deeptha KULATILLEKE
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
SUDAN - SOUDAN - SUDÁN
Mohamed Said Mohamed Ali HARBI
Counsellor (Agricultural Affairs)
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
SWAZILAND - SWAZILANDIA
Patrick King LUKHELE
Director of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Mbabane 
SWEDEN - SUÈDE - SUECIA
Ms Cecilia NORDIN VAN GANSBERGHE
Head of Section
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
Stockholm Michael ODEVALL
Minister
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Stockholm
Rolf ÅKESSON
Head of Section
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
Stockholm Ms Dorrit ALOPAEUS-STÅHL
Minister
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
SWITZERLAND - SUISSE - SUIZA
Anton KOHLER
Chef du Secrétariat suisse de la FAO
Office fédéral de l'agriculture
Berne Rolf GERBER
Ministre
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome
TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF
TANZANIE, RÉPUBLIQUE-UNIE DE
TANZANÍA, REPÚBLICA UNIDA DE
Mrs Perpetua Mary Simon HINGI
Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
L'EX-RÉPUBLIQUE YOUGOSLAVE DE MACÉDOINE
LA EX-REPÚBLICA YUGOSLAVA DE MACEDONIA
Miomir RISTOVSKI
Minister Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
TUNISIA - TUNISIE - TÚNEZ
Mme Fatma LARBI
Chargée de mission et de la coopération internationale
Ministère de l'agriculture
Tunis Mahjoub LAMTI
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
Ahmed BOUGACHA
Ingénieur principal
Ministère de l'agriculture
Tunis 
TURKEY - TURQUIE - TURQUÍA
Erdil K. AKAY
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ömer GÜCÜK
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Sinan VAROL
Head of Department
Foreign Relations and EU Coordination Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
Ankara Ahmet SAYLAM
Agricultural Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Mrs Gülgönül BÜYÜKDORA
Head of Section
Foreign Relations and EU Coordination Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
Ankara 
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
ÉMIRATS ARABES UNIS
EMIRATOS ÁRABES UNIDOS
Ali Mohammed Rashed Bin RABAH
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mirghani Hassan OBEID
Embassy of The United Arab Emirates
Rome
URUGUAY 
Sra. Laura GALARZA
Agregado
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma 
VIET NAM 
Mme NGUYEN THI XUAN HUONG
Première Secrétaire
Représentante permanente suppléante auprès de la FAO
Rome 
YEMEN 
Ahmed Ali Hummed AL-HAWRI
Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
ZAMBIA - ZAMBIE 
Russell MULELE
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
Lusaka Josias P. LUNGU
Deputy Director
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
Lusaka
Isaiah CHABALA
Ambassador
Embassy of Zambia
Brussels 
ZIMBABWE 
Ms Rudo Grace MANYARARA
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ms Sophia NYAMUDEZA
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
G.H. SIGOBODHA
Ministry of Lands and Agriculture
Harare 
OBSERVERS FROM UNITED NATIONS MEMBER STATES
OBSERVATEURS D'ÉTATS MEMBRES DES NATIONS UNIES
OBSERVADORES DE LOS ESTADOS MIEMBROS DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
FÉDERATION DE RUSSIE
FEDERACIÓN DE RUSIA
Igor V. SHAPOVALOV
Minister Plenipotentiary
Embassy of the Russian Federation
Rome Igor Z. SINELNIKOV
Embassy of the Russian Federation
Rome
HOLY SEE - SAINT-SIÈGE - SANTA SEDE
H.E. Archbishop Alois WAGNER
Permanent Observer to FAO
Vatican City
Giovanni TEDESCO
Adviser
Vatican City
Vincenzo BUONOMO
Alternate Observer to FAO
Vatican City 
SOVEREIGN ORDER OF MALTA
ORDRE SOUVERAIN DE MALTE
SOBERANA ORDEN DE MALTA
Giuseppe BONANNO PRINCE di LINGUAGLOSSA
Observateur auprès de la FAO
Rome
REPRESENTATIVES OF UNITED NATIONS AND SPECIALIZED AGENCIES
REPRÉSENTANTS DES NATIONS UNIES ET INSTITUTIONS SPÉCIALISÉES
REPRESENTANTES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS Y ORGANISMOS ESPECIALIZADOS
UNITED NATIONS
NATIONS UNIES
NACIONES UNIDAS 
Ms Katia Yolanda MIRANDA-SALEME
United Nations Information Centre
Rome 
UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
PROGRAMME DES NATIONS UNIES POUR LE DÉVELOPPEMENT
PROGRAMA DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS PARA EL DESARROLLO
Evlogui BONEV
Senior Adviser
European Office
Geneva 
WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME
PROGRAMME ALIMENTAIRE MONDIAL
PROGRAMA MUNDIAL DE ALIMENTOS
Jean-Jacques GRAISSE
Assistant Executive-Director
Rome John BAILEY
Strategic Planning Officer
Strategy and Policy Division
Rome
Ms Valerie SEQUEIRA
Secretary to the Executive Board
Chief, Interagency Affairs Service
Resources and External Relations Division
Rome Ms Barbara VAN LOGCHEM
Career and Development Officer
Human Resources Division
Rome
Eric WHITING
Deputy Director
Finance and Information Systems Division
Rome Scott GREEN
Interagency Affairs Officer
Interagency Affairs Branch
Resources and External Relations Division
Rome
Ms Arlene MITCHELL
Chief, Career and Development Unit
Human Resources Division
Rome Yasuhiro TSUMURA
Interagency Affairs Officer
Interagency Affairs Branch
Resources and External Relations Division
Rome
Imran RIZA
Chief, Interagency Affairs Branch
Resources and External Relations Division
Rome Ms Susana RICO
Assistant Secretary to the Executive Board
Rome
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE
BUREAU INTERNATIONAL DU TRAVAIL
OFICINA INTERNACIONAL DEL TRABAJO
Maurizio SACCONI
Director
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
AGENCE INTERNACIONALE DE L'ÉNERGIE ATOMIQUE
ORGANISMO INTERNACIONAL DE ENERGÍA ATÓMICA
James DARGIE
Director
Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture
Vienna 
OBSERVERS FROM INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
OBSERVATEURS DES ORGANISATIONS INTERGOUVERNEMENTALES
OBSERVADORES DE LAS ORGANIZACIONES INTERGUBERNAMENTALES
ARAB AUTHORITY FOR AGRICULTURAL INVESTMENT AND DEVELOPMENT
AUTORITÉ ARABE POUR LES INVESTISSEMENTS ET LE DÉVELOPPEMENT AGRICOLE
ORGANISMO ÁRABE DE INVERSIONES Y DESARROLLO AGRÍCOLAS
Abdul Kareem Mohammad AL-AMRI
President
Dubai Al Arabi HAMDI
Acting Director
Dubai
Noufal Hameed RASHEED
Adviser
Dubai 
INTER-AMERICAN INSTITUTE FOR COOPERATION ON AGRICULTURE
INSTITUT INTERAMÉRICAIN DE COOPÉRATION POUR L'AGRICULTURE
INSTITUTO INTERAMERICANO DE COOPERACIÓN PARA LA AGRICULTURA
Mario INFANTE OLANO
Deputy Manager for Regional Operations
San José
Costa Rica 
ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
ORGANISATION DE COOPÉRATION ET DE DÉVELOPPEMENT ÉCONOMIQUES
ORGANIZACIÓN DE COOPERACIÓN Y DESARROLLO ECONÓMICOS
Giuseppe VASTA
Consultant
Rome 
SOUTHERN AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY
COMMUNAUTÉ DU DÉVELOPPEMENT DE L'AFRIQUE AUSTRALE
COMUNIDAD PARA EL DESARROLLO DEL AFRICA MERIDIONAL
Edward Xolisa MAKAMA
Second Secretary
South African Embassy
Rome 
OBSERVERS FROM NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
OBSERVATEURS DES ORGANISATIONS NON GOUVERNEMENTALES
OBSERVADORES DE LAS ORGANIZACIONES NO GUBERNAMENTALES
ASIAN NGO COALITION FOR AGRARIAN REFORM AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
COALITION ASIATIQUE DES ONG POUR LA RÉFORME AGRAIRE ET LE DÉVELOPPEMENT RURAL
COALICIÓN ASIÁTICA DE ORGANIZACIONES NO GUBERNAMENTALES PARA LA REFORMA AGRARIA Y EL DESARROLLO RURAL
Ms Cristina LIAMZON
Representative
Rome 
ASSOCIATED COUNTRY WOMEN OF THE WORLD
UNION MONDIALE DES FEMMES RURALES
UNIÓN MUNDIAL DE MUJERES RURALES
Ms Carmela BASILI MASTROPASQUA
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
ASSOCIATION OF INTERBALKAN WOMEN'S COOPERATION SOCIETIES
Ms Litsa STOGIANNI
Member of the Administrative Council
European Programs
Greece 
CARITAS INTERNATIONALIS
Ermond HARTMANS
Permanent Representative to FAO
Vatican City 
INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE OF WOMEN
ALLIANCE INTERNATIONALE DES FEMMES
ALIANZA INTERNACIONAL DE MUJERES
Mrs Bettina CORKE
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
INDUSTRY COUNCIL FOR DEVELOPMENT
David JONAS
Secretary General
United Kingdom 
INTERNATIONAL CATHOLIC RURAL ASSOCIATION
ASSOCIATION INTERNACIONALE RURALE CATHOLIQUE
ASOCIACIÓN INTERNACIONAL RURAL CATÓLICA
Vincenzo CONSO
Secretary General
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mons. Biagio NOTARANGELO
Assistant
Rome
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE
COMMISSION INTERNATIONALE DE L'IRRIGATION ET DU DRAINAGE
COMISIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE RIEGO Y SANEAMIENTO
Mrs Maria Elisa VENEZIAN SCARASCIA
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATIVE ALLIANCE
ALLIANCE COOPÉRATIVE INTERNATIONALE
ALIANZA COOPERATIVA INTERNACIONAL
Lino VISANI
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN
CONSEIL INTERNATIONAL DES FEMMES
CONSEJO INTERNACIONAL DE MUJERES
Mrs Lydie ROSSINI van HISSENHOVEN
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCERS
FÉDÉRATION INTERNATIONALE DES PRODUCTEURS AGRICOLES
FEDERACIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE PRODUCTORES AGRÍCOLAS
Ms Paola ORTENSI
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF HOME ECONOMICS
FÉDÉRATION INTERNATIONALE POUR L'ÉCONOMIE FAMILIALE
FEDERACIÓN INTERNACIONAL PARA LA ECONOMÍA FAMILIAR
Mrs Francesca RONCHI PROJA
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF RED CROSS AND RED CRESCENT SOCIETIES
FÉDÉRATION INTERNATIONALE DES SOCIETÉS DE LA CROIX-ROUGE ET DU CROISSANT-ROUGE
FEDERACIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE SOCIEDADES DE LA CRUZ ROJA Y DE LA MEDIA LUNA ROJA
Ghebremedhin GHEBREIGZABIHER
Assistant to the Vice-President
Geneva 
INTERNATIONAL RAIFFEISEN UNION
UNION INTERNATIONALE RAIFFEISEN
UNIÓN INTERNACIONAL RAIFFEISEN
Juan Sergio LÓPEZ
Responsible for Economic Research
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANIZATIONS
UNION INTERNATIONALE DES ORGANISMES FAMILIAUX
UNIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE ORGANISMOS FAMILIARES
Sandro VOTA
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FORESTRY RESEARCH ORGANIZATIONS
UNION INTERNATIONALE DES INSTITUTS DE RÉCHERCHES FORESTIÈRES
UNIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE ORGANIZACIONES DE INVESTIGACIÓN FORESTAL
Riccardo MORANDINI
Professor
Arezzo, Italy 
ROTARY INTERNATIONAL
Aldo FERRETTI
Representative
Rome 
WORLD ASSOCIATION OF GIRL GUIDES AND GIRL SCOUTS
ASSOCIATION MONDIALE DES GUIDES ET DES ÉCLAIREUSES
ASOCIACIÓN MUNDIAL DE LAS GUÍAS SCOUTS
Ms Elena LODI FE
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
WORLD CONFEDERATION OF LABOUR
CONFÉDÉRATION MONDIALE DU TRAVAIL
CONFEDERACIÓN MUNDIAL DEL TRABAJO
Pio FRASGHINI
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
WORLD FEDERATION OF TRADE UNIONS
FÉDÉRATION SYNDICALE MONDIALE
FEDERACIÓN SINDICAL MUNDIAL
Mme Anna Laura CASADEI
Représentante permanente auprès de la FAO
Rome 
WORLD UNION OF CATHOLIC WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS
UNION MONDIALE DES ORGANISATIONS FÉMININES CATHOLIQUES
UNIÓN MUNDIAL DE LAS ORGANIZACIONES FEMENINAS CATÓLICAS
Mrs Carla ROMERSI
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mrs Maria Giovanna RUGGIERI
Rome
Table of contents
<section>4</section>
APPENDIX C
LIST OF DOCUMENTS
CL 116/1 Provisional Agenda
CL 116/1-Add.1 Addendum to CL 116/1
CL 116/1(a) Provisional Annotated Agenda
CL 116/2 Current World Food Situation
CL 116/3 Summary Programme of Work and Budget 2000-01
CL 116/3-Corr.1
(Spanish only) Corrigendum to CL 116/3
CL 116/3-Sup.1 Supplement to CL 116/3
CL 116/4 Report of the Joint Meeting of the 81^st Session of the Programme Committee and the 92^nd Session of the Finance Committee (5 May 1999)
CL 116/5 Report of the 69^th Session of the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM) (Rome, 26-27 April 1999)
CL 116/6 Report of the 62^nd Session of the Committee on Commodity Problems (Rome, 12-15 January 1999)
CL 116/7 Report of the 23^rd Session of the Committee on Fisheries (Rome, 15-19 February 1999)
CL 116/8 Report of the 14^th Session of the Committee on Forestry (Rome, 1-5 March 1999)
CL 116/8-Sup.1 Venue of the 12^th World Forestry Congress
CL 116/8-Sup.2 Venue of the 12^th World Forestry Congress: Review of Logistics and Infrastructure in Potential Congress Sites
CL 116/9 Report of the 15^th Session of the Committee on Agriculture (Rome, 25-29 January 1999)
CL 116/10 Report of the 25^th Session of the Committee on World Food Security (Rome, 31 May-3 June 1999)
CL 116/11 Arrangements for the 30^th Session of the Conference
CL 116/12 A Strategic Framework for FAO 2000-2015 (Version 3.0)
CL 116/13 Annual Report of the WFP Executive Board to ECOSOC and the FAO Council on its Activities in 1998
CL 116/13-Corr.1 Corrigendum to CL 113/13
CL 116/14 Report of the 81^st Session of the Programme Committee (Rome, 3-7 May 1999)
CL 116/15 Report of the 91^st Session of the Finance Committee (Rome, 11 January 1999)
CL 116/ 16 Report of the 92^nd Session of the Finance Committee (Rome, 3-7 May 1999)
CL 116/16-Sup.1 Scale of Contributions 2000-2001
CL 116/17 Amendments to the General Regulations and Rules of the WFP (Distribution of Seats on the Executive Board)
CL 116/17-Sup.1 Draft Conference Resolution on the Distribution of Seats on the WFP Executive Board
CL 116/18 Draft Plan of Action on Agriculture in Small Island Developing States
CL 116/19 Revised Calendar of FAO Governing Bodies and other Main Sessions 1998-99
CL 116/20 Application for Membership in the Organization
CL 116/21 Amendment to the General Regulations of the WFP
(Article XIII, Paragraph 2)
C 99/Series 
C 99/4 Programme Evaluation Report 1998-99
CL 116/INF/Series 
CL 116/INF/1-Rev.2 Revised Timetable (Subject to Council Approval)
CL 116/INF/2-Rev.1 Provisional List of Delegates and Observers
CL 116/INF/3 Provisional List of Documents
CL 116/INF/4 Note on the Methods of Work of the Council
CL 116/INF/5 Implications of Scheduling Separate Meetings for Ministers During the Conference
CL 116/INF/6 Statement of Competence and Voting Rights Submitted by the European Community (EC) and its Member States
CL 116/INF/7 Implementation of the Decisions Taken at the 115^th Session of the Council
CL 116/INF/8 Negotiations on the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture: Report of the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, 8^th Session (Rome, 19-23 April 1999)
CL 116/INF/9 Officers of the Conference and Council
CL 116/INF/10 Changes in Representation of Member Nations on the Programme Committee
CL 116/INF/11 JIU Report on More Coherence for Enhanced Oversight in the UN System (JIU/REP/98/2)
CL 116/INF/12 Work Programme of the UN Joint Inspection Unit for 1999
CL 116/INF/13 JIU Report on Fellowships in the UN System (JIU/REP/98/1)
CL 116/INF/14 Review of FAO Language Policy
CL 116/INF/I5 Arrangements for Appointing the Director-General
CL 116/INF/16 Final Report on Implementation of Conference Resolution 13/97: Review of FAO Statutory Bodies
CL 116/INF/16-Rev.1 (Spanish only) Revised Version of CL 116/INF/16
CL 116/INF/17 Preparations for the Conference on the Multifunctional Character of Agriculture and Land (Maastricht, Netherlands, September 1999)
CL 116/INF/18 Outcome of the Ministerial Meeting on Forestry (Rome, 8-9 March 1999)
CL 116/INF/19 Outcome of the Ministerial Meeting on the Implementation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (Rome, 10-11 March 1999)
CL 116/LIM/Series 
CL 116/LIM/1 Financial Position of the Organization
CL 116/LIM/2 Invitations to Non-Member Nations to Attend FAO Sessions
CL 116/LIM/3 Change in the Quota Distribution System of Information Products
CL 116/LIM/4 Appointment of Chairman of the Appeals Committee
CL 116/LIM/5 Report of His Excellency Fernando Gerbasi, Chairman of the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture
CL 116/REP/Series 
CL 116/REP/1 to Draft Report of Plenary
CL 116/REP/15 
CL 116/PV/Series 
CL 116/PV/1 to Provisional Verbatim Records of Plenary
CL 116/PV/9 
CL 116/OD/Series 
CL 116/OD/1 to Orders of the Day
CL 116/OD/6 
APPENDIX D
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE GENERAL REGULATIONS AND RULES OF WFP (DRAFT RESOLUTION FOR THE CONFERENCE)
I. PROPOSED AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE XIII, PARAGRAPH 2
Article XIII, paragraph 2*:
Donors may contribute appropriate commodities, cash and acceptable services in accordance with the general rules made pursuant to these General Regulations. Except as otherwise provided in such general rules in respect of developing countries, countries with economies in transition and other non-traditional donors, or in respect of other exceptional situations, each donor shall provide cash contributions sufficient to cover the full operational and support costs of its contributions.
The current text of the relevant paragraph is included here for ease of reference: Donors may contribute appropriate commodities, cash and acceptable services in accordance with the general rules made pursuant to these General Regulations. Each donor shall provide cash contributions sufficient to cover the full operational and support costs of its contributions. Government of developing countries may make commodity-only contributions, provided that the full operational and support costs are covered by another donor. In exceptional cases, these costs for the commodity-only contributions from IDA-elegible countries may be met from the WFP Fund.
II. PROPOSED AMENDMENT TO APPENDIX B
DRAFT RESOLUTION FOR THE CONFERENCE
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling
its Resolution 9/95 of 1 November 1995, concerning the revision of the General Regulations of the World Food Programme,
Noting
Resolution 53/223 adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on
7 April 1999, on the revision of the General Regulations of the World Food Programme,
1. Decides, subject to the concurrence of the General Assembly of the United Nations, that the members of the Executive Board of the World Food Programme shall be elected on an interim basis for a term of three years from among the States included in the lists set out in the Basic Texts of the World Food Programme, in accordance with the following distribution of seats, it being understood that this allocation of seats creates no precedent for the composition of other United Nations bodies of limited membership:
a. Eight members from the States included in list A, four members to be elected by the Economic and Social Council and four by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
b. Seven members from the States included in list B, four members to be elected by the Economic and Social Council and three by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
c. Five members from the States included in list C, two members to be elected by the Economic and Social Council and three by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
d. Twelve members from the States included in list D, six members to be elected by the Economic and Social Council and six by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
e. Three members from the States included in list E, two members to be elected by the Economic and Social Council and one by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
f. One additional member rotating among the States included in lists A, B, and C to be elected by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; the pattern of rotation shall be as follows:
i. A State from list A is to be elected to occupy the additional seat every other term out of four, starting from 1 January, 2000;
ii. A State from list B is to be elected to occupy the additional seat the second term out of four, starting from 1 January, 2003;
iii. A State from list C is to be elected to occupy the additional seat the fourth term out of four, starting from 1 January, 2009;
2. Decides that the above-mentioned distribution of seats shall be reviewed two years before the end of one full rotation scheme of four terms, as referred to in paragraph 1 (f) of the present resolution. Such a review shall be in accordance with relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions 48/162 and 50/8, taking into account the relevant inputs of the Economic and Social Council and the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; the result of the review shall enter into force on 1 January 2012;
3. Decides further that, subject to concurrence of the General Assembly of the United Nations, the revised General Regulations shall enter into force on 1 January 2000.
Table of contents
<section>5</section>
APPENDIX E
SCALE OF CONTRIBUTIONS 2000-2001
Proposed Scale of Contributions 2000-2001
(1999 and 1998 Scales shown for comparative purposes)
Member Nations
Proposed Scale a/
Scale
1999 b/
1998 c/
Afghanistan 
Albania 
Algeria 
Angola 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Argentina 
Armenia 
Australia 
Austria 
Azerbaijan 
Bahamas 
Bahrain 
Bangladesh 
Barbados 
Belgium 
Belize 
Benin 
Bhutan 
Bolivia 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Botswana 
Brazil 
Bulgaria 
Burkina Faso 
Burundi 
Cambodia 
Cameroon 
Canada 
Cape Verde 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Chile 
China 
Colombia 
Comoros 
Congo 
Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Cook Islands d/ 
Costa Rica 
Côte d'Ivoire 
Croatia 
Cuba 
Cyprus 
Czech Republic 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Denmark 
Djibouti 
Dominica 
Dominican Republic 
Ecuador 
Egypt 
El Salvador 
Equatorial Guinea 
Eritrea 
Estonia 
Ethiopia 
Fiji 
Finland 
France 
Gabon 
Gambia 
Georgia 
Germany 
Ghana 
Greece 
Grenada 
Guatemala 
Guinea 
Guinea-Bissau 
Guyana 
Haiti 
Honduras 
Hungary 
Iceland 
India 
Indonesia 
Iran, Islamic Republic of 
Iraq 
Ireland 
Israel 
Italy 
Jamaica 
Japan 
Jordan 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya 
Korea, Republic of 
Kuwait 
Kyrgyzstan 
Lao People's Democratic Republic 
Latvia 
Lebanon 
Lesotho 
Liberia 
Libya 
Lithuania 
Luxembourg 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Malaysia 
Maldives 
Mali 
Malta 
Mauritania 
Mauritius 
Mexico 
Moldova, Republic of 
Mongolia 
Morocco 
Mozambique 
Myanmar 
Namibia 
Nepal 
Netherlands 
New Zealand 
Nicaragua 
Niger 
Nigeria 
Norway 
Oman 
Pakistan 
Panama 
Papua New Guinea 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Philippines 
Poland 
Portugal 
Qatar 
Romania 
Rwanda 
Saint Kitts and Nevis 
Saint Lucia 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
Samoa 
Sao Tome and Principe 
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of 
Senegal 
Seychelles 
Sierra Leone 
Slovakia 
Slovenia 
Solomon Islands 
Somalia 
South Africa 
Spain 
Sri Lanka 
Sudan 
Suriname 
Swaziland 
Sweden 
Switzerland e/ 
Syria 
Tajikistan 
Tanzania, United Republic of 
Thailand 
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Togo 
Tonga e/ 
Trinidad and Tobago 
Tunisia 
Turkey 
Turkmenistan 
Uganda 
United Arab Emirates 
United Kingdom 
United States of America 
Uruguay 
Vanuatu 
Venezuela 
Viet Nam 
Yemen 
Yugoslavia 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 
a/ Derived directly from the UN Scale of Assessments for 2000 as adopted by General Assembly Resolution 52/215 of 22 December 1997.
b/ Derived directly from the UN Scale of Assessments for 1999 as adopted by General Assembly Resolution 52/215 of 22 December 1997.
c/ Derived directly from the UN Scale of Assessments for 1997 as adopted by General Assembly Resolution 49/19 B of 23 December 1994.
d/ The Secretariat of the UN Committee on Contributions advised that the "theoretical probable" rate of this member of FAO, which is not a member of the UN, would be the minimum rate, i.e. 0.01 percent
e/ The contribution rates of these two members of FAO which are not members of the United Nations, are derived from the percentages at which they are called upon by the UN to contribute to certain UN activities.
APPENDIX F
REVISED CALENDAR OF FAO GOVERNING BODIES
AND OTHER MAIN SESSIONS 1998-99
JANUARY 91 FC
62 CCP
15 COAG
FEBRUARY 20 ARC
23 COFI
MARCH 24 NERC
14 COFO
Ministerial Meeting on Forestry
Ministerial Meeting on Implementation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries 10-11/3
Special Ministerial Conference on Agriculture in SIDS
APRIL 24 APRC
69 CCLM
MAY 79 PC
89 FC
21 ERC
81 PC
92 FC
25 CFS
JUNE 24 CFS
25 LARC
116 CL
JULY
AUGUST
SEPTEMBER 80 PC
90 FC
68 CCLM
82 PC
93 FC
70 CCLM
OCTOBER WFD
Fri 16/10
WFD
Fri 15/10
NOVEMBER 115 CL
117 CL
30 C
118 CL
DECEMBER
APRC Regional Conference for Asia and the Pacific COFO Committee on Forestry
ARC Regional Conference for Africa ERC Regional Conference for Europe
C Conference FC Finance Committee
CCLM Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters LARC Regional Conference for Latin America and the Caribbean
CCP Committee on Commodity Problems NERC Regional Conference for the Near East
CFS Committee on World Food Security PC Programme Committee
CL Council WFD World Food Day
COAG Committee on Agriculture SIDS Small Islands Developing States
COFI Committee on Fisheries 
Table of contents
