<title>Voices for change: Rural women and communication</title>
<section>1</section>
Communication in a changing world
During these last decades of the twentieth century, the world has witnessed the emergence of a new political, social, technological and economic environment. There have been major changes in the role of the state, and governments have withdrawn from certain functions that are now being taken over by civil society and the private sector. Societies are demanding new forms of governance, allowing greater scope for democracy, decentralization, popular participation and pluralism. New institutional frameworks are being formed, and more responsibilities are being assumed by non-governmental organizations (NGOs), civil society organizations (CSOs), rural institutions and local leaders.Globalization is shaping the world economy, and the current information revolution is resulting in a knowledge-based society. New communication technologies are being developed rapidly and made more widely available, although their transfer is taking place through private investment - global media
markets are now dominated by a mere handful of transnational companies.
For communication to give a voice to rural women, they need access to communication channels and media as well as the knowledge and skills to use them.
At the same time, poverty and social inequalities still prevail, especially in rural areas. The gap between the rich and the poor continues to grow as a result of disparities in access to resources, knowledge and technology. Most major issues on the development agenda still represent a challenge for the global community. Among them are: managing the environment in a sustainable manner; curbing the exponential rates of population growth and urbanization; ensuring food security; fulfilling human health and education needs; increasing literacy; alleviating poverty; and achieving gender equality. Although it is widely recognized that both women and men have a critical role in agricultural and rural development, efforts to improve opportunities for rural women have met with limited success. Sustainable development is hindered by the restricted access that rural women have to land, credit and legal provisions as well as to education, training, extension and other support services.
Information, knowledge and participatory processes of social change are essential if women and men are to respond to both the opportunities and the major challenges of the coming century.
This is the age of communication, and the current information revolution is dramatically increasing the potential for sharing information across the globe. The information revolution we are witnessing today has been compared to the invention of moveable print in the fifteenth century or to the transition from an agrarian to an industrial society in the nineteenth century. Economic liberalization has concentrated ownership of the global media in the hands of a few large companies, but the communication environment in developing countries is changing nevertheless. Technologies and media are becoming more appropriate for conditions in rural areas. Democratization, government deregulation policies and pluralism have encouraged the decentralization of information production away from central governments while horizontal, people-to-people processes are replacing vertical, traditional lines of communication. Participatory approaches have paved the way for community-based ownership
and use of various communication media, for example rural radio.
Gender-sensitive communication processes that facilitate learning and social change can empower women to take more control of their lives and participate as equals with men in promoting food security and rural development for the present and future generations.
In today's climate of political and socio-economic change, communication can play a decisive role in promoting development. By fostering a dialogue between rural people and other sectors of society, communication processes can empower both women and men to provide information and knowledge as a basis for change and innovation, take decisions concerning their own livelihood and thereby increase their overall involvement in development. More specifically, communication processes can give rural women a voice to advocate changes in policies, attitudes and social behaviour or customs that negatively affect them. The same processes can help women exchange experiences, find common ground for decisions, take more control of their lives and add value to their role as active partners in rural and sustainable development.
Given that women and men play different roles in agricultural and rural development, communication media and strategies should reflect their diverse needs and priorities. For communication to give a voice to rural women and help them realize their potential, they must first have the means to be heard. In other words, they need access to communication channels and media as well as the knowledge and skills to use them.
<section>2</section>
Invisible Partners
Although both women and men contribute substantively to agricultural and rural development, women are assuming an increasingly prominent role. Women farmers are responsible for half of the world's food production and, in most developing countries, produce from 60 to 80 percent of the food destined for household consumption. They play an important role in fisheries and forestry and constitute an important labour force for cash crop production. They are also responsible for providing food for their families. Moreover, civil strife, rural-urban migration of men in search of employment, and the growing number of mortalities attributed to HIV/AIDS have led to an increase in female-headed households in the developing world.
This "feminization of agriculture" has placed a considerable burden on women's capacity to produce, provide and prepare food in the face of already considerable social, economic and cultural constraints. Despite their essential role in achieving global food security, the contributions of women are often underestimated and overlooked in development strategies - they remain the "invisible" partners in development.
Rural women are key actors in solving the major issues on the development agenda for the coming century, including the need to manage the environment in a sustainable manner, the exploding rate of population and urbanization, food security, human needs with regard to health, education and literacy, and the elimination of poverty.
Women are economic agents, although their work is often not accounted for and so their development potential is grossly neglected. Rural women are a major force in environmental protection because they live and work in close contact with the ecosystem, possess an intimate knowledge of local biodiversity and can help safeguard natural resources for the future by practising sustainable agriculture, forestry and fisheries. Women are also key agents of human development; they can improve the quality of life in rural communities by helping to reduce maternal and child mortality as well as birth rates, improving family nutrition, ensuring the use of safe drinking water and sanitation, and teaching their daughters good health practices as well as other skills at home.
Given equal access to opportunities and resources, women, like men, have proved to be efficient, dynamic and indispensable partners in development. Their empowerment through the exchange of knowledge and information is crucial for enhancing rural living conditions and achieving development goals.
QUESTIONS OF DIFFERENCE
Notwithstanding efforts made over the past decades to improve the status and opportunities of women, urgent action is still required to overcome the following critical issues:
Increasing poverty and declining food security
Women constitute the majority of the world's poor. Information, knowledge and skills can help decrease women's vulnerability to poverty in crisis situations.
Unequal access to land, credit and agricultural support services
Women are denied both ownership and effective use of productive resources. Knowledge of their rights and opportunities can enhance women's contribution to production.
Unequal access to agricultural inputs, tools and technologies
New technologies and inputs are channelled primarily towards cash crops, the domain of men, and women lack the money required to purchase inputs as well as the knowledge and skills to apply them.
Unequal access to education, training and extension
Women receive less education than men and constitute the majority of the illiterate population. Their vocational and technical training is even more neglected than their general education, and extension is primarily directed towards men.
Insufficient knowledge about access to marketing outlets
Illiteracy as well as capital and legal constraints limit women's access to modern markets. Women need to acquire skills in marketing, accounting and business management.
Negative impacts of structural adjustment policies and economic globalization
Globalization and structural adjustment policies have brought unemployment and undermined social services. Information on their rights and opportunities can help women to overcome the negative impact of these policies.
Statistical invisibility
A lack of gender-disaggregated data from rural areas prevents policy-makers from including womens' concerns in development programmes. Accurate gender information is crucial in the formulation of agricultural development and food security strategies.
Poor working conditions and unequal wages
Women tend to work longer hours than men, and for less or no reward. Women need to be informed of their right to organize themselves and take advantage of social services, training and other opportunities.
Ignorance of women's indigenous knowledge
Women farmers' wealth of accumulated experience and knowledge often passes unnoticed. Planners and policy-makers need information about womens' potential and actual contribution to agriculture.
Problems related to nutrition, health and violence
Women and girls are subject to food discrimination and damaging cultural practices such as genital mutilation, and they lack information on nutrition and health. Information and education to promote changes in social and cultural behaviour are crucial to help overcome these problems.
Environmental degradation
Resource-poor women farmers are driven to adopt practices that are harmful to the environment. They must be alerted to the threats that environmental degradation poses to food security, and need to learn to use technologies and inputs that are less damaging to natural resources.
To overcome these "questions of difference", and thus improve the status and living conditions of rural women, there must be a change in attitudes and behaviour at all levels - above all, through the sharing of knowledge, information and skills.
<section>3</section>
Giving a voice to rural women
HARNESSING THE POTENTIAL OF COMMUNICATION
The shift in development thinking and practice towards people-centred programmes and the participation of people and communities in decisions concerning their own lives is creating new opportunities for social change and the empowerment of both women and men in rural areas. Nevertheless, it is vital to stimulate their awareness, involvement and capabilities further.
Different methods of communication and media can facilitate development by encouraging dialogue and debate. Furthermore, they can give a voice to rural women, thus enabling them to articulate their own development agendas. Similarly, by fostering the exchange of knowledge and information, communication can stimulate women's awareness and motivation, allowing them to take informed decisions on the crucial issues affecting their lives.
Communication can promote changes in attitudes and social behaviour and help communities to identify sustainable opportunities and development solutions that are within their reach. In addition to putting development planners in a position to respect women's traditional knowledge, communication processes can improve the management and effectiveness of new social organizations and institutions, ensuring that they provide services to women in a participatory and democratic manner. Bernard When used effectively, communication acts as a mediation tool between planners and rural communities, helping to resolve conflicts, achieve consensus and find common ground for policies and actions to be taken. Media and communication technologies can also help rural women to exchange experiences and learn from each other. They can be powerful tools for advising women about new ideas and practices and improving training. The majority of rural women are illiterate and live in remote, isolated
areas where access to information, lack of transportation, a scarcity of trainers, and cultural and language differences are common problems - problems, however, that can be overcome through the use of appropriate communication technologies.
WOMEN'S INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE AND COMMUNICATION
An FAO project covering several countries in southern Africa is studying issues of knowledge related to the conservation of biodiversity and considering how that knowledge can be used to promote food security.
The project is designed to support organizations that are already working with rural communities in the documentation of indigenous knowledge. The question is: How can this knowledge be gathered, conserved and shared in ways that lead to concrete benefits for the women and men who hold it? This is why communication is vitally important to the project strategy.
Field staff are trained to work with women and men in rural communities to help them realize and document the value of their knowledge, using media that they can understand and adopt easily. This may involve folk media to promote awareness, for example, or the introduction of new media such as participatory video, which opens new horizons and interests. The project will then take the knowledge gained from working with a given community and share it with other rural communities, NGOs, government institutions, decision-makers and the media.
Communication is the key to raising awareness, sharing knowledge and supporting a broader debate on indigenous knowledge and biodiversity, all of which are conducive to more effective policies and action programmes
The communication technologies and expertise exist. The challenge now is to use them appropriately and effectively to give a voice to rural women and to promote social change and sustainable agricultural and rural development for both women and men.
COMMUNICATION AS A SOCIAL PROCESS
Communication is no longer seen as a one-way, top-down transfer of messages and information through the media; instead, when applied to development, communication is used to promote a two-way process of sharing and participation. The word itself comes from the Latin "communis facere", which means participation and doing things together. An FAO consultation in 1984 defined communication for development as "a social process, designed to seek a common understanding among all the participants of a development initiative, creating a basis for concerted action".
Communication technology and the media are useful tools for facilitating this process, but should not be considered as an end in themselves. It is the process that is important. Interpersonal and face-to-face forms of communication are essential components in this process, and they are critical for changing attitudes and behaviour.
LISTENING AND LEARNING
The experts at the 1984 FAO Consultation indicated that "people-oriented and sustainable development can only realize its full potential if rural people are involved and motivated and if information and knowledge are shared. Sharing is not a one-way transfer of information; it implies rather an exchange between communication equals. On the one hand, technical specialists learn about people's needs and their techniques of production; on the other, the people learn about the techniques and proposals of the specialists." This means that participatory communication efforts with rural women should begin with development planners and technical specialists listening to them. Lstening goes beyond a simple appraisal of needs. It involves listening to what women already know, what they aspire to become, what they perceive as possible and desirable and what they feel they can sustain.
Although often illiterate, rural women have wisdom, knowledge and practices based on deep-rooted cultural norms, traditions and values, as well as generations of experience. This indigenous knowledge should be taken into account, and traditional methods of information exchange and communication should be harnessed together with modern means.
Communication strategies and materials should reflect women's perceptions, needs and perspectives. The development of participatory and qualitative research methods such as participatory rural appraisal (PRA), focus group discussions, interpersonal communication techniques and audiovisual media enable communication specialists and communities to quicken the process of sharing experiences and learning together. Where the questionnaire and statistical survey were once the main tools of research and analysis, there is now a mix of methods that are not dependent on literacy and formal education capabilities and can be applied to discover the problems and needs of rural women as well as the opportunities and solutions open to the community.
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES RECOGNIZE THE ROLE OF COMMUNICATION
A number of major international conferences have stressed the important role of communication in attaining the goals of their action plans and achieving sustainable development.
* Earth Summit (1992). Officially called the UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), this conference produced Agenda 21, a programme devoted to various aspects of the environmental crisis. All 38 chapters of Agenda 21 implicitly recognize the critical role of communication in successfully implementing sustainable development. The Conference affirmed that all stakeholders in development are users and generators of relevant information on the environment.
* International Conference on Population and Development (1994). The Plan of Action passed by this conference calls for the strengthening of information, education and communication activities concerning population and sustainable development issues.
* World Summit for Social Development (1995). The Declaration and Plan of Action produced by this summit directs attention to rectifying social disintegration and emphasizes the role of communication for doing so.
* Fourth World Conference on Women (1995). This conference produced, for the first time in history, a Platform for Action that devotes an entire section to women and the media. It identifies the mass media as having great potential for promoting the advancement of women and the equality of women and men. It states that "television, especially, has the greatest impact on young people and, as such, has the ability to shape values, attitudes and perceptions of women in both positive and negative ways". It identifies actions to promote a balanced and non-stereotypical portrayal of women in the media, as well as the incorporation of more women at decision-making levels in the development of communication policies, technologies and media operations. It also identifies actions that can help increase women's access to, and participation in, the expression of views and decision-making through the new communication technologies. It encourages the development of education and
training programmes in communication and media technologies for women.
* World Food Summit (1996). The Plan of Action passed by this summit deals with women and rural development, among other issues. It affirms that sustainable agricultural development will only be achieved if policies and technologies are accompanied by participation, equity, dialogue, enabling mechanisms and empowerment. In short, it advocates a people-centred approach to development, in which communication is an essential component.
WOMEN'S COMMUNICATION NEEDS
Participatory audience research is an essential prerequisite for the planning of successful communication strategies, the selection of appropriate media and the design of creative messages. In developing countries, the communication requirements of women in rural areas are different from those of women and men in urban centres and developed countries. Rural women do not have equal access to information, for reasons such as their restricted mobility outside the home, lack of education and, in some cases, men's control over information and media. Development communicators may need to "repackage" information in forms that are comprehensible to illiterate women, adapting it to their understanding and perception of messages.
Special attention should be paid to selecting the communication channels that are most appropriate for women and to producing materials in local languages. Because women are involved in many aspects of rural life, their traditional knowledge systems are complex and holistic. Consequently, communication programmes must deal with the various economic and social issues affecting women, including agriculture, habitat, health, nutrition, family planning, population growth, the environment and education and illiteracy.
PARTICIPATORY RURAL COMMUNICATION APPRAISAL
INVOLVING RURAL WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT
With the support of an Italian-funded FAO project, the Southern African Development Community's Centre of Communication for Development, based in Harare, Zimbabwe, has pioneered a people-oriented alternative to traditional communication research. Called participatory rural communication appraisal (PRCA), the new approach involves rural people in the design of communication strategies.
PRCA has been used effectively to promote the involvement of rural women in decisions that affect their livelihood. Perceptions and local knowledge play a key role in development, hence the need for a communication approach that ensures the problems to be resolved are perceived in the same way by the distinct groups concerned (women, men, elders, youth) as well as by the development agents working with them. Unearthing women's perceptions and local knowledge can be difficult, however, because rural women often hide their true feelings and information from outsiders. To overcome this, PRCA uses visual methods and group facilitation techniques for generating, analysing and presenting information that helps to reveal the "visions and voices" of women. Through PRCA, development efforts can be firmly rooted in women's realities and thus be more responsive to their needs, aspirations, abilities and knowledge.
* PRCA has been used to identify constraints to, and opportunities for, women's participation in beekeeping in the Solwezi District of northwestern Zambia, where beekeeping is traditionally undertaken by men. Since considerable interest in the activity had been shown by women, a team of researchers (trained by the SADC Centre of Communication for Development) used PRCA tools to reveal the perceptions of the various stakeholders in the activity. Findings indicated that a women's beekeeping project would be viable, and also revealed the necessary conditions for its successful implementation. Based on its appraisal, the team provided guidelines for the design of a communication strategy and training materials for the project's implementation.
* "Oy! Engiten'g Ai." When a Masai mother or father expresses love for their child, especially a daughter, they will always compare the child to a cow - beautiful and full of riches. This sums up the importance of cattle to Masai people in the United Republic of Tanzania. Here, PRCA served to show that it is the women who tend the cattle from the time they enter the kraal (Boma) in the evening up until midnight. Traditionally, the Masai men have been considered the principal caretakers of cattle while the Masai women have been thought to play a minor role. However, a multidisciplinary research team that visited the Masai of Kimokouwa village in Monduli District in support of the FAO Pan-African Rinderpest Campaign was able to reveal the full role played by women in cattle rearing. The team (including staff from the SADC Centre of Communication for Development) carried out a PRCA exercise which, in addition to revealing the Masai's traditional communication practices,
clearly illustrated the important role of women in cattle rearing activities.
TRAINING IN COMMUNICATION SKILLS
The Platform of Action set by the Fourth World Conference on Women stressed the importance of enhancing women's skills, knowledge and access to information and communication technology. The training of women as rural communication specialists at all levels - from fieldworkers to trainers and planners - is an essential requirement for successful communication efforts carried out by women for the benefit of women.
Women can only have access to communication media if they have the skills and training to use them. a question of training more women, but also of improving and adapting the type of training provided. In the past, training was often theoretical and primarily concentrated on media production and technology. New participatory communication approaches require innovative and interactive learning processes, preferably field-based. Women can learn more effectively through field experience and practice rather than through traditional classroom training.
In addition to technology and media production, curricula should include participatory research methods, practices such as group facilitation, group dynamics and conflict resolution and the socio-economic, political and cultural processes related to rural development and communication.
Video, audio and computer technologies have become smaller, cheaper and more user-friendly. Easy-to-use equipment as well as participatory approaches and methods have given rural women the opportunity to become skilled in using media and to have access to, and control over, the necessary tools for information generation and exchange.
MAYAN WOMEN LEARN COMMUNICATION SKILLS
The Centre for Mayan Women Communicators, located at Atitlán in Sololá, Guatemala, is a non-profit organization that enables indigenous women to come together and communicate. The centre is supported by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and other donors, and has its own Web site. It provides training to indigenous women in video production, photography, computer use and Internet communication. Video and photography are used for research, dialogue and community organization.
Among other things, the communication process is considering the oral Mayan language and exploring ways of using visual media to overcome barriers of language and illiteracy. Videos produced in and by the communities are used to share information with neighbouring communities that can identify with the local images.
Padma Guidi, the trainer at the centre, says:
"In developing the curricula, I have been led by the requests of women who come and want to see how the stuff works. Cameras are popular and exciting, easy to use and a real ice-breaker. My approach is to keep the learning interactive... [H]istory will not repeat itself in Guatemala if indigenous women have their voices heard. With today's user-friendly communication media available to them, these women will establish themselves as a conscious and participating force in future world events."
<section>4</section>
Communication approaches
MASS MEDIA
Rural radio
Radio remains the most powerful, and yet the cheapest, mass medium for reaching large numbers of people in isolated areas. Thanks to the revolution of the transistor, even the remotest villages have access to rural radio, which builds on the oral tradition of rural populations. Although men own the majority of radio receivers, women can listen to programmes at home in the evenings when the main chores of the day are finished.
Radio is an important tool for the rapid diffusion of important messages on new agricultural production ideas and techniques as well as on health, nutrition, family planning and other social and cultural issues. Combined with other media, it can be used for training and the transfer of technologies. It can promote dialogue and debate on the major issues of rural development as well as providing a platform for the expression of rural women's needs, opinions and aspirations. Radio enables women to voice their concerns and speak about their aspirations with external partners such as national policy-makers and development planners. Finally, radio is a tool that can be used to develop community cohesion and solidarity. Community involvement is fundamental for the successful use of radio with rural populations. Radio programmes are most effective when produced with audience participation, in local languages and with consideration for cultural traditions. Successful features
include live public shows, quizzes and village debates.
Community-based radio
Democratization, pluralism and deregulation policies adopted in many developing countries, together with the decreasing cost of FM transmitters, have favoured the proliferation of local community radio stations. In Mali alone there are more than 75 radio stations, established by private individuals, associations, local communities and commercial, religious and political organizations. Community stations treat issues concerning the everyday life of their listeners and also promote local development. They are an important channel for the motivation and education of women and they raise consciousness of gender issues as well as informing women about their rights. They offer rural women the opportunity to use the microphone to talk about the issues that interest them and they play women's music that is seldom heard elsewhere. More and more women are receiving training in the programming and management of community-based radio stations so that the programmes can reflect their
real needs.
RURAL LISTENERS TALK BACK
According to one woman radio listener in Kodialanida, Mali:
"The station has helped us understand the importance of literacy for our commercial activities. It has encouraged the women to devote more time to this. To begin with, we worked separately but, after listening to radio programmes, we had the idea of coming together in an association. Other women have done the same and have been successful. They have listened to the advice given by radio stations that have made themselves accessible and have been open to questions from the listeners."
Another listener in Kodialanida commented further:
"The radio station has brought about a genuine change in the everyday lives of villagers. It has prompted a qualitative change in farming techniques (helping in the selection of the best seed varieties, cotton processing and following the farming calendar). It has also brought about a change in attitudes: individualism has given way to a community spirit and the popularity of home improvements has increased as a result of programmes broadcast on this subject. The radio station has also been a great help to people striving to master water purification and treatment methods. And, it has increased enthusiasm for literacy. Generally speaking, it has helped greatly in raising awareness."
Television
The Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women (Beijing, 1995) identified the mass media as having great potential to promote the advancement of women and the equality of women and men. In particular, it states that "television especially has the greatest impact on young people and, as such, has the ability to shape values, attitudes and perceptions of women in both positive and negative ways." Indeed, television is a prestigious, powerful and empowering tool that can raise awareness, generate discussion and increase knowledge. It is an important channel for advocacy, for drawing policy-makers' attention to the potential of rural women and for promoting the inclusion of appropriate strategies on development agendas. Although television is not generally available to communities in very isolated rural areas, increasingly in many developing countries it is becoming a reality in the countryside.
With increasing urbanization, television can be an important means to reach women audiences who have come to the city from rural areas. A striking example of the use of television for social change was the Soul City drama series in South Africa. These television programmes were aimed at young women in lower-income groups and dealt with priority maternal and child health topics in addition to the empowerment of women and communities, social issues and HIV/AIDS awareness. Drama captures people's imagination like no other television format, and the half-hour episodes used the power of drama to impart health education messages. This technique, known as "edutainment", conveys educational messages through an entertainment programme. Broadcast on prime time on the most popular channel in South Africa, the Soul City series attracted a large and loyal audience.
"WOMEN GRAB THE MICROPHONE"
The World Association of Community Radio Broadcasters (AMARC) unites participatory radio stations from all over the world and contributes to the development of the community radio movement. In 1992, it established the women's international network, WIN, to link women working in participatory radio. The objectives of WIN are to encourage the exchange of expertise and information among women working in community radio around the world; provide training for women; identify funding for the network as well as specific women's projects; and create a code of ethics to guarantee the equal treatment of women working in AMARC member radio stations. Under the theme "Women Grab the Microphone", the Seventh AMARC Conference (Milan, 1998) dedicated a day to WIN and the publicizing of women's needs in different regions.
In Asia and Africa, women see basic radio training, including training on broadcasting legislation and radio management skills, as the most urgent requirement. In Latin America and the Caribbean, women prefer to focus on fundraising and gender perspectives. One common issue is the need for more technical skills, training of trainers and production of training materials in different languages.
Audiovisual media
Low-cost audio and visual media, such as video, slide sets, filmstrips, audiocassettes and flipcharts, are valuable tools to motivate and assist in training groups. These technologies have been improving and developing over the years, and equipment is now cheaper, lighter, battery-operated and portable, thus making it suitable for use with women in rural areas. Audiovisual media can be used with women effectively at convenient times and places: women farmers do not have the time or money to travel to training centres and, for cultural reasons, often cannot attend training sessions with men.
Audiovisual training materials can be brought to women in their villages and shown to them in the hours in which they are free from their tasks of caring for the home, producing food or earning income. When this is not possible, special arrangements can be made to enable women to attend training sessions with men. For example, in the Central African Republic, slide sets on the identification and treatment of cattle diseases were shown in the villages of Islamic Peuhl cattleowners. Women and men watched the programmes together by placing a transparent screen in the middle of the village square, allowing the men to view the programme on one side, with the women seated and watching on the other side. In this manner, cultural traditions were observed, but women were given access to the training programmes.
Video, too, is being extensively and increasingly used to improve rural extension and training. With FAO assistance, a video-based farmer training methodology has been developed to reproduce farmers' knowledge at the same time as integrating it with modern scientific knowledge. Although video is the primary training tool for facilitating understanding, it is backed up with simple printed guidelines for both the trainers and the farmers.
These guidelines (with several drawings and a limited amount of text) also serve as "memory" for the trainees. This audiovisual training methodology was first developed by an FAO project in Peru and has since been applied in other countries in the region, including Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua and Caribbean countries. It has also been used in China, the Republic of Korea and Mali.
"What I hear I forget.
What I see I remember.
What I do I learn."
(A peasant proverb)
There are many examples of audiovisual training programmes and courses that have been produced and used with women farmers. They cover topics ranging from agricultural production techniques, natural resource management, small-scale irrigation, vegetable production, livestock management, food processing and storage to arithmetic and accounting, improved nutrition, breastfeeding, reproductive health and sanitation. Care has always been taken to ensure that half of the national staff trained in the production and use of these audiovisual programmes are women.
Rapid developments in small-format video technology have meant that the means of production of video programmes can be put in the hands of the communities themselves, enabling rural women, with some basic training, to articulate their own needs and tell their own stories. Participatory video is an approach that develops participants' abilities by teaching them to use video equipment to record problems around them as well as to identify solutions. What is important is not the quality of the programme produced, but the process of communication within and between groups. The use of participatory video offers a valuable tool to those working for local empowerment and social change. Communication skills are linked to leadership skills, and experience has shown that women who acquire communication and facilitation skills through their work with participatory video become stronger leaders and organizers.
The benefits of participatory video go well beyond the actual tapes and access to the technology. When women learn to make a meaningful and compelling video programme, when they master a new tool, or when they facilitate a lively group discussion after viewing a video programme, they develop communication skills that increase their standing in the community and in their organizations.
* In Ahmedabad, India, the Self-Employed Women's Association (SEWA) has been training poor and illiterate women in the production and use of video as a tool for empowerment. As a means of documenting the issues affecting women and highlighting their concerns, video is an integral component of SEWA's activities. Video programmes produced by rural women associated with the group have been used for income generation, occupational health, wage negotiations, legal interventions, teaching new skills and advocating policy change.
* Video programmes produced by women can convey useful information to motivate groups of women in other communities or countries. In Mexico, a video produced by women in one region, and illustrating how they came together to establish a cooperative, was shown to a group of women in another region. As result, these women decided to establish a similar cooperative. A group of Nepalese women is producing video-letters on reforestation and health to be shown in other communities. These women, who have low levels of education, have realized their potential for producing a collective message and diffusing it to their peers.
Communication skills are linked to leadership skills, and experience has shown that women who acquire communication and facilitation skills through their work with participatory video become stronger leaders and organizers.
Video is an important tool for enlightening decision-makers on the concerns of rural women and the critical problems they face.Experience has confirmed that video boosts self-confidence and encourages self-development. Rural women are seldom asked for their opinions or knowledge on a particular subject. Yet, when they see themselves demonstrating a technique or expressing an opinion on a video monitor, and realize that influential people will see and hear what they have to say, they become more confident and assertive about sharing their views and knowledge with others.
PARTICIPATORY COMMUNICATION TO ASSESS THE ROLE OF WOMEN IN NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN PAKISTAN
Pakistan's National Conservation Strategy states that development should allow women to realize their full potential by providing opportunities for them to take control of their own lives as well as the surrounding natural environment. Even though the role of women in natural resource management is officially recognized, it is often neglected in daily life because of traditional gender roles. To counteract this constraint, the Interregional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development (PUCD) - an FAO/Italy cooperative effort - is promoting women's participation in watershed management in Kanak Valley, Balochistan. Because of their role in managing fuelwood, rangeland and water resources, women are important for the environmental sustainability of the Kanak Valley. Under the project, they are encouraged to form and join Women's Village Associations, which provide a forum for training, regular meetings and special leadership workshops. This is important for
women who have little experience in attending or leading meetings and discussing common issues.
It is difficult to address environmental issues, since women are not encouraged to express opinions about matters outside the household or to become involved in the issue of natural resource conservation. Using participatory communication approaches, however, the project is helping women gain self-reliance in making decisions and taking action. It is promoting a new social awareness about women's role in managing natural resources.
To facilitate participation and social learning, the following communication methods and tools have been used:
* Slide language. This is a methodology whereby slides of local areas are presented to groups of women to identify solutions and negotiate common action to overcome environmental problems.
* Photo albums and exhibitions. These materials are used as "group memory" for monitoring collaborative measures for the conservation of natural resources and to share experiences among women's associations and communities.
* Slide competitions. Representatives of four womens' associations were trained to use cameras to take slides of natural resource use around their villages. A slide language exercise was then carried out to identify problems and suggest action to be taken. Slide competitions resulted in "story lines", with visual messages representing the ways in which different women's associations had interpreted the environment and its changing aspects.
The slide competitions set off a true awareness process among the women. They realized that they, themselves, could take steps to safeguard the environment and that this would have direct influence on the daily tasks of water and fuelwood collection. The slides and stories were produced by village women who "held" the social memory of their environment and proposed solutions in their communities to control the decline in the water level. Using flexible and appropriate communication methods, women were able to share their visions, needs and concerns. Photos and slides proved powerful tools for women to make themselves heard regarding the sustainable use of natural resources.
TRADITIONAL MEDIA
For generations, rural populations living in isolated villages without access to modern means of communication have relied on the spoken word and traditional forms of communication as a means of sharing knowledge and information and providing entertainment.
For illiterate rural women in particular, occasions for information exchange have consisted solely in local festivities, family gatherings, traditional and religious associations, interaction with itinerant merchants and encounters at marketplaces or water wells. However, women have made use of the oral tradition to ensure their own as well as their families' survival and, as a result, have developed a rich communication environment. They have lived creative lives, transmitting culture, knowledge, customs and history through traditional forms of communication such as poetry, proverbs, songs, stories, dances and plays. Within their communities, women are active participants in social communication networks. They use indigenous communication methods for information exchange, knowledge sharing and the dissemination of strategies for mutual assistance and survival.
Culture and history play an important role in the social development of a community. The preservation of traditional forms of communication and social change are not mutually exclusive. Traditional communication methods can be important channels for facilitating learning, behavioural change, people's participation and dialogue for development purposes. Indigenous media have been successfully adopted by change agents to promote rural development issues of relevance to women. They have been used, for instance, to influence attitudes towards family size, female genital mutilation, teenage pregnancies, unsettling lifestyles and HIV/AIDS. They have also been applied in health care, environmental protection and women's literacy programmes as well as in teaching mothers about child nutrition and in introducing new agricultural practices. Traditional forms of communication can also be integrated with other media such as radio, television, video and audiocassettes.
Communication is a product of culture, and culture determines the code, structure, meaning and context of the communication that takes place. The participation of local folk artists, storytellers and performers in the production and use of traditional media ensures respect for traditional values, symbols and realities and, at the same time, ensures that such media productions appeal to rural audiences. By tapping the community's creative pool of traditional culture, expressions and formats, women can maintain their cultural identity while gaining social self-reliance. Women's use of local media and communication channels also increases the credibility of media programmes and thus their effectiveness and impact on the knowledge, attitudes and behaviour of other women.
GRASSROOTS ARTISTS FOR POPULATION COMMUNICATION IN MALAWI
Population communication teams working in the Comoros, Burundi, Rwanda, Kenya, Uganda and the Philippines have tapped a variety of artistic expressions: the beat of drums, the sound of three-string guitars, the rhythm of skiffle bands, women's dance groups, village clowns, storytellers, theatre groups and puppets.
Building on those experiences, a population communication project in Malawi invited grassroots artists (including women) from the project's target audience to a communication workshop. The participants then worked together to produce a coherent multimedia package of songs and dances, stories and plays, village clowneries and drum shows addressing a variety of population issues and lifestyles. The productions were pretested and integrated into a multimedia campaign, which also used radio, visual materials, drama and print. Yet it was the talent, creativity and intuition of the artists that triggered a process of village participation in the rural areas of southern Malawi.
The emotional excitement created by the launching of village campaigns gave way to the spontaneous development of traditional songs, dances and popular plays by other village artists. The Malawi experience proves the potential that traditional forms of communication have to involve and reach women audiences.
From Communication, a key to human development
FAO, 1994
MULTIMEDIA
Communication programmes should make use of all media infrastructures and channels available in a country, both modern and traditional, in an orchestrated and mutually reinforcing fashion. The combination of several media approaches and tools with interpersonal channels multiplies the impact of communication campaigns, which are being used increasingly to support clearly defined development priorities. Some striking examples include a health campaign in the United Republic of Tanzania; nutrition programmes in Nicaragua, the Philippines and Tunisia; a breastfeeding campaign in Trinidad and Tobago; family planning programmes in China, Colombia, Egypt, Honduras, Pakistan and Thailand; and a campaign against female genital mutilation in Ethiopia.
Multichannel communication approaches can also help in identifying appropriate agricultural technologies for women as well as in disseminating the required knowledge and skills.
A recent evaluation of the Soul City "edutainment" programme in South Africa has demonstrated the added value and effectiveness of using a multichannel approach. This communication campaign aimed at delivering health education messages to women over a three-month period. It included a series of 13 television drama programmes, broadcast at prime time on the country's most popular television channel.
It was accompanied by a series of 15-minute radio drama programmes, called Healing Hearts, broadcast daily on the country's three largest radio stations. In addition, Soul City used newspapers to provide more detailed information and to supplement the health messages conveyed by electronic media. A booklet, illustrated with characters from the television series, was serialized in the major newspapers and distributed through clinics and health service organizations.
Finally, educational packages combining audio and videotape together with written materials were produced to facilitate learning processes in both formal and informal settings. A public relations campaign strengthened the messages further by placing the issues on the public agenda by using editorial space, competitions and a range of actuality programmes in the various media. The entire campaign was preceded by formative research to identify appropriate channels and messages. Messages were designed in consultation with the target audience and experts in the field, and materials and programmes were pretested with groups of women and men.
An evaluation analysed gender-disaggregated data to assess the impact of the various channels and materials on knowledge, attitudes and behaviour. The results showed that the multimedia approach in this case was effective in reaching female audiences.
Audiovisual materials such as slides and video can assist extension workers. Women trainees, even if they are illiterate, can see and discuss innovations before putting them into practice.
IMPROVING EXTENSION AND TRAINING PROGRAMMES
Investing in the sharing of knowledge and learning for rural women through extension and training can be an effective means of reducing poverty and promoting food security and sustainable development. However, studies on agricultural extension have highlighted a number of weaknesses in current efforts to reach rural women. There are very few women extensionists; moreover, the attitudes and behaviour of male extension personnel can be a major barrier between extension services and women.
Extension services have often ignored the specific information needs of women as well as the fact that they may require different agricultural technologies from those suited to men. They have underestimated women's indigenous knowledge and experience and have not taken the time to listen to and learn from women themselves.
A combination of traditional and modern communication methods can help extension workers to improve the quality and outreach of their programmes with women. Fieldworkers need to abandon top-down approaches in favour of participatory communication skills and methods and establish a climate of confidence and trust. They need to learn how to promote dialogue among women farmers, help them identify their needs and strengthen their self-confidence. Participatory communication methods can improve the linkages among women farmers, extensionists, researchers, policy-makers and planners, thereby fostering the exchange of information and knowledge and ensuring that development activities correspond to the real needs of rural communities.
Audiovisual materials such as slides and video can assist extension workers with their training activities. Women trainees, even if they are illiterate, can see and discuss innovations before putting them into practice.
Audiovisuals can compress time and space. For example, in a single session, a training group can explore an entire agricultural cycle, from sowing to harvest. Through visual materials, women can travel to places that are too distant to visit. The extensionists themselves also benefit from using communication materials. The technical information presented can be standardized and of high quality and the presentations made attractive and interesting. Audiovisual materials spark dialogue and debate and, overall, they allow trainers to be more confident and professional.
The use of mass media, such as rural radio, can reinforce and multiply the impact of extension messages and allow extensionists to reach rural people in isolated areas. Radio and television can be used to conduct distance education programmes for rural women who are unable to attend formal education and training programmes.
DEVELOPING AGRICULTURAL TECHNOLOGIES WITH RURAL WOMEN IN JAMAICA
Rural women play an important role in Jamaican agriculture: as farmers in their own right, in partnership with men on household farms and as the main cultivators of kitchen gardens. A challenge to extension in Jamaica has been finding creative and cost-effective ways to communicate with rural women. A pilot project, supported by the Governments of Jamaica and Canada, used various participatory communication approaches to deliver appropriately designed soil nutrient technologies to rural women.
In order to develop appropriate agricultural and soil fertility technologies for rural women, a participatory communication methodology was used that incorporated both indigenous and scientific knowledge. The project demonstrated that women have specific information needs, and a set of participatory techniques for a gender approach to agricultural activities was developed. It also demonstrated how extension workers could select from a variety of traditional and modern communication methods according to the needs of rural women. The approaches and media applied, and the products generated, by the project included:
* a series of community video screenings, followed by discussion, showing agricultural practices in Jamaica;
* video tapes of community demonstration plots, comparing the effects of various soil nutrient applications;
* a visual baseline survey, with respondents interviewed either on video or on audiotape;
* a drama performance - for which rural women were hired as actors - to improve understanding of how gender relationships affect agricultural decision-making (the peformance was used to verify the baseline survey findings);
* oral history testimonies about each community, (these emerged from interviews and were published in local newsletters);
* a quarterly newsletter, produced to inform project participants and other audiences about soil fertility and other agricultural issues;
* participatory video training carried out in each of the communities, resulting in a series of short, humorous programmes related to agriculture and soil fertility.
Based on findings from nine months of field testing as well as on the results of the video baseline survey and a mid-term evaluation, the technology package was redesigned and a final video was produced to present soil nutrient and soil conservation recommendations.
Maria Protz
from Training for Agricultural and Rural Development
FAO, 1997-98
IMPROVING WOMEN'S ACCESS TO NEW TECHNOLOGIES
With the advent of the global information society, new communication technologies are increasingly being adopted as effective tools for reaching rural audiences. Yet the benefits of the information revolution are still much debated, particularly in the case of the developing countries. There is serious concern that the gap between the information "haves and have-nots" will continue to grow.
The bulk of information resources and technologies are in developed countries, which also control the content that they transmit. Unless developing countries acquire the infrastructure and resources to access these new technologies and generate their own content, they are likely to become more marginalized and isolated - economically, socially and politically.
The situation is even more serious for remote rural communities where basic communications infrastructure, such as newspapers, television, radio and telephones, is lacking. If the benefits of new technologies are to reach rural areas in developing countries, it is essential not only to increase rural populations' access to these technologies, but also to disseminate information in local languages and ensure that it is relevant to local development needs. Included in this challenge is the task of making the new communication technologies available to rural women and providing the skills and tools necessary for them to express their opinions and produce their own information.
Given the fast pace of the information revolution, it is not unrealistic to conceive of telecommunication infrastructures and information technologies becoming practical tools for the promotion of development in rural areas. We are not yet at the stage where all remote rural areas are connected to the outside world.
However, through the Internet and electronic mail, it is possible to connect with local intermediary organizations, such as extension services, health centres, training institutions, local NGOs, farmers' associations and women's organizations which, in turn, can share information with rural people through traditional communication channels. International development agencies and national development partners are already experimenting with new information technologies and electronic communication networks for rural development, concentrating on how to make them more accessible to rural populations and thus bridging the "last mile of connectivity".
Experience gained so far confirms that new information technologies can be successfully applied in rural areas of developing countries provided that:
* they are adapted to conditions in rural areas;
* there is full user participation, in terms of identifying information needs;
* local staff are trained in their use; and
* they can be complemented by traditional media for the benefit of rural audiences that are unable to access them.
WOMEN'S ACCESS TO THE INTERNET
Exclusivity in access to the Internet has led many to brand it as yet another technology that is available only to the wealthy and powerful élite in developing countries. The true picture is more complex, however, and despite its limited access, the Internet is making an impact.
One consistent criticism centres on men's predominant use of the Internet. Access to information means access to power, and most societies continue to exclude women from both. Estimates suggest that the global Internet gender ratio has remained static for a number of years, with about 63 percent of users being men and 37 percent women. Less optimistic is the claim, made by the Association for Progressive Communications, that "male domination of computer networks" is as high as 95 percent.
For many activists, the concept of "cyberspace" is critical to understanding the importance of the new technology for women. "The issue of space has always been central for women and is highly sensitive, particularly in Africa," argues Marie-Hélène Mottin-Sylla of the Synergy, Gender and Development Programme run by ENDA-Tiers Monde in Senegal. "The freedom to have access to spaces other than the bedroom and the kitchen, and to be able to act fully and safely in other public spaces is key to women's full participation in the world's future. Unless African women can participate fully in cyberspace, they will face a new form of exclusion from society."
From The Internet and poverty: real help or real hype?
Panos Media Briefing, No. 28, April 1998
VILLAGE PAY PHONE PROJECT
In Bangladesh, the Grameen Bank has set a new trend in communications. The bank, which provides collateral-free micro loans to help the poor start up small businesses, has established a people-oriented, wireless communication system with the objective of promoting income-generating activities for the rural poor. The communication system is based on the Grameen phone, a wireless, cellular phone that poor rural people may purchase through a lease scheme. The leasers then charge other villagers a small fee for use of the phone, which thus takes on the function of a portable rural telephone booth.
Hundreds of rural women are taking advantage of this development to create pay telephone services in communities that were previously without a telephone connection. As a result, the Grameen Bank is helping rural women to run their businesses since, through the use of the phones, they gain quick, cheap and easy access to suppliers, customers and market information.
The bank believes the Village Pay Phone Project is the largest of its type in the world. It has already changed the lives of many rural women in Bangladesh, and the aim of the bank is to put at least one cellular phone in each of Bangladesh's 68000 villages within the next six years.
THE VILLAGE PAY PHONE
Laili Begun, from Uttarkhan village about 16 miles outside Dhaka, is a member of the Patia Grameen Bank group. In the past, she had received small loans from the Bank, with which she bought a cow and some chickens. She was doing well, selling milk and eggs to boost her income as well as improve her diet, and she had set up a tea shop for her husband to run. When Mohammed Yunus toured the area to tell people about his cellular pay phone idea, Laili gave it serious consideration. Eventually, impressed by Laili's record of business success, the local Grameen manager asked her if she would be interested in leasing one of the phones.
Laili had never imagined communicating with Dhaka or overseas just by voice, and without even leaving her village. Although there is only a road in the dry season (it is under water during the monsoon) she was used to walking for miles to reach a doctor or meet relatives. So she did some research and concluded that there would be a market for such a pay phone in her village. Weighing up the advantages and disadvantages, Laili decided to take the risk and lease a phone from the Bank, thus becoming the first village phone operator. The loan was much larger than those she had previously received, but she was confident that the income would easily cover the payments and leave her with a profit.
The Grameen lease scheme is in fact more like a hire-purchase agreement. Laili borrowed 18 000 taka (Tk) - about US$450 - which she was to pay back to the Bank over a period of two years at a weekly rate of Tk 150, in addition to charges for telephone calls made. When the loan is paid off, Laili will actually own the phone.
Laili charges Tk 4.60 per minute for calls, on which she makes a profit of Tk 2 per minute. She is now making Tk 100 per day from both incoming and outgoing calls, which is a great boost to her family income. Her customers form a long queue at the tea shop to telephone relatives at home and abroad. The Village Pay Phone has given Laili a touch of glamour - as well as a good income.
Adapted from Alamgeer Haque,
The Village Pay Phone: an explosion in Bangladesh,
In Appropriate Technology, March 1998
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING FOR WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
Today, the Internet's World Wide Web and electronic mail systems comprise a global "people's network" for communicating and sharing information. Women's groups and associations in developing countries are exploring the challenges and possibilities unfolded by Internet applications and are beginning to invest in the use of these tools for promoting their interests. For example, in societies that have a long tradition of women traders, new information technology offers women improved scope for business ventures as well as the opportunity to collect and disseminate information within and beyond their national boundaries. In Ghana, communication centres with fax, telephone, copy machine and computer services have been operating since 1992. These centres are owned almost exclusively by women and serve many women clients.
Communication through e-mail networks helps reduce the isolation of women and offers opportunities to overcome many of the constraints that limit their capacity to address national and local development issues. Communicating with the international community as well as with each other, rural women's groups can gain access to information about best practices, appropriate technologies, ideas and problems of other groups with similar interests. Despite the greater access that women's groups and associations now have to new information technologies, they are still underrepresented on most networks. Entering the new electronic frontier of cyberspace remains a challenge to most women of the world, not to mention rural women.
The problems faced by women users include:
* the cost of access and lack of infrastructure, especially in the poorest areas;
* a lack of education in regions where women have limited access to schooling;
* insufficient women's training programmes covering the basic skills needed to master computer technology;
* language barriers - most of the networks are in English or French, which means that women's groups that act as information brokers for rural communities need to translate information into local languages.
WOMEN'S NETWORKING SUPPORT PROGRAMME
The Association for Progressive Communications promotes a women's networking programme to empower women through the use of information technology. The programme works with women intermediaries who interact with rural communities. Its objectives are to:
* ensure women's groups in Africa, Asia and Latin America the necessary access to training, technology and information so as to facilitate local, regional and international communication and information exchange;
* empower women - through information tools - to increase their visibility and highlight their achievements as primary agents of development;
* respond to women's training needs and support the involvement of a core group of women technicians and information management specialists.
The programme has highlighted the generation of local content, the development of appropriate multimedia information systems, and the efficient and targeted delivery of information in local languages as priorities for those working with rural women for sustainable development.
From APC Women's Networking Support Programme, 1999
(http://colnodo.apc.org/ apcwomen)
RURAL TELECENTRES
Rural community telecentres are part of another approach being used by development agencies and their partners to extend access to the Internet, bringing it closer to rural communities and the intermediary organizations that provide services to these communities. Telecentres are shared information and communication facilities that provide communities with telephone, fax and Internet services as well as access to equipment such as cassette and video players, photocopiers and computers.
Telecentres can provide communities with knowledge and information from outside sources, which can then be integrated with local knowledge. For example, a telecentre can be used by a local health organization to collect information and develop material for public awareness programmes on issues such as reproductive health, HIV/AIDS or female genital mutilation.
Telecentres can be used by training institutes to obtain distance learning materials for supplementing courses offered locally for girls. They can also be used by communities to share information with other communities. For example, locally developed solutions for agricultural problems can be announced and shared with other communities with similar problems and agro-ecological conditions. Furthermore, linking telecentre facilities with other media can increase the local impact of such centres, exchanging information with rural people who cannot access their services. If local radio stations broadcast information collected on the Internet, for instance, rural women who are unable to use the services of a telecentre may still benefit from the information made available through this electronic channel.
Communication through e-mail networks helps reduce the isolation of women and offers opportunities to overcome many of the constraints that limit women's capacity to address national and local development issues.
<section>5</section>
Looking towards the future
COMMUNICATION - A PREREQUISITE FOR SUCCESSFUL DEVELOPMENT
Women play key roles in the development of their communities. If lasting progress is to be achieved, women and men must have equal access to the resources needed for development and to the benefits it produces.
There is no simple recipe to ensure successful communication in development efforts or for the advancement of rural women. Nevertheless, from best practices and lessons learned in communication for development over the past decades, the following guiding principles have emerged.
Building national capacities
Historically, the international community has not regarded communication for development as a priority. Many agricultural and rural development projects have not included communication as a component; others have merely added it as a token input, often in the form of an audiovisual production. If projects and programmes for the advancement of rural women are to be effective, the planning phase should include a communication component, designed to reflect their perceived needs and special conditions and taking into account women's active participation in traditional communication networks. In addition, this component should be allocated sufficient resources to create sustainable national capacities for applying communication skills and tools to improve the status of women.
Listening to rural women
Communication efforts should begin with development planners listening to women and carefully considering their perceptions and needs, their knowledge and experience and their culture and traditions. Planners must take into account the reality of rural areas and the changes required to improve the livelihoods of rural women in ways that can be sustained.
A holistic approach
Communication efforts should cover all the multifaceted aspects of life in rural areas affecting women, including agriculture, the environment, health, sanitation, family planning, education and literacy. A holistic approach should be used to ensure that women's concerns are integrated into research and extension programmes.
Success in achieving sustainable and equitable development is increasingly dependent on the acquisition of information and knowledge.
Multichannel approach
Communication programmes should make use of all modern and traditional media infrastructure and channels available in a country, and appropriate technologies and media should be applied according to the prevailing cultural, social and economic conditions. Programmes should be participatory and interactive, and special attention should be given to the communication channels most suited to women.
Access to new information and communication technologies
A concerted effort should be made to harness the potential of the new communication technologies for sharing information and knowledge with women in rural areas. Essential tasks include improving the quantity and accessibility of infrastructure, increasing the relevance of information to the needs of rural women, and training women in computer skills. Communication practitioners must act as information brokers, selecting the most appropriate channels for the transmission of information to rural audiences that do not have access to the new information technologies.
Training in participatory communication skills
The training of women as communication specialists at all levels - from fieldworkers to trainers and planners - is an essential requirement for successful communication efforts carried out by and for women. Training in the production and use of communication tools should be provided to rural women's organizations and community groups so that they can participate in programmes for women and effectively communicate their own messages and concerns.
Change agents should be trained in participatory communication skills and the use of audiovisual training methodologies in the aim of establishing a dialogue with rural women, learning from their experience and improving the quality and outreach of training activities.
Monitoring and evaluation
More applied research and evaluation studies should be carried out on the visual perception and understanding of audiences composed of illiterate rural women. The advent of new information technologies opens up a vast new field for evaluating the impact of communication programmes. Studies should include an evaluation of the impact of these technologies at the grassroots level, for communities that are without any form of connectivity and, especially, for female audiences that are hard to reach.
Advocating gender-sensitive communication policies
The use of communication for development must be placed on the agenda of governments, development planners and decision-makers, who need to promote an active and visible policy to mainstream gender perspectives and the requirements of women in rural communication policies and programmes. If the full potential of communication, and especially the new information technologies, is to be exploited for sustainable development, policy-makers must take rural women's specific needs into account and involve them in decisions regarding application of such technologies.
AN AGENT FOR SOCIAL CHANGE
Communication is a powerful force for fostering learning, positive change and empowerment in the process of rural development. It has the potential to enhance people's quality of life, help protect fragile environments and create a knowledge-based society that is more responsive to change and development issues.
Effective communication can lead to the empowerment of women, enabling them to take control of their lives and participate as equals with men in promoting food security and rural development. Harnessing the potential of communication to help rural women improve their living conditions remains a challenge for the global community. Without communication the voices of rural women for change will not be heard.
"Empowerment is about people - both women and men - taking control over their lives: setting their own agendas, gaining skills, increasing self confidence, solving problems and developing self-reliance. It is both a process and an outcome"
Women in Development and Gender Equity Policy
Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), 1995
Acknowledgements
For their contributions to the preparation of this publication, grateful appreciation is extended to Ms Silvia Balit, former Chief, Communication for Development Branch, FAO, who is the primary author. Mr Henri Carsalade, Assistant Director-General, Sustainable Development Department; Ms Louise Fresco, Director, Research, Extension and Training Division; Ms Sissal Ekaas, Director, Women and Population Division; and Ms Ester Zulberti, Chief, Extension, Education and Communication Service. Appreciation is extended also to the Communication for Development Group and to all others who made contributions to this publication.
Voices for change - rural women and communication was prepared as a background document for the FAO High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information, 4 to 6 October 1999, Rome, Italy. The voices of rural women are seldom heard in agricultural and rural development. It is hoped that this publication will help to break the silence.
L. Van Crowder
Senior Officer, Communication for Development
