<title>Filling the Data Gap: Gender-sensitive statistics for agricultural development</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food Summit Plan of Action, adopted by Heads of State and Government in Rome, in November 199
acknowledge the fundamental contribution of women in achieving sustainable food security for all. In particular, FAO members committed themselves to foster equitable participation of women and men, and to adopt legislation guaranteeing women access to and control of productive resources. In this context, they recommended improving "the collection, dissemination and use of gender-disaggregated data in agriculture, fisheries, forestry and rural development".
Although the role of women as powerful agents for social transformation and development has been increasingly recognized by governments, much remains to be done to translate sensitivity and commitment into action. Agricultural development policies do not adequately reflect the needs of women and, even when women's needs are incorporated, they often fail to be translated into practice. Consequently, there is a growing recognition of the need to collect and disseminate information on the crucial role women play in agricultural and rural development, in order to improve policy and decision-making processes so that sustainable livelihoods and food security can be achieved in rural areas, without discrimination of gender.
FAO is assisting its members in their efforts in this regard. The selection of the theme "Women feed the world" for World Food Day and TeleFood in 1998 was further evidence of the importance that the Organization continues to attach to this crucial issue. One of FAO's key strategic objectives is to contribute to the eradication of food insecurity and rural poverty by assisting its members in developing policies for sustainable livelihoods in rural areas, ensuring equitable participation and the access of both women and men to productive resources.
I firmly believe that there is a need to take a more holistic view of farm production systems and to offer a framework that allows policy-makers and planners to gain a clearer understanding of the dynamics operating at the household and community levels. This would enable them to formulate more gender-responsive national policies.
Too often, the different and complementary roles and responsibilities of women and men in agriculture are overlooked, and so the differing impacts of policies and programmes on women and men are not given sufficient consideration. For this reason, formal statistics need to be supplemented by socio-economic research and analysis to ensure the formulation and successful implementation of agricultural development policies that respond to actual conditions.
The purpose of convening the High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information this year is to maintain momentum in our efforts to sensitize policy- and decision-makers, as well as the general public, to the actual and potential contributions of rural women as agents for social change and as important partners in agricultural and rural development.
This publication summarizes available, albeit limited, global and regional gender-related information pertinent to FAO's mandate. It discusses methodological and measurement issues, identifies data gaps and highlights the efforts that are still needed to improve the availability of data necessary for a better understanding of gender issues in rural and agricultural development, particularly in the developing countries.
If we are to meet the challenges of the twenty-first century and overcome hunger and malnutrition, agricultural and rural development policies and strategies must identify and support both women and men farmers on an equal footing. We need to know more about rural women - for too long the invisible protagonists of development - and to find out what they do, what they know, and what their needs and priorities are as farmers and food producers in their own right.
Jacques Diouf
Director-General, FAO
<section>2</section>
Introduction
The end of the second millennium has been strongly influenced by the "era of communication", which has increased the speed and range of information as a result of more powerful communication technologies. Information is becoming the basis of development and its absence or insufficient flow may in turn become a new dimension of poverty. In developing countries, rural areas remain outside the mainstream information channels, and the central government authorities therefore have insufficient knowledge of their conditions.
For two decades, the questions surrounding the recognition of women's roles in economic and social development and of equality between men and women have fostered increasing interest among members of civil society, international organizations and governments. However, despite a noticeable improvement in gender^1 awareness worldwide, two contradictory phenomena are being witnessed.
On the one hand, information on women's contributions to development is far from comprehensive. Unfortunately, even when available, this information is not sufficiently utilized as a tool by planners and decision-makers in formulating their national development plans. This is especially evident with regard to information on rural women's contribution to agriculture and rural development. On the other hand, there is an increasing demand for gender-specific statistics at the national and regional levels, from researchers, academics and women's groups to non-governmental organizations (NGOs), all of whom are interested in addressing various socio-economic development issues and participating more actively in decision-making on such topics.
FAO has participated actively in the international effort to document, develop and disseminate information and data about the roles and responsibilities of rural women in the fields of agricultural production, food security and rural development. FAO's Plan of Action for Women in Development (1996-2001) (C/95/14-Sup. 1, Rev. 1) and the Progress Report on its implementation (C/97/INF/18) stress that, in order to make informed decisions, it is essential to have statistics disaggregated by sex,^2 together with information and precise data on the roles and responsibilities of men and women and their respective constraints and needs as they strive to reach their full potential.
During the last 20 years, information on rural women has increased significantly, but its validity and relevance are still questioned, as is its usefulness in decision-making and planning. This stems partly from the fact that the information is often not sufficiently substantiated by reliable statistics. Notorious deficiencies and shortcomings of gender data include the absence of reliable sources, a lack of precision, and weakness of analysis. Quite often, these statistics are too limited in scope and coverage, and do not allow for generalization.
In general, gender-related information also suffers from a weak dissemination system. When data are available, they are usually diffused only partially and selectively without a real awareness of the target audience. Moreover, the generation and use of information on rural gender issues compete with many other priorities. Clearly, many of the agencies producing, using and disseminating such information are those that are most likely to examine issues relating to global development; these agencies may have little interest in disaggregating data available at the subnational level. Thus, important rural/urban, gender, age and other differentials at the subnational level are overlooked in research and evaluation. This makes it difficult for issues of social equity and the specific needs of male and female agricultural producers to be adequately addressed. With new challenges arising from political and economic liberalization processes, it will be of the utmost importance to make
statistics available to a wider variety of users. This greater availability of data will help to empower rural women and men through better knowledge, representation of their interests, and more opportunities for collective action for development.
The main purpose of this publication is to sensitize policy-makers to the benefits that sex-disaggregated information can bring to policy-making, and - as the main recipients and seekers of such information - move them to action at the national level. In this capacity, policy-makers possess the ability to influence actively both the production and the quality of information.
While stressing the need for relevant statistics, this publication also shows the demographic structure and characteristics of rural areas in developing countries, most of which are dominated by agriculture. It presents the type of readily available data, albeit limited, that address gender issues in rural and agricultural development and, subsequently, methodological and measurement issues. Data gaps and action needed to improve the present situation are highlighted. Tables and figures illustrating gender disparities with respect to key socio-economic indicators (e.g. illiteracy rates, life expectancy at birth and school enrolment) are presented in the annexes.
^1 Biological differences between men and women do not change but the social roles that they are required to play vary from one society to another and according to different periods of history. The term "gender" refers to the economic, social, political and cultural attributes and opportunities associated with being male or female.
^2 Data disaggregated by sex refer to the collection of data by physical attributes. Gender-disaggregated data, however, are analytical indicators derived from sex-disaggregated data on social and economic attributes. The term "gender" in this context refers to a set of statistics derived from the results of social and economic analysis.
<section>3</section>
Rural producers: trends, issues and challenges for socio-economic development
Over the last decade agricultural and rural populations in the developing world have become more extensively and directly affected by several new processes in a rapidly changing global context. Globalization and liberalization of trade have brought about a greater integration of rural economies in both national and world markets. Rural populations are being confronted with more dynamic and, therefore, less predictable market-dominated conditions of production. The responses of rural populations to uncertainties and risks are also becoming less predictable but increasingly more important as an economic factor. In keeping with the rapid transformation occurring in global markets, markets for agricultural labour are likewise experiencing changes and becoming more dynamic. Because of production constraints, many farmers are now migrating to the cities to work in an attempt to maximize their access to scarce resources and improve the lives of their families. For those who stay
behind, access to cash and a wage income is becoming as critical as access to land (ECOSOC, 1999a).
RISING FOOD DEMAND AND THE INTENSIFICATION OF AGRICULTURE
Demographic projections by the United Nations (UN), supported by findings of the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), suggest that, over the next two decades, rural populations will continue to exceed urban populations in the developing countries. Moreover, food needs in the developing world could double over the next three decades (World Bank, 1999a). Since economic growth in the developing countries is correlated with agricultural growth (FAO, 1998), the pressure on agriculture to increase its output, and hence its productivity, will be enormous in the years to come. Production on existing land will almost have to double in order to provide the required food supply sustainably (World Bank, 1999a).
Contributory factors in the intensification and increase of agricultural productivity are thus likely to be research and the organization of research-supporting databases; new technology; the development of rural human resources, including the agricultural labour force (to be achieved through the targeting of small- and medium-scale farming operations); and the use of public environments as a forum for dialogue on policy issues. Clearly, all these developments will destabilize the existing division of labour in rural areas and will have important consequences for gender relations at the subnational and national levels.
Recent studies have shown that more varied employment becomes available as workers move out of agriculture and subsistence production and into paid employment in the expanding manufacturing and service sectors (Mehra and Gammage, 1999). However, this trend does not necessarily reflect healthy growth in the agricultural sector. Sooner or later, planners will be faced with the question of how best to invest in and maximize the productivity of the remaining human resources.
GENDER SEGREGATION AND LABOUR FORCE EFFICIENCY
There seem to be important gender deviations in the general trend of labour moving out of agriculture. A slightly increasing feminization of the agricultural labour force in most developing countries may reflect the fact that women are lagging behind men and abandoning agriculture at a slower rate (Mehra and Gammage, 1999). Furthermore, women tend to work in low-productivity jobs more often than men, especially those who remain in the agricultural sector.
Viewing workers as an important resource for agricultural development is economically advantageous. Efficiency losses related to sex segregation in agricultural activities may result in a reduction of total output as a consequence of labour force misallocation and the underutilization of existing gender-specific skills (such as women's traditional expertise in plant genetic resource management), or even loss of skills. Experts in estimating labour force efficiency have suggested that reducing labour force segregation by sex is not only an issue of redistributive justice, but can also have beneficial effects for both men and women in terms of welfare improvement (see Tzannatos, 1999, who claims that "the `size of the pie' increases with women claiming a bigger share"). From this perspective, policy interventions to improve women's productivity may involve more investment in women as agricultural producers and a reorganization of the gender-based division of labour.
WOMEN IN THE AGRICULTURAL LABOUR FORCE
In the developing world as a whole, agriculture accounted for about 63 percent of total female employment in 1997 (see Table 4, p. 14) and is still the most important sector for female employment in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. At the same time, the share of women's work in the informal sector, both urban and rural, remains high. Informal occupations provide the livelihood (paid or otherwise) of more than 80 percent of women in low-income countries and 40 percent of those in middle-income countries. These countries together account for 85 percent of the world's population (Chen, 1999; Mehra and Gammage, 1999). However, this work remains largely unrecognized because the informal sector (both within and outside agriculture) is often considered to be a "residual" category that is supposedly short-lived and does not contribute substantially to national economies in terms of output. Research in recent years has suggested that women's labour force in agriculture is often
substantially underestimated. For example, in 1994 the International Labour Organisation (ILO) reported that the difference between the employment rates registered through a narrow versus a broad definition of "work" in India amounted to 75 percent of the female labour force. The 1981 census in the Dominican Republic estimated a rural female labour rate of 21 percent, a figure corrected up to 84 percent three years later in a special survey that included activities such as gardening and animal care in the definition of "work" (Tzannatos, 1999).
THE SOCIAL DIMENSION
With globalization, rural planners face the challenge of how to account for (and rely on) the indirect effects of social factors on economic processes. For example, how can low-income countries afford to consider cash crop growth (involving expensive infrastructure) as a developmental priority if large rural populations remain constrained by low labour productivity in subsistence farming and thus are candidates for urban (un)employment in the near future? Indeed, they (primarily women) cultivate the food crops necessary for food security but, with no additional income, they cannot participate directly in development or derive benefits from it.
How can the two development processes - industrial cash crop expansion and subsistence farming - be combined without hindering one another? This may require the targeting of subsistence farming populations with specific programmes for sustainability and growth (such as microenterprise development) or learning how to assess the hidden work involved in coping strategies and the subsequent returns that are used informally by farmers.
As far as women are concerned, structural adjustment programmes have brought additional "pull-back" forces. A recent report by the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the advancement of rural women stresses that the globalization and liberalization of trade may bring more difficulties than returns for rural women because of the reduction of international aid and, correspondingly, diminishing national social budgets in the poorest countries of the world (ECOSOC, 1999a). Capital disinvestment from the social sphere may have affected the working lives of women by adding additional constraints deriving from their household roles. For example, lower health budgeting is likely to increase the care-giving functions falling on women, while disinvestment from community infrastructure, such as water supply systems, is likely to increase women's household work. In development planning, it is of crucial importance to define the target population (by sex, age, sector of
agricultural production and type of occupation/work) in view of a specific development objective. However, this will be impossible if rural planners continue to base their decisions mainly on data relating to physical inputs and outputs, while ignoring the perspective of human resources: the human labour input and the social dimensions of agriculture.
<section>4</section>
The importance of sex-disaggregated data for agricultural and rural development
While in previous decades rural policy relied very much on central government, policy-makers are now facing three fundamental changes: the expanding role of the private sector; increasing decentralization in decision-making, with corresponding demands for and expectations of transparency; and increased stakeholder participation in planning and decision-making processes at all levels - community, regional and national. Small farmers and food entrepreneurs are becoming active stakeholders. These changes are directly related to the necessity for comprehensive and technically sound databases capturing the variety of economic activities through which rural people participate in the production process.
IMPROVING DATA COLLECTION AND STATISTICAL ACCURACY
According to a recent report by the World Bank (1999a), monolithic decision chains dominated by central governments are giving way to broad-based stakeholder participation and to a greater variety of disaggregated agricultural operations comprising smaller and more diverse components. Governments may have to shift from their traditional role of centres that define rural development to a new role where they are primarily administrative and trouble-shooting organizations, providing standards for development and control mechanisms. This new role cannot be performed without solid and broad statistical information about rural producers, both landowners and landless farm workers.
It should be emphasized, however, that the decentralization of policy-making for rural development will require not only more accurate and systematic statistics on rural producers, but also officially collected data that are more relevant to the needs and concerns of data users and producers' associations, academic institutions and public and private development practitioners at all levels. As stakeholders involved in the diffusion of information, communication and public representation of various development interests, these information agents will thus empower men and women from different social groups to participate in the development processes. In this respect, some fundamental issues are not adequately addressed in agricultural censuses and surveys; for example, sex differentiation in:
i) landownership and use;
ii) access to credit;
iii) training and extension services;
iv) technology; and
v) income.
Since these variables are usually ignored in the data collection and tabulation processes, censuses need to be supplemented by other socio-economic surveys in anticipation of stakeholders' increased need for information.
The production of more accurate estimates regarding the participation of men and women in the labour force, particularly in agriculture, not only generates sound statistics but also sound economics. Accurate information forms the basis of awareness about potential labour force misallocations and resulting welfare losses (such as loss of qualification or skill potential). In rural economies striving to maximize the use of available resources, skill loss would be a high price to pay, since skills and qualifications are directly involved in the development of new and more productive processes. Despite the mechanization and intensification of agriculture, agricultural labour is likely to remain the principal factor affecting food security and economic change in many developing countries in the foreseeable future. Over the past 20 years, agricultural planners have often overlooked the "human factor", while social planners may have overlooked production or market factors, possibly
because agricultural and social planners often belong to different ministries and their efforts are not easily coordinated. This indicates a limited use of information about social and human development in relation to the developmental priorities in agriculture. The lack of information on women's input in agrarian economies may be only one example of this misunderstanding of the role people play as human capital and agents of rural development in general. However, since the focus of this publication is the gender dimension, it concentrates mainly on issues related to the use of gender-related information for socio-economic development.
GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT: A BROADER APPROACH
The general approach in development strategy over the last 20 years has moved from women in development (WID) to gender and development (GAD). Thus, the focus has shifted from women in isolation to women in relation to men. Specifically, the gender approach considers the roles of men and women, how they differ, their interrelationships and the different impacts that policies and programmes have on them. In statistics, the focus has therefore moved from statistics on women to gender statistics. These changes in the conceptual framework and approach of gender and development represent a challenge for FAO to provide more gender-balanced policy and technical advice to address development needs in member countries.
Collecting gender-sensitive data is not an end in itself. There is increasing evidence that human capital - involving the efforts of both men and women - is a crucial factor in development, more important than the physical capital involved in the process of food production. But data on rural producers in general, and women in particular, are still regarded as being of only marginal relevance to policy-making. This may be a result of policies in agricultural development that are often narrowly aimed at product growth, overlooking labour input as a major factor and, hence, the importance of human resources as well as the social and welfare aspects of development. Collecting gender-sensitive data goes beyond the simple disaggregation of data by sex. It attempts to reflect the diverse and differentiated situation of men and women, their specific contributions to agrarian economy and the consequences of their traditional roles in different social and economic situations.
Agricultural development aims at increasing productivity and overall production while, at the same time, securing the preservation of natural resources, increased incomes, the creation of employment and the improvement of food security and adequate levels of nutrition. However, these objectives are often pursued in the face of serious economic constraints and resource shortages. Thus, agricultural planning should make full use of existing resources, in particular human capital. Development lessons from the past have revealed that the invisible input of women - when taken into account by rural planners and policy-makers - can produce tangible and sustainable improvements in the quality of rural life at the household and community levels.
<section>5</section>
Readily available data at the global and regional levels
This section describes the types of data that are readily available in FAO's statistical database, FAOSTAT, in order to illustrate the main point of this publication - basic information exists, but more detailed and disaggregated data are necessary for a responsible socio-economic analysis of the gender-related aspects of agricultural and rural development.
FAO's role is not to produce primary statistics, but rather to organize global databases, methodologies and analyses. As far as demographic and labour force data are concerned, FAO uses statistics compiled and disseminated by the United Nations and ILO.
The main body of statistics produced by FAO in house are based on national data provided by member countries. Such data are derived from periodic agricultural censuses and from yearly surveys of agricultural production, including forestry and fisheries. The objective of these data collection instruments is to monitor the inputs, outputs and management of agricultural holdings so as to formulate policy recommendations for sustainable development and reliable food production systems. However, FAO's databases do not - nor is it their purpose to - incorporate the detailed agricultural labour force data that are necessary to address broader social issues concerning agricultural employment and rural development in the context of the overall economy. To study these aspects, demographic and labour force data are compiled by FAO within the framework of an interagency working group including the United Nations and ILO.
A comprehensive picture of a population, presenting the rural/urban and male/female distribution as well as linkages with agricultural and non-agricultural activities, can be formed only on the basis of data from population censuses and labour force surveys that cover the whole population. Tables 1 to 4 present an overview of the population distribution in developing and developed countries and also show the relative importance of agriculture.
POPULATION GROWTH AND DISTRIBUTION
Table 1 indicates that, of the total 5.8 billion people in the world in 1997, 78 percent lived in developing countries. It also shows that, although the population growth rate is generally decreasing, the growth rate for the developing countries is more than three times that of the developed countries in the current decade; and that, of the 54 percent of the world population living in rural areas in 1997, more than 80 percent were dependent on agriculture for their livelihoods.
TABLE 1
Total, rural and agricultural population
World/region Population (100%) Rural
population
(%) of total population Agricultural
population
Number (millions) Share in
world total (%) Average
annual growth
rate (%) % of total
population % of rural
population
World 5 849 1.7 1.5 54 44 81
Developed countries 1 299 22.2 0.7 0.5 27 9 31
Developing countries 4 549 77.8 2.1 1.8 62 54 88
African developing
countries 715 12.2 2.8 2.7 65 59 91
- of which
sub-Saharan Africa 578 9.9 2.9 2.8 69 65 95
Asian developing
countries 3 335 57.0 1.9 1.6 66 57 87
Latin American
and Caribbean
developing
countries 492 8.4 2.0 1.7 26 22 86
Oceanic developing
countries 7 0.1 2.1 2.2 75 65 87
LIFDCs* 3 643 62.3 2.2 1.7 68 60 88
Low-income countries 2 056 35.2 2.4 2.4 72 60 83
Source: FAOSTAT.
* Low-income food-deficit countries.
GROWTH OF THE LABOUR FORCE AND THE RELATIVE SHARE OF AGRICULTURE
Table 2 indicates that the growth rate of the labour force in the developing countries is more than three times that of the developed countries in the current decade, which is similar to the difference in population growth rates in these two country groupings. It shows that, although the share of agriculture in the total labour force is declining, agriculture continues to be the main activity for the majority of the labour force in developing countries; and among the developing regions, sub-Saharan Africa has the highest percentage of labour force engaged in agricultural activities, i.e. almost three times that of countries in Latin America and the Caribbean.
TABLE 2
Total and agricultural labour force
World/region Total labour force Agricultural labour force
Number
(millions) Average
annual growth
rate(%) Number
(millions) Average
annual
growth rate (%) Share in total
labour
force (%)
World 2 827 1.7 1 302 0.9 49 46
Developed countries 642 0.7 52 -2.6 10 8
Developing countries 2 185 2.0 1 250 1.0 61 57
African developing
countries 307 2.8 189 1.9 66 62
- of which
sub-Saharan Africa 257 2.8 173 2.0 71 67
Asian developing
countries 1 668 1.8 1 014 0.9 65 61
Latin American and
Caribbean
developing countries 207 2.4 44 -0.1 25 21
Oceanic developing
countries 3 2.4 2 1.7 68 65
LIFDCs* 1 790 2.2 1 113 1.2 67 62
Low-income countries 912 2.8 568 1.8 66 62
Source: FAOSTAT.
* Low-income food-deficit countries.
DISTRIBUTION OF THE LABOUR FORCE BY SEX
Table 3 indicates that, in developing countries, there has been a steady increase in the proportion of women in the agricultural labour force. Moreover, the proportion of women in the total labour force of the developing countries is lower than that of the developed countries. However, the reverse situation is true for the agricultural labour force. Women constitute about 44 percent of the agricultural labour force in developing countries.
The Table raises further issues for consideration:
* the causes, consequences, patterns and extent of work-related male migration, which means farming being left in the hands of women, children and elderly people;
* the employment-recording system on two levels: in all sectors of agriculture in developing countries, and in the informal sector (where the majority of women work);
* the measurement and evaluation of women's labour on the farm and at home;
* the percentage of women's labour force in developing countries, differentiated by seasonal, part-time and full-time labour.
TABLE 3
Sex distribution of the total, agricultural and non-agricultural labour force
World/region Women's share in:
Total labour
force Agricultural
labour force Non-agricultural
labour force
(percentage)
World 40.0
Developed countries 43.4 44.2 38.4 36.7 44.0 44.9
Developing countries 38.8 39.3 42.9 43.6 32.3 33.7
African developing
countries 40.0 40.5 46.6 47.3 27.5 29.5
- of which
sub-Saharan Africa 42.4
Asian developing countries 39.4 39.8 43.5 44.0 31.7 33.1
Latin American and
Caribbean developing
countries 32.6 34.1 16.9 17.0 37.9 38.8
Oceanic developing
countries 39.1 40.3 43.5 44.8 29.8 31.9
LIFDCs* 39.6 40.0 43.5 44.0 31.7 33.4
Low-income countries 36.2 36.9 41.3 42.1 26.0 28.4
Source: FAOSTAT.
* Low-income food-deficit countries.
DISTRIBUTION OF WOMEN'S LABOUR FORCE BY ACTIVITY
Table 4 shows that, in the developing countries, the majority of women in the labour force are engaged in agricultural activities. On the other hand, in the developed countries, only a small proportion is engaged in agriculture, and this share is decreasing over time. In 1997 only 7 percent of women in developed countries were engaged in agricultural activities compared with 63 percent in developing countries. However, Latin America and the Caribbean followed the pattern of developed countries; only 11 percent of women were engaged in agriculture in this region in 1997.
The evolution of the percentage of women in developed countries (decreasing) and in developing countries (slightly decreasing but still high) calls for a readjustment of development policies, in particular with regard to the types of proposed activities and related training and extension programmes, and the creation of an enabling environment. To this end, livelihood analysis at the household and community levels has proved a useful tool for agricultural planners.
TABLE 4
Distribution of women's labour force by agricultural and non-agricultural activities
World/region Agricultural activities Non-agricultural activities
World 56 52 49 44 48 51
Developed countries 14 9 7 86 91 93
Developing countries 74 68 63 26 32 37
African developing
countries 82 76 72 18 24 28
- of which
sub-Saharan Africa 83 79 75 17 21 25
Asian developing
countries 77 72 67 23 28 33
Latin American and
Caribbean developing
countries 21 13 11 79 87 89
Oceanic developing
countries 43 44 45 57 57 55
LIFDCs* 78 73 68 22 27 32
Low-income countries 82 76 71 18 24 29
Source: FAOSTAT.
* Low-income food-deficit countries.
POPULATION DENSITY AND THE STRUCTURE OF AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY
In many developing countries, agriculture is treated as an activity that affects the lifestyle of the entire family, rather than as a business proposition. The sector involves a large number of people and institutions.
Table 5 presents data on population density and the availability of arable land plus land under permanent crops per agricultural worker. It indicates that, in most of the developing countries (except for Latin America and the Caribbean), the availability of land per agricultural worker is less than 1 ha.
TABLE 5
Population density and availability of land for agriculture
World/region Population density
(inhabitants
/km2) Arable land plus
land under
permanentcrops (million ha) Arable land plus land
under permanent crops
per economically active person in agriculture (ha)
World 45 1 500 1 510 1.22 1.16
Developed countries 24 673 656 10.85 12.62
Developing countries 60 827 855 0.71 0.68
African developing
countries 25 175 183 1.06 0.97
- of which
sub-Saharan Africa 26 149 155 0.99 0.90
Asian developing
countries 126 501 510 0.53 0.50
Latin American and
Caribbean developing
countries 24 149 160 3.35 3.61
Oceanic developing
countries 13 1 1 0.71 0.68
LIFDCs* 82 567 592 0.55 0.53
Low-income countries 68 386 404 0.77 0.71
Source: FAOSTAT.
* Low-income food-deficit countries.
LAND AVAILABILITY, INCOME AND WOMEN IN THE AGRICULTURAL LABOUR FORCE
Based on a classification of 84 developing countries by average income and land availability per agricultural worker, Table 6 emphasizes that women's share in the labour force is generally high in countries where land availability and income per agricultural worker are low.
These figures illustrate one of the characteristics of poverty in rural areas and the faster increase in the poverty rate of the female population. Since access to other resources (technology, credit, rural organizations) is conditioned by landownership, female poverty cannot be addressed without an explicit intervention by institutions outside the household that provide credit (such as rural banks), and without the support of an enabling legal and policy environment.
TABLE 6
Women's share in the total agricultural labour force in selected developing countries, classified by income and agricultural land classes
Average income per week per
agricultural worker Arable land and land under permanent crops per economically active agricultural worker
Less than 0.5 ha 0.51-1.0 ha 1.01-1.5 ha More than 1.51 ha All land classes
(percentage)
Less than $5 48.4 50.1 49.1 49.7 48.7
More than $40 ... 29.3 18.6 19.9 20.8
All income classes 47.8 38.9 34.9 30.5 43.4
Source: FAOSTAT and World Bank, 1999b.
<section>6</section>
Sources of data
DATA FROM POPULATION CENSUSES AND LABOUR FORCE SURVEYS
Information relating to the labour force presented in Tables 2, 3 and 4 is derived from data on the economically active population collected in population censuses and labour force surveys. These are, in fact, the most appropriate sources of information about the labour force and employment in general and the agricultural/non-agricultural differentials in labour force participation. However, as a result of measurement problems (discussed in Box 1, Annex 1), it is clear that the extent of women's participation in agricultural work can be significantly underestimated in these sources. Consequently, efforts should be made to improve measurement techniques, in order to quantify more accurately the extent of female participation in agricultural work. Furthermore, more accurate details regarding the different categories of agricultural labour, as well as the hours worked (including gender differentials), should be obtained from these sources through the appropriate retabulation of
the results.
DATA FROM AGRICULTURAL CENSUSES
Agricultural censuses and surveys usually focus on the basic characteristics relating to production technologies and land use. The FAO Programme for the World Census of Agriculture 2000 (WCA 2000) has put special emphasis on various items that can provide gender-related structural information on agricultural activities. The Programme recommends that a comprehensive cross-tabulation of the following items be made by the sex of the landholder:
* General characteristics (purpose of production).
* Demographic characteristics (size of the holder's household; holders and members of their households by age, education and marital status).
* Employment (holders and members of their households who are economically active by age, main occupation and type of work [permanent, occasional]; and holdings by number of permanent workers [members of the holder's household and hired workers]).
* Land and water (number and area of holdings; tenure of land; land use; the area of land cleared under shifting cultivation each year);
* Crops (major temporary crops, other temporary crops, major permanent crops, other permanent crops, use of high-yielding varieties, use of fertilizers, use of pesticides).
* Livestock (the number of each kind of livestock; the purpose of each kind of livestock).
* Machinery and equipment (number of stationary power-producing machinery by source of supply; use of other agricultural machinery by source of supply).
* Buildings and other structures (use of non-residential buildings by tenure; area and volume of non-residential buildings by purpose).
* Other activities (number and area of forest trees; fishery activities and other kinds of aquaculture installations).
The comprehensive structural data described above can provide not only additional information on the economic status of holders by sex, but also more insight into agricultural practices, in order to study whether efficiency and productivity are related to the sex of the holder. However, in using these data, it should be remembered that agricultural censuses are generally conducted using agricultural holdings as the unit of enumeration, so that the data listed above relate to both the members of the holder's household as well as to the individual holder. Following are some examples of the important areas that can be analysed with these items of data:
* Overall, these data can be used as a framework for conducting further sample surveys for extension support programmes; for drawing up research plans in the development of gender-specific agricultural technologies for specific crops and a specific holding size/mix (a combination of land and livestock) and that support secondary activities (that could for raise the living standards of agricultural households). The value of these data could be further enhanced by grouping into agroclimatic or agro-ecological zones.
* Data on the sex of holders are useful in determining the role of women in decision-making and the proportion of women who are heads of families.
* Data on holdings by the size of the holder's household, together with details of employment status, ownership of land and assets, provide a measure for household well-being. Such analyses may indicate the level of economic support provided by the head of household, as well as the management of human resources, and help to reveal the causes of gender-biased poverty in rural areas.
* Data on the educational status of holders and members of their households can be related to the use of agricultural inputs and machinery and thus provide the basis for designing suitable extension plans to develop the potential of women in adopting the latest techniques or creating their own enterprises.
However, to be useful for both users and analysts, the information collected needs to be tabulated and presented in a form that emphasizes the relevant gender issues.
DATA FROM HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS
Since land productivity and the extent to which land can provide income for holders are limited, other (non-agricultural) sources of income are necessary to improve the status of female workers. Generally, agricultural censuses and surveys do not collect comprehensive data on the non-agricultural activities of agricultural households. Thus, household surveys are essential to address such issues for the purpose of agricultural and rural development. Most of the data normally required for relevant programmes are collected in household income/expenditure surveys. The information refers to the details of income and expenditure classified by the sex and economic activity of the head of household. However, special tabulations need to be undertaken.
The retabulation of data can provide details for compiling agricultural household sector accounts, classified by the sex of the head of household. These data can be used to study and compare the economic behaviour of agricultural households. Depending on the interest of the policy-makers, however, it should also be feasible to generate cross-tabulations as listed below to study various distributions relating to economic status:
* generation of income (agricultural, non-agricultural and total) by size of holding and number of livestock;
* generation of income (agricultural, non-agricultural and total) by size of household and sex of economically active population;
* generation of income (agricultural, non-agricultural and total) by number of economically active women in the household and holding size/asset class;
* input-output and capital-output ratios by size of holding and number of livestock.
AGRICULTURAL OUTPUT AND INCOME BY SEX
Reliable information on the contribution of men and women to production and consumption, as well as income generation in agriculture, cannot be obtained from the existing national censuses and surveys, largely because the unit of data collection for output and consumption is not an individual but holdings or households. To obtain such information, it is necessary to use time-use surveys, allowing for double measurement strategies of production and consumption variables - in time units as well as in value units, both at the individual and household levels. Time-use methods of data collection and measurement also make it possible to address productivity issues at the individual and household levels. Thus, when time-use data are added to data on the physical output of individuals and households, it becomes possible to determine whether a decrease in time input corresponds to a decrease in quantity or quality of individual or household output, or whether the time decrease shows
that productivity of the individual or household has increased. Various methods for monetary valuation of household work are also available for approximating measurements (e.g. in orders of magnitude) of the income of informal family or farm workers from various routine household and farming activities. Indeed, in agriculture these activities are often dispersed in territory and time, which creates difficulties in recording them systematically.^3These difficulties can be addressed by combinations of anthropological and statistical methods of data collection, providing qualitative indicators in addition to quantitative measures and methods of analysis (FAO, 1996).
^3 For a more detailed review of these issues, see FAO (1978).
<section>7</section>
Sources of data
STRATEGIES FOR MAXIMIZING THE USE OF AVAILABLE DATA
Substantial efforts have been made over the past decade by both FAO's Statistics Division and the Women and Population Division to include gender issues in agricultural censuses. However, this source does not normally provide data on household labour force participation and the role of household members in the agricultural holding. Therefore, it is worth while exploring alternative opportunities for further development of relevant data systems that are both cost-efficient and organizationally sustainable. Four possible strategies of action are considered:
1) In addition to the data provided by agricultural surveys, available subnational-level data from population censuses and labour surveys could be retabulated. For example, the categories of seasonal and part-time work that cannot be included in the agricultural census are most likely to capture sex differentials and emerging trends by area of agricultural activity, i.e. women's supposed overemployment in areas of low productivity, compared with the category "permanent workers". The same categories could also be beneficial in uncovering patterns of (supposed male) time-related underemployment. According to the latest ILO standards, part-time activities can be used as a measure of underemployment when they refer to "involuntarily working less" (ILO, 1999). In order to carry out the recommended improvements in the use of available data, FAO is ready (subject to availability of funds) to initiate interagency collaboration with ILO and other UN partners, for the development of a
specialized database on gender statistics relating to agricultural and rural development.
2) Another strategy of action, accepted by the 16th Session of the African Commission on Agricultural Statistics (AFCAS) in 1999, is to develop common coding systems and data merging between population and agricultural censuses in countries where the unit of enumeration in the agricultural census is the household. This can be done through the use of interfile linkage techniques, recognized as a way of maximizing the relations between available datasets for multiple purposes, while minimizing the general cost of data collection. Such a strategy is economically feasible. It also provides a wider and deeper analytical perspective, since it enables the use of statistical modelling for the analysis of complex interrelations between variables of a different nature (e.g. demographic, social and environmental forces of diversification in rural labour markets).
3) The gender efficacy of agricultural censuses can be increased at almost no additional cost, enabling up to two agricultural operators per household to be enumerated. This allows for a more accurate documentation of women's participation in the management of agricultural production units. Even in countries where the holding (and not the household) is the unit of enumeration, common coding strategies allowing for additional cross-tabulations are possible because many agricultural censuses are sample-based and their sampling frames are mainly drawn from population and household censuses. The 16th Session of AFCAS reported that several countries, such as Côte d'Ivoire, are already using such strategies to achieve cost-efficient and improved availability of more structured and comprehensive data systems. AFCAS recommended that FAO include these undertakings in its pilot projects in order to study them as test cases.
4) Diagnosis and evaluation, which are used increasingly in surveys, could be used more often and for a variety of purposes. For example, evaluation studies and quasi-experimental comparisons for the evaluation of gender-specific policies in rural development are necessary but not widely used. Yet these methods are essential in areas such as the evaluation of productivity and technical efficiency by sex in various socio-cultural, family and production contexts (World Bank, 1999c).
In most cases, qualitative indicators as well as quantitative measures are needed in order to achieve meaningful and valid analytical models. For example, the stage reached in their life-cycle may be a more important source of variance in women's access to resources controlled at the household or extended family level (such as land and cattle) than men's. But since the significance of this life-cycle stage itself may vary among different cultures, ethnic and socio-economic groups or birth cohort, age becomes a necessary quantitative measure to pair with qualitative indicators so as to obtain more robust and comparable patterns of resource allocation at the household or family level.
Gender relations and inequalities are strongly affected by two main factors: legislative change and technological innovation. Emerging new forms of inequality, especially in agriculture, cannot be identified without a strong emphasis on qualitative indicators and improved methods of collecting and combining analytically qualitative and quantitative information for exploratory, evaluation and validation purposes. In order to ascertain accurately the real situation of rural women and their labour contribution, development agents should draw qualitative information from sources such as socio-anthropological studies, values and attitude surveys, market analysis and feasibility studies as well as special studies on key issues such as land and credit access, institutions and participation in rural organizations.
INTERFACE BETWEEN USERS AND PRODUCERS: ISSUES, POTENTIAL COLLABORATION AND EXPECTED INPUTS
Gender statistics are frequently not produced because of a lack of interest and demand from potential users. In order to formulate statistical needs accurately, policy-makers, public and private development practitioners, NGOs and other involved users of gender-related data need to consider the following points:
* gender awareness and a minimum of gender analysis expertise are essential for their activities;
* the institutionalization of a gender approach can facilitate collaboration between users and producers of data;
* methodological guidance is needed both in the collection phase and during the tabulation and analysis stages;
* resources (such as time and funds) need to be made available since gender statistics are rarely included in existing agricultural development plans and budgets.
There should be a permanent dialogue between users and producers of statistics to ensure the relevance and validity of data. The synergy of knowledge and expertise drawn from various categories of users (such as planners, decision-makers and gender specialists) and statisticians will help identify the fundamental aspects of gender issues (causes, consequences, interdependencies) and facilitate monitoring and evaluation of these issues over time. This dialogue is particularly important in the determination of the categories of data to be collected and the selection of indicators.
Relevant data collection will also depend on the ability of statisticians to extend their horizons to social and gender issues. It is also important for users (such as gender experts and decision-makers) to upgrade their skills in order to understand, interpret and use statistical data correctly. Collaboration can be furthered through workshops, technical committees, expert consultations and the integration of statisticians in policy-making processes.
THE ROLE OF MEMBER GOVERNMENTS
The performance of governments in creating an enabling environment for sustainable agriculture and rural development will depend more on the availability and quality of statistics regarding rural producers. Data disaggregated by sex and age will be necessary not only to address issues of gender equality but also, and increasingly, to address issues of labour force dynamics and development, productivity and poverty.
Since governments are entirely responsible for their own data collection, decisions on the inclusion of a gender dimension in their statistical operations are in their hands. They need to review existing sources to identify the appropriate measures to be taken in determining the policy and technical framework for the compilation, analysis, presentation and diffusion of data. They must also strengthen the user-producer interface to create the synergy that is indispensable for the production of good-quality and reliable statistics on gender in agriculture.
<section>8</section>
Conclusion
Gender information is essential for equitable and sustainable development. Gender issues must be addressed in many parts of the world not only to overcome existing disparities between men's and women's participation in the development process, but also to ensure an enabling environment for improving food security and achieving sustainable development. This brief review of the available and desirable data and their sources suggests that existing systems for the collection, organization and analysis of agricultural statistics in many countries need to be reviewed to fill the data gaps. This can be done by:
* placing emphasis on the coordination, integration and retabulation of sex- and age-disaggregated demographic, labour force and agricultural data at the subnational level, wherever feasible;
* carrying out less frequent, but more specialized surveys on gender relations and corresponding issues in agricultural labour force participation;
* organizing pilot/small surveys to collect time-use data;
* organizing household inquiries to provide an overview of rural people's health, nutrition and food security status as well as other aspects of their quality of life (e.g. literacy rates, educational levels, income, consumption and expenditure) and working conditions (e.g. access to irrigation, credit and extension services);
* devoting special efforts to collecting information on smallholders, in view of their increasing significance in national and global food security and in poverty-induced degradation of the environment (the smallholder sector is often excluded in agricultural censuses and surveys).
However, as with many other challenges in rural development, the poor quality of data from rural areas in developing countries should not be used as an excuse for not taking action on pressing issues. We cannot afford to wait until all recommendations for data improvement have materialized. There will always be risks associated with acting on less than perfect information but this is true of many other areas of concern, such as ecology or unemployment. FAO thus advises its members that, while working to improve the quality of data from rural areas in general, and in particular that of data on human resources and gender issues, they should also make the best use of existing data to support current policy necessities and responsible decision-making.
Statistics are both an instrument of knowledge and a tool for advocacy. Thus, our efforts are guided by a twofold objective: i) to build a solid knowledge base that can reasonably sustain hypotheses and facts about the respective roles of women and men in rural development and, hence, the benefits from a more equitable allocation of resources; and ii) to bring new and meaningful knowledge to the relevant categories of public and private users through effective strategies and means of communication.
When based on solid data, clear and well-articulated messages can be formulated and delivered to various audiences. Basing social arguments on good evidence, these messages should be conducive to concrete action, and they have great potential in promoting accountability, good governance and the participation of stakeholders, which will ultimately lead to sustainable development and food security for all.
<section>9</section>
ANNEX 1
Gender-related agricultural statistics: problems and significant activities
BOX 1
MEASURING WOMEN'S AND MEN'S WORK
IN AGRICULTURE
Problems of methods
In some countries cash crop production determines the minimum size for measured holdings. This excludes a significant number of smallholdings where women produce food. The information overlooked is of great importance for policy formulation and planning to improve rural living conditions and food security.
In population surveys and censuses, the participation of women in agriculture is largely underreported but some data show the extent of "invisible" work. According to the 1991 Indian Census, 73 percent of rural women were not economically active (ESCAP, 1993). But a survey by the Ministry of Planning in 1987/88 showed that, of women engaged in housework and classified as not economically active, 60 percent of rural and 15 percent of urban women collected fuelwood, fodder or foodstuffs, maintained kitchen gardens or fruit-trees, or raised poultry or cattle. Moreover, 52 percent of rural women and 9 percent of urban women prepared cow dung cakes for fuel, and 63 percent of rural and 32 percent of urban women collected water from outside the household premises (ESCAP, 1993; Table 12, p. 43). All these activities are considered to be economic activities in System of National Accounts (SNA) and ILO recommendations.
In Pakistan, women's official economic participation rate varies from 3 percent (according to the country's 1981 Population Census) to 12 percent (according to the Labour Force Survey of the same year). Yet its 1980 Census of Agriculture estimated that 73 percent of women in agricultural households were economically active (UNICEF, n.d.). The Labour Force Survey of 1990/91 showed women's economic activity rates of 7 percent when using the conventional questionnaire and 31 percent when questions on specific activities such as transplanting rice, picking cotton, grinding, drying seeds and tending livestock were also included (UN, 1992).
In Bangladesh, labour force participation of women was 10 percent according to the Labour Force Survey of 1985/86. When, in 1989, the Labour Force Survey included specific activities such as threshing, food processing and poultry rearing, the economic activity rate went up to 63 percent (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 1991).
Source: UN (1995, p. 114).
BOX 2
SELECTED FAO ACTIVITIES
IN GENDER-SENSITIVE STATISTICS
The following are the most significant initiatives aimed rendering agricultural statistics more sensitive to gender issues. They illustrate the variety of actions taken to tackle issues ranging from advocacy to field activities.
The Inter-Agency Consultation on Gender, Statistics and Database on Gender in Agricultural and Rural Development reviewed the definitions and methods used in collecting gender-disaggregated data.
The Women in Development Plan of Action stressed the importance of gender-disaggregated data, not only in the formulation of policy and strategy for the integration of women in development, but also in extension and training activities and technical activities to improve agricultural production and food security.
The World Food Summit Plan of Action underlined the need to improve the quality and transmission of information on, and for, women.
In collaboration with international NGOs associated with FAO, an Information Campaign on Rural Women was launched and the International Symposium "Invest in Rural Women through Training and Information" was held in Rome on 15 October, World Rural Women's Day.
For World Food Day on 16 October, the choice of "Women feed the world" as a theme made it possible to produce a number of print and audiovisual documents to demonstrate the contribution of women to food security and to sensitize international public opinion.
A Subregional Workshop on User-Producer Statistics was held in Zimbabwe.
A series of relevant publications, guidelines and training manuals have been issued. Several pilot projects have been initiated to: i) execute a regional evaluation concerning the collection and processing of data disaggregated by sex on human resources in agriculture; ii) develop links between the agricultural and population censuses including surveys on households and labour; and iii) technically promote and support the establishment of an African network of statisticians in the agricultural and social science fields.
A project was implemented in four countries in southern Africa (Zimbabwe, the United Republic of Tanzania, Swaziland and Mozambique), aiming to improve understanding and information-sharing of gender-specific knowledge and traditional expertise with regard to conservation and biodiversity.
<title>Filling the Data Gap: Gender-sensitive statistics for agricultural development</title>
ANNEX 2
Social statistics to complement agricultural censuses
TABLE A
Estimated adult illiteracy rates by sex and region, 1980 and 1995
Region Illiteracy rates (%)
Male Female Male Female
Developed countries 2 5 1 2
Southern Asia 47 76 37 63
Northern Africa and Western Asia 45 74 32 56
Sub-Saharan Africa 48 71 33 53
Eastern Asia and Oceania 20 42 9 24
Latin America and the Caribbean 18 23 12 15
Source: UNESCO (1998, Table 2.2).
Table A shows that illiteracy rates for both males and females have decreased significantly, but the female illiteracy rate is still much higher than that of males except in the developed countries and Latin America.
Southern Asia has the highest female illiteracy rate (63 percent) as well as the widest discrepancy between males and females (26 percent). Northern Africa and Western Asia follow with 56 percent, respectively. Sub-Saharan Africa and Eastern Asia and Oceania then follow with 53 percent and 24 percent, respectively.
Although this table is not disaggregated by urban/rural residence, it is assumed that in developing countries where the rural/total population ratio is higher, the percentage of illiterate rural women will be proportionally higher.
TABLE B
Life expectancy at birth, by region, 1980-1985 and 1995-2000
Region 
Total Males Females Total Males Females
(years)
World total 61 59 63 65 63 68
More developed regions 73 69 77 75 71 79
Less developed regions 59 57 60 63 62 65
Least developed countries 47 46 48 51 50 51
Africa 50 48 51 51 50 53
Eastern Africa 47 46 49 45 44 46
Middle Africa 48 46 50 50 49 52
Southern Africa 56 53 60 54 51 58
Western Africa 46 45 48 50 49 51
Asia 60 59 61 66 65 68
Latin America and the Caribbean 65 62 68 69 66 73
Oceania 70 67 73 74 71 76
Source: UN (1998a).
More developed regions comprise North America, Japan, Europe and Australia and New Zealand. Less developed regions comprise all regions of Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, Asia (excluding Japan) and Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia.
Least developed countries, as defined by the United Nations General Assembly in 1998, include 48 countries, of which 33 are in Africa, nine in Asia, one in Latin America and the Caribbean and five in Oceania. They are also included under less developed regions.
The projections for the period 1995-2000 show a longer life expectancy for both sexes, except for a slight deterioration in eastern and southern Africa. Longer life expectancy for women is noted in all regions. A comparative analysis with the age structure in rural areas could give useful information about the ageing of rural populations and the variation of the proportion of rural women to document the so-called "feminization of agriculture" and, eventually, the "feminization of poverty".
TABLE C
Anaemia during pregnancy in Asia, 1985-95*
Country Percentage of pregnant women with anaemia
India 88
Indonesia 64
Malaysia 56
China 52
Pakistan 37
Bhutan 81
Myanmar 58
Bangladesh 53
Philippines 48
Maldives 20
Nepal 65
Thailand 57
Viet Nam 52
Sri Lanka 39
Source: UN (1998b).
* According to the most recent data available.
Anaemia is directly related to nutritional deficiencies. Iron deficiency affects about 43 percent of women and 34 percent of men in developing countries.
In Asia the majority of pregnant women are anaemic (see this Table; and UN, 1997), which poses a threat to the health status of their babies and increases the women's own risk of perinatal mortality. At the same time, it reduces the productivity of this economically active population group. In Asia, a high percentage of children still suffer from anaemia, which significantly reduces the development of children's cognitive capacities.
The persisting anaemia levels, especially in pregnant women and young children, call for an integrated approach such as that advocated by FAO/WHO in the International Conference on Nutrition, held in Rome in December 1992. Various perspectives and intersectoral activities are required, involving health, education, agriculture, extension, social planning, etc.
TABLE D
Nutritional status of adults in India - percentage distribution of adults according to BMI grades*
BMI grades RURAL URBAN POOLED
Males Females Combined Males Females Combined Males Females Combined
District nutrition profile (DNP) study
Number 60 993 81 227 142 220 14 236 21 385 35 621 75 229 102 612 177 841
CED III >16 6.1 10.5 8.6 5.4 7.8 6.8 6.0 9.9 8.2
CED II 16-17 6.7 8.6 7.8 5.7 6.4 6.1 6.5 8.1 7.4
CED I 17-18.5 16.5 19.1 18.2 14.4 14.9 14.7 16.1 18.2 17.3
CED TOTAL >16-18.5 29.3 38.2 34.6 25.5 29.1 27.7 28.6 36.3 32.9
Low normal 18.5-20 21.3 20.4 20.9 19.8 17.5 18.4 21.0 19.7 20.4
Normal 20-25 45.4 37.3 40.5 48.9 47.3 47.9 46.1 39.3 42.1
Normal 18.5-25 66.7 57.7 61.4 68.7 64.8 66.3 67.1 59.0 62.5
Obese I 25-30 3.7 3.6 3.7 5.4 5.4 5.4 4.0 4.0 3.8
Obese II >=30 0.3 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.6 4.0 4.0 3.8
Obese (Total) >=25 4.0 4.1 4.1 5.8 6.1 6.0 4.3 4.6 4.5
NNMB survey
CED III 10.7 
CED II 11.5 
CED I 26.3 
CED (Total)
Source: Government of India (1998).
* Weight in kilograms; height in metres.
The nutritional condition of the adult population in India was assessed by body mass index (BMI) grades. According to BMI grades, one third of the adult population (33 percent) was classified in various grades of chronic energy deficiency (CED). About 63 percent had normal BMI grades and about 4 percent constituted the obese grade of BMI. A mild form of CED was observed among 17 percent, moderate among 7 percent and severe among 8 percent of the adult population (DNP study).
The prevalence of CED as observed in the pooled data of eight states covered by the National Nutritional Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) was higher than that of the DNP study for its various grades.
This table shows fewer women than men in India having a normal BMI. The discrepancy between rural and urban is significant. It should be noted that the percentage of women in the situation of CED is much higher than that of men, especially in the most critical situation (CED III): 38.2 percent against 29.3. Here, only a gender-disaggregated analysis can show the critical nutritional status in rural areas and among rural women.
FIGURE 1
Seasonal calendar indicating gender-disaggregated working times in Nepal
Note: Two patterns for gender division of labour are shown, without taking workloads into account.
Source: FAO (1997).
FIGURE 2A
Gross enrolment ratios (all levels) by sex, 1980, 1990 and 1996
(Developed countries, Latin America and the Caribbean, Eastern Asia and Oceania)
Source: Based on data in UNESCO (1998).
Although gross enrolment ratios of women in the developing regions are in some cases increasing more quickly than those of men, they are still lower than men's.
The developed countries show a reverse pattern; gross enrolment ratios of women in these countries are increasing more quickly and are also higher than those of men.
FIGURE 2B
Gross enrolment ratios (all levels) by sex, 1980, 1990 and 1996
(Northern Africa and Western Asia; Southern Asia; Sub-Saharan Africa)
Source: Based on data in UNESCO (1998).
Although gross enrolment ratios of women in the developing regions are in some cases increasing more quickly than those of men, they are still lower than men's.
Gross enrolment ratios of women in Asia and Northern Africa are among those increasing most quickly and are of a similar magnitude to those of women in developed countries.
FIGURE 3
Illiteracy rate among young urban and rural women
(15-24 years old) according to a 1990 census
* 12-24 years.**Data refer only to the former Yemen Arab Republic.
Source: UN (1995, p. 91).
The divergence between the literacy rates of young women from urban and rural areas is clearly shown in this Figure. Countries with the highest female illiteracy rates are those that are predominantly dependent on agriculture. Low performance may also be compounded by religious and cultural factors. Data such as these are of paramount importance to training and extension programmes.
<title>Filling the Data Gap: Gender-sensitive statistics for agricultural development</title>
<section>1</section>
Bibliography
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. 1991.Statistical Yearbook of Bangladesh. Dhaka.
Berger, M. & Buvinic, M., eds. 1989.Women's ventures: assistance to the informal sector in Latin America. West Hartford, Connecticut, Kumarian Press, Inc.
Buvinic, M. & Mehra, R. 1990. Women and agricultural development: a review of two decades of work. In J. Staats & C. Ficher, eds.Agricultural development in the Third World. Baltimore, Maryland; Johns Hopkins University Press.
Chen, M. 1999.Women and the informal sector: realities, statistics and policies. Paper presented at the Economic Policy Forum, International Center for Research on Women. Washington, DC, 15 March 1996.
ECOSOC. 1999a.The role of employment and work in poverty eradication: the empowerment and advancement of women. Report of the Secretary-General (E/1999/53). United Nations, Economic and Social Council.
ECOSOC. 1999b.Improvement of the situation of women in rural areas. Report of the Secretary-General (A/54/123-E/1999/66). General Assembly, United Nations, Economic and Social Council.
ESCAP. 1993.Women in India: a review of the implementation of the Nairobi forward-looking strategies, 1985-1992, by T.K. Sarojini. Project report funded by the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific of the United Nations Secretariat. New Delhi.
FAO. 1978.Collecting statistics on agricultural population and employment, p. 119. FAO Economic and Social Development Paper No. 7. Rome.
FAO. 1996.Statistics and gender. Agricultural censuses: orientations for a revision of concepts and methodology. Rome.
FAO. 1997. Lessons from Nepal - a case study, by S. Sontheimer. In Gender and participation in agricultural development planning: key issues from ten case studies. Working document. Women in Development Service. Rome.
FAO. 1998.Growth, trade and agriculture: an investigative survey. FAO Economic and Social Development Paper No. 143. Rome.
Government of India. 1998. District Nutrition Profile. Department of Women and Child Development, Ministry of Human Resource Development. New Delhi.
ILO. 1999. Innovations in labour statistics.International Labour Review, 138(1).
Mehra, R. & Gammage, S. 1999. Trends, countertrends and gaps in women's employment. In World Development, 27(3): 533-550.
Tzannatos, Z. 1999. Women and labour market changes in the global economy: growth helps, inequalities hurt and public policy matters. World Development, 27(3): 551-569.
UN. 1992. Report on a mission to Pakistan, by M. Pedrero. Department of Technical Cooperation for Development and Statistical Division. New York, United Nations.
UN. 1995. The world's women 1995: trends and statistics. New York, United Nations.
UN. 1997. Third Report of the World Nutrition Situation. Administrative Committee on Coordination/Sub-Committee on Nutrition (ACC/SCN). New York, United Nations.
UN. 1998a. World population prospects: the 1998 revision. New York, United Nations.
UN. 1998b. Challenges for the twenty-first century: a gender perspective on nutrition through the life cycle. Papers from the ACC/SCN 25th Session Symposium, Oslo, 30 March-1 April 1998. ACC/SCN Symposium Report Nutrition Policy Paper No. 17. November. New York, United Nations.
UNESCO. 1998. UNESCO Statistical Yearbook 1998. Paris, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
UNICEF. n.d.Women's economic participation in Pakistan: a status report, by F. Shaheed & K. Mumtaz. Islamabad, United Nations Children's Fund.
World Bank. 1999a. Rural development: from vision to action. Washington, DC. (electronic publication)
World Bank. 1999b. World development indicators. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 1999c. The importance of gender issues for environment and socially sustainable rural development, by A.R. Quisumbing et al. In E. Lutz, ed. Agriculture and the environment. Washington, DC.
