<title>REU Technical Series - 61. CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPEAN SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE NETWORK: first workshop - </title>
<section>1</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The first workshop of Central and Eastern Sustainable Agriculture Network (CEESA) and these proceedings are the result of work and joint efforts of a number of people who have invested their enthusiasm and experience to the successful launch of the Network.
Professor K. Hagedorn of Humboldt University deserves a special recognition for having conceived this idea and for providing support throughout the process of its realization together with his associates A. Luetteken, B. Holthusen and R. Judis. Their work on development of the concept of the Network, moderation and leadership throughout the workshop, as well as review of country reports, was crucial contribution to the succesful launch of CEESA.
Intellectual input to the workshop provided by the authors of country reports and experiences shared by participants during discussions were vital for the creation of a cross-section picture on the relationship between the agriculture and the environment and the state of sustainability of agricultural and farming systems in participating countries.
Particular appreciation goes to Z. S. Karnicki, the former FAO Subregional representative, for his support to collaboration between SEUR and Humboldt University in preparation and implementation of the first CEESA workshop, as well as to his successor J. Suchman for his encouragement to the follow-up activities of the Network.
L. Podmanicky and his associates from Gödöll University of Agricultural Sciences, have provided excellent support in the organization and implementation of the first workshop.
Finaly, a note of appreciation goes to S. Tanic and D. Minoiu for final revision and editorial work, needed to publish these proceedings.
<section>2</section>
FOREWORD
This workshop has been an excellent example of growing cooperation between the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, who are faced with the absolutely unique challenge of transforming their economies from centrally planned to market oriented ones. This process by itself is not an easy one, but is even more complex due to the additional task of accession to the European Union. With closer integration into Western Europe where the environment, food quality and animal welfare are already prominent in the agenda of public concerns and are more and more included into agriculture and rural policies, the countries of Central and Eastern Europe will have to pay far greater attention to these matters.
One fundamental issue very much related to the present changes taking place in Central and Eastern Europe, but also important in the global context, is the sustainability of agriculture. Many countries in Central and Eastern Europe are producing, or have the potential to produce, a surplus of some agricultural products which require sound long-term policies and strategies. Those policies and strategies have to be founded firstly on a reliable knowledge of intensive but sustainable production systems and secondly, on human capacity and on institutions needed to develop sustainable agricultural sectors of national economies. Therefore, sustainable agricultural development remains a cornerstone of food security in a given region and has been recognized as one of the priorities of FAO assistance in the Subregion.
One of the ways to assist in the area of sustainable agricultural development and building on past FAO initiatives, is to support the networks on sustainable agricultural development and sustainable intensification. I hope that the Central and Eastern Sustainable Agriculture Network will facilitate collaboration and help in both the collection of and the use of, knowledge concerning the compatibility of transition strategies and the idea of sustainable agricultural development in the participating countries.
This workshop was an example of excellent co-operation initiated by Mr Stjepan Tanic, Farming Systems Development Officer, during the mandate of my predecessor, Mr Zbigniew S. Karnicki, between the most prestigious agricultural research institutes from the region and the FAO, in particular the Subregional Office in Budapest. This is not only a good sign and a serious commitment, but also implies a responsibility to find ways in providing knowledge which could be transformed into strategies and policies leading to sustainable agriculture in the Subregion.
Jaroslav Suchman
FAO Subregional representative
for Central and Eastern Europe
<section>3</section>
INTRODUCTION
This workshop and its proceedings are the outcome of collaboration between the FAO SEUR and the Humboldt University of Berlin (HU), which was formalized in the Memorandum of Understanding on Collaboration Regarding Activities of Establishing the Central and Eastern European Sustainable Agriculture Network (CEESA). Based on the project proposed by HU, the FAO SEUR and HU agreed to collaborate in the preparation and implementation of the first CEESA Workshop as the initial step in establishing the Network.
The purpose of the project and the Network is to provide a framework for discussion and exchanges of opinion between interested professionals from CEECs on issues concerning and specific approaches to, the transition of the agricultural sector, which are needed to develop environmentally sound and sustainable agricultural and farming systems in CEECs. The expected result of this collaboration is the collection of and use of, knowledge concerning the compatibility of transition strategies with the idea of sustainable agricultural development in the participating countries.
The lecturers and discussion leaders came from HU. At the Workshop, the FAO was represented by participants from the SEUM, SEUP and TCAS. Organization and the implementation of the Workshop was entrusted to the Gödöll University of Agricultural Sciences, Institute of Environmental and Landscape Management, and was coordinated by the Local Organizing Committee. The Workshop took place at the Gödöll University of Agricultural Sciences, Gödöll, Hungary, from the second to the seventh of March 1999.
Participants for the Workshop were selected on the basis of their professional interest and their experience in agri-environmental and sustainability issues from the following countries: Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia and Ukraine^1. These countries are expected to participate in future Network activities. Besides the selected participants, the Workshop was attended by several volunteering participants from CEECs and European countries.
From each of the selected countries, one person was the author of the country report prepared under the guidance of HU and the SEUR. All reports cover the following major topics:
1. The impact of transition and the structure of property rights (privatization and redefinition of property rights on natural resources, restructurization in rural areas and liberalization).
2. The development of the economic framework on the farm level (land market and development of input and output prices).
3. The impact of agriculture on the environment (environmental degradation caused by agriculture, agriculture and soil, water and air protection, agriculture and its impact on the protection of landscape, agriculture and biodiversity and effects of environmental degradation on agriculture).
4. The influence of society on the agricultural environment (institutional change within environmental policy, environmental policy related to agriculture, legislative and institutional framework for a national agri-environmental policy, national measures on the promotion of ecologically sound agricultural practices, the importance of national environmental associations and organizations for environmental policy).
5. Conclusions and proposals for future co-operation.
Country reports, as they were prepared by the authors, present not only a factual situation of these topics in individual countries, but can also serve as an indicator of the availability of relevant information and the state of conceptual knowledge about agri-environmental and sustainability issues.
1 Although selected and invited, the participant from Slovenia did not attend the Workshop and submit a paper. However, it is expected that Slovenia will take part in future Network activities.
<section>4</section>
OPENING REMARKS
Konrad Hagedorn
Humboldt University of Berlin, Department of Agricultural Economics and
Social Sciences
Nearly ten years ago, transformation of the political and economic system started in the Central and Eastern European countries and at that point in time people in the former socialist societies were disappointed because of the failure of the old system, and most of them may simultaneously have had great expectations for the new system which was still to come. Hopes and fears, discouragement and new motivation were somehow mixed together. The struggles and upheavals which led to the fundamental changes in institutions and policies differed from country to country and were accompanied by tremendous insecurities. However, two points seemed to be rather clear for the politicians and the political advisors in transition countries:
1. The frame of reference for transforming the centrally planned economies had to be the western societies and economies because they had proven to be more successful. As a consequence, the rules and institutions of western democracies and economies, above all market mechanisms, had to be introduced.
2. Because of this clear objective, most of the politicians and economists were convinced that this change would be feasible within a limited number of years although it would take some time to complete the transformation. Only a few people predicted that there would be tremendous difficulties connected with the task of transforming deeply rooted norms, habits and informal institutions.
However, there is a German saying which goes: "Wenn man vom Rathaus kommt, ist man klüger". This means: "When you return from the town hall you are more clever". As far as the second point I mentioned is concerned, many of us were surprised how difficult and how slowly transformation of agriculture turned out to be.
In particular, the discussions among agricultural economists first focused predominantly on the farm level, and they mainly raised two questions related to the transaction costs economics of farm enterprises:
(a) Which farm size will emerge? To what extent will decreasing production costs - due to economies of scale - be accompanied by likewise decreasing transaction costs or, on the contrary, be outweighed by progressively increasing transaction costs?
(b) Which organizational structure of farming will be the most competitive, if production co-operatives, limited companies, joint-stock companies, partnerships, for example, are compared with family farms?
Then, however, many authorities recognized that this conception was incomplete: Which system of agricultural production will be dominant depends not only on the transaction costs in the farm enterprises. The level of transaction costs within these economic units is interrelated with the level of transaction costs in other areas of economic activity which are in permanent interaction with farms. Accordingly, institutional solutions to reduce transaction costs of agricultural production also have to take into account product markets, factor markets, the farm family, institutions to internalize external effects (with special reference to environmental problems), training and education institutions, price information systems, extension systems and many other agrarian institutions.
Nevertheless, yet another issue was more or less excluded. The evolution of agrarian institutions still appeared to be a question of minimising transaction costs by means of self-organization within the domain of private action. If this were true, the political economy of collective action would not play any role in this process. Since agricultural policies are strongly influenced by group interests, this assumption had to be dropped and political determinants of institutional change of socialist agricultural systems became a part of the game: electoral control and party competition, interpretation systems for legitimating agricultural policies, collective action by interest groups, coalition building, log rolling, bureaucracy, negotiation processes, only to mention some examples.
In other words, it may be reasonable to solely consider the farm unit as a transaction-cost saving entity if we are in a well-developed and stable agricultural sector which is not affected by major changes due to structural adjustment or reform policies. In a period of fundamental transformation of the farm sector, however, the whole network of relationships has to be taken into account. But after we have learned that we have to consider the whole network of interrelationships between the many institutional and political elements, what does this mean for the feasibility of transformation? This means that - if we take an idealistic view - all elements and relationships within the institutional network must change in a harmonious manner when passing from collective or state ownership to private land ownership or from collectivized to de-collectivized agricultural structures. Some of the components may have to change quickly, others more slowly, some may have to be reformed in
early, others in later stages of the process. This depends on the question of what kind of evolutionary interaction will maintain and improve the workability of the system. Furthermore, this means that all actors in the various parts of the system must be willing and must be able to perform these changes in a coordinated or even co-operative way and do not act against the transformation process. Most of the difficulties in the transformation process can be explained by the fact that such a harmonious change is nearly impossible.
As far as the first point I mentioned earlier is concerned, as a frame of reference for transforming Central and Eastern European countries, Western economies and societies appear to be a less reliable model which can be copied without any modification and additional considerations. This is due to the fundamental insight that the systems developed in the Western countries are not in accordance with the requirements of sustainability. In other words, not only the Central and Eastern European economies have to be transformed, but also the Western economies need fundamental transformation towards sustainability and, up to now, nobody has refuted the hypothesis that this transformation towards sustainability may be even more fundamental and more difficult than the transitions taking place in the former centrally planned economies.
In fact, the changes required to achieve sustainability may have been underestimated. This can easily be explained if we refer to Herman Daly, an ecological economist from Maryland, who likes to point out, as he for instance did in his book "Beyond Growth", that we as economists do have a stop rule in microeconomics, but have forgotten to establish a similar stop rule in the macroeconomic sphere. In microeconomics, we often have to make decisions on how far we should extend economic activity by applying the principle of equalising marginal costs and marginal yields. However, in macroeconomics we usually recommend maximizing economic growth and do not apply a similar stop rule. This appears to be only rational, because we conceive of the economy as being the only entity we have to take into account, an entity which has no relationships with other entities in our society.
But this is not the case. We all know that besides the economy there is the social system, the cultural system and above all ecological systems, nature and landscape. And, in principle, we also know that marginal gains in the economy are, in most cases, linked to marginal costs in the other areas I have just mentioned: loss of social cohesion and social hardship, destruction of natural capital and disturbances in the functions of the ecosystems, negative impacts on culture and on the identity of people concerned. Instead of concentrating on economic growth, decision makers should change to an integrated view on these different spheres of human activity and human well-being. And this integrating view is what environmental and ecological economists mean by "sustainability".
Sustainability as a new paradigm may also serve as the leading principle of our network. What is this network supposed to be: CEESA, that means Central and Eastern European Sustainable Agricultural Network, is intended to focus on countries in transition and to discuss the topic sustainable agriculture in these countries. It consists of agricultural and environmental or ecological economists and social scientists and it will hopefully stimulate research and communication among the members of the network and develop co-operative relationships with many groups and actors.
We will go into more detail about the goals and the structure of the network in the next session, but before doing so I would like to thank all those who helped to establish the network and made this first workshop possible. First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to Stjepan Tanic and all those people involved from the FAO/SEUR Budapest for providing the financial and organizational pre-requisites for this workshop. I am very grateful that we found such a friendly and constructive partner for the first step of the network's activities. I also want to thank the staff of the Institute of Environmental and Landscape Management from Gödöllö Agricultural University, in particular Laszlo Podmanicky, who acted as local organizer of this workshop and has done a lot of work in preparing this meeting. Let me also address all those of you who have prepared country reports and other papers for this workshop. We appreciate your co-operation very much. Without your papers about
the situation in the participating countries we would have no basis for our discussion. And last but not least let me mention the organising group from our institute at Humboldt University, the Department of Agricultural Economics and Social Sciences and, above all, Ms Antonia Lütteken, who is a PhD student of mine and has very enthusiastically developed the idea of this network and has done most of the preparations in Berlin. She has received support from two people who have recently joined the group. These are Mrs Renate Judis and Ms Beate Holthusen, who are also involved in the sessions, in particular in activities of moderation and documentation.
I wish and I think, that we will have a very fruitful workshop, and that this will be the start of a co-operative network and that in the end we will have produced some results which can contribute to both scientific progress and applied solutions to our problems as well.
<section>5</section>
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE WORKSHOP
1. Participants agreed that this workshop was very useful:
* in establishing contacts between identified scientists and other professionals interested in sustainable agricultural development,
* in the exchange of experiences and opinions,
* in getting acquainted with the agri-environmental situation in the countries from the sub-region,
* in raising awareness of sustainability concepts and issues,
* in stimulating human capacity building,
* in identifying necessities and priorities for research on sustainable agricultural development in the sub-region.
2. The workshop helped to identify the most serious environmental problems; the main obstacles and the chances of reaching the goal of sustainable agriculture in the CEECs. The opinions of participants will be compiled by Humboldt University included in the proceedings of the Workshop (Table 1).
3. Differences between the countries with respect to their attained level of sustainable agricultural development are mostly caused by a different approaches to the rearrangement of property rights as the most important institutional arrangement in the reform process.
4. Common characteristics of the countries with respect to their achieving the objective of sustainable agricultural development, identified by participants were:
* While extensification in the use of inputs during the past period has led to lower pollution emissions, there is, however, no guarantee that this will lead to sustainable agriculture;
* Deep financial crisis in both agriculture and the economy as a whole restricts the introduction of sustainability-oriented technologies and practices and leads to the abandonment and or degradation of previous long-term investments in soil fertility and erosion-control measures. This, in turn, results in the degradation of natural resources and the environment.
* Current agricultural policies are oriented towards addressing short-term priorities, with emphasis given to intensification and increases in production, thus neglecting to give appropriate attention to the long-term interests of preserving natural resources.
5. The framework for future activities of the CEESA should include a strategy for research and communication that helps to:
* change the present situation in agriculture from an extensive one caused by difficulties in structural adjustment, to long-lasting, sustainable agriculture;
* propose corresponding incentive systems for the farmers by means of adequate sustainability-oriented policy instruments;
* promote the system of institutions during transformation that would lead to the improved protection of nature.
6. Based on the resource papers, during the discussions the participants agreed that the three main areas of activities and research treated by the CEESA should be sustainable farming systems, agricultural and environmental policies and the institutional concept of sustainability. For each of those areas a working group was formed together with a contact person responsible for preparing an initial draft concept of research and communication in the respective area.
7. To stimulate communication within the Network, it was agreed that participation in the CEESA should be extended to decision-makers and to other interested and qualified professionals. To further stimulate information exchange it has also been agreed that the CEESA needs to develop a networking capacity for distribution of information.
8. In order to assure envisaged future activities, representatives of the FAO and Humboldt University should take initiative to identify support for the future activities of the Network.
9. The reports presented at the workshop provide a good background as to the issues that were dealt with. Together with other papers presented at the workshop, country reports should be published by the FAO as the proceedings of this workshop and circulated as soon as possible.
Table 1: Major environmental problems, hazards and chances on the way to sustainability in Central and Eastern Europe
Country Most serious environmental problems Main hazards to sustainability Main chances for sustainability
Bulgaria Soil acidification Decreasing soil fertility Restoration of the full property rights Quality of natural and human resources 
Croatia Harmonisation of conventional and sustainable agriculture Soil degradation Trends to increase agricultural production Lack of awareness and knowledge Low level of contamination Favourable legislative basis
Czech Republic Water pollution Soil degradation Lack of communication between government, NGOs, farmers Property rights do not favour conservation Transition itself, i.e. choosing the right way EU integration, policy level + participation (NGOs)
Estonia Ground water pollution Land privatization Increase in quality of management Supportive economic regulations
Hungary Liquid manure ponds Old machines & technologies Lack of awareness Lack of capital Pressure from EU High level of education
Latvia Heritage of former period Lack of economic basis for sustainable agriculture Natural resources relatively preserved and diverse
Lithuania Degradation of drainage systems Afforestation Insufficient financial resources Culture, ethics 
Poland Soil erosion Water pollution Consumer habits Lack of institutions interested in sustainable agriculture Transition process Current situation in agriculture
Romania Soil degradation (erosion, humus) Water pollution Weak legislative framework, low funding Low coherence between sectoral policies and regional environment NGOs and government concern International agreements and environmental projects
Slovakia Industrial emission Soil erosion and acidification Conflict between environmental and production objectives Financial aspects Increase in GDP Good agricultural policy
Ukraine Destruction of nature's reproduction ability Lack of national policy for -balanced agri-cultural development Conflict between state policy and farmers' needs Land privatization Favourable ecological and economic regulations
<section>6</section>
BACKGROUND, SCIENTIFIC CONCEPT AND OBJECTIVES OF THE NETWORK
Konrad Hagedorn and Antonia Lütteken
Humboldt University of Berlin
Department of Agricultural Economics and Social Sciences
INTRODUCTION
CEESA is intended to become a network of interested scientists and experts and is oriented towards the following objectives:
* It focuses on the topic "sustainable agriculture" integrating economic, social and ecological aspects of agrarian and rural development, but gives priority to environmental issues without neglecting the other ones.
* It consists of agricultural and environmental or ecological economists and social scientists, but also depends on the knowledge and cooperation of ecologists, agronomists and other experts.
* It stimulates research and communication between the members of the network by adequate activities like workshops, publications and networking and tries to develop cooperative relationships to other organizations.
In this paper, we will first point out how this idea came into being, for what reasons it was established, what the main goals are, which subjects of research are planned to be covered and how the process of communication will be scheduled over time. All these concepts should be regarded as preliminary suggestions which will be discussed and can be changed by the participants themselves.
BACKGROUND OF THE PROJECT
Throughout the history of mankind, the economic activity has always relied on the availability of natural resources used for production and consumption and on a well-functioning ecosystem because its services were indispensable. Although traditional societies have also experienced many cases of ecological crisis, most of them developed norms and procedures that protected the natural environment. However, this has changed substantially since modern technologies have increasingly enabled economic and political actors to deplete natural resources and to disturb or even destroy elements of and relationships in the ecosystem. Agriculture and its ecological impact on rural areas has given many examples of this problem.
Since we know as economists that the emergence of ecological problems is closely connected with the fact that environmental goods are public goods which require collective action and are otherwise not provided, theoretical reasoning has led to a conclusion that appears to be logical: In the process of constant development of new technologies we expect the mechanisms of economic competition to be always able to select the most favourable ones among the new opportunities. However, these mechanisms have not only selected those options that increased productivity and efficiency, but often gave priority to those ones that only gave the appearance of economic progress because they burdened external cost on nature and ecosystems. From this we have learned that we have to redefine progress, and some members of our discipline argue that this simultaneously means to redefine economics to a large extent.
In socialist systems, the economic coordination was neither separated from the political system nor left to market mechanisms and other pluralistic arrangements, but was integrated into the hierarchies of central planning. In principle, this presents a governance structure which could more easily prevent external cost to be allocated to nature. However, the inefficiencies of the system often left little scope for avoiding environmental pollution and damage. Therefore, the above conclusion is in sharp contradiction to empirical findings. During the socialist era the idea of sustainable development was obviously even more neglected in the Central and Eastern European countries (CEE countries) than in the western industrialized countries, a phenomenon that also applies to the agricultural sector. At present, problems of environmental protection and nature conservation increase in importance particularly within the agricultural sector and have, therefore, to be taken into
account in the current long-lasting transition process. "Old" environmental issues deriving from the past and "new" problems of resource protection which result from the transition process itself have to be tackled simultaneously.
A variety of investigations regarding the environmental situation in transition countries demonstrate that there is considerable need for economic, institutional and political approaches in order to find adequate solutions that meet the requirements of sustainability. On the one hand, serious environmental damage have been documented in CEE countries, and also in the agricultural sector where particularly improper agricultural practices have caused severe environmental problems. On the other hand, areas showing a high biodiversity have been kept more or less untouched in economically less important regions. Some of them have now obtained a new status as protected areas.
The crucial question to be answered is whether and how the requirements of environmental protection and nature conservation will be taken into account in the process of restructuring the political and economic framework. This holds especially true of the agricultural sector. During the first years of transition, the impact of agriculture on the environment declined in most of the countries due to a lack of liquidity and other typical transformation problems like insecurity of property rights. After these difficulties have been overcome, economic recovery of the sector will lead to an increasing intensity of production. This will probably be correlated with the increase in negative impacts on natural resources if the process is not accompanied by adequate environmental measures and arrangements to achieve intensification in a sustainable manner.
The guiding question of our network will be whether the transition of the agricultural sector and the transition to sustainable development will be both achievable and compatible. The complexity of this subject can be highlighted by defining four main issues:
1. Can the transition process cope with the requirements of environmentally sound development? - This initial question refers to the above-mentioned observation that natural capital and ecosystem services may be neglected in the transition process. This could be due to the fact that economic and political actors are dominated by the motivation to distribute land and other assets which secure long-term private income streams, and forget about the importance of public goods and institutions for providing these goods. In this respect, they have to cope with the additional difficulty that such "institutions for sustainability" cannot simply be copied from the western world, but also here they are still to be designed ^2.
2. Does the transition towards a market economy simultaneously facilitate a change towards the paradigm of sustainable development? - This extended question can be considered as a response to the insight that environmental protection cannot be achieved against the economic, social, political, cultural and ethical convictions and interests of the groups and actors involved. Instead of an isolated view on environmental issues an extended perspective integrating these aspects is required, and the network's approaches and results on ecological and related economic questions must always be based on this understanding of sustainability.
3. Will the traditional and the transformed agricultural institutions both support this transition towards sustainability? - This question emphasizes a central element regarding the theoretical foundation of the network's activity. It is based on the hypothesis that both the transformation of agriculture and the transformation towards sustainability are an issue of institutional change. Adequate institutions are the basic pre-requisite for a political consensus on environmental objectives, for sufficient efforts of monitoring the environmental situation, for the design of policy instruments and efficient methods of implementation and evaluation. In this context, traditional institutions as well as new institutions emerging after 1990 have to be taken into account.
4. What institutional and political changes are required and what is the role of international agreements and EU enlargement in this context? - The required changes of institutions and instruments may not only be endogenous to the transformation processes within a country, but can also derive from exogenous sources. The governments of transition countries may follow the objective to comply with international agreements on environmental protection, to be integrated into international programmes supporting them with funds, to achieve the desired membership in the European Union and NGOs whilst scientists can also stimulate cross-country discussion. Whether or not such transfers of rules and policies are feasible and what kind of difficulties and particularities they may bring about has to be analysed.
WHY CREATE A NETWORK FOCUSING ON RESEARCH AND COMMUNICATION?
The basic idea of the project is to stimulate and initiate research and motivate publications in the field of environmental and agricultural economics and social sciences. Of course, this requires increased communication and improved coordination between the people involved. CEESA is supposed to facilitate these processes. The following arguments show that there is a need for such an innovation:
* Many studies and investigations have been made within the various sub-disciplines of agronomy leading to more or less detailed recommendations on changes in production techniques to solve particular problems regarding the environmental impact of agricultural production.
* Similarly, several interdisciplinary research groups have been established to make a broader approach to these problems, but they still do not include the contribution economics and social sciences could (and should) make to solve agri-environmental problems.
* In addition, up to now rather few work has been done in the field of environmental and agricultural economics taking into account both sustainable farming systems and the political and institutional framework of sustainable development.
* Furthermore, in the field of "classic" or "pure" nature conservation the disciplines of environmental and agricultural economics as well as other branches of the social sciences are rather underrepresented, which may be the reason why the above-mentioned integrated view of sustainability has often not been adopted here.
* Due to the specific situation of transition in CEE countries, it is necessary to consider environmental problems from a different point of view than in well-established western economic systems. The main reason for this is the ongoing institutional change of the whole economic and political framework influencing the use of natural resources, but also other differences may play a role.
As a consequence, all subjects and aspects CEESA will deal with have to be approached considering the interrelationship between two types of transformation, i.e. transformation of society and the economy towards a market-oriented system embedded in pluralistic arrangements of institutions, and transformation towards sustainability whatever the institutional and organizational structure required to achieve this fundamental change may be in the future.
Stimulating research and communication by CEESA network therefore has two objectives:
* first, analysing present problems is supposed to lead to recommendations for interested groups and actors like politicians, administrators, associations and farmers. This aspect refers to research results which may be immediately used by agricultural or political practitioners.
* second, providing incentives for the long-term establishment of research concepts may increase the small share of environmental economics in agricultural sciences in the participating countries. These efforts are oriented towards the objective of improving our understanding of the conflicts between transformation and sustainability.
Accordingly, the network's orientation differs substantially from many other activities to be found in the same area:
* Gathering new knowledge about the interdependencies of transition to a market-oriented economy and transition towards sustainable agricultural and rural development has the highest priority in the concept of the network, and it may also make a contribution to research methodology.
* The approach of CEESA will, therefore, be much broader than pilot projects implementing well-proved political measures to solve concrete environmental problems in agriculture. On the contrary, CEESA intends to contribute to basic explanations and integrative solutions corresponding to the concept of sustainability.
Research undertaken within the CEESA network may contribute to the wide range of research topics on societies under transition. As the transition process requires difficult political and economic changes and will, hence, take a long time, research has to focus on the political and economic feasibility of the process, the next steps of development, the temporary structures of agricultural organization and the obstacles against transition and sustainability. As far as research in the field of environmental economics and environmental policies in countries under transition is concerned, the political and institutional aspects of reforming or introducing agri-environmental practices and policies are of major importance. Of course, this also holds true if we consider medium and long-term impacts of agriculture on the natural environment.
RESEARCH REQUIREMENTS TO BE MET BY THE NETWORK
The issue of pursuing the change of paradigm to sustainable development refers to the process of restructuring in the countries itself. In East Germany, the economic research on the transition of the agricultural sector could assume relatively favourable conditions for the process of change, resulting in a normative approach oriented towards the desired results of transformation. The situation in other Central and Eastern European countries is different, i. e., their political and economic conditions were more unfavourable for a rapid transition of the sector. Therefore, research has to focus on the political and economic feasibility of the process, which first requires a positive approach. The result of the transition process, which will be seen only in the far future, may, therefore, be considered as less important than the process itself concerning the next steps of development, the transitional structures of agricultural organizations, the obstacles against
transformation as well as the medium and long-term environmental impacts of agriculture. As a consequence, a positive and process-oriented approach seems to be adequate.
This has conceptual consequences for the analysis of the transition process. Two factors are of main importance:
* first, the economic and the political factors of the transition process and its interrelationship with sustainability have to be differentiated. Both have to be included in the analysis, and
* second, a limited or a broader definition of these key factors has to be differentiated. The limited definition refers to production and transaction costs in one institution - the agricultural enterprise. The wider one refers to the overall institutional and political framework which has an enormous impact on both the economic success and the environmental externalities of agricultural activities of farmers.
Within this framework, further research has to deal with the various problems of sustainable development in countries under transition. Nearly all of these fields of further research are linked to the complex institutional and political system in which transition takes place. Analysis has to focus mainly on the institutional and legal framework, the participating protagonists and organizations, adaptation of farming systems as well as impacts at the farm level and the political sphere, i. e. on politics and policies on the national and international level. The following main areas of research can be identified and from which a few issues have to be chosen to be studied by the CEESA Network^3:
1. Major environmental problems caused by agriculture in the CEE countries have to be quantified and analysed, with an attempt to explain the main reasons for environmental impacts of agricultural activities. In other words, the network to be set up may aim at developing a monitoring system based on ecological indicators and economic evaluation, including the causal connections responsible for the environmental problems. A comparative analysis between the participating countries regarding environmental hot spots in agriculture could be useful, focusing on common features and differences between countries. This could be the first step to be taken before starting analysis on the institutional and political level concerning the emergence of environmental damages. Country reports already elaborated on the "Present Environmental Situation in Agriculture" are initial studies leading to a more comprehensive analysis of interdependencies between agricultural practises, institutional
arrangements and environmental impacts. Following the comparative approach, interesting questions are whether similar environmental damages are caused by different reasons and vice versa, i.e. whether similar legal and institutional arrangements lead to the same degree of environmental threats in the participating countries.
2. In the course of privatization and restructuring of agricultural land and agricultural production units, decisions on institutional arrangements and the organizational form of agricultural production units have been made, which, in most cases, have long-term impacts on environmental protection and nature conservation. Often opposite priorities of land use and protection of natural resources have been competing with each other, e.g. in Poland where the privatization and utilization of protected areas for agricultural purposes is debated. Other examples, like Bulgaria, reveal the problem of contamination of agricultural land and the question of compensation of the former (pre-war) owners. Generally speaking, it is a question of property rights on the various components of natural resources and the question of how these rights should be distributed among the stakeholders involved. Sometimes, it may be difficult to harmonize the goals of "desired distribution of income
streams resulting from agricultural property rights" and "allocation of nature according to sustainability criteria".
3. Attention has to be paid to the conditions at the level of institutional arrangements and instruments of agri-environmental policies including implementation. Do implemented regulations and given legislation act as incentives for sustainable development and environmentally sound agriculture? How can the latter be improved? What kinds of systems of regulation and administration were established? How can the efficiency of institutions be increased and developed? What kinds of political measures may encourage and improve implementation? What is the role of international cooperation and international aid in promoting environmental policies and sustainable development?
4. The question whether market-oriented use of natural resources will be compatible with sustainable development in agriculture also depends on mechanisms of participation and conflict resolution. This mainly refers to the actors participating in the process of establishing institutional arrangements and introducing policy instruments. Probably, many environmental groups may not have enough influence in the decision-making process on environmental policy. It is a question of balanced participation and collective action, who - i. e. what part of the rural community - is integrated in this decision-making process and what interest groups are included. The analysis of the agricultural and environmental framework has to take into account the structure of society as well as the structure of interest groups. Further research has to clarify whether the latter did already exist in the former political system or whether they have constituted themselves during the transition process,
whether they could be integrated in the decision-making process without any constraints and whether they are actually representing the preferences of their members.
5. On-farm research has to deal with the possibilities of adapting farming systems and farmers' behaviour to the new conditions of future agricultural policies under EU conditions and simultaneously including sustainable, environmentally sound forms of agricultural production. Adequate strategies for farmers and decentralized strategies on regional levels have to be developed. Indicators of sustainable development should be elaborated for the purpose of international comparison. Furthermore, problems of implementation and acceptance of elaborated measures have to be analysed, including impact assessment on farm level.
6. Since many CEE countries want to join the European Union, environmental demands on land use may increase in importance. For the agricultural sector so-called "CAP-style policies" are implemented step by step, in the five associated countries in particular. In comparison, harmonization of environmental policies has been much slower. One reason may be that there are no financial transfers from the EU in the field of environmental policies as may be expected by the countries in the field of agricultural policies. Nevertheless, the necessity of harmonization with EU standards and regulations and the problems of their implementation have to be analysed, particularly with regard to the costs.
7. International organizations and international agreements such as the Rio Convention as well as cross-border cooperation like the "Pan European Ecological Network" or "Baltic 21" may play an important role in the process of sustainable development. They may influence the process of transition via the activities of protagonists and institutions and may act as driving forces towards sustainability.
8. Sustainable agriculture is more a question of the overall system of agrarian culture than an isolated technical problem. That means that not only the cardinal questions regarding the ecological problems (such as degradation and overuse of natural resources) or economic problems (such as the risk of policy changes or globalization of markets etc.) are of major importance. The complex system of normative institutions and values that shapes the environmental awareness of the population and, hence, influences demand and supply of environmental goods has to be taken into account, too. This system of informal institutions may change in the course of the transition process, as well as the belief systems concerning the role of agriculture in the society. These changes and the impact on agricultural development as well as on natural resources in the countries under transition have to be included into the research.
PROPOSED NETWORK ACTIVITIES FOR A PERIOD OF FOUR YEARS (1999-2002)
The main elements for structuring the activities of the network are the workshops and the working periods between the workshops. This "CEESA process" can be outlined as follows (see also the attached Table at the end of the paper):
* Preparatory phase:
* Initiation of the network
* Elaboration of country reports on Present Environmental Situation in Agriculture
Four phases of research determined by five workshops for presentation, discussion and identification of research issues:
* Phases I and II: Analysis of problems concerning agriculture and the environment in CEE countries, country reports and research in working groups
* Phases III and IV: Elaboration of suggestions to solve the problems analysed, impact assessment
Three different reports/studies should be elaborated:
* Present Environmental Situation in Agriculture
* Results of research in working groups on special key issues of the network
* Recommendations for Sustainable Development in Agriculture in Central and Eastern Europe
Presentation and publication of results:
* Publication of workshop proceedings after each workshop and of the Final Conference
* Final Conference on "Sustainable Agriculture in Central and Eastern Europe" with presentation of summarizing publication of results of the network.
The priorities of research will be chosen depending on the interests and capacities of the CEESA participants. In particular, the first workshop will be used to collect suggestions and arguments and to decide on future research activities and adequate structures of cooperation. Further issues will be the formation of working groups and organization of research during the periods between the workshops, as well as the preparation of forthcoming publications and next workshops.
REFERENCES
Bromley, Daniel W. 1989. Economic Interests and Institutions: The Conceptual Foundations of Public Policy, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Runge, Carlisle Ford. 1981. Institutions and Common Property Externalities: The Assurance Problem in Economic in Economic Development, Ph. D. Dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Ruttan, Vernon W. 1984. Induced Institutional Innovation, Manuscript (42 S.). St. Paul: Department of Economics and Department of Applied and Agricultural Economics, University of Minnesota.
2 In economics and social sciences, institutions are usually defined as follows: "Institutions are the rules of a society or of organizations that facilitate co-ordination among people by helping them form expectations which each person can reasonably hold in dealing with others. They reflect the conventions that have evolved in different societies regarding the behavior of individuals and groups relative to their own behavior and the behavior of others. In the area of economic relations they have a crucial role in establishing expectations about the rights to use resources in economic activities and about the partitioning of the income streams resulting from economic activity - "institutions provide assurance respecting the actions of others, and give order and stability to expectations in the complex and uncertain world of economic relations" (Runge, 1981: XV)", Ruttan, 1984, p. 2f.). Bromley (1989, p. 42) distinguishes between "conventions" and "entitlements". "That is: A
convention is a regularity (R) in human behavior in which everyone prefers to conform to R on the expectation that all others will also conform to R. A convention is a structured set of expectations about behavior, and of actual behavior, driven by shared and dominant preferences for the ultimate outcome as opposed to the means by which that outcome is achieved. On the other hand: An entitlement is a socially recognized and sanctioned set of expectations on the part of everyone in a society with regard to de jure or de facto legal relations that define the opportunity sets of individuals with respect to the opportunity sets of others". In addition, we have to distinguish between institutions and organizations. We may mention as an example, "that schools, corporations, and futures markets obtain their meaning from institutions; such organizations only exist because there is a set of working rules which defines them. A corporation only exists as a separate legal entity by
virtue of a set of working rules (entitlements) which defines what is and what is not, a corporation. The same holds true for futures markets, for schools, and for hospitals. Institutions define certain organizations or social programmes, but these programmes and organizations are best thought of as not being institutions, but as being defined by institutions" (Bromley, 1989, p. 43).
3 Based on this paper presented during the first CEESA workshop and during further discussions, participants have agreed on three main areas of activities and research done by CEESA: Sustainable Farming Systems (point 5, see above), Agricultural and Environmental Policies (points 3, 6 and 7) and Institutional Aspects in the Process of Sustainable Development (points 2 and 3). Under each research topic a working group was formed to prepare initial concepts of research and communication in the respective area. The detailed issues to be treated within the network will be subject to further discussion.
<section>7</section>
IMPROVING FARMING AND KNOWLEDGE SYSTEMS IN CEE BY CEESA
Stjepan Tanic
Farming Systems Development Officer, SEUM, Budapest
Starting points and chosen ways of transition in CEECs differ from country to country. The same applies to the progress in achieving objectives toward market based agriculture and farming. There has been little difference between one country and another in terms of what needs to be done. However, there are quite big differences when it comes to the pace of realization and the manner of implementation. At the beginning of the transition process, the most visible effect of the initiated reforms in agriculture was a sharp decline of agricultural output. Besides the deteriorating effect caused by the loss of previous markets and an inability to infiltrate new ones, another major reason for this decline was an inherited low level of productivity, which was further emphasized by a so called "spontaneous extensification^4".
Since the beginning of the transition process in CEECs a set of reforms was prepared and implemented to create incentives for the agricultural sector to improve its efficiency and sustainability. One of the major issues facing policy makers concerns the promotion of efficient farm units. In some countries, like Poland and Slovenia, structural changes that occur are geared towards the enlargement of small family farms, whilst in a number of others the trends and objectives of agricultural policies are aimed at a decrease in the average farm sizes. Both processes have the objective of increasing economic efficiency by finding appropriate farm size in order to achieve the effects of economies of scale. Several of the initial tasks of transforming the inherited structure into market - and private ownership - based systems have not been fully resolved in some countries, such as land privatization, completion of land titling and registration and the restructuring and consolidation
of the new farming units, etc.
ARE FARMING SYSTEMS IN THE EU AND CEE CHANGING TOWARDS THE SAME TARGET?
During the last few decades, the development of EU agriculture has been inter alia characterized by greater intensification, specialization and the enlargement of farm units. The increase in inputs and yields has been accompanied by greater specialization, with a huge reduction in mixed farming, and in particular a loss of traditional rotations. This previous farming and traditional rotations brought environmental benefits greater than those of the systems which have now replaced them. Such trends produce negative environmental effects, which need to be controlled to ensure the sustainability of agriculture.
Public concern about those negative effects has led to an increased demand for environmentally beneficial agricultural production methods, such as integrated production, traditional low-input farming and organic farming. Increased environmental awareness, combined with product surpluses and a low competitiveness on the world markets, have resulted in the introduction of appropriate policy measures and the promotion of a decrease in the intensity of production. With regard to the economic impact of decreasing the intensity of production, the following main aspects were noted:
* in crop production, less intensive techniques affected yields and the resulting income loss was generally not compensated by a better price for a more healthy product of better quality;
* farm management became more sophisticated and more costly due to the compulsory introduction of additional tasks (carrying a nutritive balance, setting up a manure balance, preparation of a farm environmental management plan, etc.);
* the economic impact extensification measures entail has been immediate, while positive environmental effects are expected to appear in the long run; this has made state support inevitable, with the resulting need for budgeting funds for direct payments and price-independent subsidization.
European agriculture is now facing economic, environmental, political and social pressures which are forcing a fundamental reappraisal of agricultural production systems. Today farmers in Europe, particular in Central and Eastern Europe, are faced more and more not only with constraints originating from their micro and neighbouring environments, but with constraints that are generated on the macro level too. Among these, of particular importance are constraints related to the:
* changes in the economic system and policies and pressures designed to increase competitiveness and profitability on domestic and global markets;
* the need to assure the long term viability and preservation of existing natural resources in order to comply with new emerging requirements concerning access to international markets and by doing so, sustaining household food security.
Farmers in CEECs are now faced with a new political and economic environment, one which results in structural changes and a transfer of responsibilities and decision making to the farm level. The speed of this transfer depends not only on the implementation of national structural policies, but also on the development of support institutions as well as farmers' willingness and ability to manage new responsibilities. This is to say that not only will they enjoy the freedom, for instance, to decide what to produce and how to produce it (which they did not have before), but that farmers will also have to take responsibility for and bare the risk of, making those decisions (Table 1). To assure the sustainability of their farms, they will also need to adopt new, and in most cases, environmentally friendly technologies and practices.
Since the technical efficiency of natural resource use in CEECs is lower than in the EU in the short run, an attractive approach for both farmers and policy makers might be to boost production by increasing the volume of output per unit by applying conventional production technologies. Even if there was a market for increased production such an orientation would potentially lead to increased subsidization, not to mention the negative impact on the environment. A alternative approach would be to increase technical and economic efficiency at either the existing, or just slightly higher, level with regards to the use of production factors (inputs, labour, capital). Both approaches require a knowledge of existing and alternative farming systems and farm management principles and skills.
Table 1. Types of farm management decisions and responsibilities taken by governments and farmers in the transition to market economy farming*
Before transition Transition Market economy
Government
level
decisions
· producer prices
· structure of production
· quantity of production
· size of business
· marketing of products
· way of production (input mix)
· risk and responsibility bearing
· macroeconomic, legislative and institutional support
· producer prices
· structure of production
· size of business
· marketing of products
· risk and responsibility bearing
· macroeconomic, legislative and institutional support
Farm
level
decisions
· way of production (input mix)
· risk and responsibility bearing
· structure of production
· size of business
· marketing of products
· risk and responsibility bearing
· quantity of production
· way of production (input mix)
· adoption of new technologies
· structure of production
· size of business
· marketing of products
· risk and responsibility bearing
· quantity of production
· way of production (input mix)
· adoption of new technologies
* Italics denote types of decisions that are made on both levels on a case to basis.
Even before the beginning of the transition process, environmental pollution problems caused by agriculture were waiting for a solution. They were caused by inappropriate and environment-damaging practices, and in some cases, a very high level of industrial input use. The resulting ecological damage was not mitigated by spontaneous extensification during the first stage of the transition period.
To ensure the effective transition to market-oriented agriculture, and also improved income opportunities and food security for the rural population, farming systems in CEECs will need to become more intensive but at the same time sustainable and diversified. These farming systems have to provide that:
* farm productivity is sustained or enhanced over the long-term;
* adverse impacts on the natural resource base of agriculture and associated ecosystems are minimized or ameliorated;
* residues resulting from the use of chemicals in agriculture are minimized;
* the net social benefit derived from agriculture is maximized;
Such farming systems could improve the well-being of individual farming families by increasing the overall productivity in the context of both private and social goals. They also need to be sufficiently flexible to manage risks associated with the variability of climate, markets and legislative and policy measures. To be able to design and to develop such farming systems, it is of paramount importance to have the appropriate knowledge about the environment (natural, social, economic, political) in which farmers operate in order to assist them in the adoption of appropriate production and management practices.
WHY DO WE NEED CEESA?
The complexity of relationships within the individual farming systems, and the imminent interactions of those systems with their physical and social environment, require complex approaches to the identification of, and research into the causality of both their internal operation and their behaviour in the systems' surroundings as well. As the result of the conflict between short-term individual interests and the long-term objectives of societies in attaining sustainability, in most cases those relationships are not in harmony. In these instances, adequate solutions can only be identified in an interactive setting. Hence, networking emerges as a tool that can provide the necessary flexibility to address the dynamic changes of systems and their surroundings.
In the context of the globalization of research, production and trade, regional networks are becoming an effective tool for developing the capacity to deliver adequate knowledge to farmers and policy makers alike. Networking is becoming increasingly popular among researchers and professionals not only in developed, but also in developing countries. Governments and development agencies such as the FAO, together with members of the donor community, have been instrumental in promoting this form of regional cooperation. Several examples of regional networks related to agricultural research and development are presented in textbox 1.
Regional networking can also serve as the vehicle for information exchange. It is a cost effective way of collaboration between experts and practitioners, particularly for smaller countries, which may not have the necessary "critical mass" of human and financial resources needed to resolve the complex emerging issues they are faced with. Collaboration between experts from countries with different levels of development not only provides an opportunity for access to "state of the art" knowledge, but also contributes to the building of human capacity in less developed countries.
New initiatives and developments in Central and Eastern Europe (EU accession, globalization of environmental concerns, etc.) create the need to facilitate and strengthen collaboration between experts and institutions who are both interested and engaged in the issues of sustainable agricultural development. There are several reasons for this. First of all, there is a rapidly increasing demand for expertise in economic and institutional issues surrounding the evaluation of the environmental effects of agricultural systems and also in the design of schemes aimed to reduce their negative impacts. Because of the lack of an appropriate forum coupled with poor information flows, there have been limited activities in the sharing of information between countries. There is also the need to analyse the impacts of structural adjustment on farm incomes, the quality of the environment, rural development, trade and the functioning of world markets.
The Sustainable Agriculture Network (SAN)
http://www.sare.org/san/
"SAN is the communications and outreach arm of the Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE) programme. SARE is a U.S. Department of Agriculture-funded initiative that sponsors competitive grants for sustainable agriculture research and education in a regional process nationwide. SAN is dedicated to the exchange of scientific and practical information on sustainable agriculture systems using a variety of printed and electronic communications tools."
Farm-level Applied Research Methods for East and Southern Africa (FARMESA)
http://www.farmesa.co.zw/
"FARMESA is a regional collaborative initiative of Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe, with Bostwana, Malawi, Mozambique and South Africa being Associate Countries. It is financed by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida) and executed FAO. The goal of this initiative is the improvement of food security, incomes and resource management of farming families, emphasizing innovative systems and participatory methods for identifying, testing and adapting small holder technologies. The concept of FARMESA is to develop methodologies and tools which allow field workers, researchers and policy makers to work with farmers and improve their standard of living."
The European System of Cooperative Research Networks in Agriculture (ESCORENA)
http://www.fao.org/regional/europe/activ-e.htm
"ESCORENA promotes cooperation in research, exchange of information and transfer of know-how and methodology advances, with clear sustainable development and socio-economic implications. These objectives are implemented through activities which include: a) collaborative research projects, b) network consultations, c) meetings and workshops of working groups and sub-networks, and d) documentation, proceedings and publication of network bulletins."
Textbox 1. Examples of regional networking for agricultural development
Taking into account all these concerns, the 21^st FAO Regional Conference for Europe confirmed that sustainable agricultural development remains a cornerstone of food security in the region, and that questions about the sustainability of agricultural systems in Central and Eastern Europe have been identified as one of the FAO's priorities in Central and Eastern Europe.
Networking is also becoming another major model for providing answers and solutions to complex issues such as sustainability. Building on past FAO initiatives and experiences, by fostering cooperation between both researchers and those professionals from the EU and CEECs interested in sustainable agricultural development, it has been recognized that collaboration in the Central and Eastern European Sustainable Agriculture Network (CEESA)^5 has the potential to:
* provide forum to stimulate collaboration and information exchanges between institutions and individuals interested in issues related to sustainable agricultural development within the agreed framework.
* facilitate the design of recommendations and options for the building of country-specific approaches to the development of sustainable agricultural systems.
* foster better integration with researchers and practitioners from Western and Central and Eastern Europe and help to plan and co-ordinate collaborative research projects.
* enable higher visibility of research results in an international/global context and prestigious recognition of research activities.
Figure 1. The framework of CEESA
By providing a broad regional and professional framework together with a flexible structure, the concept of CEESA has the potential to respond to the complexity of themes related to the development of sustainable agricultural systems by enabling the interaction of its members on both a country and regional level (Figure 1.). As such, CEESA also has the potential to benefit other European countries and to have a multiplier effect through the generation of information relevant to policy formulation and technology development in member countries outside the region as well.
Given such a broad framework, there are a number of opportunities to address farming systems issues in the CEESA context. Unlike some existing but narrowly based networks, it could, for example, deal with on-farm and off-farm economic and environmental costs and benefits and not just crop output and ecosystem process matters. One possible approach would be to make studies concerning the needs and possibilities for the introduction of farm environmental accounting, which could be used to propose methodologies for the development of sustainability indicators and the introduction of farm-level environmental accounting.
The imperative need for improved farming efficiency in CEECs, combined with the requirement for the environmental neutrality of production systems, as well as household and country level food security, will most likely lead to the adoption and development of such farming systems which are at the same time intensive and sustainable. The process of the sustainable intensification of farming systems in CEECs is heavily dependent on the availability of multi-disciplinary expertise. In this context, CEESA can certainly have a catalytic role.
Technological changes along with the globalization of markets are transforming industrial countries into knowledge-driven economies. This shift away from resource-based toward knowledge-based economies is reflected in the promotion of contemporary approaches to farming systems development in industrialized countries too. The ability, skills and knowledge of the people who farm the land has been recognized as a major factor of efficiency. It is not enough that farmers have only the relevant information but also the knowledge of how to judge what is in their best interests. Therefore, to achieve adequate levels of agricultural productivity, quality, efficiency and profitability, farming systems in Central and Eastern European countries would need not only to be resource but knowledge intensive as well.
REFERENCES
Buckwell, A. & Kydd, J. 1998. Vision and Action for FAO Priorities for the European Region, Report prepared for the Europe Regional Representative for 21^st FAO Regional Conference for Europe.
Budavari, J. 1997. Economic and structural impact of changing (higher or lower) intensity in agriculture in pursuance of the goal of sustainable agriculture, Report of the Regional Workshop, Gödöll, Hungary.
Csaki, C. & Nash, J. 1997. The Agrarian economies of Central and Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States, Situation and Perspectives, World Bank Discussion Paper No. 387, The World Bank, Washington, D. C.
Commission of the European Communities. 1999. State of application of regulation (EEC) no. 2078/92: Evaluation of Agri-environmental Programmes, Commission working document - DG VI, http://europa.eu.int/comm/dg06/envir/programmes/evalrep/concl_en.htm.
Commission of the European Communities. 1999. Directions towards sustainable agriculture, Communication to the Commission to the Council: The European Parliament; the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, COM (1999) 22 final, Brussels, Belgium.
FAO. 1998. Report on FAO activities in the European region 1996-97, and actions taken on the recommendations of the Twentieth Regional Conference, 21^st FAO Regional Conference for Europe, Tallinn, Estonia, 25 - 29 May 1998.
http://www.fao.org/regional/europe/ERC/DEFAULT.HTM
FAO. 1999. Priorities for FAO activities in the European region, Draft proposal for 22^nd FAO Regional Conference for Europe, Rome.
Koutsouris, A. 1998. Networking for sustainable future: The case of developing agencies, Proceedings of third European syposium on rutal and farming systems analyses: Environmental perspectives, March 25 to 27, pp. 131-145, Stuttgart-Hohenheim, Germany.
Laroche, M., Merette, M. & Ruggeri, G.C. 1998. On the Concept and Dimensions of Human Capital in a Knowledge-Based Economy Context, Ministere des Finances du Canada; Division des Etudes Economiques et Analyse de Politiques, Ottawa Ontario Canada.
4 Spontaneous extensification refers to the decreased use of industrial inputs and investments in the beginning of the transition period that was not caused by deliberate and balanced extensification policies, but by unclear property relations, deteriorating terms of trade for agricultural enterprises, a lack of financing and insufficient management knowledge and also by a reduced domestic and export market demand for food (Budavari J. 1997).
5 A more elaborate concept of the "CEESA" project is provided in the paper by K. H. In the context of these proceedings, observations by the author may be considered as complementary to that paper.
<section>8</section>
CONCEPTS AND ISSUES OF SUSTAINABILITY IN COUNTRIES IN TRANSITION - AN INSTITUTIONAL CONCEPT OF SUSTAINABILITY AS A BASIS FOR THE NETWORK
Antonia Lütteken and Konrad Hagedorn
Humboldt University of Berlin
Department of Agricultural Economics and Social Sciences
INTRODUCTION - THE BASIC IDEA OF SUSTAINABILITY
The concept of sustainability is a wide approach everybody is talking about in a period when environmental problems caused by various human activities are requiring serious solutions. As it is well known, the concept found its roots in the United Nations' 1987 Brundtland Commission Report "Our Common Future" and even earlier in the 1980's World Conservation Strategy. Starting from a `pure' ecologically based concept in the 1970s and in the World Conservation Strategy, it transformed very quickly into a more comprehensive socio-economic approach. The definition in the Brundtland Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED 1987, p. 43) is as follows:
"... development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs".
"... In essence, sustainable development is a process of change in which the exploitation of resources, the direction of investments, the orientation of technological development and institutional change are all in harmony and enhance both current and future potential to meet human needs and aspirations" (ibid., p. 46).
Within the Brundtland Report, the aspect of "development", to be distinguished from "growth" (which also is not questioned in the concept as such) increased in importance focussing on getting "better" rather than getting "bigger". The idea was to have a "qualitative concept incorporating ideas about improvement and progress and including cultural, social and economic dimensions" (Abrahamson 1997, p. 31).
To understand what the concept of sustainability means for the work within the network, we have to look on the characteristics of this paradigm. Two main characteristics are (ibid.):
1. "Sustainable development is people-centred in that it aims to improve the quality of human life and it is conservation-based in that it is conditioned by the need to respect nature's ability to provide resources and life-support services. In this perspective, sustainable development means improving the quality of human life while living within the carrying capacity of supporting ecosystems."
2. "Sustainable development is a normative concept that embodies standards of judgement and behaviour to be respected as the human community `the society' seeks to satisfy its needs of survival and well-being" (emphasised in original).
To arrive at a more operational concept of sustainability necessary for recommendations regarding daily life the detailed consequences of this first and very general definitions have to be understood.
TOWARDS A MORE CONCRETE CONCEPT OF SUSTAINABILITY
A people-centred concept being conservation-based means to have a close interaction between both:
"...sustainability is a relationship between dynamic human economic systems and dynamic, but slower, ecological systems, in which: (a) human life can develop indefinitely; (b) human individuals can flourish; (c) human culture can develop and (d) effects of human activities remain within bounds so as not to destroy the diversity, complexity and functioning of the ecological life-support system" (Costanza 1992, quoted in Abrahamson 1997, p. 31, emphasized in original).
Improving the quality of human life within the carrying capacity of ecosystems therefore means to "maximize simultaneously the biological system goals (genetic diversity, resistance, biological productivity), economic system goals (satisfaction of basic needs, enhancement of equity, increasing useful goods and services) and social system goals (cultural diversity, institutional sustainability, social justice, participation)" (Barbier 1987, quoted in Abrahamson 1997, p. 31). The idea is to promote a balance between these three interrelated systems and to maintain capital stocks, i.e. natural capital stocks as well as social capital stocks.
If we look for resulting recommendations on activities, e.g. in the context of Agenda 21 (Rio Summit 1992), we find a set of measures which shows that neither totally new production methods nor completely new political instruments have to be introduced. Therefore it is also not a question of individual decisions on innovative concepts to implement, for instance, sustainable agriculture. It is rather a question of a holistic approach to "emphasize explicitly the durable cross-linking of economic production and social compensation processes with the load-bearing capacity of the ecological systems. This strategy of total cross-linking was described by the Council of Experts for Environmental Problems in Germany (SRU 1994) as the `reticulate principle' (taken from the Latin rete=net)" (Kolloge 1997, p. 11).
Robinson and Tinker underline this aspect of the principle as follows: "Addressing any one of the three imperatives in isolation, without also satisfying the other two, virtually guarantees failure, first because each is independently crucial, second because the satisfaction of each is urgently necessary to remove elements of gross unsustainability from human society and third because the three imperatives (like the three prime systems) are intimately connected" (Robinson and Tinker 1995, p. 19). In other words, it is indispensable to harmonize the needs and interests of these three systems and to avoid antagonism between them.
SUSTAINABILITY AND THE ROLE OF AGRICULTURE
What does this mean for the agricultural sector as one sector of human activities that is much closer related to nature and natural resources than many others in a modern society? The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) tried to answer this question elaborating the concept of sustainable agriculture which superseded the paradigm of the "green revolution". The FAO working definition later on influenced also the concept of the Agenda 1:
"Sustainable development is the management and conservation of the natural resource base and the orientation of technological and institutional change in such a manner as to ensure the attainment and continued satisfaction of human needs for present and future generations. Such sustainable development (in the agriculture, forestry and fishery sectors) conserves land, preserves water, plant and animal genetic resources, is environmentally non-degrading, technically appropriate, economically viable and socially acceptable." (FAO 994):
According to Lynam and Herdt (1989), sustainability in agriculture has to be defined with respect to systems (in our case agrarian systems) rather than doing singular analyses of inputs and outputs, because "crop varieties and inputs produce nothing in isolation. Only when combined as components of a system do they produce output" (Lynam and Herdt 1989, quoted in Herdt and Steiner 1995, p. 5). As they understand sustainability as a "result of the relationship between technologies, inputs and management used on a particular resource base within a given socio-economic context", three aspects of systems - spatial level, time and the different dimensions have to be taken into account.
1. Spatial level: Systems exist within a large range of spaces: global, regional, farm, field, individual plants and microscopic. Figure 1 illustrates the different systems, showing that the number of types of systems is increasing. Herdt and Steiner argue that this shows one of the major difficulties of the concept of sustainability and "reinforces the need to define carefully the spatial dimension. The number of levels and their interconnections are part of the problem of determining when sustainability is an inherent property of a given system and when sustainability is so dependent on external forces that it can be most usefully examined at a higher-level system" (Lynam and Herdt 1989 quoted in Herdt and Steiner 1995, p. 5).
2. Time: The idea of sustainability can only be seen in relation to a certain time period. Taking into account the time dimension is getting difficult considering that, e.g., "the real world agricultural production systems are constantly changing. ... Experience shows that in most cases the important trends affecting the sustainability of a system usually become apparent in the first 20-40 years" (Herdt and Steiner 1995, p. 7).
Figure 1: Spatial levels and associated number of systems
Source: Herdt and Steiner 1995, p. 6
3. Dimensions: These are the different dimensions within which thinking about human conditions takes place. Usually, three dimensions are mentioned, the biological/physical, the economic and the social dimensions. But as seen in chapter 2, there are even more of them. The following points are of major importance for specifying the concept:
* Ethic dimension: inter-generation fairness as an ethical concept for the future;
* Ecological dimension: protection of natural resources, maintenance of the basis of production, reduction and avoidance of environmental degradation, conservation of biodiversity, minimization of damages to the ecological system caused by agricultural production;
* Economic dimension: saving the economic basis of livelihood, safeguarding and improving of employment in agriculture, food security and food quality, contribution to the productivity of the whole economy;
* Social dimension: development of rural social structures and social cohesion, participation of rural population, improvement of quality of life in rural areas, among the agricultural population in particular, social infrastructure, social security systems;
* Global dimension: responsibility for avoidance and solution of global environmental problems, international fairness in distribution of and access to natural resources, food security in the global context, accession to international agreements as the Agenda 21, Climate Convention etc.;
* Dimension of the reticulate principle: lasting cross-linking of economic production and social compensation processes with the carrying capacity of the ecological systems (see Chapter 2).
Considering only the three "main" dimensions, the interrelations between them is shown in Figure 2. The Scheme also outlines the links between the process of transition to a market economy as it takes place in Central and Eastern Europe and the concept of sustainable development.
Figure 2: Questions within the three dimensions of sustainable agriculture and transition
Source: Adapted from Herdt and Steiner 1995
SUSTAINABILITY, INSTITUTIONS AND LEARNING SOCIETIES
The Enquete Commission of the German Bundestag: "Protection of Man and the Environment" has recently published two books on the institutional interpretation of sustainability. In its works published before, the Commission had mainly concentrated on the question: "what" is sustainable development. Objectives of environmental quality and activities were defined, for example for the area of soil protection and management rules as well as policy instruments for the implementation of sustainable development were developed. However, sustainable development has to be conceived of as a comprehensive process of searching, learning and gaining experience. For that reason, it is not only the question of "what" might be sustainable development but also the question of "how" and by means of what organizational principles applied to a learning processes in society sustainable development can be achieved. As a consequence, environmental goals and their implementation by means of policy
instruments is not the only task. In addition, sustainable development has to be interpreted as a "regulative idea" which requires adequate institutions to become effective in the various areas of society.
For this purpose, the Commission has defined four basic strategies:
1. Strategies to improve reflexivity: These strategies reinforce the sensitivity of all actors regarding the ecological, economic and social site effects of their behaviour. Such strategies can be seen as an answer to the increasing complexity and differentiation of societal and political processes. Strategies of reflexivity have to be implemented at all levels and in all phases of the political processes. In many cases they serve as a starting point and a basis for further institutional reforms of the processes of consensus building and policy making.
2. Strategies to reinforce self-organization and participation: These strategies can be considered as a response to the fact that political processes are increasingly isolated and separated from the citizens and the people concerned. Accordingly, self-organization and participation are supposed to have an integrative impact by which politics are embedded again into society. People and groups concerned by political decisions are supposed to become political actors again, and poorly organized groups which are not able to express their interests in the political sphere, e.g. many social and ecological interests, may use such strategies to get a hearing in the political process.
3. Strategies for interest harmonization and conflict regulation: These strategies aim at balancing inequalities of power and control over resources. They may lead to constructive solutions regarding conflicts between different interests and conflicting values, for example between ecological, economic and social aspects of sustainability. Particularly in the agricultural sectors, ecologically motivated restrictions on property rights and new environmental policies cause winners and losers. Feasibility of such concepts may be lacking if mechanisms to deal with conflicts of distribution are underdeveloped.
4. Strategies for innovation: These strategies create new options and capacities for action in society, which may be societal, political, economic or technical in nature. They provide possibilities for creative processes of searching and learning in society during the process of achieving sustainable development. In this way, they may help to reduce or even to avoid conflicts between the different objectives which constitute sustainability. Cooperative approaches to cope with environmental problems on the regional level could be an example for such innovations.
The Commission stresses the point that the actors in a society should learn to interpret their position as a member of a network (Enquete-Kommission 1998). They are supposed to take into account the framework conditions of other actors and the determinants and constraints guiding the development of society as a whole, and they are expected to include these aspects in their own decision making. A better understanding of mutual dependencies enables each actor to integrate long-term societal conditions into his reasoning and helps him to contribute to sustainable development.
In this way, society is moving towards a "learning organization". Sustainability as a regulative idea requires such processes of searching within society because the design of institutions and of policy instruments cannot immediately be derived from this basic principle. As a consequence, discourses play a central role in this process of learning. Organising such discourses requires "learning organizations" which both provide signals for learning processes to society and receive such signals from society. Learning organizations as well as the learning society as a whole can be conceived of as being both pre-requisites and results of the processes of discourse.
SUSTAINABILITY AND TRANSFORMATION IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES
How these strategies can be applied to agriculture in transition countries will be one of the most important research topics of CEESA. In addition, transition to a market economy in the agricultural sector as it takes place in the Central and Eastern European countries, affects other institutions and instruments influencing the use and management of natural resources. In a comprehensive approach, the following groups of mechanisms are relevant:
1. Fundamental formal and informal institutions: property rights on nature and social and ecological values in the agrarian culture adapted to the overall society;
2. Institutions of the learning society: strategies for reflexivity, interest harmonization and conflict regulation, reinforcement of self-organization, participation and innovation;
3. Instruments of public policy: environmental, agricultural and regional policies including policies for rural development and their federal structures;
4. International policy instruments and institutional arrangements: EU regulations, international agreements, European ecological concepts and supranational movements.
In the present stage of transformation, the impact of privatization of property rights should receive major attention. This seems to be important for the following reasons:
* The (re)distribution of property rights on the various components of natural resources is one of the key issues regarding the use and overuse of such resources. (Hanna and Munashinghe 1995). One question arising is how these rights should be distributed to the stakeholders involved. Often opposite priorities of land use and protection of natural resources compete with each other. In Poland, for instance, the privatization and utilization of protected areas for agricultural purposes is debated. Other countries like Bulgaria exhibit the problem of contamination of agricultural land to be privatized leading to the question of compensation payments for the former (pre-war) owners.
* Well-defined property rights on soil and water play a significant role in how to use these resources for agricultural practises, i.e. to determine the degree of conservation of soil productivity or exploitation and non-reversible damages to soil structure and water resources. However, it is not only important whether or not the structure of rights has been designed in a useful way, but also whether they can be enforced. The capacity of property rights arrangements to safeguard the natural environment always depends on the reliability of the state and its authorities.
Within the transition process, the whole system of values, including economic values as well as tangible values, undergoes a sharp change resulting, among others, in different expectations of the future use of natural resources. These values are intensively influenced by the experiences of people during the first decade of transformation. This can be illustrated by the following interpretation of the relationship between agricultural production and environmental pollution in the countries in transition, referring to a pattern of development more or less applicable to each of the countries (see Lütteken and Hagedorn, 1998). It contains four periods: first, the period of the centrally planned economy as it had existed before the radical political changes occurred; secondly, the time of political upheavals; thirdly, the period of transition and finally the period of an established market economy as the main political objective in Central and Eastern Europe.
The first phase of centrally planned economies was characterized by state and collective farming and centrally controlled agricultural production. As consumer prices were supposed to be low, inputs had to be subsidized resulting in a high level of input use and an environmentally harmful application of inputs. This method of production, together with improper agricultural practises, produced a high level of environmental damages.
The second period of political upheavals was accompanied by the destruction of marketing channels, both for inputs and outputs, of legislation and of structures needed for any economic activity. After the political upheavals and during the transition process new rules had to be institutionalized, norms and property rights had to be redefined. Generally in this phase, institutional change, liberalization, restructuring and inflation caused an atmosphere of uncertainty in agriculture. The abolition of input subsidies and the drop of demand for agricultural products (domestic and external) resulted in an unfavourable input-output ratio. As a consequence, both the use of chemical inputs and the production output were declining. Thus, the political changes in 1989/90 and the collapse of the economy reduced the pressure on the environment both in the general economy as well as in the agricultural sector. It gave nature a "chance to rest" and at the same time it offered the
possibility to have a look at the damage to nature of the last 40 years.
The ongoing low level of the use of agrochemicals in agriculture, mainly due to the lack of capital, can be seen as one example for the "third period" and the ongoing resting of nature. The countries in transition to a market economy have to establish new rules for economic activities and to redefine agricultural policies. Environmental considerations have not had a priority status in this process in the past few years but it is obvious that it will play a more important role in the future. In this phase, internal driving forces towards sustainability as a holistic approach are more or less missing, although there may be some pressure from new environmental groups, requirements needed for future EU membership and from international agreements. In particular, the goal of some of the CEE countries to achieve access to the EU in the near future stimulates the agricultural policy makers to organize this sector in a way that makes it adaptable to CAP. This motivation certainly
also affects environmental policies in the agricultural sector. But it has to be expected that the low use of potentially harmful inputs will actually reduce the motivation to implement strong environmental regulations.
In the fourth phase, which is still to come in most of the transformation countries, agriculture will be restructured, agricultural and some environmental policies will be institutionalized, the input-output ratio will be stabilized and agricultural production will be significantly boosted. This will be achieved by a high and efficient level of input use leading again to increased environmental pollution.
In other words, rules for sustainability and corresponding environmental policies appear to be unnecessary in the short run, although they will be urgently needed in the long run. Does the environment find itself in a "transformation trap"? After the period of institutional innovation has passed, it may be very difficult to change the rules again in favour of the environment.
This hypothesis seems to be even more realistic if we look at the next phase of development: When the agricultural sector will have been stabilized in the years to come, it might happen that the use of energy, fertilizer and pesticides will have increased at a higher rate than can observe now without having adequate instruments to limit it, resulting in new damages to natural resources. For this reason, a crucial element of the transition process is the redefining of property rights with regard to the use of natural resources. While in western industrialized countries property rights have been defined over decades and while it seems politically difficult to change some of these rights to obtain fewer environmental changes, such rights could - theoretically - be defined in a more "environmentally sound" way in the transition countries, e.g. prohibiting any contamination of natural resources harmful to future generations. However, redefined property rights alone will not
guarantee less contamination unless institutionalized mechanisms for controlling implementation are established.
The hypothesis that there is a transformation trap for the environment in the transformation process may be helpful to identify one major important problem. However, a second serious problem can be identified if we consider the fact that the issues of environmental pollution and resource degradation have increased the consciousness of many people regarding the question of sustainability, but many of them have neglected the fact that questions of sustainable development are always associated with economic, social and political requirements. If sustainability is only demanded for the area of natural resources and environmental protection, this may lead to non-feasible concepts because options to achieve ecological progress may be non-feasible from an economic, social or political point of view or may even be destructive in these areas. Moreover, this implies that ecological objectives cannot be achieved by such a strategy. This leads us again to the integrative approach of
sustainability already pointed out in Chapter 2.
As a consequence, the question arises whether the process of transformation to be observed in Central and Eastern European countries aims at this new paradigm for designing society and the economy. This question leads to a second hypothesis: the guiding principle for the transformation of socialist economic systems is derived from the experience that market-oriented systems have been more competitive in the past than centrally planned economies. Accordingly, if we follow these interpretations without any second thoughts, the traditional principles of market-oriented economies are used as guidelines for transformation in Central and Eastern Europe. This way of reasoning which has been confirmed by many arguments in many studies in the area of transformation analysis suffers from the fact that it is oriented towards the past, although it should be oriented to the future because remodelling societies and economies represents a long-lasting process which - as a further
consequence - should not be oriented towards the principle of growth but follow the paradigm of sustainability. Most economists would agree that well-established market economies have to transform in the sense of sustainable development. There is no reason why the same demand should not equally be valid for the transformation of former centrally planned economies. In this respect, a second transformation trap for the development towards sustainability can be revealed: the prevailing concepts of transformation towards market economies follow empirical evidence and are therefore based on a way of reasoning that refers to the past. Since priority is given to this orientation towards the experiences of market economies, the danger arises that transformation towards sustainability will be neglected for a long time.
This stresses the necessity for finding solutions for incorporating both transition processes and making them compatible - being the main task of the CEESA network.
REFERENCES
Abrahammson, K. V. 1997. Paradigms of sustainability. In S. Sörlin, ed. The road towards sustainability, A historical perspective, A sustainable Baltic Region, The Baltic University programme, Uppsalla University, pp. 30-35.
Enquete-Kommission. 1998. "Schutz des Menschen und der Umwelt" des 13., Deutschen Bundestages, Konzept Nachhaltigkeit: Leitbild zur Umsetzung (Abschlußbericht).
FAO. 1994. New directions for agriculture, forestry and fisheries, Strategies for sustainable agriculture and rural development, Rome.
Herdt, R. W. & Steiner, R. A. 1995. Agricultural sustainability, Concepts and conundrums. In Vic Barnett, Rodger Payne & Roy Steiner, eds. Agricultural sustainability, Economic, environmental and statistical considerations, Teachester, New York, Brisbane, Toronto, Singapoor: John Whiley, S. 3-13.
Hanna, S. & Munasinghe, M. 1995. eds. Property rights in a social and ecological context, Case study and design apllications, The Beijer International Institute of Ecological Economics and the World Bank, Washington D.C.
Kolloge, S. 1997. Sustainable agriculture in agenda 21, The implementation of the UN Action Programme by the New Common Agricultural Policy, In Plant research and development, 45: pp. 7-21.
Lütteken, A. & Hagedorn, K. 1998. Transformation and environment: Perspectives for Central and Eastern European countries, In G. H. Peters, G. C. van Kooten & G. A. A. Wossink, eds. Economics of agro-chemicals, Proceedings of a symposium of the International Association of Agricultural Economics, Wageningen, The Netherlands, 25th-27th April 1996, Aldershot, Hampshire, Ashgate, pp. 347 - 358.
Minsch, J., Feindt, P.-H., Meister, H.-P., Schneidewind, U. & Schulz, T. 1998. Institutionelle reformen für eine politik der nachhaltigkeit, Enquete-Kommission: "Schutz des Menschen und der Umwelt" des 13., Deutschen Bundestages, Konzept Nachhaltigkeit, Studienprogrammem, Berlin et al.: Springer.
OECD. 1995. Sustainable agriculture. Concepts, issues and policies in OECD countries, Paris.
OECD. 1997. Environmental indicators for agriculture, Paris.
Robinson, J. & Tinker, J. 1995. Reconciling ecological, economic and social imperatives: Toward an analytical framework, SDRI Discussion Papers Series
1995-1, Sustainable Development Institute. Vancouver, Canada.
Schaller, N. 1993. The Concept of agricultural sustainability, In C. A. Edwards, M. K. Wali, D. J. Horn & F. Miller, eds. Agriculture and the environment, Amsterdam, London, New York, Tokyo: Elsevier, pp. 89-97.
<section>9</section>
FAO EXPERIENCE, ACTIVITIES AND VIEWS IN THE AREA OF POLICIES FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT -
CONCEPTUAL AND PRACTICAL APPROACH
Dorina Minoiu
Policy Officer, SEUP, Budapest
FROM RIO DE JANEIRO ONWARDS: PAVING THE ROAD TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
During the second half of the 20^th century, a period in which the growth of national income has been given top priority in economic policy, a considerable increase in production has been duly accompanied by an alarming destruction of environmental assets. Environmental degradation has, for the most part, been a consequence of a significant growth in production, a growth resulting largely from increases in productivity, and one in which the loss of scarce environmental assets has not been taken into account. This has led to an uncontrolled degradation of natural resources, such as deforestation, desertification, erosion, flooding, ozone depletion, landscape deterioration and a loss of biological diversity coupled with various forms of pollution and contamination. Not surprisingly, the risk of conflict between agricultural development and environmental protection has thus exacerbated.
The close but quite often detrimental link between economic growth and the environment brought to the forefront of development thinking at the beginning of the 1990s^6, has lead many countries to recognize the need to pursue policies that promote Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development (SARD). An unprecedented world-wide consensus, Agenda 21, was reached on the complex programme of working towards sustainable development into the next century. Toward this end, the FAO was designated as the task manager for five key chapters of Agenda 21: planning and management of land resources (chapter 10), combating deforestation (chapter 11), combating desertification and drought (chapter 12), sustainable mountain development (chapter 13) and sustainable agricultural and rural development (chapter 14).
Agenda 21 states that SARD's aim is threefold: (i) to increase production in ways that ensure access by all people to the food they need; (ii) to help people satisfy their social and cultural aspirations; and (iii), to protect and conserve the capacity of natural resources with a view to, on the one hand, providing consumer goods and, on the other, environmental and cultural services. It thus appears that the long-term objective of food security^7 can be attained through enhanced food production coupled with the sustainability of the natural resource base, with no conflict seeming to appear between these major goals. In the short-term, however, there may well be trade-offs between growth in agricultural productivity and the preservation of the environment. Currently, therefore, a major challenge is to find appropriate policies, effective institutions and feasible technologies to reconcile this towards increased food security.
POSITIVE TRENDS TOWARDS INCREASED SUSTAINABILITY
Chapter 14 makes it clear that achieving SARD is not a "big bang" process but rather one of making necessarily slow, incremental steps over a wide range of social, economic and technical issues. Hence, it should be continuously monitored, evaluated and, if needs, be adjusted. Both the world community and its individual nations thus regularly monitor the status of Agenda 21's implementation and progress reports following from Rio have consequently been prepared^8. The two following trends become better and better shaped:
The growing awareness of the need to consider environmental issues in agricultural policy design
According to the FAO Agenda 21 Progress Report of June 1997, there is a growing awareness, albeit uneven, among both developed and developing countries, including economies in transition, of the need to integrate environmental concerns in agricultural and trade policies. Indeed, the need to meet consumer demands and to open new food markets makes agricultural trade issues an important factor in this process^9.
The increasing recognition of the role of civil society institutions in decision and policy making
In the area of people's participation, there is now a better understanding of civil society institutions and a concomitant recognition of the need to strengthen their involvement in the decision- and policy-making processes. Coalitions and networks need to be formed in order to facilitate and effectively support the process of consensus-building with regard to the achievement of sustainable development.
Due to the ongoing processes of economic and political liberalization, agricultural systems are changing, not only at the regional and/or sub-regional levels, but on a world scale also. Consequently, these changes have resulted in the recognition of a new role for the functionality of the state alongside a new theoretical advocacy regarding the institutional structure of the agricultural system. Governments are now beginning to accept that effective policies can only emerge from a pluralistic decision-making process rooted in the participation of the key actors: stakeholders, coalitions and civil society representatives. Considering this crucial trend, governments should thus devote time to creating an appropriate institutional framework in order to facilitate the realization of this new participatory decision- and policy-making.
Most aspects of the old development model have been drastically changed, but the main feature of this period is the transition from a state-oriented agricultural and rural development model to one in which other driving forces will be present. It is broadly recognized that one of the prerequisites for successful (with regard to sustainability) agricultural and rural development is the formation of local self-help co-operatives, alongside various types of professional associations. Field evidence has shown that these bottom-up building processes create more sustainable and self-reliant organizations than those which are state-imposed. Autonomy allows every association or co-operative the ability to decide internally its choices and its policy^10. It appears that the greatest contemporary challenge facing the actors in agricultural and rural development is the creation of the necessary institutional support and workable conditions for an effective articulation between states,
markets, communities and associations.
FAO CHALLENGING KEY ISSUES OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
In managing the move towards sustainable development in a changeable global arena, the international community has identified several key issues requiring urgent consideration by FAO. They are summarized below.
Promote SARD-oriented agricultural policies
Working on how SARD can be incorporated into decision- and policy-making processes, the FAO advises governments on how to address issues such as:
* making the most efficient use of available resources, and investing wisely in the economy. The goal in this respect is to prepare for the future; to maximize the welfare of generations to come, especially of poor and disadvantaged people.
* addressing the technical problems of natural resource degradation and environment damage (this is where most analyses usually stop). A broader set of agricultural policies incorporating the environmental concerns is essential for the promotion of sustainable development.
* designing proper institutional arrangements for:
(a) making efficient use of available resources, both natural and human;
(b) alleviating poverty; and
(c) efficiently transferring the productive capacity to future generations.
Fresh approaches coupled with new policy instruments are indeed required to sustain the decentralized policy-making process^11 to effectively reach widely scattered smallholders.
Develop and implement an integrated and participatory approach to land resources management
At the international level, priority is given to developing a new approach to land resource conservation and management. In collaboration with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the FAO has been developing an improved framework for rural resource development and management^12 that addresses the major weaknesses in present approaches. The new approach combines public participation in the management of local resources with appropriate information technology and extension services, the provision of incentives and an improved institutional and policy framework. More emphasis is placed on rural workers' organizations and farmer-centred participatory approaches, while carefully recording and assessing indigenous knowledge and technology. Besides developing new concepts and approaches for natural resource management, in practice the FAO actively supports the thorough use of agricultural resources and aids member nations in improving their management of land and water
resources through numerous ongoing programmes. The FAO has developed land use data bases, a methodology for classifying and mapping agro-ecological zones, a land evaluation framework and methodologies for matching climate and crop environmental requirements. Moreover, it has developed a land-cover and land-use classification system in collaboration with other relevant UN agencies (i.e. the major project to map land cover and use on African continent).
Enhance human resources and institutional development through continuous exchange of information and experience
Complying with Agenda 21 requirements, the FAO policy assistance division is undertaking the crucial task of disseminating existing knowledge and methodological tools by providing technical assistance and training to its member countries. There have been considerable achievements in terms of strengthening the capacity of governments to analyse the impact of agricultural policy on the environment and consequently to design sectoral development policies conducive to a wider use of environmentally friendly farming practices. In this area, the FAO is strengthening national research institutions, assisting in the development of regional co-operative networks for research and technology and helping to ensure that SARD objectives reflect the views and concerns of all stakeholders concerned: rural organizations, local governments, the private sector and NGOs.
THE CONCEPT OF SUSTAINABILITY FROM THE FAO PERSPECTIVE
According to the FAO definition of sustainable development^13 (1988), three targets can be identified as the core of SARD strategy. These are equity, efficiency and resilience.
Equity: Presumably, if the needs of the poorest communities are not satisfied, in consequence, there will be a growing pressure on the natural resource base arising from attempts by the disadvantaged to overexploit common (community or public) resources (i.e., forests, pastures, etc.). For the most part, this is an issue of property rights and management of the common resource base, and such practices should not, therefore, necessarily be confined to the poorest elements in society. A more balanced redistribution of the incremental income from economic growth, inter alia the creation/enhancement of basic services for the poor and the creation of opportunities for a better life (access to education and investment) are all more appropriate to market-oriented systems than direct wealth redistribution.
Efficiency: This implies the use of available resources in such a way that while an acceptable (in economic terms) level of production is firmly maintained, such a process nevertheless remains (relatively) harmless with regards to the environment. This certainly requires a coherent policy package, including adequate economic incentives coupled with the required environmental instruments.
Resilience: The resilience of the system is measured in the face of the external stresses against it. This relates to the capacity of the system to maintain its structure and patterns of behaviour and its ability to cope with and to adapt to external disturbance. The collapse of the system may arise when stress (such as overgrazing) reduces resilience to the point where normal fluctuations (e.g., drought) threaten its collapse (e.g., desertification, inability to sustain population, etc.). Monitoring the extent of system resilience and its consideration in policy development is, therefore, highly important.
FAO GUIDING CRITERIA FOR THE CONCEPT OF SUSTAINABILITY
With a view to making the concept of sustainability more operational, the FAO has defined several guiding criteria to support of SARD policy formulation. A brief interpretation of each of these criteria is presented below.
Meeting the basic nutritional requirements of present and future generations, quantitatively and qualitatively, while providing a number of other agricultural products
The provision of basic nutritional needs does not necessarily mean self-sufficiency in all staple food products. Food security considerations certainly do not exclude trade relations among countries. Trends in the world trade of agricultural and food produce increasingly emphasize the role of comparative advantage. While producing in accordance with its comparative advantage, food security should be attained through a balanced policy of domestic production and imports financed by export sales.
Providing durable employment, sufficient income and decent living and working conditions for all those engaged in agricultural production
Off-farm, non-agricultural employment is emerging as a necessary supplement to part-time farming activity and agricultural income for most small households irrespective of the particular domestic setting. Therefore, rural employment and the income of rural dwellers should not be restricted uniquely to agricultural production. This limited sectoral perspective stimulates the need for a wider approach to rural development. The decentralized regional/local development policies play a fundamental role into this integrated vision.
Maintaining and, where possible, enhancing the productive capacity of the natural resource base as a whole and the regenerative capacity of renewable resources, without disrupting the functioning of basic ecological cycles and natural balances, destroying the social-cultural attributes of rural communities, or causing contamination of the environment.
This complex criterion embraces a number of sensitive issues which should be addressed through an adequate package of economic and environmental policy instruments, including standards and regulations, the use of relevant technologies, as well as appropriate pricing policies. Any agricultural and rural activity damaging the environment should bear the cost of negative externalities.
Reducing the vulnerability of agricultural factors to adverse natural and socio economic factors and other risks and the strengthening of self-reliance.
This essentially promotes the issue of resilience, as well as that of self-reliance. Again, given the trends in international trade, self-reliance could be interpreted as self-management at the regional, state and local level, and not necessarily as self-sufficiency. Empowerment and community self-management concepts are thus being given greater consideration. A successful community needs to be able both to harvest the benefits and bear the costs of its own actions on the resources it has at its disposal.
COMMITMENTS OF PROMOTING SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE AND FOOD SECURITY IN CEECS
The FAO's initiative in Europe takes into consideration the major economic challenges and constraints to sustainable agricultural and rural development facing the region, as well as the post-World Food Summit strategic framework and FAO Mission Statement for promoting sustainable food security. Aiming toward creating favourable conditions for the growth of sustainable agriculture and to the enhancement of food security and the welfare of the rural population in developing countries, FAO committed itself inter alia to:
* ensuring and enabling the social and economic environment;
* implementing policy aimed at eradicating poverty and inequality;
* pursuing participatory and sustainable development practices;
* fostering a world trade system that is both fair and market oriented;
* anticipating natural disasters and crises; encouraging the optimal application and use of public and private investment.
While addressing crucial issues affecting the agricultural and rural sector in those European economies in transition, the FAO works toward the development of an "economically, ecologically and socially sustainable agriculture which takes into account preservation of the countryside, maintaining viable rural areas and arresting job losses and migration from rural areas for both men and women"^14.
CONCRETE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE FAO IN POLICY ADVICE IN CEECs
The establishment of the policy assistance branch in the European regional office (FAO HQ, Rome) and of the policy co-ordinating unit in the sub-regional office for Central and Eastern Europe (Budapest), has enabled the FAO to meet most of the increasing demands from individual CEE countries for assistance in agriculture policy issues. Policy analysis and advice focuses on the comparative advantage of national agriculture and food industries, taking into account the status of reform in the private sector, plus the degree of restructuring with regard to public enterprises. Policy-makers are advised on price, taxation and trade policy options in the context of global and regional trade agreements and their implication for the agricultural sector. In this respect, special attention has been given to training activities aimed at strengthening human and institutional capacity building in agricultural policy analysis.
Food security and agricultural development strategies-horizon 2010
National approach
In 1997, the FAO prepared a number of national food security and agriculture strategies, Horizon 2010, in close co-operation with CEE experts from Ministries of Agriculture and Economic Development in their respective countries. The underlying idea behind this initiative was that there is still considerable scope for improved agricultural sector performance in most countries in the CEE sub-region^15. A common feature is that all countries from CEE could contribute to a greater degree in pursuing the goals of the World Food Summit: food-exporting countries in the region could potentially export more, thus adding more substantially to world food security. Acceptance into the European Union is also another important goal for a number of CEE countries. Policy and other agricultural sector adjustments needed to pave the way for membership are, therefore, high priorities in these development strategies. National food security and agriculture strategies were, in most cases,
submitted to the donor community as a basis for mobilizing resources for a country-level implementation of the World Food Summit Plan of Action.
Nevertheless, some key issues were not treated fully enough in the earlier mentioned national agricultural development strategies and will thus require a more thorough analysis. Bearing in mind that the achievement of food security involves more than just agricultural development and additionally requires not only sectoral interventions, the following remarks are perhaps deemed necessary:
* A wider analysis and multi-sectoral efforts should be undertaken to further address issues pertaining to household food security (i.e., health, education, nutrition and poverty mitigation) and to rural development, more broadly.
* A more balanced diet is an issue that should increasingly be addressed: food security in CEE countries is now more a matter of the quality and not the quantity of food consumption.
* Wasteful use of natural resources is a crucial issue of increasing concern in all countries. While draft strategies make frequent reference to the need of addressing this issue, more analysis and emphasis on the environmental dimension of agricultural and food production should be covered in forthcoming analyses.
Regional/sub-regional approach
The national agricultural development strategies did not attempt to cover the regional dimension. Nevertheless, it has been recognized that their harmonization within the regional framework is greatly needed, in particular in those areas where regional economic groupings exist. It was felt that issues such as research, trade, plant protection and animal health as well as environment protection could benefit from regional co-operation. Consequently, the FAO is now preparing regional strategy papers. This process will integrate the national strategy papers of those countries belonging to the major inter-governmental organizations. In accordance with Horizon 2010, these regional papers will identify common problems and issues related to agriculture and agricultural development, synthesize the resultant main recommendations, as well as initiate lines of action required at the national, regional and international levels in order to meet the targets of the World Food Summit. This
kind of co-operation with the Ministries of Agriculture of the Central European countries is now underway.
Formulation of policy and national programmes for medium- and long-term sector development (under technical co-operation agreements)
In close co-operation with central governments, assistance has been provided in the formulation of medium- and long-term strategies and national programmes^16 in making significant progress towards sustainable agricultural and rural sector development and national food security. Policy recommendations are based on a thorough diagnosis of the characteristics of the agricultural sector, an assessment of its macroeconomic environment, a review and analysis of agricultural policies and an identification of binding constraints to development, of potential opportunity and of priorities for agricultural development.
Advice on selected agricultural policy issues is also provided to CEE countries on request; i.e., an assessment of the implications of the Uruguay Round Agreements for agricultural trade was done for Turkey and Lithuania, and policy options relating to EU accession were formulated for the Czech Republic and Slovenia. Some other countries such as Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia are assisted in the formulation of policies and methodologies for improving land registration, cadastre and the development of farmland markets.
Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS): the FAO vehicle to ensure increased access to food in LIFDCs of the CEE sub-region
Taking into account that the CEE sub-region is comprised of a number of Low-Income Food Deficit Countries^17 (LIFDCs), the FAO has initiated the formulation and implementation of the SPFS in those concerned^18. Drawing on Agenda 21, the SPFS activities concentrate on the widespread adoption of technological packages and institutional innovations aimed at increasing both the overall availability and stability of domestic food production. They also focus on generating income in agriculture and related activities. Placing a strong emphasis on national ownership, the SPFS programme is organized mainly at the village level, and is directly implemented in conjunction with farmers in these communities. This is primarily to ensure that the direct beneficiaries of the programme are the poorest rural people and that the profits of higher production and efficiency are equitably shared.
Through direct participation, problems encountered at different levels, in particular those impeding farm profitability and farmers' access to new, more productive technology, are identified by farmers themselves and sustainable actions for their resolution are thus taken (also by the farmers). In a more advanced stage of SPFS implementation, the analysis will also include for an environmental impact assessment of proposed new technologies, while the adoption of environmentally friendly farming practices will duly be encouraged through adequate policy instruments.
PRACTICAL REMARKS FOR A MORE SARD-ORIENTED AGRICULTURAL POLICY IN CEECS
Given SARD's complexity, there is perhaps no single strategy employable for its ultimate realization. For example, economists may choose to start from the point of reformulating policy in order to create incentives for SARD in the first place. Alternatively, agronomists may prefer to focus on resource management, Integrated Pest Management, Integrated Plant Nutrition Systems, or at improving the technical capacities of natural resources. And sociologists would perhaps tend to look more squarely at human resource development and grassroots actions. Undoubtedly then, for SARD there are many potential entry points and where to start is really the question. What is certain, however, is that with dwindling resources and increasing demand, unless appropriate policies are designed, the agricultural practices will continue to exacerbate environmental problems, leading inevitably to food insecurity and poverty in the subregion.
SARD policies should be directed at the questions of access to credit, to natural resources (like land tenure), to technologies, to education and to information. The objective should be to improve livelihoods of rural dwellers. In other words, to provide them with the necessary tools for the successful management of their sustainable systems. It is all too often realized that, as soon as intervention takes place, as soon as subsidization is introduced, a grain of unsustainability takes root. To make SARD more operational, participatory mechanisms, designed expressly to reach populations right down to the village level, should both be instigated and strengthened in those relevant national ministries. Moreover, investment in research, technology and in human capital is often mentioned as essential policy towards SARD.
A much larger programme of workshops is also necessary in order to facilitate the exchange of knowledge and experience needed in promoting SARD and its adequate consideration in agricultural development strategies. These kinds of events should be organized at various levels: within and among countries with similar natural resources and social-economic conditions; i.e., mainly at the regional level and at the global level too. Individual countries or groups of countries should establish action frameworks that enable states and donor institutions to collaborate voluntarily in the joint development and implementation of SARD-oriented policies and programmes. That is why CEESA initiative is not only welcome but also promising.
REFERENCES
Crowley, E. 1998. Rural Poverty: Population Dynamics, Local Institutions and Access to Resources, paper presented at the Thematic Workshop on Population, Poverty and Environment held at FAO, Rome, 26-30 October 1998.
FAO. 1995a. Integration of Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development Issues in Agricultural Policy, Proceedings of the FAO/Winrock International Workshop on Integration of SARD Issues in Agricultural policy, Rome.
FAO. 1995b. Sustainability issues in agricultural and rural development policies, Vol. 1 Trainees' reader, Policy Analysis Division, Rome.
FAO. 1995c. Sustainability issues in agricultural and rural development policies, Vol. 2 Trainers' kit, Policy Analysis Division, Rome.
FAO. 1996a. Environment and sustainability issues in agricultural policy analysis and planning, Proceedings of a Training of Trainers Seminar, Nicosia, Cyprus, 8-19 May 1995, Cairo.
FAO. 1996b. Déclaration de Rome sur la Sécurité alimentaire mondiale et Plan d'action du Sommet mondial de l'alimentation, Sommet mondial de l'alimentation, Rome.
FAO. 1997a. Issues and Opportunities for Agricultural Education and Training in 1990s and beyond, Agricultural Education Group of the Extension, Education and Communication Service (SDRE), Rome.
FAO. 1997b. Earth Summit+5:progress on the road from Rio, Agenda 21: Progress Report, Rome.
Gordillo de Anda, G. 1997. New Trends and Emerging Coalitions, Paper presented at the High-level technical seminar: Private and Public Sector Cooperation in National Land Tenure Development in Eastern and Central Europe, University Residential Center, Bertinoro, Italy, 1-5 April 1997.
Marcoux, A. 1998. Population and Environmental Change: from Linkages to Policy Issues, Modified version of the paper presented at the Thematic Workshop on Population, Poverty and Environment held at FAO, Rome, 26-30 October 1998.
6 The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) was held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.
7 In the light of an alarming prevalence of hunger in developing countries in particular, the participating countries at the World Food Summit, held in Rome in November 1996, committed themselves to implementing Agenda 21, particularly with regard to chapter 14: to halve the current number of 800 million malnourished by 2015.
8 The first series of Agenda 21 progress reports were prepared by FAO five years after the programme had been signed, and were to be discussed during the high level Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly in June 1997.
9 In this respect, progress has been made, albeit from a relatively small production base, toward introducing organic farming methods under a variety of certification schemes.
10 Autonomy also implies that the generally weak capital base of rural co-operatives in many countries should be strengthened. To this end, FAO and the Committee for the Promotion and Advancement of Co-operatives (COPAC) have launched a special research programme on sustainable capital formation.
11 Up to now, most technical advice in terms of agriculture policy including SARD considerations has been directed toward central governments, and to a lesser extent toward local/regional governments and the private sector.
12 New concepts are being introduced through publications, such as "Our Land Our Future", which briefly elucidated the fresh approach, and "Negotiating a Sustainable Future for Land" published in 1997.
13 "Sustainable development is the management and conservation of the natural resource base, and the orientation of technological and institutional change in such a manner as to ensure the attainment and continued satisfaction of human needs for present and future generations. Such sustainable development (in the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors) conserves land, water, plant, and animal genetic resources, is environmentally non-degrading, technically appropriate, economically viable, and socially acceptable".
14 This was stressed during the 21^st FAO regional conference for Europe held in Tallinn, May 1998.
15 Many countries have the capacity to be net food exporters such as Bulgaria, Croatia, Estonia, Hungary, Lithuania, Moldova, Slovak Republic, Turkey, and Yugoslavia. The others have the necessary resources to obtain needed food imports. Because of the recent war, however, Bosnia-Herzegovina is a special case: its disrupted production system is unable to meet consumption needs, and currently it does not possess the means to import the food it needs - amounting to about a third of demand - to fill up this particular gap.
16 Some medium- and long-term agricultural and rural strategies were formulated (for Croatia, Estonia and Slovakia) while a number of others are currently under preparation (for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria and Malta). For countries such as Armenia, Azerbaijan and FYR of Macedonia, these are in an earlier stage of preparation.
17 Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia and Macedonia.
18 The SPFS is now in an advanced stage of its implementation in Albania, where a constraints analysis component has been launched since the formulation stage conducted both through a participatory involvement of farmers, and an extensive policy dialogue with representatives from both local and central government. The National Programme Document and the corresponding National Plan of Operations have been drafted for Bosnia-Herzegovina and are now in the process of technical revision within FAO. For the other LIFDCs, excluding Macedonia, the National Programme Document was formulated. But due to certain local circumstances (i.e., in Georgia the civil turmoil and the recent change of government), in places there are delays in its implementation.
<title>REU Technical Series - 61. CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPEAN SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE NETWORK: first workshop - </title>
COUNTRY REPORT ON THE PRESENT ENVIRONMENTAL SITUATION IN AGRICULTURE
- BULGARIA -
Nelly Bentcheva
Higher Agricultural Institute, Plovdiv
and
Stanko Georgiev
Institute of Introduction and Plant Genetic Resources, Sadovo
INTRODUCTION
The country is located in the most southern part of the temperate zone and has a strongly broken relief with diverse climatic, hydrological, soil and biogeographical conditions, favouring the development of agriculture.
Essential changes that have occurred in these concepts for integrating efforts on both a world and regional scale to solve acute social, economic and ecological problems have found a high response in Bulgaria. The paradigm for sustainable and ecologically sound development, adopted by the United Nations Organizations, was reflected in the environmental policy and development of specific programmes for the solution of ecological issues at the national, regional as well as local level. In the conditions of market economy transition, an effective environmental policy is a solid basis for restructuring the agrarian sector from the institutional, productive and infrastructural point of view with an aim to maintain sustainable and ecologically sound development in the years to come.
At the present stage of the national economic development and restructuring, in spite of the limited supporting capacities of the state and its institutions, the first steps towards the establishment of a stable environmental policy have been made. In the period of transition, soil, water and air pollution has sharply diminished, due chiefly to financial and economic reasons and less to the effect of increased environment protection control by governments and non-governmental organizations.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSITION AND STRUCTURE OF PROPERTY RIGHTS
The effect of privatization and redefinition of property rights on natural resources
As a result of the political and economic reforms started in 1989, agriculture in Bulgaria is undergoing dramatic changes. Agrarian reform, initiated in the early 1990s, is dismantling the central planning system and administrative resource distribution which changes the structure of agriculture. The main tasks of the reform are: restoration of former land property rights and the break-up of collective farms; price and trade liberalization; privatization at all points of food production; agricultural support policies, directed to solve the problems of market economy transition; development of a well-functioning finance and credit system; establishing the necessary market structure for agricultural development.
Before the start of reforms in 1989, Bulgarian agriculture as a whole was relatively efficient compared to that in the rest of the Eastern European countries, but significantly lagged behind agriculture in the United States and Canada. Over the period 1970-1989, the share of agriculture in the Bulgarian economy, expressed as a percentage of gross domestic product, decreased to reach its lowest level (10 percent) in 1989. The share of those engaged in this sector during the first years of the reform was low. The main reason foris was the process of the liquidation of former collective farms and the resulting changes in the ownership of the main means of production. At the end of the period studied, the percentage of people engaged in agriculture came to reach that of the 1980 figure (23 percent). After 1995, as a result of the measures undertaken by agrarian reform, this branch's share in the coungry's gross domestic product in 1997 increased to 22.7 percent. Most of the
people engaged in farming are in the private sector. In 1997 their total number reeached 744 619. Only 2.91 percent of them worked in the public sector, the other 97.09 percent being private farmers. The high percentage of occupation in the branch as compared to the low percentage of long-term assets acquired in agriculture (around 3 percent of the total number of assets acquired in 1996/1997), is indicative of a still high labour intensity and low productivity in the branch.
In 1997, the total acreage of agricultural land in Bulgaria stood at 6 203 thousand hectares, 4 805 thousand hectares of which is arable. Private farmers cultivate 94.8 percent of the land, in contrast to 1990 when only 15.4 percent were cultivating it (Table 1). Pastures and grasslands occupy 1398 thousand ha, the share of state and public ownership still being predominant in them (71.9 percent).
In 1997, some 10 341 agricultural enterprises were registered in the country. Most of the farms have up to one hectare of land, while the share of those cultivating over 10 hectares is the lowest.
With land privatization arable land is subdivided into smaller plots for the great number of landowners' heirs. Now, the average size of land per owner is significantly less than that before collectivization (around four hectares). This prevents the practising of modern and effective farming, the application of modern agricultural technologies and high-performance machines. In our opinion, at this stage there is no suitable land market which can contribute to the natural and permanent enlargement of areas, as well as to the creation of the necessary conditions and prerequisites for the appearance of large and profitable farms. Such farms are now created by renting land.
Of the total number of farms registered in 1997, 64.1 percent are engaged in crop production, 16.4 percent in animal production, 6.4 percent in both, 12.3 percent in farm services and 0.9 percent in management of pasture areas. 95.2 percent of the Trade Law registered companies are private, only 4.6 percent of them being under state ownership. Of the private companies, only 0.6 percent have foreign participation.
A significant part of the agricultural cooperatives is owned by members of the cooperatives themselves. Another part is owned by people permanently engaged in non-agricultural branches and activities far from the location of their land. They are, however, equally deprived both of agricultural machines and equipment and the necessary financial means for the normal management of farm activities. Therefore, neither the farm cooperatives nor the private farms are able to establish sustainable crop rotation on the areas they possess. The statistical data for the areas show clearly the reorientation of labour-intensive crops to private farms and those with predominant mechanized cultivation to cooperatives and large farms, including those established on rented land.
The changes occurring in the structure of agricultural farms according to the size of their land are of significant importance for the product structure of Bulgarian agricultural production. It is affected by a number of factors of a market, social, material-technical, financial-economic and agrotechnical nature. Irrespective of the intensity of a factor's impact on the product market (including the export structure of Bulgarian agriculture), the limited number of farms, the poor material-and-technical equipment and the lack of farmer's financial abilities are decisive factors at this stage of agricultural development. This necessitates the choice of one or another agricultural activity, taking into consideration in the first place the survival of the respective farm and a minimum income guarantee for farmers. Hence, the natural resources of the country and home and international food market capacities appear to be secondary factors for the determination of the size and
structure of agricultural production.
The present cooperatives as entities in the agricultural structure, managing a significant part of farm land in the country and their engagements with members of the cooperatives, are not interested enough either in market-oriented agriculture or in the use of national natural resources. Their outdated and amortized material equipment and their poor financial and economic power make them develop only activities relying on still available resources, which guarantee their survival as economic subjects. They do not undertake any market or export risks, because of the on-going procedures of land redistribution and the extremely narrow interests of their members. The statistical information for the period after the implementation of the Law for Land Ownership and Use shows a sharp increase in the percentage of uncropped areas. Their significant size is typical for the whole period of the agrarian reform. In cooperative and private farms, together holding - 95.4 percent of the
arable land in the country in 1997, the share of the uncropped areas is 35.2 percent. The tendency of their increase is more strongly expressed in the private farms, which in 1995 owned nearly 90 percent of the arable lands: their uncropped areas amounted to 24.4 percent with their share in 1996 being still higher (38.9 percent).
The legal basis for land reform is the Law for Land Ownership and Use passed by the Grand National Assembly in 1991. The best main points of the law are: that the property rights of all former landholders are restored; that the latter are entitled to realize their land ownership in all possible ways; that it secures the use of farm lands only for agricultural production; that it ensures the protection of farm lands against degradation and pollution.
Land privatization, as an element of the agrarian reform in agriculture, has not yet been completed. According to data from both the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Agrarian Reform and the Statistical Institute, for 1998 about 55 percent of the landholders have already received their land. The other 45 percent of the arable lands are either not being cultivated or are being given to temporary use. The users of these lands have no property rights on them and are not interested in making any investments for their long-term improvement, which affects negatively the productivity and maintenance of the respective farms. Priority is given to the privatization of the following enterprises: those requiring investments to secure the competitiveness of the goods they produce, as well as to settle ecological problems related to their production; enterprises whose product sales would provide conditions for production increase, as well as for keeping and extending their employment
capacities.
Restructurization in rural areas
Rural regions in Bulgaria occupy 84 percent of its area, but constitute only 32.3 percent of its population, or approx. 2.7 million people. Because of the high dependence of the economy of these regions on natural resources, they are specializing in the development of a limited number of activities. The most important of these are farming, wood industry, mining, trade and tourism, which are the major source of income for the people.
At the present stage of national economic development and restructuring, in spite of the limited supporting capacities of the state and its institutions, the first steps towards the establishment of a stable policy for the development of rural areas have been made. These conform with official EU documents from the December 1995European Council in Madrid of, as well as with the July 1997 stand of the European Commission of concerning the use of EU Structural Funds by associated countries.
The more important forthcoming tasks related to the development of rural areas are the following:
* Developing a national programme to determine the priorities in the use of the Structural Funds and rural area development;
* Developing some approaches and methods for evaluating the degree of the development of these regions, including their demographic situation, the level of people's employment and income, the state of the infrastructure and communications, the state of soils and forestry, characteristics of the terrain (mountainous, semi-mountainous or plain), the ecological environment, conditions for a balanced development of the regions, etc.
* Stimulating income sources through the creation of new jobs, in addition to traditional farming, such as the processing of foods with specific taste qualities, production of ecologically sound products, development of agro-tourism and so forth;
* Stimulating the development of sustainable and ecologically sound farming and preventing the negative impacts on the environment through specific ecological sanctions, national standards for ecologically sound products, complied according to the respective international standards, exploring those possibilities to include Bulgaria into the EU list of organic product exporters, as well as a system for certification.
Liberalization
After 1990, a number of changes occurred in the price policy for agricultural products. These changes led to decentralization in the procedures of price fixing, and hence to price liberalization. The results of this first step in price reform are unfavourable for the existing monopolistic practice of distribution and manufacturing. The process of price liberalization was begun in 1991. It was applied because of the inability of centrally fixed prices to send the necessary price signals to producers, as well as a result of the pressure of international financial institutions. A specific feature of price liberalization in Bulgaria is that it is applied as a part of general macroeconomic reform, and not as a specific policy with respect to the agrarian sector. As a result of this, almost all production and consumer prices have been liberalized at the same time. This leads to a sharp change in the input and output price ratio for agricultural products. Another unfavourable
peculiarity of price liberalization is that it is applied under the conditions of a lack of market competition. In this period, no basic institutional conditions for functioning market have been presented in the country. In a short-term plan, the market response is only toward a price increase, without expanding or improving production. The lack of complete price liberalization thus led to the introduction of the so-called "expected price system", modified in 1993 into a "price ceiling system", as together with the imposition of different restrictions and regulations including: registration, licensing, temporary export bans, quantitative export restrictions, export and import fees and levies, as well as import tax exemption and, in some cases, the application of minimum export prices.
The development of the economic framework at farm level
Land market
The existence of an efficient land market in Bulgaria is closely connected with the restoration of the macroeconomic stability of the country and the course of land reform implementation. The delayed course in land reform, related to the restoration of land property rights, is the main reason for the absence of a land market in the country. According to a number of researchers, private farming development in Bulgaria depends, to a great extent, on the land leasing rather than on the market for land selling or purchase. The main arguments supporting this conclusion are the following: inflation as a factor compelling landholders to keep their land; the costs of land transactions are higher than those of land property restoration. Newly created farms do not want to rent small and scattered plots due to higher costs and lower efficiency in the use of resources.
Though the Government should not affect and control the land market, nevertheless needs a strategy for managing this process. This necessitates the speeding up of the legal basis established to manage the process of land transactions.
The development of input and output prices
Comparisons made between the dynamics of input and output prices in the agricultural production system have shown a disturbed parity. The rate of increase in prices for the factors of production is many higher than that for prices received for the goods produced in agriculture.
Analyses made on input and output prices have proved, similarly to import-export restrictions, that the fall in production which occurred in the period of transition is due to price policy, the short-term effect of land property changes, and the economic structure of the sector as a whole.
THE IMPACT OF AGRICULTURE ON THE ENVIRONMENT
Environmental degradation caused by agriculture
Agricultural production is realized in the open, using all natural resources - soil, terrain, water, climate, the biological productive potential of crops and farm animal breeds. For that reason, agriculture is directly affected by all negative changes occurring in environmental conditions. On the other hand, the violation of the requirements and standards for ecologically sound practices could also exert a direct and negative effect on the environment.
In the period of the centralized planned economy, the main purpose of the state in terms of agriculture was to obtain quantitatively the maximum amount of plant and animal products. To this end, technologies required the application, of thousands of tonnes of mineral fertilizers and plant protection pesticides on a national scale. Their incorrect and intensive application exerted a strong negative effect on soil, water, plant and animal production. The control of the residual amounts of nitrates, nitrites, ammonium ions and pesticides in soil and water was of episodic nature: it was conducted only in "hot spots"; not systematically and regularly, hence the reason for its low efficiency.
Agriculture and soil protection
Plant and animal production
The Crop Production subsector affects the soil in several ways:
1. Intensive mineral fertilization leads to soil acidification. Especially sensitive and susceptible to that phenomenon are soils with lower buffer capacity. According to the soil balance of Bulgaria for 1985, the acid soil area was 477.5 hectares, (Table 2). According to the data of the Ministerial Council for 1994, around 1 500 thousand hectares, or 32.4 percent of the cultivated lands, suffered from increased soil acidity due to the excessive use of mineral fertilizers. Of these, 460 thousand hectares (30.7 percent) showed a harmful-to-plants acidity, and 630 thousand hectares (42 percent) had moderately acidified soils. Soil acidification is observed almost everywhere in the plain regions of the country, where agricultural crops are produced leader in this respect is the region of Plovdiv, where the situation is especially serious and disturbing. A harmful soil acidity is present in 41 percent of the area, while another 11.2 percent of the cultivated lands is endangered
acidification. Second place in terms of harmful soil acidity (17.4 percent of the areas) is occupied by the region of Lovech. No favourable tendency is observed in other regions of the country either, where the areas endangered by acidification occupy significant parts of the cultivated lands - the region of Burgas (19.3 percent), the region of Sofia (17.6 percent), and that of Haskovo (12.3 percent). After 1994, the acidification rates in the cultivated lands decreased sharply, which is directly related to the reduced amounts of mineral fertilizers applied due to economic reasons (Table 3). Fertilizer prices increased drastically. According to our investigations, the prices of mineral fertilizers from 1994 to 1997 rose 10.5 times, which reduced their use and retained the processes of soil acidification. Against the background of the high percentage of land with harmful-to-plants soil acidity, the measures undertaken for its normalization through liming have just a symbolic
significance. The areas limed in 1994 are only 1.7 percent of those limed in 1989, which means, in our opinion, that at this stage the situation remains serious and disturbing.
2. Defective irrigation systems, non-standard irrigation and excess watering, led to a secondary salinization and irrigation erosion of cultivated lands. At the national level, the salinized areas amount for 28-30 thousand hectares, and another 40 thousand hectares are potentially salinized (Table 2). These are mainly found in the regions of Burgas - 60 percent, Lovech - 22 percent, and Plovdiv - 13.3 percent.
3. Intensive pesticide use in crop production at inadequate rates of application and bad storage contributes to the increase of their amounts in soils above the maximum permissible concentrations. Pesticide pollution of soils is usually of a local and incidental nature. According to data produced the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Agrarian Reform for 1994, the highest soil pollution is registered in the region of Blagoevgrad where 12.7 kg/ha were used, followed by the regions of Pazardzik and Sliven with 10 kg/ha. In the region of Sliven, the amounts of herbicides used per head of population reached 6 kg/capita. In separate sites - Uzundzovo (the region of Haskovo), Komatevo (the region of Plovdiv), Pomorie (the region of Burgas), concentrations of the banned chloro-organic insecticides - isomers and metabolites of DDT (hexachloran, heptachlor, aldrin, dieldrin and edrine) exceeding the maximum permissible levels were registered. In 1994, 1 666 tonnes of fungicides,
4.5 tonnes of insecticides and 5 363 tonnes of herbicides were imported into the country. The total amount of plant protection materials imported and used in plant production over the period 1992-1995 was in the range of 5 001-6 456 tonnes, this decreasing sharply in 1996 to 3 282 tonnes (Table 3). The reduction in the total amount of chemical materials is due to their unafordable prices. Their increase in 1997 was almost 9 times over those of 1994. In spite of the positive tendency towards a decrease in the use of chemicals, the risk of soil pollution remains at a rather high level. Sporadic copper contaminations of vineyard soils were registered due to the long-term application of copper-containing pesticides. The investigations made by Balinova for the period 1994-1996 in the areas around pesticide storehouses and the sites for their solution preparation, showed high concentrations exceeding the maximum permissible levels of 2,4-D, DDE, DDT, Atrazine, Alachlor, etc. in
Kostinbrod, Aldimirovtsi, Vakarel, Ihtiman, Bozhurishte - the region of Sofia. According to the same author, soil contamination with pesticides near their storehouses presents a risk source and potential pollutant for ground waters. Since 1995, over 2 700 tonnes of banned preparations have been stored in about 500 storehouses throughout the country. With land privatization and the liquidation of the old structures, the problem of pesticide storage, protection and controlled application arose, as well as their destruction when they were no longer fit to be used. Cases were registered where outdated chemical preparations were removed from their original packaging and offered for sale. Not all amounts of the outdated pesticides were destroyed. This creates a risk situation for thefts and fires with very serious and unforeseen consequences for people's health. According to the requirements of the Civil Protection services, at this stage our country has not yet the necessary
special equipment for the burning and destruction of pesticides without damaging people's health.
4. Animal husbandry also contributes to soil and water pollution through farmyard and liquid manure. Not all animal farms store their farmyard and liquid manure adequately according to the respective normative requirements. With agrarian reform and land privatization, the total number of farm animals in the country sharply decreased, which contributed to the improvement of the general ecological situation (Table 4). A large part of the animal breeding farms and complexes were liquidated, which contributed to the decrease in environmental pollution. Of those remaining near the bigger towns, not all follow the legal environment protection requirements. Though paying the requisite fines for doing so, them nevertheless continue to pollute canals, small rivers, and micro dam-lakes with effluents. In the villages, after land restitution and the increase of farm animal numbers, the farmers utilize their farmyard manure for manuring their land much better without causing any serious
environmental damage.
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability at farm level
The factors exerting negative effects on the productivity of farms are various. We shall treat only the most important of them, which are significant for increased farm productivity:
1. The main factors which directly exert a negative impact on soil fertilization are acidification and salinization, although they have a limited impact on the total land area.
2. The main factors which have indirect negative effects on soil fertilization are related to the application of the agricultural system.
* The financial capacity of the new farmers is severely limited. They are not able to purchase the necessary crop production resources, such as: seeds, fertilizers, plant protection materials, machines and farm equipment, storehouses, as well as paying the fees for water. The animal breeders cannot buy purebreed productive and reproductive animals, fodders and the necessary equipment.
* The machines obtained after the distribution of former cooperative property are obsolete, thus a lot of money is required for their maintenance and use. At this stage, the purchase of new machines and equipment by farmers is almost impossible because of their high prices and the lack of available funds. Bank credits are unacceptable for farmers because of their unfavourable interest rates.
* Most of the landholders have not got the necessary professional qualifications and production experience for the organization and management of agriculture, which negatively reflects in the economic results obtained from their new operations.
* Some of the landholders live in towns, sometimes at a distance of more than 150-300 km from their agricultural land. They also have other professions and incomes and do not rely on the profit gained from using their land. Usually they offer it to rent at a low payment or leave it uncultivated. Some of the landholders, living in the villages, have neither the necessary qualifications nor the professional experience in agriculture and do not apply the required agronomic system of land cultivation and soil protection.
* In the period of transition to a market economy, through banks the state has been providing credit for agricultural producers to conduct their sowing and harvesting campaigns for cereals and some other crops against part of their production at low prices or against a project of their future activities, submitted to and approved by the bank authorities. These forms of financial support were not well received by the farmers. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Agrarian Reform created a specialized "Agriculture" fund for crediting farm producers under comparatively favourable terms. Because of the liberalized market prices, which are close to or actually under the cost of production, many of the producers do not use it. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Agrarian Reform does not subsidize agricultural production, not even grain which is of a strategic importance for the country.
* As a result of political and economic changes, Bulgaria lost its former position within the international markets in Europe and the ex-Soviet Union republics, particularly in Russia, and this affected negatively the volume and structure of agricultural production. The new EU's export quotas for Bulgarian agricultural products are quite insufficient to stimulate this production. These factors reflect negatively on the financial possibilities of the producers.
All the above-mentioned factors adversely affect soil fertilization and the stabilization of agricultural production in the country.
Agriculture and water protection
Plant and animal production
According to Iliev and Naidenov, using data from the Ministry of the Environment for 1989-1990, the irrigated areas in Bulgaria are around 1 185 thousand hectares, and the total amount of irrigation water is 2.8 billion m^3. The use of water in agriculture decreased by about 40 percent in 1992 to 725 354 thousand m^3, of which fresh water accounts for 718 704 thousand m^3. With agricultural land privatization, the water supply of the sector was reduced to 145 697 thousand m^3 in 1996 as compared to that in 1992 (19.9 percent), of which 97 725 thousand m^3 (67.1 percent) are used for the irrigation of crops and 47 972 thousand m^3 (32.9 percent) for animal husbandry. Compared to water use in 1989 in 1996 only 5 percent of this total. Of the fresh water used in agriculture in 1996 (142 868 thousand m^3 ), 31 950 thousand m^3 (22.4 percent) were polluted, of which 19 929 thousand m^3 (62.4 percent) flowed into rivers without being purified. The sharp reduction in the water
supply to agriculture decreased the extent of water resource pollution. Despite this, the pollution of ground and surface waters with nitrates, nitrites, ammonium ions and pesticides continues, though at lower rates, as a result of the intensive and incorrect application of mineral fertilizers and plant protection chemicals. From the sites around pesticide storehouses, with high contents of nitrogen compounds and pesticides in the soil, through the water flow from rains and irrigation, they pass into the ground water, and then into the surface water. Although only episodically, the surface water of canals and small streams is also polluted by chemicals from the washing and cleaning of plant protection machines. As we have already mentioned, in the soil section not all of the large animal breeding farms left after privatization have at their disposal special waste water pits, and thus directly pollute the soil, water and air in the region.
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability at farm level
In connection with the use of water in agriculture, the main factors negatively affecting the productivity of crops and animals, thus decreasing arm effectiveness, are:
1. The last 10-15 years were characterized by dry spells in spring and summer. The rainfalls were about 40-50 percent less than the normal, their distribution being extremely unfavourable during the crop growth period, and thus not coinciding with their maximum water requirements. Crop production became completely dependent on precipitation amounts and the possibilities for irrigation.
2. The process of privatization has not yet been completed and the land has not been returned to its owners.
3. Irrigation equipment and pumping stations are completely destroyed. Their restoration and refunctioning is at the expense of water users, which was led to a 220 times increase in the price of irrigation water and the compulsory fees for irrigated areas.
High prices and financial difficulties have made a significant part of water users give up irrigating their crops and start growing unirrigated crops on the former irrigated areas for several years.
Agriculture and air protection
If compared to the other economic sectors - energetics, chemical and petro-chemical industries, metallurgy and transport - the level of air pollution caused by agriculture is extremely low. It is of a local and most often seasonal character and it is realized by the performance of agricultural machines in the field and by the small processing enterprises and greenhouses using black oil. Because of the high sulphur content in the black oil, they pollute air through emissions of sulphur, nitrogen and carbon oxides. The air is more seriously polluted by ammonium and nitrogen oxides from farmyard manure, stored around the animal breeding farms. Wood-processing by farm cooperatives also contributes to the dust pollution of air. Air pollution results, although of an episodic nature, from the burning of stubble after cereal harvesting - a harmful practice which has become very common in recent years. Methane emissions from rice fields proved to be more serious air pollutants, but
they were sharply reduced after land privatization because of destroyed irrigation facilities and the high water prices.
The agriculture and its impact on landscape
During the period of socialist agriculture, all land was cultivated on a large scale with various annual field crops, orchards, vineyards, and roads, where irrigation systems as well as storehouses for products and machines were built. With land privatization; the coming into force of the new plans for land redistribution in the plain regions, the landscape is constantly changing. The large stands of orchards and vineyards are gradually disappearing and being replaced with annual field crops. The irrigated fields and the systems for surface and ground irrigation have been destroyed. New roads, canal networks, small-sized orchards and vineyards, field houses and drilled wells are now being created. A large part of the areas remain uncultivated and severely weed-infested, which makes the plain regions ugly. In the semi-mountainous, and especially the mountainous regions, the changes in the landscape are comparatively smaller. Here, the arable land was not allotted on a large
scale because of the unsuitable terrain, which is mainly under meadows and pastures.
Agriculture and biodiversity
Taking into consideration the importance of biodiversity issues in the country, as early as 1934 Bulgaria declared the first national park on the Balkan Peninsula, "Vitosha", putting it under legal protection. In 1985, the number of national parks declared in the country was 10 with a total area of 57 980 hectares, plus 85 reserves, of which 17 are recognized by UNESCO as unique "biospheric" and registered in the Red Book for biospheric reserves on the planet. In 1996, the number of national parks in Bulgaria was already 12 with a 351 584 hectare area, 90 reserves comprising 85 562 hectares, and 2 234 natural sights with 23 408 hectares. Besides them, single trees of various species which are 1 000 to 1 600 years old are under legal protection, witness the foundation and the 1 300-year history of the Bulgarian state. Complex and systemic ecological research is being conducted in these reserves, the data for which is being used as a background base for ecological biospheric
monitoring, and the control and forecasting of biospheric pollution. There is a great biodiversity of medicinal plants, but the annual export quantities of herbs and forest fruits abroad, their wrong harvesting practices, and predatory attitude towards them, threaten the survival of a great number of plant species in the country. Of the Bulgarian flora and fauna, 389 plant species and 473 animal species have been protected by law. The Institute for Plant Genetic Resources with a genebank in the town of Sadovo was founded in 1977 to collect, study and store the diversity of local and introduced crops and wild plant species.
Effects of environmental degradation on agriculture
The degraded environment, for its part, leads to the exhaustion of natural resources and exerts a strong effect on all branches of the economy, including agriculture. This effect is most strongly expressed in the decrease of arable land and the deterioration of soil fertility, which in turn has a negative impact on food supplies. The agricultural land resources of Bulgaria are given in Table 1. The data shows that the size of lands in agriculture is generally remained unchanged for the period 1985-1997. A slight increase in arable land has taken place, but at the expense of grasslands and pastures. Small changes are registered in the separate land categories (by mode of use), the greatest decrease being established in the artificial pastures and meadows. Of a total cultivated area of 4 652.9 thousand hectares for 1985, deteriorated lands are 824.4 thousand hectares (17.4 percent), the heavy metal contaminated ones 41.1 thousand hectares (0.9 percent), and the degraded lands
1 752.6 thousand hectares (37.7 percent).
The heavy metal polluted lands are situated in the industrial, mainly mining and metallurgical regions of the country. The degraded lands also represent a big share of the arable area: 1 752.6 thousand hectares (37.7 percent), of which 20.9 percent are eroded, 20.3 percent acidified and 0.6 percent salinized lands (Table 2). Although for 1985 the data show that the process of arable land reduction and its quality deterioration is still in progress. Though at lower rates, pollution with wastes from energetics, chemical, mining, metallurgical and construction industries, as well as everyday refuse, affect negatively the ecological situation, which deepens the ecological crisis in the country. They affect negatively not only the amount and quality of agricultural lands, but also pollute the surface and underground waters in the country.
Bulgaria is deficient in water resources. The surface water flow of the rivers on the territory of the country, together with the underground waters undrained therein, amount, according to data collected over a long period of time, to 20.16 billion m^3 per year. The precipitation on the territory of the country is about 75.2 billion m^3 water, of which around 20 billion m^3 evaporates, hence the actual annual surface water flow is 55 billion m^3. In different seasons, it varies greatly. Taking into consideration big differences in relief heights and the flow rate, we come to the conclusion that around 22 to 57 percent of that water mass is collected and stored in approximately 2 200 dam lakes and water catchments. The total volume of the water in dam lakes amounts to about 7.3 billion m^3, which is approximately equal to the annual water use by people, industry and agriculture. Approximately 37 percent of the total used water of the average annual flow of rivers runs off
unpurified.
The situation concerning water used for everyday life is better. The percentage of water treated by mechanical and biological processes is about 60 percent. In the region of the oil-processing enterprises, both soils and waters are severely polluted with oil products, which are difficult to purify. According to Iliev and Naidenov, almost all of our rivers are polluted in their lower courses as a result of industrial enterprises. Practically, they are not fit to be used for economic purposes. The Danube, which catches its waters from Central and South-Eastern Europe, is highly polluted in our section. It, and the other smaller rivers emptying into the Black Sea, import thousands of tonnes of wastes, including organic and inorganic products, nitrates, nitrites, pesticides, etc. The Black Sea is on the verge of an ecological catastrophe because of the accumulation of hydrogen sulphide, which is the reason for the high rates of decrease in the number of fish species and other
marine animals.
Each year, energetics and industry emit hundreds of tonnes of gases - nitrogen, sulphur, carbon oxides, methane, ammonia, non-methane compounds and dust, into the atmosphere, thus polluting the environment (Table 5). With the emissions of the ore-processing and metallurgical industries, besides gases and dust, significant amounts of heavy metals - zinc, cadmium, lead, iron, copper, cobalt, manganese, nickel, etc. - are also emitted into the environment in the direction of the predominant winds. These fall directly on soil, open water areas, field vegetation and agricultural crops. Through the soil, their water soluble compounds fall into agricultural products and the underground waters. Copper mines and enterprises cause additional soil and water pollution with arsenic. Polluted air, water and soils exert a direct or indirect effect on human health. A direct correlation has been established between the rates of respiratory diseases in people and the air pollution in
industrial regions, as well as the cancer rates in heavy-metal polluted regions. For these reasons, part of the population moves to other regions in the country enjoying a better ecological state.
THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIETY ON THE AGRICULTURAL ENVIRONMENT
Institutional change within the environmental policy
Agrarian reform in Bulgaria has necessitated the occurrence of some functional changes in the responsibilities, rights and obligations of the different governmental and non-governmental institutions concerned with, and influencing the changes in, agricultural development and environmental protection. The management, control and protection of the environment, natural resources and biological diversity in the country is under the by the Ministry of Environment and Waters (MEW). As a competent organ of the executive, this ministry implements governmental policy in the field of environmental protection and the ecologically sound use of natural resources. The authorities of the ministry are regulated by the Law of Environmental Protection, Law of Natural Protection, Law of Air, Water and Soil Protection against Pollution, Law of Arable Land and Pasture Protection, Law of Waters, etc., including over 60 decrees and regulations. MEW assumes all international responsibilities for
the country proceeding from international multilateral and bilateral conventions, contracts and agreements on environment, natural resource and biological diversity. MEW has a two-level structure. The first level is the Central Administration with 16 Regional Environment Inspections (REI). The second level is the National Centre for Environment and Sustainable Development, working on the scientific development and implementation in the field of ecological monitoring. The development of a legislature adequate for the changing socio-economic situation in the country pre-determines the changes occurring within the separate departments. Intra-department reorganization has been, directed towards an institutional development, inconformity with the formulated priorities and policies, as well as toward the creation of economic and normative instruments for their control and implementation. Gradually, the focus is being moved from measuring environmental parameters to the estimation
of the efficiency of the applied policies and invested funds for environmental protection, to inspecting the self-control and monitoring of the economic subjects under the regime of permission and to the support of environment parameters and life quality. In this connection, the Government has also sanctioned some measures designed to stabilize environmental policy. Their realization depends on the actualization of the Bulgarian Environment Strategy^19.
The Republic of Bulgaria has signed the documents of the two international conventions the International Convention on Gas Emissions in Atmosphere and the International Convention on Biological Diversity. How the Government realizes its programme for environmental protection is seen in the data in Table 6. The cost structure by items for the period 1992-1996 confirms that the Government allocates funds for the restoration of the damage done to nature, increases its long-term assets related to environmental protection, and conducts research activities to find suitable solutions to ecological problems and biodiversity conservation. In other words, it discharges the duties of the country to the international institutions, and realizes its programme in all directions. The legislative activities of the Government are directed to the development of the necessary normative acts for regulating and settling the relations among all institutions concerned with environmental protection
and biodiversity conservation in the country, i.e.: state, cooperative and private. In addition to this, the principle objective and task of the Government is the development of Bulgarian standards on environmental protection; achieving the same status as those of the EU countries.
The regional bodies, conducting ecological policies, should also undergo some changes. The increasing volume of activities, corresponding to their extending functions as well as their technical re-equipment, necessitates the specification of their structures with a view to increasing the effectiveness of their work as local control.
The institutional stabilization of ecological policy and the creation and development of structures for an efficient realization of priorities requires close coordination between the responsible institutions and their activities. The delayed process of structural agrarian reform makes it still more necessary for the creation of new-type institutional structures and their rational interaction. For the specificity of the transition from a centrally planned to institutional structure, all elements of the institution-structural and production-structural changes and the related organizational-legal and economic measures, should be considered as interrelated and interdependent. For the moment, this approach is not being applied mainly due to subjective reasons. The more important reasons are of an organizational nature, related to the fragmentation of the political and the other institutional structures - the lack of a thorough scientific concept for the institutional structure
and the mechanisms of its macro-level functioning; the elements of this structure are formed separately, both by scope and time, and not interrelated; inadequate coordination of those developed economic laws regulating the mechanisms for the functioning of institutions and market subjects. In a number of cases, these laws are directly taken from other countries, without considering the actual economic and other conditions of the country; greater attention is given to the legislative and institutional elements of the restructuring and less to its application to the productional and infrastructural restructuring of the branch. The state's withdrawal from productional and infrastructural restructuring can lead to long-term negative consequences. Ultimately, the effective realization of ecological policy, the abiding by the principle of shared responsibility between ministries, economic enterprises and the public for the environmental situation, and protection in the country
depends entirely on these relations.
Environmental policy related to agriculture
The legislative and institutional framework for a national agri-environmental policy
Since 1991, the new normative system of environmental legislation has been initiated in the country: setting the objectives, strategies and common normative requirements of the state ecological policy, as well as the responsibilities of the institutions. An operative normative system is based on three main principles: "the pollutant pays", "prevention and protection from the pollution", "society has rights to information". Intensive work has been carried out toward the establishment and improvement of a system of ecological and natural protection legislation through the elaboration and confirmatiom of laws and standards, standards for the maximum permissible concentrations of the pollutants of the environment, harmonized with international approved system. Existing laws have been added and these new laws and sublaw acts passed related to the protection of environment are as follows: Environmental Law, Law for the transformation and privatization of state and municipal
enterprises, Law for air, Law for protection of medical crops, Law of biodiversity, Laws of Forestry, Waters, Mineral wealth, etc. The elaboration of various standards for the maximum permissible concentrations for soil pollution and agricultural production is assigned to research teams as projects and pilot ecological farms. Although intensive work has been carried out on the development of ecological policy and the improvement of ecological legislation, its efficiency is not high, and this is determined by several factors:
1. At times delays in the examination and passing of draft laws for environmental protection;
2. A lack of coordination and contradictions between institutions taking part in the development of the drafts for normative acts;
3. A lack of specialists on ecology in the Ministry of Environment and Waters and, due to financial reasons, a lack of highly skilled external experts.
Laws and directives on the use of inputs
The main objective of state regulation through laws and directives is to put restrictions on environmental pollution by stimulating the reproduction of environmental elements and environment-protection activities. The principal normative act, regulating the character and quality of the resources invested in agricultural production, is the Law for Land Ownership and Use and the regulations for its application. The regulations of the act state that all landholders and users should observe the sanitary-hygienic and ecological standards when managing their lands, by protecting them from erosion, waterlogging, and salinization and increasing soil fertility; the water they should use must be free of noxious substances and wastes over the maximum permissible levels.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Agrarian Reform and the Ministry of Environment and Waters periodically elaborate and approve lists and reference books for the use and storage of permitted pesticides in agriculture. The standards and the methods of application are within them. Through the divisions of the Ministry of Environment and Waters, the regurous control of banned chemicals is fulfilled and sanctions are imposed on those infringing them.
Laws and directives on the protection of natural resources in agriculture
The main laws dealing with the issues of natural resource protection are: the Constitution, defining land as a main national wealth, put under the protection of state and society. Arable land is used only for agricultural purposes. Change in its use is admitted only as an exception, regulated by law. The main normative act for environmental protection is the Environmental Law, passed in 1991 and changed and supplemented in 1995. It regulates the principles of collecting information on the state of the environment, and its dissemination. It defines the rights and obligations of institutions and individuals concerning environmental protection, as well as the respective control and measures. Air protection is regulated by five laws and decrees. The protection of land and soil is regulated by 22 laws, decrees and instructions. The protection and rational use of forests and protected natural sites is regulated by nine laws, decrees and tariffs. The protection and rational use of
flora and fauna is controlled by nine laws, decrees, and regulations. Water protection and its rational use is regulated by 31 laws, ordinances, instructions, and government decrees. The Law of Air, Water and Soil Protection, including the regulations for its application, appears to be an important law for natural resource preservation by protecting air, water, and soil from pollution. Decree No. One for the assessment of environmental impacts, develops further the formulations of the Environmental Law. The Law for Land Ownership and Use regulates the restitution of land to its former owners in ecologically polluted regions. The Council of Ministers defines ecologically polluted farm lands, as well as the mode of their restoration. According to this law, all the expenses for the ecological restoration of polluted lands are undertaken by the state.
National measures on the promotion of ecologically sound agricultural practices
The national indicators for estimating the public response to the strategy and realization of the ecological policy of state, government and department institutions on the environment and agriculture protection, are ultimately reduced to whether people approve and support them or not. The ecological policy consolidates the legislative and executive activities, the funds, the structure of costs, the mode of their use, the effect of the conducted policy, and the control and the sanctions applied. All these activities are discussed in sections 4.1 to 4.2, inclusive. We should note that all of them are popular subjects open to discussion and consideration through out the mass media - television, radio and press where people can give their opinion. On the other hand, all state institutions concerned with environmental protection, publish in monthly bulletins and annual reference books information on the current state of the environment and agriculture and these are available to
both specialists and individuals showing an interest in the matter alike. In our opinion, it is necessary to increase research activities in agriculture, especially those related to education, with a view to training workers - producers able to implement scientific achievements in ecologically sound and organic farming.
The importance of national environmental associations and organizations to environmental policy
The "Green face" of civil society organizations
In the process of environmental management, the search for suitable forms and means of attracting the member of society is of increasing importance. The hope is to improve the knowledge of the population on the current state of and risks to the environment, to enable people and their associations in the process of discussion and decision making on specific activities or local projects concerned with the environment, and to educate young people and adults alike in high ecological culture and an adequate attitude to the environment. In this respect, sociological surveys are conducted in the country within the framework of different projects and international programmes, such as the "Investigation of Environmental Protection Issues". To provide access to information on the matter, periodical bulletins (weekly and quarterly) on the current state of the environment and the sources of its pollution are published in the country and made available to its citizens and
non-governmental organizations. This information policy, however, has not yet provided the expected results, as only a small percentage of citizens and the mass media have shown an interest in it. Work on the ecological education of young people is considered as not yet being effective enough either. A lot of the planned public campaigns, e.g. "Ecology in the Bulgarian Home", were not realized for both organizational reasons and a lack of funds. The organization of optional training of students in ecology (competitions, circles, Olympiads, brigades, expeditions) is unsystematic and episodic. Work with the mass media, as powerful instruments for the formation of public attitude and a civic position on problems relating to environmental protection and the conservation of natural resources and biological diversity in the country, is reported to have been ineffective.
The importance of private and non-profit organizations
The process of restructuring Bulgarian agriculture is accompanied by the creation of new non-governmental agricultural structures, which are more or less concerned with the problems of environmental protection and the defence of the producers' interests under the new economic and political conditions. So far, 44 branch unions have been created. More important non-governmental organizations considering environmental protection are the Association of Organic Farming "Ecofarm" and the National Consultative Council of Organic Farming. All non-governmental organizations have direct contact between growers and manufacturing enterprises. Thus, the necessary horizontal and vertical relations in the branch are achieved, which affects the type, volume and quality of agricultural products. These non-governmental organizations are considered very important as organized associations and public correctives for the effectiveness of the conducted ecological policy. The weak points in
ecological legislation, as well as the prevention of environmental pollution, necessitate close public control. Its effectiveness demands the application of preliminary, current and consequent control. Suitable forms of public control organizations are, firstly, an independent control network of non-governmental ecological organizations seeking to prevent the occurrence of new ecologically threatened regions. In cases of unsatisfactory responses, they undertake specific campaigns (protest letters, subscription lists, meetings, live chains, etc.) to stop activities on the site. Secondly, the formation of initiative groups of citizens to participate actively in the public discussion of ecological problems and to initiate different measures for eliminating the negative impact on the environment. Thirdly, the conducting of referenda with a decisive role in the restraining or closing of the sites of pollution.
CONCLUSIONS
On the basis of the present environmental situation in agriculture in Bulgaria, the following more important conclusions from economic, legal, social and institutional points of views can be drawn:
1. Privatization as a key element of agrarian structural reform can contribute to the ecological state of agriculture on condition that this process is accompanied by an effective agrarian policy and working laws. The restitution of land property rights and the restructuring of the agricultural sector do not mean an immediate change in the attitude of farmers to and their motivation for, the application of ecologically sound methods of production. It is logical to assume that the economic interests of the owner will direct him to preserve soil fertility, to observe the ecological, nature-protective and sanitary-hygienic standards for the production of quality products. It is wrong to expect, however, that this change in the attitude to natural resources will occur automatically. Efforts should be taken by the Government to lay the foundations of sustainable farming and practical working ecological legislation through the development of suitable mechanisms.
2. The delayed course of agrarian structural reform in the country extended the period of transition, which affected negatively the rates of agricultural development. In the period of transition, the rates of soil, water and air pollution sharply decreased, mainly as a result of a production decrease due chiefly to financial and economic reasons and less to the effect of increased environment protection control by the government and non-governmental organizations. Irrespective of this, with the funds allotted by the state a high level of state and public control on the ecological situation has been achieved. Besides preventive measures, a more effective relationship between the damages caused and the sanctions imposed should be found for the realization of more effective pollution control. In terms of the conservation of biological diversity, the country is conducting active research activities for the better conservation and study of rare species in country`s flora and
fauna, as well as those which are threatened with extinction.
3. As a result of unfavourable political and macroeconomic conditions and ineffective government policy on behalf of the executive, the process of institutional, productional and infrastructural restructuring of the sector was delayed. Agrarian structural reform can allow no delay, especially in its institutional sector, if the speeding up of the process of land restitution and the creation of economically viable farms is to be accomplished. Environmental policy should be built into the institutional, structural and infrastructural changes. In this respect, the role of ecological legislation is of great importance.
4. The laws on environmental protection should be supported by the whole of society. Without this support, their function will not be effective.
5. The capacities of sustainable and ecologically sound development can be increased by extending research, training, education and extension activities. In perspective, the training of executive staffs, producers and future farmers should put into practice the achievements of ecological science for the realization of sustainable development is the only alternative.
REFERENCES
Aroyo, J. 1997. Transition to a market economy - ideas and reality, V. Tarnovo, Bulgaria.
Balinova, A. 1998. Environmental risk from point sources of pesticides in the soil, Agricultural Science, 4: pp. 51-54, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Bojinov, T. & Atanasov I. 1990. Ecology and economics, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Georgiev, S. & Bentcheva, N., 1998. Groundnut production costs by different economic forms, Agricultural Economics and Management, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Iliev, N. & Najdenov, N. 1993. Applied ecology and environmental economics, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Khadgieva, V. 1994. Ecological problems of agricultural, Agricultural Economics and Management, 1-2, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Kopeva, D. & Mishev, P. Summary of land reform, APAU Ministry of Agricultural Development, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Kovachev, A. 1997. Business environment, Abagar, V. Tarnovo.
Madjarova, S. 1998. The institutions and rural areas, Agricultural Economics and Management, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Madjarova, S. 1998. Rural tourism-alternative form for development of economics in rural areas, Economics, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Mandova M., Kosev, N. & Boneva, D. 1995. Intriguing geography, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Mihajlov, M., Bentcheva, N. & Zaprianov A. 1998. Agribusiness/Economics Marketing Management, Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
Ministerial Council of Bulgaria. 1995. Annual Report of the Environmental Status in 1994. (Green book), Ministerial Council of Bulgaria Project, 12 December 1995., Sofia, Bulgaria.
Ministry of Environment. 1996. The process of environmental impacts and the world practice, Sofia, Bulgaria.
National Statistical Institute. 1992a. Environment 1991, Sofia, Bulgaria.
National Statistical Institute. 1992b. Environment 1992, Sofia, Bulgaria.
National Statistical Institute. 1995a. Environment 1993, Sofia, Bulgaria.
National Statistical Institute. 1995b. Environment 1994, Sofia, Bulgaria.
National Statistical Institute. 1996. Environment 1996, Sofia, Bulgaria.
The World Bank. 1991. Bulgaria - Crisis and transition to a market economy, The main report, Washington, D.C.
Trendafilov, R. 1995. Agrarian reform, IPK Racio-90, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Valchev, N. 1997. Cereal production restoration is important for Bulgarian agriculture progress, Agricultural Economics and Management, Sofia, Bulgaria.
TABLES
Table 1: Cultivated land in Bulgaria and on private farms /1990-1997/
Items 1985 1990 1995 1997
Thousand
ha Thousand
ha Private
Farms*
% Thousand
ha Private
farms
% Thousand
ha Private
farms
Total 6 169.3 6 159 11.6 6 164 72.3 6 203 79.8
Cultivated land 4 652.9 4 643 15.4 4 693 85.8 4 805 94.8
Arable land n.a** 3 856 13.7 3 998 89.9 4 298 95.4
Other land n.a n.a n.a 648 72.1 1 182 90.2
Area under crops n.a n.a n.a 3 350 93.3 3 116 97.4
Meadows 293.5 287 36.6 276 88.0 294 87.7
Cultivated and complex pastures 229.3 204 0.5 215 1.4 14 42.9
Permanent crops, berries and others 4 130.2 296 28.4 204 90.7 199 97.0
Common pastures and pastures 1 516.4 1 516 0 1 470 29.2 1 398 28.1
Source: Annual yearbook of Bulgaria 1998
*In the indicated source-"Private farms" include private farms and cooperatives land
**n.a -Not available.
Table 2: Deteriorated, polluted and degraded soils in the Republic of Bulgaria /1985/
Thousand ha
Total arable land 6 169.3 100.0
Cultivated land 4 652.9 75.4
Total deteriorated soils 824.4 17.7
Agricultural land fund 612.9 74.3
1. Deteriorated , of which 820.6 99.5
1.1.Coal output 16.5 2.0
1.2.Ore output 8.4 1.2
1.3.Non-metalliferous and building materials 10.4 1.3
1.4.Chemical industry 0.4 0. 05
1.5.Territory and village construction 784.1 95.5
1.5.1.Village construction 171.3 20.9
1.5.2.Industry engineering 298.6 36.4
1.5.3. Livestock farms 12.2 1.5
1.5.4.Technical infrastructure 2.0 0.2
1.5.5. Hydraulic engineering 131.2 16.0
1.5.6. Road and railway construction 150.5 18.3
1.5.7. Recreation construction 4.9 0.6
1.5.8.Ministry of Defence, Minisrty of Internal Affairs 13.4 1.6
1.6.Plant production 8.0 -
1.7.Animal production 3.0 -
1.8.Municipal and public services 0.6 0.6
2. Soils contaminated by heavy metals 41.1 0.9
3. Total degraded soils 1 752.6 37.7
3.1. Eroded soils 975.0 20.9
3.2. Acified soils 477.5 10.3
3.3 Surface-damped soils 300.1 6.4
3.4. Salinized soils 28.0 0.6
Table 3: Consumption of fertilizers and pesticides
1.Fertilizers (nutrient units, tonnes)
n.a
Nitrogenous ( N ) 
n.a
Phosphate ( P[2]0[5 ]) 
n.a
Potash ( K[2]0 ) 
n.a
Per 100 ha cultivated land (kg) 
Nitrogenous ( N ) 
Phosphate ( P[2] 0[5 ]) 
Potash ( K[2]0 ) 
2. Pesticides (nutrient units, tonnes)
n.a
Of which: Herbicides 
n.a
Per 100 ha cultivated land (kg) 
n.a
*Without private farms
Source: Annual yearbook of Bulgaria 1998
Table 4: Livestock numbers /thousand heads per 1^st January/
Species 1993 1995 1997 1998
Total Private
farms Total Private
farms Total Private
farms Total Private
farms
Cattle 973 488 638 578 582 567 612 601
Of which: Cows 489 295 351 325 358 353 389 385
Buffaloes 22 17 14 12 11 11 11 10
Pigs 2 679 837 1 986 1 088 1 500 1 247 1 480 1 354
Sheep 4 813 3 582 3 398 3 289 3 020 2 986 2 848 2 820
Goats 611 610 795 795 849 848 966 966
Horses 113 103 133 130 170 169 n.a n.a
Donkeys 303 303 275 275 286 286 n.a n.a
Mules and Hinnies 21 20 16 16 17 17 n.a n.a
Rabbits 383 361 517 514 667 667 n.a n.a
Poultry 19 872 12 001 19 126 13 688 16 227 13 501 14 766 14 099
Source: Annual yearbook of Bulgaria 1998
Table 5: Emission of contaminants into atmosphere /thousand tonnes/
Indicators 1994 1995 1996
Sulphuric oxides 1 469 1 477 1 420
Nitrogen oxides 298 265 259
Methane 534 507 501
Non-methane volatile compounds 393 351 309
Carbone oxide 932 832 623
Carbone dioxide 72 401 72 808 66 074
Dinitrogen oxide 49 49 48
Ammonia 25 84 83
Dust(non-toxic) 248 270 306
*Included data for contaminants from road transport, agriculture and househols
Source: Annual yearbook of Bulgaria 1998
Table 6: Expenditure on protection of the environment by use /million Levs/
Indicators 1992 1994 1996 % to 1992
Total 2 477.7 5 308.3 18 159.7 732.9
For water 1 197.3 2 426.0 6 751.3 563.9
For air 650.4 1 269.6 4 233.0 650.8
For soil 320.4 253.4 1 432.3 447.0
For Forest 26.9 85.3 516.2 1 918.9
For protected natural scenery 4.0 7.9 7.5 187.5
For hunting and fishing protects 8.2 17.9 64.4 785.3
For circulating water supply 95.2 306.8 1 703.0 1 992.6
For utilization and detoxication of waste 130.8 709.2 2 489.2 1 903.0
For noise protection 13.0 17.9 127.8 983.1
For scientific and research activity 31.5 19.3 87.0 276.2
For educational activity - - 16.8 -
For administrative activity - 43.7 178.0 407.3*
Others - 7.3 40.6 556.2*
For monitoring and control equipment - 144.0 512.6 355.9*
*For rows 13, 14 and 15: 1994=100;
Source: Annual yearbook of Bulgaria 1998
19 The strategy and the programme of the Government for improving the ecological situation in the country were given in the national report, read by the President of the Republic of Bulgaria at the UN Conference on Environment and Development "Brazil 1992". The report is grounded on the four principle priorities of our time - security, democracy, ecology and economy, formulated by Gro Harlem Bruntland from Norway in the paper of the International Commission of Environment and Development "Our Common Future" (1987).
<title>REU Technical Series - 61. CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPEAN SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE NETWORK: first workshop - </title>
<section>1</section>
COUNTRY REPORT ON THE PRESENT ENVIRONMENTAL SITUATION IN AGRICULTURE
- CZECH REPUBLIC -
Tomas Ratinger and Jaroslav Prazan
Research Institute of Agricultural Economics, Prague
INTRODUCTION
At the time the reform process started, the Czech republic was more than self-sufficient in the production of the main agricultural commodities. High food consumption per capita was dominated by quite a large number of meat and dairy products. It was recognized as a success of the Czech farming system mainly in comparison with other countries of the Soviet block. In fact, the food system was driven to high production and consumption by planning and ideological demagogy at the expense of economic efficiency and the quality of life. Very often, the misallocation of resources was reduced only by the high cost of pre-reform production, but one also had to question the concentration of collective farms on the production of non-agricultural goods having practically no link to agricultural production (neither outputs nor means).
Highly intensive, very industrialized, agricultural production led to the severe pollution of water; degradation, to a large extent, of its own essential resource - soil; and gave little respect to the well-being of farm animals and the surrounding environment. Collectivized agriculture also completely changed the social environment in rural areas, mainly by eroding traditional habits and values.
It is evident that such a system could not be considered to be sustainable in a democratic system in a market economy. A set of institutional reforms and policy instruments had to be defined and implemented to create incentives for the sector to improve its sustainability. Obviously, the process had to be sequenced by introducing reforms giving different priorities to various policy goals instruments.
This paper tries to investigate if the preference was given to economic viability of farming system, environment protection, technological innovation or social feasibility when politicians designed their agricultural reforms and stabilization policies.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSITION AND STRUCTURE OF PROPERTY RIGHTS
The effect of privatization and the redefinition of property rights on natural resources
A lack of responsibility and interest of individuals in nationalized firms and collectivized agriculture is usually considered to be the reason for the malfunctioning of the centrally planned system, particularly in respect to sustainability. While many authors (Begg, 1991; Brooks et al; 1991; Swinnen; 1994) emphasized that the economic efficiency objective created reforms, particularly privatization in CEEC, Ratinger & Rabinowicz (1997) argued that the ideology that assets and distribution have to be primarily owned by individuals was what shaped Czech land reform. Analysing the institutional, especially the legal framework of ownership reform (Land Law, Act No. 229/1991), four principles can be identified (Ratinger& Rabinowicz, 1998):
* legal ownership rights are the basis of property rights;
* former injustices (expropriation) must be rectified by the restitution of legal ownership to rightful owners;
* obscured collective property rights must disappear;
* the state should not directly own or control factors of production (land, capital and labour).
The reform was implemented in three ways reflecting the above principles - restitution, transformation of collective farms into private cooperatives, and the sale of state assets.
Restitution rules restricted the eligibility to individuals, Czech citizens whose assets were expropriated after February 1948 and obliged the current user (later Land Fund) to give back the assets physically only if the eligible person was a farmer or his/her rights were transferred to any farming organization. The restituent was compensated if the original assets could not be returned (Decree of the Czech government from 4 December 1991).
Since collectivized land was never expropriated and did not constitute collective farm assets, the transformation procedure focused only on non-land assets. The originally collectivized assets were allocated to the owners or their heirs. The rest (newly created assets) was distributed to land owners (50 percent), original asset owners (30 percent) and member workers (20 percent) in the form of shares. The individual recipient had the right of disposal of the share. If the shareholder wanted to farm independently from the successor organization (transformed cooperative), the withdrawal of the property had to be settled within a period of 90 days. If the withdrawal was for non-agricultural purposes, the settlement could be delayed until the end of 1999. The shareholders who became members of the successor organization subordinated the rights of disposal of their shares to the internal rules governing the new entity, which are, in turn, subject to the Commercial Code.
Although state farms could be privatized within the framework of large scale privatization, due to the very large number of restitution claims only a few of them were privatized in this way. The majority of state farms were sold in privatization projects approved by the Ministry of Privatization. In both cases, however, land was excluded from privatization. Non-land assets could be acquired not only by individuals but also by legal entities. This definitely contravenes the schemes as land is supposed to be sold only to individuals.
In 1991, the Land Fund of the Czech Republic was established to watch over state land and other property before these were to be privatized. Most of the property has been leased to allow farming activities to continue.
Liberalization
To ensure that the transition from the centrally-planned economy to a market-led one preserves sufficient stability, a strict macro framework has been settled: the establishment of fiscal credibility, providing nominal anchors (low rate of inflation) through a nominal exchange rate backed up by tight credit and a temporary freeze on wages, and current account convertibility. Complete reform has been sequenced further to market liberalization, privatization, taxation reform (income tax, VAT, new health and social care payments), trade liberalization (less protection, fewer subsidies, more competition from abroad), liberalization of wages and capital account convertibility (Begg, 1992). It is obvious that those are overlapping processes, some of them could be done overnight (price liberalization), while others lasted longer (privatization) (V.Klaus, 1992).
In the middle of 1990, during the first reform, the government removed the legal and administrative barriers to market entry (and exit in 1991) thereby both allowing and stimulating the disintegration of markets. At the same time, the cut in the deficiency payment, (initially compensated for by the lump sum of CZK 140 per person per month) ended with different price ratios for producers and consumers. However, prices remained under the governmental control untill January 1991. Full price liberalization has not yet been completed. While all prices of manufactured goods, including agricultural and food products, were liberalized during 1991, very sensitive housing prices, railway tariffs and few other services have remained under state supervision and have gradually been raised to their expected "market" level.
Price liberalization brought with it a significant shift in price structure and a tremendous adjustment on both the consumer and producer sides. Consumer prices jumped by 58 percent and real income of households dropped by 27 percent in 1991. Consumers appeared to be able to adjust quickly their consumption pattern by adopting budget constrained utility maximizing behaviour. (Ratinger, 1992). As a consequence, food consumption fell by more than 17 percent in 1991. Obviously, this caused oversupply on the agricultural market with a significant depression of farmers' prices. The situation developed most dramatically in the meat market, where supply surpluses were multiplied by the effort of farmers to reduce the size of their herds. With large (financial) assistance from the government, most of the surpluses were exported between the second half of 1991 and 1993. This calmed the situation on the domestic market. Markets of the majority of agricultural commodities have been
more or less balanced since that time. The exceptions are the milk and sugar markets where adjustments have been slow (or slowed down) due to, besides other factors, expectations of the introduction of quota regimes when the domestic policy is harmonized with the CAP (Doucha, 1999). In autumn 1998, the pork market collapsed, but not as a consequence of the post-liberalization adjustment.
The Development of the economic framework at farm level
The situation in the national economy
The gross domestic product dropped by 20 percent during the first three years of reform. Between 1994 and 1997, the economy enjoyed moderate growth as a result of the success of macroeconomic stabilization. However, insufficient economic and institutional reforms and slow restructuring has returned the economy to recession since the middle of 1997. The social impact of the recession in the early 1990s resulted in a fall in real income while the recent economic slump has brought with it a sharp increase in unemployment (from only 2.9 percent in 1995 to 8.1 percent in January 1999).
Agricultural credit
The land lease scheme (land cannot be accepted as a collateral) and the bad economic performance of the whole agricultural sector made access for farmers to bank credits difficult (ilar, Doucha, 1999). As a result, investment activity decreased by 70 percent between 1989 and 1993. The government offered several schemes to encourage investment giving slight preference to new farming entrepreneurs (family farms, partnerships and farming companies).
In 1993, the Support and Guarantee Fund for Agriculture and Forestry (SGFAF) was founded. This fund offers guarantees for bank credits and refunds a portion of interests paid by farmers. The maximum level of guarantee ranges from 30 percent to 80 percent. The level of interest subsidies is defined by the SGFAF in compliance with its real financial possibilities. The interest rate paid by a client has to amount to 1 percent at least. In the period of 1994 - 1998, the bank loan interest rate for agriculture was on average 17.58 percent^20 and the average interest rate subsidy from the SGFAF amounted to 12.32 percent. This means that the nominal interest rate paid by a client was reduced to 5.26 percent (ilar, Doucha, 1999). As a result of the operation of the support and guarantee fund, investment activity in agriculture has improved since 1994. The annual real investment level was 75 percent higher between 1995 and 1997 than in 1993.
However, arguments have already appeared that highly supported credits have not sufficiently influenced the restructuring of Czech agriculture. To the contrary, it seems that, together with other measures and instruments of agricultural policy, the supported credits have functioned like income subsidies and have enabled the less effective farm structure emerging during the first years of the reform to petrify. SGFAF operations have to a large extent, substituted normal agricultural credits with stricter conditions, emitting distorted signals to the market (ilar, Doucha, 1999).
Land market
In the pre-reform period, 39 percent of the total agricultural land (TAL) was state land. The rest was formally private, but almost completely collectivized. The restitution process restored the property rights of private persons in nearly 80 percent of TAL. In 1993, state land subjected to privatization was transferred to the Land Fund and leased to expected owners. This accounted for 22 percent of TAL in 1995. An area of 202 220 hectares (4.7 percent of TAL) was retained as public land operated by public organizations.
Three million hectares of agricultural land was returned to three million owners. Thus, the average size of this ownership is around a one hectare. Most of the restituted land was not physically taken by owners, but directly transferred for renting to successor organizations. In this way, 89 percent of land used by the former collective farms was transferred to new cooperatives between 1992 and 1993. Nevertheless, 700 thousand hectares of agricultural land (16.4 percent of TAL) was physically returned to former owners by the end of 1994 including land reclaimed from new cooperatives. Three quarters of this land was in small plots of less than 20 hectares. Consequently, four fifths of the land is leased. A quarter of this area is still state land and leased by the Land Fund. According to the Agro-census of 1995, 95 percent of land on which corporate farms operated was rented. Family farms used more of their own land, but, nevertheless, the share of leased land was still over
70 percent. The rental rate is usually low, around 1 percent of the administrative price of land.
From surveys which were conducted by VUZE, land transactions accounted for only 8 500 hectares (between 1993 and 1996). This indicates relatively low interest in investing in land and points to some barriers to land exchange. Currently, it seems there are three objections hampering the land market: the national principle in land ownership; the difficulty of demarcation of the plots (Doucha, 1999); and the awaited privatization of state land.
Between 1989 and 1997 the TAL changed only slightly (a contraction of only 0.4 percent). However, an area of fallow land appeared and increased to 100 000 hectares (2.3 percent of TAL). Also, a slight shift in the land use structure was observed, with only 141 000 hectares of arable land converted into grassland over the same period.
The development of input and output prices
Price scissors opened between almost stagnating farm gate prices and jumping input prices (of 69 percent) during the first three years of the reform. In reaction to a such dramatic price change, agricultural producers reduced rapidly the consumption of most inputs - mainly fertilizers and pesticides. The application of fertilizers dropped by more than 60 percent between 1989 and 1993. Since 1994, the price development of agricultural outputs and inputs has been parallel and the consumption of intensification inputs slightly increased.
Contrary to price development which was negative to agricultural producers, the assortment and quality of inputs, particularly agro-technical services, improved significantly over the transitional period and this process is likely to continue. Suppliers of services are specialized firms and very often farmers or farming companies which offer their extra capital and labour capacities.
Structural development
Farm structure (operation form, size)
Since land reforms were introduced in 1992, Czech farms have passed through essential organizational change. In 1989, individual farmers accounted only for less than 1 percent in the TAL, while the sector was dominated by collective farms with more than 60 percent and state farms with one quarter of the TAL. Remaining area was operated by various types of public companies, not necessarily specialized in agricultural production. The most dramatic change was observed between 1992 and 1993, when farming entities were forced to adopt new legal forms.
Most collective farms were turned into new private production cooperatives in 1992 (until 28 January 1993). Land owners, whether they became cooperative members or not, usually leased the land and assets to new cooperatives. At that time, only 11 percent of former collectivized land was withdrawn for use in new cooperatives. This land was used by successor farming joint stock companies, limited liability companies and individual farmers (family farms). Since land continued to be withdrawn from cooperatives, the area used by cooperatives consequently dropped from 53 percent of TAL (as for January 1993) to 43 percent of TAL in 1995. Most state farms terminated their agricultural activities by the end of 1994. Some of them ceased to exist at all (160 of the 303 original state farms were liquidated by the end of 1995). An area of more than one million hectares used by state farms in 1989 dropped to only 19 thousand hectares (0.4 percent of TAL) in 1995
Nearly one third of TAL is utilized by individual farmers and partnerships (1997); the rest is managed in a corporate way. Family farms in this context also involve part-time farming. Farming joint stock companies, which appeared as an alternative resulting from the transformation of collective farms, joint agricultural enterprises on collective farms and the privatization of state farms within the framework of large-scale privatization (voucher method), have been a minor type of farm business operating on only 9 percent of TAL so far. Limited liability firms covered almost 20 percent of agricultural land in 1997. They originated predominantly from the process of privatization of state farming enterprises.
Production structure
Most of the non-agricultural activities^21 were quickly separated from the collective farms as a consequence of the abolition of the restrictions on emerging new businesses in the early 1990s. While shifts in land ownership and farm operational structures are consequences of legal changes and the administrative process, the structure of production has mostly been influenced by depressed markets for agricultural products. From 1989 to 1997, total gross agricultural output (in 1989 prices) contracted by 29 percent. Livestock production dropped by 35 percent and crop production by 21 percent. The ratio between crop and livestock gross output shifted from 41:59 to 46:54.
The markets for animal products (milk, beef, pork, poultry) and sugar beet were affected most seriously by the price adjustment, while the market for cereals was touched only slightly and has improved since 1995. Opposed to that, the oilseed market has expanded since the beginning of the reform. The changed market situation caused a radical reduction of cattle herds and numbers of other animals. By spring 1998, the number of cattle fell about 52 percent compared to 1989, pigs about 17 percent and poultry by only about 10 percent. The intensity (use of variable inputs, and consequently yields) of all types of production dropped as the new price relationships encouraged a lower input strategy during the transition period (1990-1997). Despite these dramatic changes, the Czech Republic remains self-sufficient in basic foods.
More than half of the national herd of cattle is to be found in cooperatives, but almost all the beef and milk production of state farms was transferred to private (non cooperative) hands. Pigs and poultry moved out of the cooperatives to a large extent. Forty-nine percent of pigs and 62 percent of poultry are in farming companies, partnerships and family farms.
The degree of specialization of agricultural producers was low in the pre-reform period. State farms were a bit more specialized^22 with 12 percent in crop production and 17 percent in animal production, while 96 percent of collective farms had mixed production. This phenomena is persisting in post-reform farming. The most specialized among agricultural enterprises are farming join-stock companies with 30 percent of farms oriented to animal production.
Since the beginning of agrarian reform, the average size of farms has decreased significantly (from 842 hectare in 1989 to 41 hectares in 1997). And this is not only due to an emergence of individual farmers. The average size of former collective farms, today cooperatives, fell from 2 500 hectares to 1 086 hectares over the same period.
The increase of full-time farming was reflected by the growth of the average size of family operated farms from 4 hectares in 1989 to 14 hectares in 1997. Eighty percent of individual farmers are smaller than 10 hectares, with an average size of 3.8 hectares and covering only 12 percent of single farming land (4.9 percent of TAL). This is a considerable change since 1993 when small plots occupied only 1.7 percent of TAL. On the other hand, family farms with more than 100 hectares occupied 51 percent of individually managed land in 1997.
Performance of farms - its effect on rural development
During the transition period, the use and composition of factors of production have significantly changed. First of all, labour moved out from farms very rapidly. Labour resembled a variable input adjusting accordingly to declining output. The total labour force fully engaged in agricultural decreased from more than half a million to 200 thousand in 1997 (a fall of 62 percent). Much of this labour outflow is associated with the separation of non-agricultural production from farms (52 percent of the change 1989-1995) and cuts in excessive managerial staff (19 percent of the change 1989-1995), but a lot of the labour outflow is associated with the reduction of production. The cut in agricultural labour caused problems only in a few industrially underdeveloped regions (MZe, 1994), local unemployment rising up to 8 percent. But the national economy, in general, offered enough opportunities for employment outside agriculture so that the released agricultural labour force did not
affect national unemployment figures.
Consequently, the labour to land ratio dropped from 15 per 100 hectares in collective farms in 1989 to 6-7 per 100 hectares in cooperatives and farming companies today. Since family farms have a smaller proportion of livestock production than large scale farming and owner labour is employed more than 8 hours per day, their labour intensity is around 3 people per 100 hectares. Overall, average labour productivity increased about 88 percent between 1992 and 1997. The operational efficiency of capital however, decreased. This is particularly true for original or transformed collective farms, from where capital, particularly fixed assets, is moving out only slowly. In spite of the structural changes and the decline of output, more than 99 percent of total agricultural land remained in agricultural production, hence land productivity fell as well.
Three million owners of land plus some others acquired nearly 200 billion state and collective farm assets, 120 billion of that being fixed assets. Personal capital in agricultural organizations is under the 40 percent level. This is because a large proportion of privatized assets have not been repaid yet and also because a large proportion of assets are in the possession of individuals having no interest in leaving it in agriculture. Certainly, less than one tenth of owners want to work in agriculture (only 4.6 percent of the total work in agriculture).
The share of agriculture in GDP decreased to almost only two percent. A characteristic feature of Czech agricultural production is a high share of intermediate inputs (68 percent in 1997) in the final output, hence a low formation of value added. Despite the release of labour, labour costs account for nearly 70 percent of the gross value added to market prices. In total, the agricultural sector generated losses over the whole transitional period. The situation slightly improved in the second half of the 1990s, which might suggest that the adjustment progressed. On the other hand, governmental transfers to agriculture significantly increased at the same time (subsidies on production tripled between 1994 and 1997).
The low performance of the sector was also mirrored by the development of agricultural wages. The dynamics of real income growth has been substantially lower in agriculture than in the rest of the economy, and thus agriculture belongs among the sectors with the worst parity (20 percent below) to the national average. However, according to the sociological survey of VUZE, between 60 and 70 percent of households depending on agricultural income considered this income sufficient to cover their basic needs in 1994, and that probably still holds. More than 80 percent of those employed in farming companies and cooperatives work less 60 hours per week, while almost 70 percent of individual farmers work more than 60 hours (Horská, Spná, 1996).
THE IMPACT OF AGRICULTURE ON THE ENVIRONMENT
Environmental degradation caused by agriculture
Agriculture and soil protection
Plant and animal production
Over 50 percent of the total territory is used for agricultural purposes. The agricultural land area is fairly stable, with a slight downward tendency. The area of arable land has been decreasing slightly, giving place to fallow land, meadows, pastures and forest. In the period 1990-1996, the proportion of grasslands increased by 3 percent. However, the magnitude of this trend was insufficient. The share of arable land at 72 percent is unacceptably high and is amongst the highest in Europe. Further growth in the proportion of permanent grassland and forest is necessary. Traditionally, around 50 percent of the arable land is sown with cereals, between one quarter (1997) and one third (1989) of the arable land is used for forage production, and the rest is covered by potatoes, sugar beet, rape seed, flax etc. Obviously, changes in forage production are associated with the decline of cattle (beef and dairy) production. The production of both cereals and forage relaxed in
intensity, measured by yields and fertilizers consumption (CSO 1998).
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability at farm level
According to estimates by the Research Institute of Melioration and Soil Protection, close to 70 percent of agricultural land was jeopardized by water and wind erosion in 1996. Erosion was classified from slight to medium over most of the country ,with the average annual loss of soil about 5 000 kg/ha of arable land (Praan, Kí, 1997). This is mainly due to a big proportion of arable land being located on slopes. Usually the off-site effects (silting rivers or water reservoirs, contamination of water etc.) are documented. It is estimated that the social cost of the off-site effects of erosion might amount CZK 20 bn (around 20 percent of the agricultural final output) each year (Praan, Kí, 1997). The use of heavy machinery in many regions resulted in severe soil compaction. Unfortunately, there is lack of information on the extent and cost of that degradation.
Besides a significant reduction in the consumption of industrial fertilizers, the decline of animal production has also affected soil fertility. This has been due to first: lower production and consequently a lower application of manure; and second, a lower need for forage has constrained possibilities for rotation. One may see that farmers have tried to avoid this effect by reducing the intensity of forage production since the number of cattle dropped to half and the area used for forage only by 25 percent during the transition.
All of the above mentioned factors have contributed to a slowly declining content of humus in the soil (erosion by run off, declining animal production followed by a lower input of organic components). Obviously, the process of unbalanced consumption on soil fertility the impact of which is less observable in the short run, might threaten farm production and sustainability in the future. On the other hand, extensively utilized intensive technology might threaten economic viability in the short run.
Contamination of the soil has been inherited mainly from the environmentally improper mining of mineral materials and the expansion of the metallurgical industry during the period of communist industrialization. However, unacceptable levels of heavy metals have been detected only locally, and the extent of pollution has not been very significant.
Agriculture and Water pollution
Plant and animal production (management of water pollutants)
The use of fertilizers and the input of manure was relatively high during the communist period. In the middle of the 1980s, the nitrogen balance reached more than 100 kg/ha of agricultural land (Klír, 1998). The cost minimizing behaviour of farmers resulted in a rapid fall in the application of industrial fertilizers during the first years of transition. Due to a structural shift away from animal production, the application of manure dropped as well. As a result, the biggest improvement of agricultural nitrogen balance in OECD countries was observed in the Czech Republic, i.e. down over 80 percent to 51 kg/ha of agricultural land in the period 1988 - 1996. This figure might still be over the OECD average value of 17 kg/ha of total agricultural land. However, it is close to the EU average of 46 kg/ha, and definitely substantially lower than in Benelux or Denmark (Brower, Loewe, 1998).
Although there has been an upward tendency in the use of plant protection substances in recent years, their level still remained below half of the pre-transition figures. In 1996, nearly four thousand tonnes of active substances of plant protection products were used in the Czech Republic, which, in turn, corresponds to 0.91 kg/ha, compared with the application of 2.42 kg of active ingredients per hectare in 1980s.
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability at farm level
Czech water resources are relatively small, and the intensity of use significantly higher than the OECD average. Agriculture is not a big user of water resources, but it is one of the biggest water polluters. This is mainly due to concentrated animal production units with improper manure management, and agricultural land use, with 72 percent arable land, consolidated into large fields (24 hectareson average). Such land management also allows the absorption of only a small proportion of rainfall, while the rest with a high content of nutrients runs off. Most of the country is subject to floods, and in some regions a significant deficit in ground water has appeared.
The sharp reduction in the use of fertilizers and pesticides did not seem to have a substantial influence on water quality. In the 1990-1996 period, a modest decrease in ammonia nitrogen, organic pollution and phosphates concentration in major rivers (not observed in small watercourses) was reported. The concentration of nitrates remained roughly the same. Only in the case of organic pollution, oil and NO[2], was there a small and gradual improvement. It seems that the level of contamination is affected mostly by a large number of point pollution sources. While on average the concentration of cattle per farm and per hectare of agricultural land decreased by 50 percent, concentration of pigs and chicken remained almost unchanged. Thus a large number of pig and poultry farms, with a large concentration of animals and still using inappropriate systems for the management of organic fertilizers and slurry, have been responsible for most of the water pollution.
Water pollution causes off-site damage rather than problems for the farms themselves. Its effect on farm sustainability can be indirect if the local community or society as a whole is concerned with the negative implications of polluted water and thereby requires strict measures for improving water quality. Moreover, a loss of water (ground water deficit) and the run-off of nutrients affect yields and consequently farmers' income.
Air pollution
The contribution of Czech agriculture to the total emissions of the main greenhouse gases is 5 percent, slightly lower than the OECD average of 6.7 percent.
High natural values - biodiversity, wildlife habitants, landscape
A high proportion of habitats have been destroyed, especially wetlands, semi-natural meadows, field banks, scattered trees, small woodlands, and ponds. All Czech land was changed by agriculture and forestry. In some regions, semi- natural habitats were formed due to traditional farming, but the proportion of such areas is relatively small. It is estimated that 35 percent of mammals, 43 percent of birds and 36 percent of fish are endangered. There is an increasing danger to some grass ecological systems, connected with the decrease in the intensity of agricultural production-leaving meadows and pastures fallow decreases the species composition, supports the spreading of invasive and non-indigenous species, an invasion by tree species and thus leads to the disappearance of rare species. These factors have a substantial influence on fauna and flora, especially because of the relatively short period of time affecting the extent and numbers of the individual species. A
significant part of valuable areas are managed in Landscape Protected Areas.
Effects of environmental degradation on agriculture
It is obvious that a loss of fertility due to the run-off of nutrients from eroded fields has either to increase cost of production or to reduce yields. In addition, the compaction of soil generates higher costs in cultivating the land. However, these phenomena are hardly recognized by farmers, rather declines in yields have always been accounted for by insufficient application of fertilizers because of a lack of operation capital.
THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIETY ON THE AGRICULTURAL ENVIRONMENT
Institutional change within the environmental policy
Since political changes in November 1989, environmental policy has been institutionalized in the Ministry of Environment together with separate departments in other ministries and policy objectives have been spelled out. However, the governments has been constrained by the predominance of a need for economic growth over the need for sustainable livelihood from the beginning. Early governments concentrated very much on reducing pollution, particularly, air pollution which seriously harmed nature, especially forests, and human health. Most attention was paid to technological improvements for the largest (state) polluters (coal power stations). Restrictive legislation was adopted to prevent the emergence of new producer - polluters, while those already existing were treated rather softly.
Environmental policy related to agriculture
An agri-environmental policy which would be an integral component of agricultural policy and environmental policy has not been formulated in the Czech Republic so far. Many instruments declared as agri-environmental measures often fulfilled other objectives and their contribution to environmental improvement was negligible (Praan, 1998).
Agri-environmental legislation
The framework for agri-environmental policy is given by overall environmental legislation and sector specific legislation. The first one rests on three key laws: the Environmental Act (law No. 17/1992) incorporating fundamental relations and links of environment protection policies; the Law on the State Environmental Fund (law No. 388/1991) completing the above mentioned act with financing and budgeting; Law No. 244/1992 including ecology among the criteria for the selection of all relevant human activities in the landscape. The second one includes The law on Fertilizers and Norms, Legal Restrictions, on Organic Fertilizer Management on Farms and Law 252/1997 with the accompanying Decree 341/1997 which both define programmes for supporting production of high natural values on farms. These legal bases would already permit the creation of a comprehensive agri-environmental policy rich in its instruments and measures if objectives were well spelled out. The last mentioned law
will require prompt revision to make it fullly compatible with the EU Act 2078/92.
Current policy instruments
Current agricultural policy is poor in environmental instruments. Beside restrictions on the use of improper polluting technologies, there are a few support programmes: investment support by the SGFAF in the programmes FARMER and LANDSCAPE, direct payments and investment grants from the state budget.
Because particular directions of investment support by the SGFAF have not been reported, it is impossible to assess the impact of that instrument. The objectives of direct payments and investment grants from the state budget varied substantially from year to year. To illustrate the recent targets of the budgetary outlays, we present the structure of 1997:
1. Afforestation: An area of 433 hectares was converted to forest with a investment subsidy of CZK 17.1 millions. It was a considerable decline (of 37 percent) in spending on afforestation compared with 1996.
2. Reconstruction of vineyards, hop gardens and orchards: The investment subsidy amounted to CZK 74.5 millions, which ,in turn, affected an area of 978 hectares of permanent crops.
3. Cultural landscape management: Direct payment of CZK 1 669 millions in exchange for the proper management of permanent grassland on an area of 524 thousand hectares.
4. Support for apiculture: Direct income support of CZK 76.3 millions.
5. Support for extensive animal production on pastures in mountain and sub-mountain regions: Headage payment of CZK 278 millions to stimulate conversion from dairy to extensive beef meat production.
6. Support for biological plant protection: This programme stimulated, by an amount of less than CZK 10 million, the substitution of chemical plant protection by the less harmful biological one.
The government has spent on these programmes over CZK 2 billion, the total area benefiting from that budget amounting to 12.3 percent of TAL. Despite the intention to present these programmes as social contracts for the public good, their actual character was close to direct income support since getting a subsidy was not subjected to the effective monitoring of the delivery of environmental goods (benefits). From this point of view, such programmes would not be compatible with the EU ACT 2078/92. Because the primary goal of these programmes is a transfer to farmers' income, the institutional back-up for achieving environmental improvements (benefits) is missing. Neither an extension network nor a monitoring body has been yet introduced.
The national programme for the conservation and utilization of the genetic fund (micro-organizms, plants and animals) was supported by CZK 48 millions in 1997 (CZK 45 millions in 1996). Another essential contribution to environmental and landscape stability should come from the land consolidation programme. For this purpose, over a half a billion crowns was spent in each of the last two years (1996, 1997). However, the programme has progressed only slowly, hence anyenvironmentally positive impact is rather negligible at present.
Farmers have had access to Ministry of Environment programmes, but the actual support and effect is small.
agri-environmental policy and its measures
Current policy has effectively prevented the neglect and degradation of grasslands, and has modestly reduced a further increase of the off-site effects of erosion by turning some of the eroded land into grassland and forests and has supported conversion from intensive dairy production to less ecologically harmful extensive beef and sheep production, particularly in LFA.
On the other hand, such a policy has not addressed a number of other serious environmental issues such as the preservation and creation of high natural values including the cultural landscape in all its aspects, environmentally sensitive farming practices mainly in respect to preventing further pollution of water by nitrates, and targeted technological innovation in order to eliminate point pollution resources.
The government has concentrated only on two instruments; restrictions and subsidies. If, as we pointed out in the introduction, behind the reforms there was an implicit wish to restitute individual responsibility of individuals, no particular emphasis is given to this aspect in the implementation of the agri-environmental policy. A lack of evidence toward the spontaneous production of environmental welfare or benefit points to a lack of farmers` awareness of the negative ecological impact of agricultural activities, of what is socially demanded, and how to produce this benefit. Therefore, there is a need to improve in the dissemination of information, the building up of extension services, and the issuing of guidelines (a codex) for the best environmentally friendly agricultural practices. Some of these aspects have already been recognized by policy makers and will be (it seems) included in the Agricultural Agenda for the next 4 years.
The importance of national environmental associations and organizations to environmental policy
In general, early reform governments paid only little attention to the role of civil society organizations in the transition. As a reaction, most of the non-governmental organizations concentrated on the development and implementation of individual projects contributing to the improvement of the environment, more less from a local or particular perspective, while they were effectively discouraged from suggesting and debating agri-environmental policy objectives and measures. The greatest concern of non-governmental organizations, particularly the largest one, the Czech Union of Nature Conservation, has been landscape management and the preservation of natural values.
With preparations progressing for EU accession, the attitudes of both sides, the government and non-governmental organizations, to mutual communication has been slowly changing. A number of Czech non-profit organizations and associations for environmental protection have learned from their EU colleagues and have been encouraged to start the preparation of programmes or programme frameworks which are flexible enough to fit in with future governmental and EU structural programmes. The extensive programme for improving the environmental situation in the Bile Karpaty region (headed by the Foundation for Organic farming and Czech Union of Nature Conservation) might be a good example of an EU like approach to institutional cooperation. The programme is rich on agro-components, designed to fit in with the objectives and condition of the SAPARD programme.
CONCLUSIONS
One of the most important observations of transitional conduct in agriculture is that of the overall relaxation of production intensity. It might be judged as an opportunity for establishing an environmentally friendly farming system in the long run. Nonetheless, extensively utilized intensive technologies might seriously threaten in the short run the economic viability of farms. It has to be stressed that less intensive production originates in a lack of operational capital rather than in ecological concerns. When interviewing farmers and production specialists (VUZE, 1999), respondents always complained that the current economic situation of farmers did not allow them to utilize their land and assets optimally; intensively enough. From this perspective, the adoption of CAP after accession might return the farming system to the methods of high intensity.
Farmers' behaviour also cannot be separated from their wish to generate maximum income from recently acquired property. Thus, conservation, or a claim to environmentally sensitive extensive farming practices, always comes into conflict with this aspect of land property rights. Therefore, only a fully institutionally equipped agri-environmental policy with well-defined objectives and powers can contribute to overcoming this conflict.
REFERENCES
Begg, D. 1991. Czechoslovakia, Political Economy 3.
Brooks, K. et al. 1991. Agriculture and the transition to the market, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5(4), pp. 149-161.
Brower, F. et Lowe, 1998. Discussion paper, LEI DLO, Den Haag.
Czech Statistical Office. 1998. Past and Present of Agriculture through Statistics, Prague.
Doucha, T. et al. 1999. Vývoj agrárního sektoru R v období 1989 -1997, Working paper no.52, VÚZE, Prague.
Klír. 1998. Materials for OECD report, Unpublished, VURV, Praha.
Horská, H. & Spená, D. 1996. Signály zmn sociálního postavení zemdlc, Working paper no. 30, VUZE, Prague.
Ministry of Agriculture. 1994-1998. Reports on Czech Agriculture, Annual reports, Prague.
Praan, J. 1998. Koncepce zemdlské politiky R v oblasti ivotního prostedí, Discussion paper, MA, Prague.
Praan, J. et al. 1994. Vybrané otázky TUR v zemdlství, Working paper no. 14, VÚZE, Prague.
Praan & Kí. 1997. Vliv zemdlství na ivotní , Working paper no. 26, VÚZE, Prague.
Ratinger, T. 1994. Trade off between the economic goals of the agrarian reform and environment protection ideas in the Czech Republic, in Naturschutz and Landschaftspflege, Collection of papers of the 3rd conference of OGA, Vienna.
Ratinger, T. & Rabinowicz, E. 1997. Changes in farming structures in the Czech Republic as a result of land reform and privatization. In Agricultural privatization land reforms and farm restructuring in Central and Eastern Europe, ed. Swinnen, J., Buckwell, A., Matijs, E., Ashgate, Aldershod.
Swinnen, J. (ed.). 1994. Policy and Institutional Reform in Central European Agriculture, Avebury, Aldershot.
ilar, J. & Doucha, T. 1999. Credit support scheme provided by the SGFAF-R Document for the OECD conference, Moscow, 10-12 January, 1999.
VÚZE 1999. Interviews on competitiveness, A working material for the FAO TCP/CEH/8821 project, Prague.
TABLES
Table 1: Use of land (thousand hectares)
Year Total Agricu-ltural Land Arable Land Perma-nent Crops Gardens Meadows Pastures Share of Arable Land in TAL Conve-rsion to Grassland Farmers per hectare of TAL
Source: CSO
Table 2: Price indices
Price indices 1989 1993 1997
Input prices 100% 169% 232%
Farm gate prices 100% 119% 152%
Consumer food prices 100% 204% 258%
CPI 100% 231% 327%
Source: CSO
Table 3: Application of fertilizers (kg/ha)
Crop year 1989/90 1990/91 1992/93 1994/95 1996/97 Index
Total fertilizers 217.9 121.8 82.0 97.2 91.3 42%
Nitrogen 98.5 73.3 55.8 66.8 64.4 65%
Phosphorus 63.5 25.8 14.8 18.2 15.7 25%
Potash 55.9 22.7 11.4 12.2 11.2 20%
Source: CSO
Table 4: National Economy Indicators
Unit 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997
GDP in constant prices 1994 CZK billions 1 445 1 228 1 156 1 222 1 282
GDP deflator index 1 1.62 2.21 2,7 3,16
CPI index 1 1.72 2.31 2.77 3.27
Government budget balance CZK billions -1.2 -8.4 1.1 7.2 -15.7
Current account balance CZK billions 3.4 -50.2 -100.1
Unemployment % rate 4.1 3.5 2.9 5.2
Wages real index 1.00 0.70 0.80 0.93 1.03
Exchange rate CZK/USD 15 29.49 29.2 26.6 31.7
GDP growth real index 1.00 0.85 0.80 0.85 0.89
Source: MA (1998)
Table 5: Gross Agricultural Production (CZK millions)
Item 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 Index 1997/89
Crop Production 44 694 43 072 37 387 35 694 35 138 79%
Animal Production 63 939 53 611 45 672 46 337 41 665 65%
GAO total 108 633 96 683 83 059 82 031 76 803 71%
Crop Production Share 41% 45% 45% 44% 46% 
Animal Production Share 59% 55% 55% 56% 54% 
Total Labour 53 3057 410 911 270 849 221 620 200 590 38%
Labour Productivity Index 100% 115% 150% 182% 188% 
Source. CSO
Table 6: Production structure
CR EU-15
Item Total Corporate Sole 
farms farmers 
Average area of surveyed farms (ha) 131.9 1 000.0 34.2 17.5
-farms over 5 hectares (ha) 186.1 1 144.9 48.6 38.2
Share of enterprises with more then 100 hectares (%) 90.4 99.6 60.1 39.7
Share of arable land (%) 80.1 81.3 76.2 56.6
Share of enterprises (%) having - Cattle 65.5 73.4 64.4 25.9
- Pigs 53.6 60.8 52.8 16.0
- Poultry 47.4 16.7 50.8 31.4
Number of animals per farm (thousand) - Cattle 109.1 797.9 20.9 44.7
- Pigs 249.0 1925.5 31.6 95.1
- Poultry 1 932.5 42 419.1 436.4 426.0
Concentration of animals
- Cattle (heads/100 ha AL)
- Pigs (heads/100 ha AL) 126.3 143.9 64.1 154.2
- Poultry (heads/100 ha AL) 866.2 870.3 852.0 1353.4
Share of own land (%) 11.1 5.4 30.2 59.4
Source: CSO, MA (1998), Eurostat
Source: MA (1994) -MA(1998)
Table 7: Real wage growth
Agriculture 149.8 95.9 95.3 100.0 108.0 112.9
National average 116.4 81.2 92.8 100.0 108.7 120.4
Agriculture/National economy wage ratio 108.99 100 87.004 84.711 84.214 79.411
Source: Doucha (1998)
Table 8: Economic Accounts for Agriculture (CZK millions)
Item 1994 1995 1996 1997
Final Production
Crop Production 39 879 40 279 47 390 45 615
Animal Production 55 045 59 175 66 759 65 293
Total Production 94 923 99 454 114 149 110 908
Intermediate Consumption
Intermediate consumption 62 936 60 846 72 825 75 535
Indicators
Value added in market prices 31 987 38 608 41 324 35 373
Subsidies on production 2 255 4 631 6 338 7 259
Taxes on production 2 270 2 384 2 503 2 503
Value added at factor costs 31 972 40 855 45 159 40 129
Depreciation 9 449 10 551 11 839 10 702
Net value added 22 523 30 304 33 320 29 427
Compensation of employees 21 971 21 412 23 853 23 960
Net operation surplus 552 8 892 9 467 5 467
Rents 1 600 1 374 1 557 1 600
Interests 4 509 5 038 4 878 5 094
Net income for total labour 16 414 23 892 26 885 22 733
AWU 246 549 221 620 217 208 200 590
Indicator 1 (NVA/AWU/INF) 0.0914 0.1253 0.1291 0.1139
Indicator 2 (NVA/AWU/INF) 0.0666 0.0988 0.1042 0.0880
Profit/loss -5557 2480 3032 -1227
GDP in market prices 1148600 1348700 1532600 1649500
Share on GDP 2.8 2.9 2.7 2.1
CPI 100.0 109.1 118.8 128.8
Source: MA (1998)
Table 9: Agri-environmental programmes of MA
Programme Budget outlay
(CZK millions)
Change
Area affected
(ha)
Forestation 27.3 17.1 -37% 433
Reconstruction of vineyards, hop gardens and orchards 92.5 74.5 -19% 978
Cultural landscape management 1 452.2 1 669.3 15% 524 000
Support to apiculture 64.3 76.3 19%
Support to extensive animal production on pastures in mountain and sub-mountain regions 354.8 278.0 -22%
Support to biological plant protection n.a. 9.9
Total 1 991.1 2 125.1 7% 525 411
Source: MA (1998)
Table 10. Operation Structure
Operation Structure No. Publicly owned and operated Private but collectivized Privately owned by operator Rented to private organizations Total area Average size Number of employees Total Labour Men per hectare
State Farms 174 1089414 1089414 6261 127865 127865 0.12
State Cooperative (collective farm) 1024 262246 2360218 2622464 2561 403192 403192 0.15
Private Cooperative 
Farming Company 
Partnership 
Family Farm (sole proprietorship) 3205 12820 12820 4 2000 0.16
Other, including non agr. enterprise 342781 228521 571302 
Totals 4403 1694442 2360218 241341 4296000 846 531057 533057 0.12
State Farms 240 552000 552000 2300 25157 25157 0.05
State Cooperative (collective farm) 
Private Cooperative 1334 97385 2019673 2117058 1587 184965 184965 0.09
Farming Company 1088 31171 592253 623424 573 51744 51744 0.08
Partnership included in farming companies 
Family Farm (sole proprietorship) 52003 211652 360381 572033 11 8493 17807 0.03
Other, including non agr. enterprise 189964 228521 418485 0
Totals 54665 741964 568729 2972307 4283000 71 270359 279673 0.07
State Farms 22 19000 19000 864 508 508 0.03
State Cooperative (collective farm) 
Private Cooperative 1256 61762 1302238 1364000 1086 89480 89480 0.07
Farming Company 2152 60303 1164697 1225000 569 79602 79602 0.06
Partnership 56 907 17466 18373 328 in farming companies 
Family Farm (sole proprietorship) 91708 494311 805377 1299688 14 33000 0.03
Other, including non agr. enterprise na 148939 205002 353941 na 18350 0.05
Totals
Source: Ratinger/Rabinowicz, 1997: Own estimates for 1996 and 1997 based on the Report on Agriculture for 1997, MA 1998
20 The average interest rate in the banking sector for all credits amounted to 13.03 in 1994 and to 15.55 in 1998 (January - September).
21 Former collective farms often had various non-agricultural activities, which were not linked to agricultural production at all, like construction activities, production of computers, spare parts for cars etc.
22 Specialized production: more than 66 percent of output creates crop or animal production; Mixed: otherwise. Percentage in operational form output.
<section>2</section>
COUNTRY REPORT ON THE PRESENT ENVIRONMENTAL SITUATION IN AGRICULTURE
- CROATIA -
Zoran Grgi, Ramona Frani, Ivan. Kisi
Faculty of Agriculture, University of Zagreb
INTRODUCTION
Due to unfavourable economic conditions in the entire economy, and because of the poor economic position of a large number of producers over a long period, Croatian agriculture has been a rather insignificant polluter of the environment. Family farms in particular, having a greater part of agricultural resources, have used less potentially harmful inputs in agriculture. On the other hand, an underdeveloped ecological sense and unsatisfactory professional support for the producers caused in rural areas an inadequate use of inputs, and an unorganized disposal of the waste and by-products of agricultural production. Rational management of waste and harmful stuffs is commonly legalized practice in agricultural companies, but on the majority of family farms in rural areas no attention was paid to this problem in the past. Today, there is an institutional and legal framework established in Croatia for regular monitoring and control of all important factors affecting the
environment. Agricultural production is affecting the environment on the one hand by using potentially harmful inputs (pesticides, fertilizers, manure), and by its by-products and waste on the other.
The considerable pressure of agriculture on the environment is expected in the future due to an increased need for intensifying agricultural production as one of the basic economic activities in Croatia. The most rapid production growth in conventional agriculture should be achieved through an increased use of fertilizers and pesticides. The plan for the next decade is to reach the level of current consumption of these inputs in developed countries. According to predicted agricultural development, and requests for environmental protection, the consumption of these inputs has to be rational and controlled. There is also a need to develop the concept of sustainable agriculture through its basic elements, in particular land resources, sustainable land management, and integrated pest management.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSITION AND STRUCTURE OF PROPERTY RIGHTS
Transition processes in the Croatian economy have had a direct impact on overall production conditions in agriculture. These changes are mostly reflected in the economic position of agricultural producers determined by price parities of agricultural inputs and outputs, by changes in distribution and agricultural land utilization, and by a system of state support to agriculture.
The effect of privatization and redefinition of property rights on natural resources
The basic foundation of Croatian agriculture is family farms, which in the ex-socialist system already hold more than 65 percent of agricultural land, and more than 90 percent of livestock. The privatization of production resources in agriculture began closely after attaining independence in 1991. Of more than 400 agricultural firms formerly "socially-owned", the great majority are now privatized and organized as private enterprises or joint stock companies. Former agricultural cooperatives also do business as privately owned commercial companies. A part of nationalized agricultural land has been given back to its former owners or, alternatively, they have received some form of compenzation. Most of the processing capacities are still owned by the state privatization fund, but they will be privatized in the future.
Restructurization in rural areas
Croatian legislation is positively oriented to stimulate enlarging the land property, and to encourage the "farmer type" of production. Out of more than 530 000 family farms dealing with agriculture as prevailing or additional activity, about 100-150 000 farms are expected to develop commercial production. The latter are expected to function as profitable systems on which state support measures would be implemented more efficiently. Rural areas, particularly mountainous and hilly regions, are additionally stimulated by the system of premiums and penalties, so as to develop agricultural activities with regard to the demands of domestic markets and comparative regional advantages.
Liberalization
The former planning system of agricultural production, in which family farms used to be only a kind of "service" for social-owned agricultural companies, was abandoned in the 1980s. During that time, the domestic prices of agricultural goods and inputs were set apart from the influences of the world market. Being based on the cost of production, the price system resulted in an inadequate regional allocation of agricultural resources and investment in agro-processing capacities.
After 1990, trade liberalization started in the whole economy including agriculture. The Croatian Government has prepared its agricultural reform policy with the aim of entering into the World Trade Organization. A basic characteristic of these preparations is a decrease in the level of agricultural protection. However, at the same time, the intention exists to preserve the balance in protection between domestic agricultural producers and processors.
The system of agricultural protection in Croatia is based on the system of protection prices. Direct price support is restricted to strategically important products, for which there exists a national interest in increased production. Producer prices of those products are supported by a combination of protection prices, production subsidies (premiums and reimbursements), and by import protection measures, such as tariffs and variable levies, while import quotas and special import taxes have recently been removed. There are no serious limitations on the export of Croatian agricultural products. Export licenses apply to only a few medicinal and drug-based plants and plant products, mainly in conformity with international obligations.
The development of the economic framework at farm level
The economic conditions for developing agricultural production within family farms are determined by the strategic goals of increasing the size of farms, and on the improvement of the economic situation of family farms. Changes in agricultural structure, the financing of rural areas and agriculture, the new orientation of trade and price policies, developing agricultural extension services, and the continual improvement of the social and economic position of agricultural households are fundamental determinants and priorities in the Strategy of Croatian agricultural development, adopted by the Croatian parliament in 1995.
Land market
Of approximately 3 million hectares of agricultural land in Croatia, almost 1.9 million hectares is arable land. Today, about 1.97 million hectares of agricultural, and about 1.51 million hectares of arable, land is privately owned by family farms. From the aspect of natural resources utilization, special attention has to be given to introducing into production nearly 260 000 hectares of abandoned land area. This relates to 100 000 hectares owned by family farms and about 160 000 hectares in possession of companies, which are ex-social firms. Since the agricultural reform of the past regime, until the beginning of the 1990s there was no significant agricultural land trade.
Table 1: Structure of agricultural, arable and cultivated land in Croatia in 1996
(thousand of hectares)
Land category Business companies Family farms Total
agricultural land 1 034 1 973 3 007
pastures 678 459 1 137
ponds, read beds and fishponds 23 3 26
arable land 332 1 511 1 843
orchards and vineyards 7 118 125
meadows 70 343 413
arable land and vegetable gardens 255 1 050 1 305
land sown (arable land and vegetable gardens) 161 773 934
cereals 112 507 619
industrial crops 42 33 75
vegetables 2 114 116
forage 6 118 124
uncultivated 93 275 368
Source: Central Bureau of Statistics of the Republic of Croatia, Reports in 1997
Agricultural land tenure (almost completely of arable land, and less of meadows and pastures) has been developed in the private sector. The average family farm size is about three hectares, and less than 3 000 farms have a size greater than 20 hectares of agricultural area^23. At the end of the 1980s, unfavourable economic conditions and gradual economic deterioration caused, in some regions, social-owned companies to rent arable areas to prosperous family farms. Consequently, in plain regions some family farms have cultivated more than 150 hectares of arable land over the years.
To fulfil those objectives concerning the enlargement of family farm size, the privatization of ex-social companies and the reclamation of abandoned land, the Government laid down incentive laws and regulations that enabled long-term renting and gave loans for the purchase of agricultural land. Tenders for land lease and purchase, with a period of lease and repayment of up to 20 years, are administered by regional governments. Likewise, soil-improvement measures (hydro-meliorative, technological) are also covered by the credit system. It is estimated that about 350 000 hectares is disposable for purchase and long-term land tenure, both from ex-social arable land and from land that elderly households left to the state during the last decade. The private sector has no common practice in agricultural land trade; households that are not engaged in intensive agricultural production prefer to rent their land.
The development of input and output prices
Input and output price relations in agriculture showed extreme instability during the period of high inflation from 1992-1994. The current price protection system significantly diminished this instability and disparity, but, due to the relatively high importation of agricultural products, the slow re-activation of business companies, and inadequately developed market institutions, certain distortions can still be found in the domestic market of agricultural products.
Table 2: Average producer prices of basic agricultural products in 1997 in US$/ton
Cereals
Price 
Fruit and vegetables
Price
Wheat 136.23 Plums 529.24
Maize 106.99 Apples 451.93
Rye 171.26 Pears 374.63
Barley 162.38 Cherry 1 361.75
Seed-wheat 207.21 Sour cherry 297.33
Seed-maize 2 033.24 Peaches 814.67
Industrial crops Price Strawberries 576.81
Sunflower 342.41 Olives 963.33
Oilseed rape 333.00 Grapes 362.74
Soybean 347.28 Potatoes 184.34
Sugar-beets 42.32 Seed-potatoes 529.24
Tabacco 2 663.44 Beans 1 468.79
Forage Price Onions 303.27
Hay 71.27 Cabbage 196.23
Clover 87,95 Paprika 362.74
Other forage 30.52 Tomatoes 261.65
Source: CBS, Reports 1997
Producer prices of basic cereals and industrial crops (oilseeds and sugar-beets) include a state subsidy. These prices are rather stable. Great seasonable variability can be seen in the prices of fruit and vegetables. Insufficient domestic production and inadequate storage and processing capacities are the reasons for significant imports of fruit and vegetables. Although the protection system of domestic production is applied, the prices of a great majority of fruit and vegetables are at the level of the nearest international market prices.
Input prices have been relatively stable during the past 3-4 years. Depending on the type and share of active substances, average prices of fertilizers are about
US$250-340 per tonne. The price of oil without government subsidy is about US$0.6 per liter, while for certain crop productions those prices are below US$0.5 per litre, due to state support measures. A similar situation is found in fertilizer prices, where purchase prices for producers are 20-30 percent lower. This is often the way of support to contractual production on family farms by business entities and cooperatives.
Table 3: Prices of basis inputs in agriculture in 1996 in US$/t
Mineral fertilizers 
Price
UREA 177.21
KAN (reinforce nutrition) 122.50
NPK (various combinations of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium) 205.15
Pesticides Price
herbicides 4 757.20
fungicides 4 519.34
insecticides 8 206.18
Energy inputs Price
Diesel 624.38
Petrol 784.94
Oil 3 865.23
Electricity (thousands kWh) 63.77
Source: According to Statistical documentation of the Central Bureau of Statistics of the Republic of Croatia, Reports in 1997
Livestock production shows a rather stable purchase price for milk, that is about US$0.4 per litre, including the government subsidy. Prices of fattened animals have greater seasonal and annual fluctuations, due to unstable relationships on the domestic agricultural product market, as mentioned above. The basic reasons for these fluctuations are those unbalanced supplies that depends on the production of a large number of small-size family farms, as well as the great impact of price fluctuations in basic cereals used for livestock feed. Prices of beef and veal are about US$2.2-2.7/kg and US$3.0-3.3/kg, respectively. Prices of pigs for fattening are about US$2.2/kg, and those of fattened hogs are about US$2.3/kg.
The input and output price system in agriculture now provides a relatively favourable economic framework for the business of family farms with a high level of work productivity and satisfactory utilization of available resources. The great majority of family farms (almost 60 percent) have an area of less than 3 hectares, and their business is not economically efficient in agriculture. Nevertheless, such farms ensure the economic survival of the families farming them.
THE IMPACT OF AGRICULTURE ON THE ENVIRONMENT
Environmental degradation caused by agriculture
The overall deterioration of the environment in Croatia has now reached a level that required organized activities, above all preventive ones, directed toward its protection and preservation. However, agricultural development in Croatia is not based on large-scale farms that could possibly be greater polluters of the environment. The concept of large-scale agricultural capacities within ex-social companies was already abandoned at the beginning of 1980s. Although there was no adequate attention paid to the problem of environment protection up until a decade ago, the soil, water and air in Croatia are among the best most preserved in Europe. Relatively low levels of aggressive substances used in family farm production, and a relatively smaller percentage in the ex-social sector that used more of the potentially harmful inputs (fertilizers, pesticides, fossil/solid fuels) and had larger livestock farms (harmful gases and waste), meant that agriculture had a significantly
smaller role as a polluter.
Agriculture and soil protection
While Croatia has the most preserved soils in Europe, However the damage caused to the pedosphere has reached such a level that it needed to be investigation and activities organized for its protection, are needed. In agriculture there is, however, a relatively low level of production intensity which has little significance in soil pollution.
In Croatia, the Law on agricultural soil has been enacted, giving special emphasis to the protection of natural resource. Regulations on Croatian agricultural soil protection, agreed in collaboration with other Alpine and Alpine-Adriatic countries, determine the principal parameters of soil protection. Ten heavy metals, and PAH (Polycyclical Aromatic Hydrocarbons) of organic substances are marked as polluters. Limitations are duly determined for the maximum tolerated content in soil^24.
In the process of soil protection, Croatia has organized an inventory of damage processes, and has established a system of stations for the permanent monitoring of soil status. Additionally, there is a plan for organizing an adequate service of soil protection by providing a complete information system on soils. In Croatia, agricultural and forestland are under the competence of the Ministry of Environmental Protection, although treated separately. The role of the Ministry of Environmental Protection regarding the soil, is still unclear as it is possible to protect the environment without protecting the soil.
Plant and animal production
Regarding crop production in Croatia, about 7.2 thousand tonnes of pesticides (3.2 tonnes of active ingredients), and about 379 thousand tonnes of various fertilizers are used annually. Estimates are that the private sector in agriculture uses annually less than two tonnes of manure per hectare of arable land. Consumption of fossil fuel in agriculture is about 308 thousand tonnes. Considering the average consumption of about 3.9 kg of pesticides (1.7 kg of active ingredients) and 205 kg of fertilizers per hectare of arable land, Croatia is significantly below the average levels of those amounts in developed European countries. In agricultural companies and cooperatives, the consumption of fertilizers was about 304 kg/ha of arable land in 1997. Pesticide consumption in that sector is about 6.23 kg/ha. In family farms, the consumption of fertilizers is 173 kg/ha of arable land, while the pesticide consumption is 1.9 kg/ha, of which herbicides were one kg.
Table 4: Consumption of mineral fertilizers in tonnes
Total quantity 316 937 347 557 379 124
Private producers - total 182 555 221 351 240 608
Companies and cooperatives - total 134 382 119 206 138 516
- Mixed and composite 73 946 66 802 77 525
- Nitrogen 58 896 50 787 59 602
- Phosphate 58 38 2
- Potassium 1 482 1 597 1 387
Active ingredient 
Total 61 838 79 912 79 268
N 26 709 36 155 35 273
P[2]O[5] 15 959 20 577 20 747
K[2]O 19 170 23 180 23 248
Source: CBS, Reports 1997
The consumption of pesticides has decreased during the last ten years. This situation is similar to the consumption of fertilizers on family farms which decreased in 1995 compared with 1991 (Tables 4 and 6). This is the result of unfavourable global economic conditions after the war (mainly a lack of money and unclear market conditions). Ecological reasons had no significant impact on this aspect of consumption in agriculture.
Table 5: Consumption of agricultural chemicals in 1996 in tonnes
Type Total Companies Cooperatives Family farms Total
Fungicides 1 246.00 1 167.78 78.21 691.70 1 937.70
Herbicides 2 336.05 1 106.00 48.00 1 517.45 3 853.50
Insecticides 748.60 431.00 7.00 697.00 1 445.60
Total used 4 330.65 2 704.78 133 2 906.32 7 236.97
* According to Census 1991
Source: CBS, Reports 1997
During this past three-year period, the improved economic situation has had a stimulating impact on input consumption. Estimations show that adequate technological usage of pesticides and fertilizers in intensive agricultural production is applied on only 20 percent of arable land in Croatia. Input consumption on the rest of that land is much more lower. Increased consumption is expected in the future, particularly because of the improving economic position of family farms, which ten years ago, used only a half of today's quantity of inputs.
Crop production in Croatia is expected to be more intensive in the near future, which means a higher level of potentially harmful substances. Special attention will thus need to be paid to strategically important crop production (cereals, oilseeds and other industrial crops), as well as to the production of some insufficient crops. This production will be organized as large-scale production and will be based on a greater use of fertilizers, pesticides and fuel.
Table 6: Consumption of fertilizers and agricultural chemicals on family farms in 1990
Family farms according to total used land Number of farms Fertilizers used Fertilized land Agricultural chemicals
Total Herbicides
tonnes ha kg kg
Total 534266 268881 554825 2906322 1517446
Without land 1461 - - - -
Up to 0.1 ha 4777 168 93 3519 567
20.00 ha and more 1429 2020 5686 33122 18560
Source: Census 1991, Central Bureau of Statistics of the Republic of Croatia
It is anticipated that pre-war consumption of fertilizers will not be reached until the year 2 000 (750 000 tonnes). Not until 2010 do we expect to reach the current average European level of 225 kg of consumption of active ingredients per hectare of arable land. From this aspect, a potentially greater risk exists for the environment because of poor technical equipment used by family farms and big losses in the usage of chemicals, which means their retention in the soil and in the air. There is a general intention to direct this increased consumption to the rational and purposeful consumption of ecologically acceptable substances. In achieving this goal, state support measures and professional help services are inevitable.
Table 7: Consumption of energy inputs in 1996
Total state sector Agricultural companies Cooperatives Family farms* Total
Diesel, t 44 246 39 928 4 336 274 236 318 500
Petrol, t 1 824 1 728 95 - 1 824
Oil, t 3 186 3 120 66 11 792 14 979
Electricity, thousand kWh 75 488 73 056 2 462 330 176 405 664
*According to Census 1991
Source: CBS, Reports 1997
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability on farm level
Current production levels of most of agricultural products in Croatia are insufficient, and the yields of some crops, especially in the family farm sector, are significantly below those technologically achievable. Naturally, one of the most important factors in a comparatively fast and considerable increase in yields in Croatian conventional agriculture is an increased quantity of applied fertilizers and pesticides. The enlargement of family farm production capacities is currently supported in Croatia, which likely implies a greater endangering of the environment by increased agricultural production. Intensive agricultural production within Croatian family farms is based on conventional production, and just a small number of these farms, mostly small-sized, choose to produce "ecologically". More than two thirds of family farms have a size less than three hectares, and most of their production is based on traditional production, technical far from modern technological
standards. A basic limiting factor in fitting the concept of sustainable agriculture into domestic production is reflected in inadequate technical equipment and the low level of knowledge of agricultural producers when adopting new technologies and production methods. The general unwillingness of producers and agronomists to accept this concept arises from doubts about its ability to satisfy production-consumption balances in a country where the level of self-sufficiency has not yet been achieved. Besides, in planning the future development of sustainable agriculture, one economic reason is very important; namely, for efficient agricultural production under current economic circumstances and domestic production support system, conventional agriculture is much more acceptable regardless of the existence of one consumer segment in bigger consumer centres that has the interests in "ecological" quality goods, and is ready to pay higher prices for these products.
Agriculture and water protection
The results of scientific research work in Croatia point to low levels of contamination in both surface and ground waters. Agriculture has a particularly small impact on this contamination. Agricultural production is carried out in compliance with legal regulations covering water protection (Water classification statutes^25 and Statutes on dangerous substances in water^26). The potentially harmful impact on waters can be expected from ex-social, large-scale farms, but their market production is controlled by a legal system with an extremely high level of water protection. There are legal regulations determining the ways of disposing waste and agricultural by-products. Family farms reaching a level of production who's waste could be harmful for waters are also included in these regulations (as agricultural crafts or enterprises). When they sell their products on the market, they have to obey regulations determining the control of waste.
Plant and animal production
During the war the quantity of water for irrigation was considerably decreased. Surface irrigation, using natural watercourses, became the predominant method. According to 1997 data, about 1 786 hectares of arable land and gardens have been irrigated, as well as 256 hectares of orchards and 284 hectares of the rest of arable land.
Table 8: Water used for irrigation thousands m^3
Total 63 068 58 512 10 357 9 597 12 094
Underground waters 558 2 204 448 232 144
Watercourses 62 445 1 300 8 658 9 000 11 755
Lakes - 450 - - -
Reservoirs 5 54 000 3 - -
Other 60 558 1 248 365 195
Source: CBS, Report 1997
Table 9: Irrigated areas in hectares
Irrigated area total 3 616 1 554 3 046 2 291 2 326
On surface 3 334 235 2 932 2 244 2 252
By sprinkling 276 1 319 114 47 74
Drop by drop 6 - - - -
Source: CBS, Report 1998
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability on the farm level
According to legal regulations on water protection, agricultural production is encouraged to implement correct soil fertilization and the regular harmonizing of nitrogen and phosphorus, due to soil characteristics. Therefore, several professional agricultural support services are engaged in promotingthe goal of preserving water quality (both surface and ground). This is achieved by supporting the system of "permanent green" areas, and shortening the period of "grassless" (bleak) soil, thus reducing soil erosion caused by water. When building livestock and processing capacities in agriculture, all regulations regarding the preservation of surface and ground waters should be respected. The combination of all mentioned activities provides a positive contribution to environment protection on the principle of intensive agriculture combined with the preservation of water quality.
A lack of economic efficiency is a cause for the use of more simple irrigation systems, which in most cases irrationally use large quantities of water. Only in narrow Mediterranean areas and in eastern parts of the Panonian region, where there is a small deficit in water supply, for some sorts of fruit and vegetables it is economically justified to set up complex irrigation systems.
Agriculture and air protection
Measurements by the State Department for Meteorology show that 60 percent of SO[2] in the air comes from abroad (Western European countries), while 40 percent arises from "domestic" industrial sources. Agriculture contributes with high emission rates of methane, nitric monoxide and ammonia because of its nature and conventional way of production. Agriculture's share in total emissions of CH[4] is about 25 percent, in emission of N[2]O it is 66 percent, and of NH[4] almost 70 percent.
Table 10: Air pollutant emission annually, in tonnes
SO[2] NO[X] NMVOC* CH[4] CO CO[2] N[2]O NH[3]
Total 106723 49987 129993 279976 430134 16370537 17425 33986
Other 106723 49974 62618 66736 430105 16355942 4756 2830
Agriculture - - - 69643 - - 10395 23796
Nature - 13 67735 143597 29 14595 2274 7360
Total 57980 56612 143059 242492 522109 16828 18550 30418
Other 57680 56607 79417 37439 522104 16823 4059 2632
Agriculture - - - 61141 - - 12204 20452
Nature - 5 63642 143912 5 5 2287 7334
* Non methane volatile organic compounds
Source: CBS, Report 1997
The impact of agriculture on the environment is reflected primarily in its impact on the soil and water, while effect on air pollution is negligible. However, the concentration of livestock, as well as intensive use of pesticides and fuel in conventional agricultural production contribute to air pollution, that is to acid rains and the destruction of the ozone layer. These negative consequences of conventional agriculture for air pollution could be diminished through organizing livestock farms of smaller size, and the professional use of agricultural chemicals. Statutes^27 also regulate the problem of the collection and usage of liquid manure, which annually reaches an amount of 40-60 m^3/ha, depending on specific soil porosity. Besides, these statutes also determine the professional use of fertilizers and corresponding obligations of the Extension service, as well as ways of determining and measuring the level of air contamination.
Agriculture and its impact on the landscape
Intensive crop production characterized by reduced crop rotation and the intensive use of agrochemicals and heavy machines is a significant cause of soil damage. Further more, emissions by certain industries into environment cause air contamination and acid rains, more so than waste depositories and the use of fossil fuels in urban centres and in traffic.
The total amount of waste from agriculture is about 425 thousand tonnes. More than 80 percent of those substances are delivered to other economic activities to be either processed or harmlessly removed.
Table 11: Amount of waste removal in 1996 in tonnes
Total waste Waste from manufacturing From others From abroad
Waste taken away or delivered to others
Total waste Public removal service To industrial landfills To building ruble landfills To other waste treatment To other for re-use Abroad
Source: Statistical documentation of the CBS, Reports 1997
Together with its contribution to pollution and the endangering of the environment, agriculture also takes part in investments and expenditures for the environment. The highest share it contributes in investments and expenditures is for the protection of surface waters and for the harmless elimination of waste.
Table 12: Fixed capital formation and expenditure for environmental protection in 1996, in thousands US$
Total Waste removal Protect. Of surface waters Protect
against noise Prot.
of air Protect. of soil and ground waters Prot. of nature and landscape
Fixed capital formation for environmental protection
Total 31 609 10 209 8 808 91 2 510 8 977
Agriculture 401 190 211 0 0 0
Expenditures for environmental protection
Total 37580 23 836 9 386 344 79 890 3 045
Agriculture 463 119 314 0 0 6 25
Source: CBS, Reports 1997
Agriculture and biodiversity
It is well known that agriculture is one of more important reasons for decreasing biodiversity on Earth. There is no doubt that future agricultural activity will depend on genetic diversity and on the ability of experts to find and choose, from among various species and sorts, adequate types of plants and animals. These should be resistant to negative external influences, highly efficient in energy input use, and adaptable to changes in production technology and consumer demands. For the purpose of genetic resource protection, Croatia follows the recommendations of the World Congress of National Parks and Protected Areas (Caracas, 1993) which has defined the basic principles and determinants of biological resources protection.
In Croatia, the drainage system is applied to about 19.6 percent of arable land, and irrigation is carried out on only 0.29 percent of the total area. Considering such a small area, it is believed that agriculture has not affected biodiversity - the disappearance of swamp vegetation, wildlife (game) and ornithofauna. As in the past ten years, there was no agricultural production on most of the irrigated land (because of the war), and it thus seemed that the greatest part of that land had been "given back" to nature. It would be easy to reactivate that land, but in doing so relevant experiences from the developed world would have to be taken into account.
The most endangered areas from the aspect of biodiversity are the basins of the rivers Drava and Neretva in the northern and southern parts of Croatia respectively. This is because intensive agricultural production is concentrated in relatively small areas, so nitrate inflows are greater than in other parts of the state, and soil erosion is therefore increased. Environmental pollution due to intensive agriculture has caused some damage in biodiversity. The future could bring a greater impact of agriculture on biodiversity in rural areas, especially in mountainous regions, where intensive agricultural development is stimulated by agricultural policy measures. However, the current legislative framework strongly protects naitonal parks and game reserves, so it is expected that conventional agricultural production development will be excluded form these areas.
Effects of environmental degradation on agriculture
The protection and improvement of the air quality in Croatia is the first step in achieving the general goal of protecting human health, flora and fauna, cultural and material values. Top priority in this process is given to decreasing local air contamination. First, the problem of contamination by particles and sulphur dioxide has to be settled. Then, next on the priority list comes decreasing contamination from traffic and specific industrial plants. Currently, air quality in settlements is mostly in category I - clean or insignificantly contaminated (recommended values for air quality are not exceeded) and in category II - moderately contaminated air (recommended values are exceeded, but limits for air quality are not exceeded). The worst air quality, which means category III - over-contaminated air (air quality limits exceeded) - is in Zagreb, Rijeka, Split and Kutina. Bigger sources of emission are petroleum refineries, thermo-electric power plants, organic-chemical
industry and cement works. From a total of 24 identified major sources within the INA^28, there is 8 such sources, 6 sources within the HEP^29, with the 5 remaining sources being in the .cement industry.
Resolving the problem of overall atmospheric (ozone) contamination needs to be coordinated with Croatian's role in the specific contamination of the stratosphere. The fulfilment of Croatian commitments according to the Montreal Protocol regarding this problem should not be a problem, considering that Croatia is only an importer, and not a producer, of substances harmful to the ozone. The total production of those substances in Croatia in 1995 was about 0.09 kg/capita, which was significantly lower than the 0.3 kg/capita consumption in developed countries. The State directorate for environment and nature protection authorizing the achievement of the Montreal Protocol in collaboration with the National programme body and with the professional and financial support of UNEP, in 1996 made the "National programme for the gradual removal of ozone-harmful stuffs".
With regard to emission of CO[2], its contribution to the "Greenhouse effect" and climate change exceeds some 55 percent. While it is not possible to decrease that emission, but, a 50 percent increase in relation to 1990 should be expected (5.1 tonnes/capita), which in fact would still be 20 percent less than the actual average level of emissions in Europe as a whole. Creating a policy of global climate protection, it is important to notice that in 1990 Croatia was within one third of those countries having the lowest level of emissions. After decreasing emission in the period 1990-1995 (24 million tonnes to 15.6 million tonnes), our situation has improved. Consequently, in Croatia there is no need for further rigid standards of emissions. For other greenhouse gasses (CH[4] and N[2]O), it is technically possible to decrease them.
Erosion is a process whereby soil particles, due to the natural influences of water and wind, are separated from the soil mass and transported a certain distance. More than 90 percent of soils are subjected to varying intensities of erosion. Within 1.3 million hectares of Karst, erosion has already reached bedrock. The worst problem in this respect lies is in the central and coastal areas of the Istria region, due to an increased tendency of the soil to be eroded, with 100-200 tonnes of eroded material per hectare annually. A similar situation exists in the Neretva River delta, where greater amounts of soil particles come from neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina. For some time now, there has been a trend in Croatia toward decreasing areas of agricultural land due to its reassignment; namely, the pressure of both non-agricultural activities and urbanization, which in the period 1965-1987 resulted in the loss of 166 441 hectares of agricultural soils, or 7 235 hectares per
year. Likewise, from the aspect of the utilization of agricultural land, great importance has to be put on mined agricultural areas. It is estimated that about 25 percent of deserted and uncultivated agricultural land in Croatia is totally or partly mined. Such areas, especially in rural regions, will be an integral part of agricultural land utilization problems in Croatia for a long time. This is because of the complexity of the mined areas, inadequate plans for their clearing, and a lack of technical and financial resources.
THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIETY ON THE AGRICULTURAL ENVIRONMENT
Institutional change within the environmental policy
The State Directorate for the Protection of Nature and the Environment is responsible for environmental protection and the protection of nature. It is responsible for creating regulations, administrative controls and other professional activities in the sphere of environmental protection. This means creating a general environmental policy toward providing a framework for sustainable development as follows:
* protection of air, soil, water, sea, flora and fauna in synergetic action;
* suggestions, promotion and monitoring the measures for environment protection improvement;
* providing the cadastre of polluters (monitoring);
* implementing the information system of environmental protection;
* determining measures and terms for environmental protection;
* managing waste;
* preparing propositions and standards for environmental protection;
* inspection activities for environmental protection;
* stimulating education and training for environmental protection;
* research, study, record-keeping, promotion and supporting the documentary evidence of the natural heritage;
* organizing the central service of information and documentation;
* identifying and evaluating the characteristics of protected areas;
* central record-keeping system of protected areas;
* prescribing rules for establishing the programme of public needs in the sphere of environment protection;
* care, coordination and control over financing the environmental protection programme;
* evaluation of the working conditions for legal entities and individuals in environment protection activities;
* providing conditions for the education and training of professionals in environmental protection activities;
* taking control over trade, import and export of protected areas;
* stipulating terms for the use and purposes of protected parts, and managing them according to the rules;
* strengthening the specific terms for building in achieving environmental protection and parts of natural heritage;
* fulfilment of the inspection and other activities of the environment protection domain, and of the State directorate responsibility.
Within the State Directorate for the Protection of Nature and the Environment there are 58 graduate employees. All over the country, there are county offices for regional planning, municipal services, architecture and environment protection. In such offices there are one or two employees dealing with problems of environmental protection; one is usually the environment protection inspector, and the other is an assistant. Qualitative cooperation of the national and local units, particularly in the sphere of inspection and control, is a prerequisite for the efficient fulfilment of environmental protection.
Environmental policy related to agriculture
Environmental protection relating to agriculture is defined primarily by legal regulations and statutes for the protection of national resources (soil, water and air), and by regulations for the usage of inputs harmful to the environment. This ecological approach is also represented in the legal procedures necessary for the construction and carrying out of agricultural production and the processing of agricultural products.
Legislative and institutional framework for a national agri-environmental policy
The Law on the protection of nature (NN 30/94 and 72/94) ensures the integral preservation of environmental quality and biodiversity. Among the established goals of environment protection, it prescribes the constant preservation of biodiversity originality and ecological balance. Based on this Law, about 7.5 percent of Croatian territory is now covered by its protection. Eight categories of space protection are determined: national parks, natural parks, strict and special wildlife refuges, outstanding natural features of nature, protected landscapes, park-forests and monuments of park architecture. This Law also protects some plant and animal species. While primarily so these are not only endangered or rare species in Croatia, but also those endangered on an international scale too. Thus we are obligated by international conventions to protect them. It is forbidden to kill, catch, hurt, capture, buy, sell, export or import these protected species, and it is also forbidden to
cause damage to their habitats. All wild animals in national parks and wildlife refuges are protected, together with complete cave fauna.
The protection of animals that can be exploited economically is prescribed by numerous other laws too, such as the Law on hunting (NN 10/94, 22/94, 5/95, 25/96), the Law on fresh-water fishing (NN 34/89, 19/90, 26/93) and Law on sea fishing (NN 74/94, 57/96). The economic exploitation of other unprotected species is regulated by the issuing of licenses for their collection from their natural habitat, and these are issued by the state administrative body responsible for environmental protection. This refers mostly to snails and green frogs.
The great majority of native mammals are also protected, with the exemption of some "problematic" and hunted species. All nest birds and all kinds of European birds are protected as well, except fish-eaters and waders near fishponds and starlings near agricultural areas. In the case of reptiles, increasingly endangered by the recent "home pets" trade, all native species are protected, except the horned viper and the common adder, a amphibians are protected too, except for three kinds of green frogs. The protection of other species is faced with the problems of a lack of scientific data and poor information about domestic fauna.
Concerning plant species, only 44 are currently protected, but the preparation of regulations is under way for the protection of all species registered on Croatia's red list. The protection of habitats in areas exploited economically is improved by the fulfilment of certain directions for nature protection in agricultural, forestry, water-management, space planning and other services. With the Law on forests (NN 92/90, 76/93) the procedure has been established for forests and forestry land. A fixed payment for the utilization of general benefits from forests has to be paid which is prescribed by laws for all business entities in Croatia.
Regarding indigenous species of cultivated plants and domestic animals, measures for their protection are also required. The Law on financial support in agriculture and fisheries (NN 46/97) ensures specific help for breeding certain indigenous breeds (Istrian cattle, pigs from Turopolje and Slavonia, sheep, goats, turkeys).
Laws and directives on the use of inputs
Basic laws and directives on the use of inputs are as follows:
* The Law on plant protection (NN 10/94) - determines what substances can be used with a permit from the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. The permit is given based on a report from the CBS on the chemical, physical and biological characteristics of the substance, and according to the decision of the Ministry of Health about the acceptability of the toxins. Besides, the trade of plant protection substances is regulated by the Law on the trade of toxins, and by additional directives to both laws.
* The Law on seeds, seedlings and recongnized agricultural plants (NN 131/97) - arranges the production and trade of agricultural seeds, seedlings, the mycelium of edible and medicinal fungi (mushrooms) and recognized agricultural plants, as well as other questions in organizing a uniform system for the production of seeding material.
* Statutes on types of seeds that require to be treated before being put into circulation or used for their own reproduction
* Statutes on the protection of agricultural land from contamination with harmful substances (NN 15/92) - establish the methods of using mud from towns, compost and liquid manure, as different means for the improvement of agricultural soil. Maximum doses of harmful metals and organic substances in refuse, compost and liquid manure are determined, as well as the amounts of refuse, compost and manure that can be put into the soil (not more than 10 tonnes of dry matter per hectare annually). The maximum quantity of liquid manure applied to the soil is 60 m^3/ha annually, and in the winter period (October - April) the quantity allowed is 30 m^3/ha. It is forbidden to apply refuse from towns and the compost of the refuse and waste: in vineyards, in orchards and hop-gardens, on areas under berry-fruits and medical herbs, on light sand soils, in nature parks and other protected areas, on coastal and water protected areas, on Karst fields, on water-saturated soil and soil covered
with snow, and on frozen agricultural soil. Liquid manure can not be put into agricultural soil saturated with water, under snow or frost, or into soil producing vegetables, berry-fruits and medical herbs 30 days before maturity and harvesting. According to these statutes, fertilizing has to be based on integrated plant production principles, characteristics of habitats, the level of nutritive substances in soil and the specific requirements of crops for these substances.
Laws and directives on the protection of natural resources in agriculture
The Main laws and regulations for the protection of natural resources in Croatia are the following:
* The Law on agricultural land (NN 54/94) - provides for the protection of agricultural land in case of change of its use and against harmful substances, it regulates necessary agricultural technology measures resulting from change of purpose, compensation for the disposal of state-owned land, payments for inspection and control services, fire protection measures, protecting crops from erosion, and credit use.
* Statutes on agricultural land protection from contamination with harmful substances (NN 15/92) - as mentioned above, this document determines the following: what substances are considered to be harmful to agricultural land, allowed doses of these substances in the soil, measures for the prevention and control of soil contamination aimed at keeping the soil safe from chemical and biological deterioration and favourable for the production of healthy food.
* The Law on waters (NN 107/95) - legal basis for water evaluation and management (water use, water protection, supervising water-courses and protection against harmful impact of water); it also explains the method of organizing and the fulfilment of, activities and tasks in the processes of water management, basic terms for the economic utilization of waters, the obligations and competence of the state administrative institutions and of local administrative units.
* The Directive on dangerous substances in waters (NN 78/98) - it explains the types and amounts of substances considered as dangerous for the water environment, according to the Law on waters. It particularly determines substances proved dangerous for both the water environment and for humans alike. This Directive also covers materials that have unacceptable influences on the water environment, or on the taste and smell of food products from waters.
* The Law on air protection (NN 48/95) - determines the measures and organization necessary for the fulfilment of air protection and air quality improvement, with the purpose of preserving human health, flora and fauna, and cultural and material values. The main objective is to reach the best air quality possible, and to prevent or at least to decrease, contamination that might be a cause of climatic changes.
* The Directive on recommended and marginal air quality values (NN 101/96) - provides the basis for air quality evaluation and the classification of areas into categories according to their level of air contamination.
National measures on the promotion of ecological sound agricultural practices
There are no special activities for the promotion of ecologically oriented agricultural practices. The Measures and activities of different civil associations (of producers or traders) have no specific legal framework at the state level. There are some government institutions oriented toward the promotional and executive activities of environmental protection. However, in the sphere of agriculture, only a few civil associations and individuals within scientific institutions are oriented to bio-dynamic and sustainable agricultural production, although still only in a limited way.
The importance of national environmental associations and organizations for environmental policy
Croatia has a long tradition in the functioning of non-government associations. It is estimated that there are currently between 150 and 200 non-government associations engaged in environment protection, of which one-third are in Zagreb. These associations operate mostly at a local level, having no permanently employed workers or office, and faced with the problem of recruiting members. Their financial situation is poor, lacking monetary means for the fulfilment of even the simplest tasks. Most of them have an annual budget of less than US$6 000.
The "Green face" of civil society organizations
For the last few years in Croatia there has been an active civil movement for "healthy life", the production of "healthy food", biodynamic management, and the like. It is estimated that there are about 30 active, registered civil associations, which in their statutes contain some form of sustainable agriculture concept.
The importance of private and non-profit organizations
During the period 1992-1996, a number of international institutions have financed projects, programmes and various other activities related to environment protection, either with or without repayment. The number of grants has increased since 1992, with the highest level being reached in 1995. Such a tendency is characteristic of state institutions, institutes and faculties, while for non-government associations this trend continued until 1996. The Republic of Croatia is also involved in the 1992-1996 Regional Programme for the Protection of the Environment in the Danube River Basin, partly financed by GEF, with a total amount of US$12 690 000. A Phare programme also finances the Programme, but this source is still unavailable for Croatia. Additionally, environmental protection is financed by loans from the World Bank, and by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Besides the projects directly relating to environmental protection, these loans are directed to
support Croatian economy and agriculture as a whole, from the aspect of sustainable development.
CONCLUSIONS
The growth of production is the main strategic objective of Croatian agriculture. This should be achieved by a quality re-assessment of production resources on family farms as the basic support of agriculture. In the near future, the greater enlargement of farm size is expected, as well as an improvement in technical equipment and the implementation of modern production technology on a greater number of commercial farms. Anticipated technological progress in agriculture implies a potential danger for the environment, and special attention needs to be applied to this in the future.
Traditional methods of production, together with the unfavourable economic situation of family farms owning the great majority of production resources in agriculture, have caused a decrease in the use of inputs that could be harmful to the environment. As a result of the limited release of contaminating materials from agriculture into the soil, water and air, Croatia is an insignificant polluter in comparison with the majority of European countries. Unfortunately, most emissions of harmful material are "imported" into Croatia from neighbouring developed countries.
Global agriculture has to be oriented toward "ecologically" conscious production, and thus must be stimulated by legislation together with scientific research and the support of professional services. Sustainable land management, integrated pest management, and plant nutrition systems are the basic elements of a sustainable agriculture concept, and represent a radical change and a new way of thinking with regard to existing production. Such a change will require greater professional knowledge and an increase in producers' skills so that a professional service will be qualified to provide assistance. "Fundamentals" and basic principles of sustainable land management, as defined by the FAO - productivity, stability of yields, natural resources protection, economic efficiency and social acceptability - are acceptable and usable in Croatia. The basic purpose of research work is national resources protection, and soil protection in particular. This research includes identifying
and permanently monitoring the type and intensity of damage, as well as organizing a reliable and contemporary information soil system. Only scientific research, based on exact quantitative data, can give reliable solutions to numerous problems involved in the future management of agriculture.
In order to protect the soil, as a basic national resource, it is necessary to establish a system of collecting detailed information about soil conditions, and the influences of natural factors and human activities on the soil, as well as about damaging processes and soil contamination. That is why the State Directorate for the Protection of Nature and the Environment has begun the organization of a data base of habitats of the Republic of Croatia, which is the basic prerequisite condition for completing the scientific soil inventory - the Elementary Pedology Map of the Republic of Croatia. Together with a manual about pedology in environment protection, it creates the basis for scientifically-based planning and decision making in the sustainable land management process.
REFERENCES
Bai, F. & Hrlec, G. 1991. Organische Problemstoffe in den Ackerböden, Kroatiens, Experttagung der gemeinsamen Arbeitsgruppe Bodenschutz ARGE Alpen, Alpen-Adria und Donauländer, Szombathely, 17-18 Oktober 1991., Sonderdruck Bayerisches Staatsministerium für Landesentwicklung und Umweltfr. 32-47, München.
Bai, F., Butorac, A., Vidaek, ., Racz, Z., Ostoji, Z. & Berti, B. 1993. Programme zatite tala Hrvatske - Inventarizacija stanja - Trajno motrenje - Informacijski sustav, studija, Fond strune dokumentacije Zavoda za OPB Agronomskog fakulteta, 122, Zagreb.
Bai, F., Mesi, M., Kisi, I., Jelavi, V., Pravdi, V., Steinbauer, M. & Villi, M. 1993. Danube Integrated Environmental Study, Draft final report, phase I. for the Republic of Croatia, Urbanistiki institut Hrvatske, Hasskoning, Royal Dutch Consulting Engineers and Architects, p. 37., Zagreb.
Bai. F., Grgi Z. & Vinja Jeli-Mück 1995. "Environmental Analysis" Private farm support services project, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Zagreb.
Kisi, I., Bai, F., Butorac, A. & Mesi, M. 1998. Soil erosion in different tillage systems on stagnosol in Croatia. 16^th World Congress of Soil Science, Proceedings - CD, p. 7, Montpellier.
23 Estimation made in 1998, after the process of private purchase of the state land.
24 "Narodne novine", 15/92 - official paper of the Republic of Croatia
25 Narodne novine, 77/98
26 Narodne novine, 78/98
27 Narodne novine, 101/96, 78/98.
28 INA (Industrija nafte) - oil industry
29 HEP (Hrvatska elektroprivreda) - Croatian electricity
<section>3</section>
COUNTRY REPORT ON THE PRESENT ENVIRONMENTAL SITUATION IN AGRICULTURE
- ESTONIA -
Ülle Roosmaa
Estonian Agricultural University, Tartu
INTRODUCTION
Estonia has an area of 45 230 km^2 and a population of 1.5 million inhabitants. Administratively, Estonia is divided into 15 counties, with 254 municipalities. The largest city is the capital, Tallinn, with a population of 435 000. Estonian independence was declared in August 1991. Up to 1990 the Estonian economy grew slowly, but from 1991 onwards the transition from a centrally planned economy to a market economy led at first to a significant decrease in GDP. In 1992, the real change in GDP was -22 percent. Since then, significant progress has been made in terms of macro-economic development. In 1993, the economic decline slowed down to -8.5 percent and in 1994 to -1.8 percent. The year 1995 was the first year of resuming growth with a rate of 4.3 percent, in real terms. In 1996, economic growth continued at 4.0 percent.
The stabilization and recovery of Estonian agriculture is dependent on the country's general economic growth. In the first half of 1997, Estonia was one of the world's fastest-growing economies, reaching a real growth rate of 11.7 percent. For 1998 and 1999, a growth rate of 4.7 percent is expected; a growth rate of 4.5 percent is forecasted for 2000-2003. Domestic demand is expected to increase, a trend which will also hold for the demand for food products. Agriculture has traditionally been one of the most important sectors in the Estonian economy. In 1996, agriculture accounted for 5.5 percent of GDP and employed 8.1 percent of the labour force. When forestry and fishery are included, the share of GDP is 7.3 percent. The drop in agricultural employment from 18 percent in 1989 to 8 percent in 1996 illustrates not only dramatic developments, but is also attributable to several statistical changes. In 1997 the gross agricultural output was 5.51 thousand million EEK at 1995
prices, i.e. 1.5 percent smaller than in 1996. Fisheries play an important role in the Estonian economy. In 1996, fishing provided 0.5 percent of GDP, excluding the fish processing industry, which is the fourth biggest subsector of the food industry. Fisheries employ approximately 20 000 workers. Forestry is an important part of Estonian economy and natural resource base as forests cover 45 percent of the total land area with 1.9 million hectares in January 1997. In 1996, forestry accounted for 1.3 percent of GDP, and the manufacture of wood and paper products 1.1 percent of GDP.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSITION AND STRUCTURE OF PROPERTY RIGHTS
The effect of privatization and the redefinition of property rights on natural resources
The development of agriculture in Estonia has been the subject of several agricultural reforms. There have been three agricultural reforms in Estonia in the 20th century:
* Land reform and the establishment of new family farms on a wide scale in 1919;
* The Collectivization of family farms in 1947-1950; and
* Land and agricultural reforms started in 1991 with the aim of spliting up large-scale collective and state farms and re-establishing family farms.
Regarding the last stage, the very first structural changes in agriculture were launched before independence was regained in 1989 when The Farm Law was adopted. This law was the first step which departed from the central planning of agriculture. The Farm Law permitted the creation of private farms with an arable area of up to 50 hectares. Approximately 8 600 private farms were established according to this law.
Bigger and basic structural changes in the Estonian economy, including agriculture, started after independence in 1991. From 1991 to 1992 some laws that were to have a far-reaching influence upon developments in agriculture were passed: Basic Proprietary Reform Law (1991), Land Reform Act (1991), Agricultural Reform Act (1992). The above mentioned laws formulated and specified the objectives, the principles, and the routine of privatization.
The objective of privatization was the creation of structures oriented towards the competitive market. Privatization was carried out based on two main principles: the restitution of, and compensation for, illegally alienated 1940 property, and the distribution of property acquired after 1940 in accordance with labour input (Laansalu, A.). The land reform process started in 1992 on the basis of The Land Reform Act, which was passed on 17 October 1991. This act has been modified and amended several times, and it regulates the re-arrangement of relations of land ownership within the framework of land reform. The land reform procedures are complicated because restitution was assigned first priority. This means that the land can not be privatized before the applications for restitution are discussed in the local municipalities and the respective decisions are made. The property will not be restituted if this is not possible or if the former owner opposes it. Most of the
entanglements and complications of land reform are connected with privatization (Järv, A.).
The whole privatization process proved to be time consuming in Estonia. After more than five years of land privatization policy, preliminary results indicate that only one fourth of the land will finally be restituted. Originally, there were claims covering only 50 percent of the arable land; during the process, half of the claims were withdrawn. Many people who had the right to claim land had other professions; in many cases they were city dwellers, so that to start farming would require moving to the countryside. Also the attitude of the general public towards agriculture was not encouraging. Some people even questioned whether Estonia needs agricultural production at all. Combined with the poor profitability of farming in general, as well as lack of actively functioning land markets, these reasons resulted in a low rate of claims.
The privatization process involved new obligations for agricultural enterprises. Firstly, they must pay compensation totalling 377 million EEK to 100 000 qualified claimants. Secondly, they must recognize labour shares of 987 million EEK for 185 000 former workers. In January 1997, agricultural reform was completed in 178 state farms, and 85 percent of the compensation and 94 percent of the labour shares were paid. Reform was well advanced in most of the remaining farms. The privatization of the agricultural enterprises' land would be possible either by selling it to the current members of agricultural enterprises or by opening competition to buyers on the basis of auctioning. There are also proposals for creating the legal framework for leasing. If farmland can not be privatized by selling it, a long-term lease would solve the problem for some time. At the expiration of the lease period, the parcel would be auctioned for sale again. Leased land could be used as a guarantee
for loans and selling part or all of the lease would be possible.
Only 10 percent of the forests are managed by private owners. In August 1996, 57 percent of the forests were managed by state forest districts. The privatization of forests encountered the same problems as the restitution of arable land. The 22 000 private family farms each have at present approximately 8 hectares of forest on average. As for fisheries, the whole sector is privatized. The privatization process of up- and downstream facilities advanced faster than the privatization of land. Privatization took place by tender, public or restricted auction, or public offers for the sale of shares through the stock exchange. Shares in the agroprocessing enterprises are held either by producers, private shareholders or by foreign investors. Shares of these farm enterprises are quoted on the Tallinn stock market quite succesfully. Since 1996, the whole downstream industry has been privatized.
Restructurization in rural areas
In 1990, there were 117 state farms and 212 collectives in Estonia. The average size was 3 700 hectares. After independence, these farms were to be privatized, and land and other assets returned to previous owners or to their heirs.
Table 1: Number and average size of private farms and agricultural enterprises, 1 January 1994-1998
Private farms 10 153 13 513 19 767 22 722 34 671
Average size (ha) 24.8 23.1 20.8 22.0 21.7
Agricultural enterprises 1 013 983 873 854 803
Average size (ha) 450
Source: Agriculture 1997
A key issue in the structural development of the farm sector has been the privatization of land. New agricultural enterprises are organized mostly as joint stock companies, but also as cooperatives and partnerships.
Agricultural enterprises are referred to as former state farms and collectives, of which most are now privatized, although the state still owns the land on which they operate. Family farms are defined as private farms, which operate on restituted land and which is owned by the farmer. In 1997, their average size was 22 hectares of which approximately 14 hectares was arable land and the rest forest or other land. About 29 percent of the farms have less than 10 hectares, while 24 percent have more than 30 hectares. In the period 1992-1997, the number of smaller farms increased more than the number of bigger farms. About 45 000 household plots exist with an average size of approximately four hectares. Household plots which form 21 percent of the cultivated arable land are cultivated by workers of former state and collective farms. The difference between a private family farm and a household plot is not always clear. Some of the farms, privately owned by a family, are counted as
household plots because they are not enrolled in the farm register.
Liberalization
After regaining its independence, Estonia has pursued the principles of a liberal trading policy and has not applied any means to protect its domestic market. The liberal strategy is oriented towards promoting a specialized, intensive, "capitalist type" of farm. Liberal agricultural policy causes a complete restructuring of the agricultural production, labour, and marketing systems, even though the competitiveness of Baltic agricultural products on both local and international markets is by no means guaranteed, and rural livelihood has dramatically changed. Liberal policies in their present shape copy the Western agricultural model of previous decades in underestimating social and environmental concerns (Tisenkopfs, T.). In view of the present situation, normal competition on the domestic market is being distorted by the subsidized import of agricultural products from rich countries, with the export of Estonian agricultural production inhibited by (high) protective tariffs
on the domestic market in foreign countries.
Food prices have still been increasing at a slower pace than the general consumer price index: in comparison to 1993; the consumer price index of August 1996 was 236.5 percent, food accounting for 181.3 percent (Maadvere, E.).
The development of the economic framework at farm level
Land market
Farmers have the possibility to expand their crop production without purchasing land as unused arable land is available. Non-privatized land can be used on the basis of a request to the local community, but only on an annual basis, and without having any guarantee of continuance. The charge for using this land corresponds to the land tax. There is a strong need for a functioning land market and land rental market, since land would be needed as a collateral for loans. Efforts toward creating a land registry have been made, but progress is still limited. The price of land fell as a result of poor profitability and inadequate land markets in Estonia. Land tax is approximately one-two percent of the taxation price of land. In 1993, the taxation price of arable land was EEK 6 000, but by 1995 the taxation price decreased to EEK 3 000. The bureaucratic process of buying land costs, in many cases, as much as buying the land.
The development of input and output prices
From 1991 to 1994, the prices of agricultural inputs increased 17 times, the producers' prices 11 times, and the retail prices of food products 29 times, resulting in a decline of the purchasing power of the population and a drop in income of agricultural businesses (Laansalu, A.).
In the second quarter of 1997, compared with 1995 (base year), seeds became more expensive by 87.3 percent, energy, fuels and lubricants by 58.3 percent, and feedingstuffs by 47.9 percent. Pesticides became 1.6 percent cheaper( Statistical Office of Estonia). As for inputs, the Statistical Office of Estonia has calculated a price index since 1995. There is no index available with a base year prior to 1995. Animal feed prices have the biggest influence on the overall index. Together with energy, they account for 72 percent of the whole index. According to the input price index, by the third quarter of 1997, input prices had risen by 51 percent compared to 1995. While the price of pesticides declined, pesticide use has not yet returned to normal.
There is no detailed data available concerning output prices. The calculation of an output price index was scheduled to start in 1998. However, some rough estimates can be made on the basis of national accounts and nominal producer prices. In 1996, the nominal producer price level of all products rose significantly compared to 1995; but in 1997, the nominal cattle and poultry meat prices decreased by 2-3 percent and the price of milk rose by 5 percent compared to 1996. Comparing 1997 to 1995, average producer prices rose by 12 percent for beef and 24 percent for milk. The average cost level rose during the same period by 51 percent, which indicates a reduction in profitability at the farm level.
Changes in international prices have immediate effects on Estonian producer prices because of the lack of border protection. Since the fourth quarter of 1996, pork prices have been at exceptionally high levels, increasing within one quarter from EEK 20 840 to EEK 24 892 per tonne, affected by international markets and the lack of domestic supply. During the fourth quarter of 1997, the pork price level even slightly exceeded the EU-level, being EEK 25 610 or ECU 1 618 per tonne. During the fourth quarter of 1997 pork prices were 44 percent higher than in 1995. Despite the higher prices, costs have risen more than the revenues.
Estonia is a small country, which means that it is destined to be a price-taker on the world market. The difference between Estonian and EU producer prices has decreased remarkably since 1993. However, this is not the case for all products. Domestic markets are only just beginning to stabilize. But imbalances and fluctuations in supply and demand could still have an impact on price relations. Estonia has no quota system for milk production, nor for any other products. And finally, Estonia had practically no support measures for agriculture. The year 1998 was the first year with direct payments. Since Estonia abolished all consumer subsidies and all border protection measures, the markets are strongly affected by changes in international prices. For this reason, the stabilization of production proved to be difficult, and the profitability of farming varies strongly. Price differences vis-à-vis the EU was also caused by a lower quality of products. This is the case, in
particular, for beef and milk. In addition, the downstream industry is still relatively inefficient and the collection of raw materials is not effectively organized. Price information is collected by the Statistical Office of Estonia, with the help of different sampling methods, which may, however, to some extent affect the results. The following producer prices are converted into ECU using an annual exchange rate (compared prices are EU-15 average market prices).
Table 2: Estonian producer prices, % of EU prices
Wheat 47 50 68 88 ...
Rye 40 44 64 97 ...
Barley 36 36 50 85 89
Milk 27 33 48 54 56
Beef 30 34 36 46 43
Pig meat 69 93 87 84 96
Poultry 63 88 114 118 121
Source: Agricultural Situation and Prospects ...
THE IMPACT OF AGRICULTURE ON THE ENVIRONMENT
Environmental degradation caused by agriculture
Agriculture and the environment are not conflict in themselves. The conflict is caused by the behaviour and interests of men (Deverre, C.). The environmental aspect means that we have to take into account changes caused by human beings in nature: fields, roads, irrigation, etc. In Estonia we can observe what happens to the natural balance when great areas are not cultivated for some years. On the other hand, sustainability also means sustainable development in bodies of water: fewer fertilizers and pesticides and new technologies in agriculture. So sustainability does not only mean maintaining the situation. Changes in the environment (landscape, oxygen, etc.) also have to be dealt with as a product of agriculture.
Concern about environmental issues in agricultural production is not a new subject in Estonia. Environmental problems have been discussed and worked on for many years. One of the most urgent problems during the period of Soviet rule in Estonia was the pollution of surface and ground water due to an excessive concentration of animal husbandry and system of liquid manure. The other important problems were linked with bad spreading technology and storage facilities for mineral fertilizers and pesticides. Sustainable agriculture deals with problems in the border areas between economic and technological development, food production, protection of the environment, and the quality of life. A vital task is to maintain the production potential of the soil, farms, and agricultural society, without unacceptable consequences for the environment or the human population (Skutlaberg, A.).
Those rural communities based on agricultural production have reached the limits of their growth and development. There are environmental and technological limitations on the one side, and market, consumer and economic ones on the other. The demands on agriculture by both society and the market have changed more quickly than agricultural production, technology and rural society. People living in rural regions are often no longer able to earn their living in the traditional ways without adapting them. In spite of their different historical backgrounds, this problem is common in both the Nordic and the Baltic Countries (Westerlund, K., Loolaid, Ü.). The negative influence of agriculture on the environment has decreased remarkably in Estonia. Due to the decline in production capacities, the emission of pollutants to the environment has decreased and the general state of the environment has improved. However, despite the sharp decrease in the use of fertilizers, the recovery of
the environment will take a long time.
Agriculture and soil protection
According to the data of the Yearly Cadastre on 1 January 1998, the area of Estonia was 4 522 726 hectares. The area of agricultural land was 1 433 100 hectares (32 percent of the total area) and the area of arable land was 1 119 780 hectares (78 percent of the agricultural land). About 45 percent of the total area is forest (Table 2).
Table 3: Land stock, 1 January, 1995-1998 (thousand hectares)
Area, total 4 523 4 523 4 523 4 523
Agricultural land 1 450 1 450 1 433
Arable land 1 128 1 128 1 128 1 120
Orchards 15 15 15 14
Natural grassland 307 307 307 299
Forest and woodland 2 016 2 016 2 016 2 016
Inland water 283 283 283 283
Source: Agriculture 1997, (Data of the Estonian Land Board)
Despite Estonia's small area, the soil-climatic conditions for plant growth are extremely variable. Land structure varies from county to county. The share of arable land is greatest in Tartu County (55 percent of all land) and the share of forest is the greatest in Hiiumaa (42 percent). Arable land covers 1 128 million hectares, representing 78 percent of the agricultural land. About 310 thousand hectares are permanent pastures and the remaining 15 thousand hectares are used for permanent crops i.e. fruit and especially berries. Thus, in 1997 the main part (56 percent) of cultivated arable land was used for fodder crops and 39 percent for cereals. The remaining 5 percent was used to grow industrial crops, potatoes and vegetables.
Currently, the percentage of unused arable land has stabilized at around 220 thousand hectares, which is equivalent to 20 percent of the total arable land. In 1992, only 1 percent of arable land was idle. There are three principal reasons for this situation. Incomplete land registration is one of the key elements, as 75 percent of agricultural land is still in the hands of the state. The land privatization process is proceeding slowly and, so far, idle land also remains in the hands of the state because there are no claims on such land at all. In addition, farmers find it unprofitable to produce. And thirdly, the quality of soils on the remaining state owned land is lower than the national average.
One possible outcome may be that most of the idle arable land will not return to agricultural use and the land will gradually start to become woodland. This phenomenon has also a regional dimension; most of the idle land is situated in the south-eastern part of the country. The share of idle land is even much higher when the idle natural grassland area (approximately 175 thousand hectares) is included. This means that more than one quarter (about 400 thousand hectares), of the total agricultural area is currently idle. The share of idle land is expected to decrease, although parts of it will probably never come back into production. The share of idle land will decrease for two reasons. Parts of it will be taken into other use, and parts of it will be used for cultivation due to the increased need for cereals and fodder.
We should pay more attention to fields which are out of production and make use of their potential to produce alternative energy or afforest them. In order to prevent a rapid decline in soil fertility and the growth of weeds in the fields which are temporarily out of production, these fields should be conserved with an association of grasses (Vipper, H., Põder, I. et al).
Nearly the third of the arable land has been drained over the past 40 years, but as collective farms were dismantled after 1991, the drainage system lacked maintenance and, therefore, can often be found in a bad condition requiring investment. This also has a negative impact on yields. From the World Bank and national funds, a total of US$5.5 million has been made available for the maintenance of the drainage system. The Ministry of Agriculture has chosen the maintenance of its drainage system as one of its key investment areas. The use of heavy machinery lead to compaction and the poor structure of soils.
Plant and animal production
The share of arable land used by agricultural enterprises decreased from 1.019 million hectares in 1992 to 395 thousand hectares in 1996. In 1996, agricultural enterprises cultivated 45 percent of total arable land. About 40 percent of the land is used to grow cereals and 55 percent is used for forage crops. In 1997, the sown area of field crops was 864 191 hectares (0.6 percent larger than in 1996), while the sown area of grain was 335 241 hectares (14 percent larger than in 1996). The sown area of food cereals (rye, wheat, buckwheat) and legumes was 93 898 hectares (28 percent of the sown area of grain). The area under potatoes was 35 236 hectares (in 1996 35 285 hectares), and the area under open field vegetables 3 917 hectares (in 1996 4 245 hectares). Unused arable land amounted to 231 072 hectares (21 percent of the total arable land). In addition, agricultural enterprises still produced 52 percent of all cereals, although their cereal area was only half of the 1992
figures.
The production of vegetables is concentrated on private farms (50 percent) and household plots (41 percent). It is used largely for direct consumption by farm households. In 1996, the most important vegetables in open field production were cabbages (44 percent), carrots (17 percent) and red beet (13 percent).
Grains and legume accounted for 667 486 tonnes of dry weight in 1997 (4 percent more than in 1996), potatoes 437 466 tonnes (13 percent less than in 1996) and vegetables 52 310 tonnes (4 percent less than in 1996). The yield of grain and legumes was 1 991 kilograms of dry weight per hectare in 1997 (in 1996, 2 183 kilograms), the yield of food cereals and legumes amounted to 2 131 kg/ha (in 1996, 2 126 kilograms) and the yield of fodder grain was 1 937 kg/ha (in 1996, 2 205 kilograms). In 1997, the yield of food cereals and legumes was higher than that of fodder grain. The yield of potatoes was 12 415 kg/ha (in 1996, 14 176 kilograms). The production of grain was 458 kilograms and the production of potatoes were 300 kilograms per capita. Agricultural enterprises still have a major role in animal production. In 1996, they produced 57 percent of all milk, 48 percent of all beef, 70 percent of all pork and 64 percent of all eggs.
Under the Soviet regime, Estonia was an intensive animal producer. A significant share of production, which was based partly on imported low priced grain, was dedicated to Russia. If we look at longer period changes, then pig, poultry, sheep and goat numbers decreased by two thirds, perhaps more, up to January 1998 as compared to 1988 levels. The decrease in cattle and dairy cow numbers was only slightly lower. Last year the number of livestock decreased. The number of cattle decreased from 343 000 to 325 600, i.e. by 5 percent. The number of cows decreased by 2 percent. On 1 January 1998, cows accounted for 52 percent of the total number of cattle. In 1997, the number of pigs increased from 298 400 to 306 300, i.e. by 3 percent; the number of sheep and goats fell from 39 200 to 35 600, i.e. by 9 percent; the number of poultry grew from 2 324 900 to 2 602 000, i.e. by 12 percent.
In 1997, the production of meat decreased by 9 percent compared to 1996. The production of meat was 53 383 tonnes, of which the beef represented 18 983 tonnes, pork 29 547 tonnes, and poultry 4 357 tonnes. The production of milk was 717 149 tonnes (6 percent more than in 1996), the production of wool 120 tonnes (25 percent less), with the production of eggs amounting to 296 million (2 percent less). The average milk yield per cow was 4 210 kilograms in 1997 (3 809, in 1996).
In 1997, the gross agricultural output was EEK 5.51 thousand million at 1995 prices, i.e. 1.5 percent smaller than in 1996. In 1992, animal production accounted for 59 percent of gross agricultural output, but by 1996 its share had decreased to 51 percent.
During the last 20 years, 50-55 percent of the total harvest of crop production was received on account of inorganic fertilizers used. In 1988, the area fertilized with mineral fertilizers was 92 percent of the sown acreage, while in 1996, the coverage was only 31 percent. Manure was used on 10 percent of the sown area.
Figure 1: Use of fertilizers, 1996-1997
Source: Agriculture 1997
In addition, the intensity of fertilizers used per hectare was reduced significantly. In 1988, for the whole sown area, 250 kg/ha of NPK was applied; in 1996 the figure was only 25 kilogram. In 1996 Nitrate was used at an intensity of only 19 kilogram per sown hectare on average, and 62 kg per fertilized hectare. In 1996 as with the three previous years, the trend of agricultural cultures was in removing more plant nutrients from soil than were introduced into the soil with fertilizers. Hence, for example, in 1995 the rate of fertilizer use in Estonia dropped under the critical level. As a consequence, the fertility of the soil decreased significantly. In 1997, a slight recovery took place.
The use of pesticides declined fivefold, according to national statistics. In 1996, farm enterprises used 0.6 kg/ha of herbicides and 1.0 kg/ha of fungicides. Herbicides were used on 140 000 hectares in 1996. The application of an agro-technically correct fertilization and plant protection system is of great importance when speaking about increasing the crop yielding capacity of field cultures.
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability on farm level
Agricultural production has declined sharply during the last few years and the intensity of agricultural production has gone down. At the same time, prices of inputs increased rapidly leading to low purchasing power at farm level. This led to a decreasing use of fertilizers and pesticides.
Although a decline in the use of agrochemicals in production has had a positive impact on the environment, in the long run the old practices of heavily chemicalized production may be readopted, as farmers grow economically stronger and seek to enhance their profits by applying intensive technologies. This is the reason why environmental sustainability should be considered (Tisenkopfs,T. 1995).
Market conditions lead to economic differentiation of farms, often to a reduction in economic activity and bankruptcies on the part of small farms. The number of private family farms will continue to increase, but their importance, especially in animal production, will remain low. One reason for this is the limited availability of credit for private farms. A second reason is that the turnover of these farms is limited due to their small size, limiting also the amount of possible investments which can be made on an economically stable basis. Animal production is traditionally concentrated in agricultural enterprises. The share of private family farms in crop production will continue to increase, because the necessary investments are lower than in animal production. In addition, the input suppliers also provide short-term credits for farmers and the repayment takes place in the autumn by selling the grain to the input suppliers.
Agriculture and water protection
In Estonia the biggest share of water (84 percent) is consumed by industry. In second place is agriculture (9 percent). And around 7 percent of water is consumed by households. Estonia has extensive water resources. Groundwater is the main source of drinking water in Estonia, except in Tallinn and Narva where surface water is used. The majority of drinking water in Estonia meets EU standards, with some exceptions. There are three main actual problems concerning drinking water. In several areas the quality of water does not come up to standard for natural resources; the second problem is the pollution of groundwater with either oil products or nitrates; and the third problem is the amortization of water supply systems and a lack of drinking water treatment in several places. Surface water quality has improved since 1990. In the Soviet era, Estonia was an intensive animal producer, based on low-priced, heavily subsidized, imported inputs. Also, fertilizers and pesticides were
highly subsidized. The high intensity of livestock production led to problems with organic fertilizer disposal. National statistics estimated that in the 1980s, 76 percent of the nitrogen load and 20 percent of the phosphorus load that leached into water bodies originated from agriculture. Under the Soviet era ground water became increasingly polluted. At the end of the 1980s, there was even the danger that large areas would have problems with usable drinking water. In 1996, out of the samples of drinking water, 9.4 percent did not meet health standards. After the spliting up of large farms into several units, the number of cattle decreased as well as the number of people in rural settlements. Many small treatment plants in rural regions stopped working. In addition to smaller water consumption for production, possibilities were found for saving water. Water was also saved in order to decrease the pollution charge. The high price of water in towns encouraged both industry
and the population to save water.
Eutrophication is the nutrient enrichment of the water body often causing a reduction in water quality. Eutrophication can occur naturally or by the introduction of artificial pollutants entering water bodies. Agricultural chemicals, sewage, industrial and municipal waste waters, can contain organic compounds, nitrogen and/or phosphorus, all of which contribute to eutrophication. The organic, nitrogen and phosphorous concentrations in Estonian's rivers has decreased since the middle of 1990's. This is probably due to the improved purification of wastewater and the reduction of agricultural and industrial production. The levels are only just above the background levels normally expected for unpolluted rivers.
Agriculture and air protection
The main cause of acidification is the release of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides into the air. These dissolve in rainwater and fall back to earth as acid rain. The main sources of sulphur and nitrogen oxides are industry and power production, although oxides are also released from transport. The main pollution sources in Estonia were the following branches: industry (69.7 percent), the building materials industry (6.6 percent) and the oil-shale industry (4.5 percent). The volume of pollutants from the building materials industry decreased about 300 percent during 1994-1996, but emission from the energy sectors increased in 1996. Between 1990 and 1996, the volume of SO[2] emission decreased by 50.9 percent, NO[x] by 27.9 percent and the emission of solids decreased by 63.2 percent.
Air pollution is measured in several of the largest towns in Estonia and compared to the short-term maximums defined under regulations. NO[x] pollution is largely attributable to traffic pollution, but SO[2 ]comes mainly from industrial pollution from stationary sources. Acidification or acid rain is not one of the most urgent environmental problems for Estonia, though there is a problem with alkaline precipitation and dust in the town Kunda in the north-east part of Estonia. Agriculture has not creating significant air pollution in Estonia.
Agriculture and its impact on landscape
Estonia's landscapes include agricultural, urban, agricultural and areas of wilderness. Estonia has a large proportion of natural landscapes including forests, coastlines and bogs. It also has man-made landscapes including farmland, towns and mines. Development exerts pressure on Estonia's natural environment. However, it should be noted that the area of land covered by buildings in Estonia is small compared to other European countries. Also, survey results show that the area of cultivated land in Estonia decreased between 1990 and 1995 as agricultural production declined during the first years of independence.
Not only can agriculture have an impact on the landscape. Among other activities, the most remarkable is the mining of mineral resources. About 887 million tonnes of oil-shale have been mined in Estonia since the beginning of the use of oil-shale deposit. Output related in peak in 1980; 31.3 million tonnes. Some 14.7 million tonnes were mined in 1996, of which 7.8 million tonnes by underground mining and 6.9 million tonnes by surface mining. Another 212 hectares of land was damaged during surface mining in 1996, while 273 hectares was recultivated. Almost 1 450 hectares (or 13.9 percent) of damaged land has not been recultivated.
Estonia is rich in peat lands with some 1 590 million tonnes of peat resources spread throughout the country. Estonia has used peat for hundreds of years, both as heating fuel and as fertilizer. Peat is considered to be a renewable natural resource provided that the rate of exploitation does not exceed that of growth. In 1996, 1 124 thousand tonnes of peat were mined. This is below the established legal limit and extraction is considered to be sustainable.
Agriculture and biodiversity
Biodiversity has been well preserved in Estonia and forms a very important natural asset, not only for the country but also for the region. The biodiversity of Estonian natural habitats is the country's greatest advantage in comparison with others of intensive and extensive agriculture. The realization of this advantage for diversifying agro- cenoses is the main precondition for the sustainable development of agriculture. This allows for an increase in the number of beneficial insects on farmland to favour the efficiency of pollinators and entomophages of pest insects. As a result of diversification, the productivity of both cultivated and natural plants increases, which will be the main precondition for nature and human saving agriculture (Martin, A.-J.,Mänd, M., et al.).
Estonia has a rich biological diversity, being home to a wide variety of wildlife species. Many endangered species, including the bear, lynx, greylag goose and bumblebee, live and thrive in the country. Those protected include 210 species of plants, 30 species of fungi and 299 animal species. Ten protected species found in Estonia are also included in the IUCN Red Book.
Effects of environmental degradation on agriculture
With decreasing agricultural land use, much more attention must be paid to non-agricultural land use (forestry, recreation, sewage disposal, wildlife preservation, protected areas). In Estonia, almost the third of arable land is drained. At the end of the Soviet period, more than half of plant production was obtained from drained land. Due to transition difficulties during the past seven to 10 years, no maintenance and repair work has been done on drainage systems. As a result of this, the functioning capacity of drainage systems has been decreasing and the water regime of drained areas has returned its pre-drainage state. On fields which need artificial drainage, the restoration of the natural water regime brings about a rebogging process and a decrease in the average crop yield. The yield loss has the general tendency to rise in time and, sooner or later, it obtains a unacceptable level for high-productive field rotation. This decrease obviously depends on the natural
(pre-drainage) overwetting rate of soil (Soovik, E., Tomson, H., et al.). Areas nominally drained with tile drainage, but in reality reverting to bog can be used mainly for grassland or forest without expensive rehabilitation.
Simultaneous and harmonic development of soil management and animal husbandry is the most important precondition for sustainable agriculture in Estonian soil-climatic conditions. Unfortunately, many producers are forced by the market to specialize in cereal production, growing only a few crops. The monoculture of grain crops, with the simultaneous deficiency of manure decreases the humus content of the soil. The average annual reduction, caused by the monoculture of cereals, in humus reserves is approximately one tonne per hectare in the soils with medium texture (Vipper, H., Lauringson, E.. et al.)
THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIETY ON THE AGRICULTURAL ENVIRONMENT
Institutional change within the environmental policy
The Law on Sustainable Development, passed in February 1995, is the long-term strategy for sustainable development in Estonia. A number of regulations supporting this law have already been formed, but there is still plenty to do. Should Estonia gain associate status with the EU, we must take into consideration the same policy implementation. The main goals for developing sustainable agriculture in Estonia are:
* to ensure satisfactory income for farmers;
* to supply Estonian consumers with healthy food;
* to ensure stable employment opportunities in the countryside;
* to maintain traditional landscapes and natural values; and
* to protect resources (soil, water protection, energy conservation, conservation of biodiversity) (Sepp, M.).
The Estonian Monitoring Programme (EMP) gives a comprehensive assessment of the country's environment. One of the main tasks of the Environmental Information Centre (EIC) is to report on the state of the Estonian environment. An environmental information system based on indicators will make it possible to identify the data from the EMP and assess this information in a systematic way. In this context the Estonian Environmental Indicators System (EEIS) has been developed.
Many different frameworks to organize and structure indicators have been reported in different countries in recent years. The most thoroughly discussed framework is the "pressure-state-response" framework of the OECD (1993). This framework is chosen as a starting point of the EEIS because of its simplicity, wide acceptance and its applicability for reporting environmental problems. There are four types of indicators. With respect to the classic pressure-state-response model impact-indicators have been added. The impact indicators identify and quantify the changes in ecosystems and human health based on the conditions of the environment.
Coordination of the EMP should, in the first place, involve the collection of information that allows a description of the present state of the environment and predicts the future on the basis of the following aspects: the quality of environment; pressure on the environment; and environmental tolerance .
Environmental monitoring is to be a strategic instrument for environmental work and serve as a basis for political decisions on the environment. Simultaneously with environmental monitoring we must support environmental research, activity.
The Estonian Environment Information Centre of the Ministry of Environment is responsible for the coordination, administration and annual reporting of the EMP on the state level. Local environmental services are responsible for the implementation of regional monitoring. In 1996 the Estonian State Monitoring Programme included 60 sub-programmes and -projects with more than 1 600 monitoring stations all over Estonia,. Estonia has two international integrated monitoring stations; on the Island of Vilsandi (biomonitoring area) and at Saarejärve (intensive monitoring area). In 1996 the integrated monitoring site at Saarejärve relieved an automatic air monitoring station. According the Sustainable Development Act, environmental auditing is the assessment of the compliance of environmental management and activity with environmental requirements, good environmental experience and principles of sustainable development.
The purpose of environmental auditing is to identify the positive and negative aspects of an enterprise's environment-related activities. Auditing involves very different aspects, starting with controlling the compliance of an enterprise's activity with environmental legislation up to environmental management systems. Auditing provides for tight and motivated collaboration between the enterprise's administration and its auditor. The result of an internal audit is confidential and only a short summary is reported.
Toward a better system of standardization, the Estonian Standardization Board (EVS) has started to conclude contracts with production unions, ministries and other organizations, thus empowering them to implement standardizing in relevant fields. A contract between EVS and the Ministry of Environment was concluded on 14 October 1996. As provided for in the contract, the Ministry of the Environment regulates the substantial work involved in the process of compiling and establishing standards in the field of environmental management, environmental monitoring, environmental technology, environmental information, geographic information system, forestry, regional and municipal planning, building, building materials and products used for building.
At present, small countries seldom formulate original standards because it is time-consuming, expensive and often impossible due to lack of specialists. As a result, small countries usually take over regional and international standards (e.g. Finland and Sweden have taken over 95-99 percent of standards). It is essential to be aware of ISO standards as one of the CEN's principals is to formulate original standards only if the ISO has not already got one in the field. A survey of existing standards, or standards that are being prepared at present, are presented in a database, ISOPLAN, formed in the department of environmental impact assessment and environmental requirements of the Ministry of Environment. By the end of 1996, this database contained 274 entries.
Environmental policy related to agriculture
There has been rapid development in environmental policies in the Nordic countries. For farmers, the following factors have been important:
* the establishment of national parks and other protected areas with strict restrictions on the use of land; instance forestry, hunting and fishing. The regulations also include for the maintenance of biodiversity and the protection of agricultural landscapes, old farms or buildings, cultural monuments and historical places;
* strict governmental control on the use of pesticides and other chemicals in agriculture; and
* strict national regulations in order to prevent the pollution of groundwater, rivers and lakes. These regulations include measures to control soil erosion and the leakage of plant nutrients and pesticides.
In Estonia we have to follow the same factors.
During the last decade the area under protection has gradually increased. Estonia has four national parks and 217 protected areas. In addition, the West Estonian Islands Biosphere Reserve has international status. Estonia is an active supporter of nature conservation at an international level and has joined several international agreements related to biological diversity such as the Bern, Ramsar, Washington, Helsinki and Biodiversity Conventions.
Nature conservation is based on a system of protected objects, protected species and protected areas. The total extent of protected areas is 472 000 hectares, accounting for 10 percent of the country's territory. The main part of the protected area consists of landscape reserves.
Table 4: Protected areas 1996
Number Area (000 ha)
National parks 4 120.4
Nature parks 4 45.0
Nature reserves 53 115.6
Landscape reserves 156 190.7
Total 471.7
Programme area 640.0
Source: Agricultural Situation and Prospects...
Policy related to landscape and biodiversity aims to improve the protection of landscapes and the existing network of nature reserves in accordance with EU recommendations by the year 2000. Forests are considered to be one of the Earth's richest and most valuable ecosystems. Estonia has some of Europe's finest forest resources. The Estonian Environmental Strategy (1997), under the Maintenance of Landscape and Biodiversity policy, aims to establish a network of protected forests by the year 2000. These will be protected according to nature conservation criteria, thus, ensuring the preservation of all natural and semi-natural forest types and communities. Currently, some forests are protected. In other forests, timber production is of primary importance. The exploitation of these resources may tend to override the limits of sustainability and presents an important challenge for environmental policy. Current forestry data indicates that the volume of trees felled is less than
the current growing stock of forests in Estonia.
Commercial fisheries, both marine and freshwater, are economically important in Estonia. Indicator species include Baltic herring, sprat, cod, pike-perch and perch. The International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission (IBSFC) regulates the exploitation of fish resources in the Baltic Sea. Commercial fish catches declined between 1980 and 1990 although increasing once more during, the 1990s. In order to avoid the over-exploitation of fish resources, the Commission established the annual Total Allowable Catch (TAC) for the Baltic Sea. Quotas are allocated to the national economic zones. A number of factors have caused the fisheries to decline to their current levels. These include general over-fishing in the past, pollution of near-shore breeding and nursery grounds, and a decrease in salinity in the Gulf of Finland.
The goal of the Estonian Environmental Strategy is to ensure the ecological balance of surface water bodies and coastal seas, the natural regeneration of fish-stocks and aquatic flora and fauna by the rational use of water bodies. The aim is to remove nitrogen compounds from the waste water of municipalities, in order to maintain the ecological balance of water bodies sensitive to nitrogen. The main policy framework in the Estonian Environmental Strategy is to ensure good quality ground water resources and its sustainable use and protection.
Legislative and institutional framework for a national agri-environmental policy
Environmental policy in agriculture follow international guidelines and initiatives, the guidelines of international conventions and agreements ratified by the Estonian government, as well as the guidelines of the Estonian Environmental Strategy. During the last few years, Estonia has signed several international agreements. The most important are: The World Nature Protection Strategy, Agenda 21 (adopted in 1992 in Rio de Janeiro at the UNO Environment and Development Conference), and the Action Plan for Central and Eastern Europe (adopted in 1993 in Luzern at the Conference of the Ministers of the Environment).
In 1995, the framework Act on Sustainable Development was adopted and will influence environmental legislation in the next few years. Besides drafting new laws, emphasis has been laid on enforcement through the means of enacting both governmental and ministerial regulations. In drafting laws and regulations, more attention has been paid to the approximation of Estonian legal documents with those of the European Union, thus, taking part in the approximation procedure of the associated environmental legislation with that of the EU. The following table gives a review of the work in the field of environmental legislation during 1990-1996.
Table 5: Environmental legislation during 1990-1996.
Year Acts Governmental
Regulations
Ministerial
Regulations
Source: Legislation in the Field of Environmental Protection
Among those laws adopted during these years the ones regulating environmental protection are: the Law on the Right to Use Nature Resources (1993), the Law on Pollution Damages (1993), the Forest Law (1993), the Water Law (1994), the Law on Protecting Nature Objects (1994), the Pollution Charge Law (1994), the Law on Sustainable Development (1995), and the Law on the Package Excise (1996). Estonia has started to develop the Estonian Agenda 21 as the Estonian National Long Term Sustainable Human Development Strategy for the 21st century. For example, for agriculture the priority is to preserve soils with high fertility and improve methods of land cultivation
Laws and directives on the use of inputs
The Plant Protection Law (1994) regulates the use of pesticides. In 1997, the Law on Organic Farming and Fertilizer Law was enacted.
Since September 1997, an Estonian Approximation Strategy concerning environmental legislation has been elaborated within the PHARE-programme. Legislative gap analysis, implementation analysis and investment analysis has started to harmonize Estonian environmental legislation with those of the EU, and to assess the necessary efforts to build up the institutional conditions for their implementation. This work also deals with directives related to agriculture and agricultural production, like the Nitrate Directive.
In addition, the Ministry of Agriculture runs, together with the County Environmental Departments, the Environmental Impact Assessment the (EIA). EIA is used to evaluate the effects of proposed projects on the environment. Assessment covers the food industry and, at farm level, facilities for animal husbandry with more than 10 cows or 30 pigs and corresponding cattle sheds and poultry farms.
Laws and directives on the protection of natural resources in agriculture
The 1994 law on water has had a very significant influence on agriculture. The regulation reduces nutrient leaking from agriculture through the following measures:
* regulation on animal density. The Maximum permissible animal density varies from 1.0 livestock unit per hectare in environmentally sensitive karst areas and environmentally vulnerable islands, up to 1.5 livestock units per hectare in other regions;
* fertilizer and manure application according to quantities and timing; and
* capacity of manure storage. Storage capacity should not be less than 8 months for cattle farms and 10 months for pig and poultry farms. Manure should be stored, spread, and handled in such a manner that it will not endanger surface and ground water quality.
National measures on the promotion of ecologically sound agricultural practices
By applying measures of environmental management, Estonia is put into a new situation where the main attention is now focused on promoting environmental awareness and making people understand that investing in environment protection is definitely worth while in the long-term.
The purpose of establishing charges on the use of natural resources was to receive money for the maintenance of natural resources. However, there is no information available if the money has been used for this purpose. In 1996, prices for the right to use mineral resources were increased by 2.5 percent of their sale price. The price for mine-water was increased by 200 percent. The price for using water of drinking quality from the Cambrian-Vendian ground water stratum for technological purposes has risen more than 200 percent (50 cents/m^3 instead of 25). In order to reproduce natural resources, the money was allocated to those spots where these issues had to be dealt with directly. The share of payment received by local governments was increased.
Starting from 1996, the share not allocated to the local budget will be received by the Estonian Environmental Fund. From the Environmental Fund it goes towards the reproduction of relevant natural resource to the financing of environmental projects. In 1995, the revenue collected from pollution charges amounted to EEK 35.3 million instead of the expected 29.2 million. This included EEK 14.2 million for water pollution, EEK 6.7 million for ambient air, and EEK 14.43 million for waste generation. The increase in received pollution charges was due to the introduction of advanced registration practices for waste depositing and the new pollution charges effected by the Government Regulation No.412 of 29 March 1995. This regulation put more emphasis on public health and recreation possibilities. The pollution charge can be described as a complex indicator of the extent of pollution. According to this indicator, 80 percent of the total pollution volume in Estonia originated from
some twenty enterprises.
During the first years of independence, most branches of agriculture proved to be unprofitable. Up to 1997, only a limited number of support measures for Estonian agriculture were effected. The main emphasis was on providing farms with loans at favourable terms. Compensation for the fuel excise tax was of a certain importance, so were measures to improve the quality of inputs used. By 1997, proposals for direct income support measures were not accepted despite the Agricultural Producers' Income Law. This was due to budgetary considerations in maintaining a balanced budget.
In 1997, new tools for Estonian agricultural policy were developed. The Rural Credit Guarantee Fund provides additional credit guarantee, and the Capital Grant Scheme supports investments of up to 30 percent of the investment amount. In 1998, Estonia launched direct income support measures. These are direct hectare payment and direct support measures for milk. For hectare payments, the requirements are a minimum of five hectares of supported crop. For the dairy payments, the preliminary requirements at farm level is to have at least five milking cows participating in, and registered under, the milk recording scheme and exceeding certain regional reference yields. In 1998, farmers also got subsidies from the government for crop failure due to bad weather conditions.
The importance of national environmental associations and organizations for environmental policy
The idea of sustainability was popular in Estonia at the end of the 1980s. It was resistant to the totalitarian Soviet system and it aimed at preserving Estonia, its nature, culture and people. The environmental "green movement" was the most popular movement. Later, however, a polarization took place. Some people concentrated on nature protection and others on political, social and economic issues.
Estonian Non-Governmental Organizations have a long history and have played a significant part in national development. The oldest is the Estonian Naturalists Society formed in 1853. In a general meeting in 1879, the academician G. Helmersen put forward the idea of protecting Estonian nature objects. The Tartu Student Nature Protection Circle (1958) is active in providing environmental education to students of the two universities in Tartu. The Estonian Green Movement (1988) was the first internationally active Non-Governmental Organization in Estonia.
The Estonian Fund for Nature (1991) operates as a partner-organization of the WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature), mainly raising funds for nature protection projects and carrying out field work on biological diversity in Estonian nature.
Here we can name only a few organizations dealing with environmental issues: The Association of Baltic National Parks, the Association of Teachers of Biology and the Geography, the Union of Protected Areas of Estonia, the Estonian Nature Conservation Society, the Estonian Society of Foresters, the Environmental Club "Scarabeus", and several others.
Several Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO) are engaged in agricultural and environment issues. The four main ones are: the Estonians Farmers Union, the Agricultural Producers Union, the Estonian Biodynamic Association and the Estonian Green Movement. Of these, only one is dealing with sustainable agriculture - the Estonian Biodynamic Association, which was established in 1989.
REFERENCES
Publications
Deverre, C. 1995. Social implications of agri-environmental policy in France and Europe, Sociologia Ruralis, no 2, pp. 227-243.
European Commission (DG VI). 1998. Agricultural Situation and Prospects in the Central and Eastern European countries, Estonia, (DG VI), Working Document, p. 70.
Järv, A. 1997. Land Cadastre Development and Land Reform Process, Agriculture in Estonia 1996, Jäneda Training and Advisory Centre, pp. 60-66, Jäneda.
Laansalu, A. 1996. Overview of Agricultural Policy and Strategy, Agriculture in Estonia, Jäneda Training and Advisory Centre, pp. 12-15, Jäneda, 1997.
Maadvere, E. 1997. Survey, Agriculture in Estonia 1996, Jäneda Training and Advisory Centre, pp. 39-49, Jäneda.
Martin, A.-J., Mänd, & M., Maavara, V., Islands of biodiversity - the main precondition for nature sparing agriculture, NJC, Environment and Sustainable Agriculture, Proceedings, II international Conference of Agricultural Scientists from the Nordic and Baltic Countries, 24-25 November 1995, pp. 211-212, Estonian Agricultural University, Tartu.
Sepp, M. 1996. Agricultural policy and sustainable agriculture in Estonia, NJC, Environment and Sustainable Agriculture, Proceedings, II international Conference of Agricultural Scientists from the Nordic and Baltic Countries, 24-25 November 1995, pp. 89-92, Estonian Agricultural University, Tartu.
Skutlaberg, A. 1996. Important factors for development of ecological and sustainable agriculture in Norway and the other Nordic countries, NJC, Environment and Sustainable Agriculture, Proceedings, II international Conference of Agricultural Scientists from the Nordic and Baltic Countries, 24-25 November 1995, pp. 16-24, Estonian Agricultural University, Tartu.
Soovik, E., Tomson, H. & Jõgeva, V. Drainage preconditions for sustainable agriculture in Estonia, NJC, Environment and Sustainable Agriculture, Proceedings, II international Conference of Agricultural Scientists from the Nordic and Baltic Countries, 24-25 November 1995, pp. 156-159, Estonian Agricultural University, Tartu.
Statistical Office of Estonia. 1998. Agriculture 1997, p.142, Tallinn.
Tisenkofs, T. 1996. Sustainability strategy in agriculture in the Baltic countries, NJC, Environment and Sustainable Agriculture, Proceedings, II international Conference of Agricultural Scientists from the Nordic and Baltic Countries, 24-25 November 1995, pp. 25-34, Estonian Agricultural University, Tartu.
Vipper, H., Lauringson, E. & Kuill, T. 1996. Soil management in the missing of animal husbandry, NJC, Environment and Sustainable Agriculture, Proceedings, II international Conference of Agricultural Scientists from the Nordic and Baltic Countries, 24-25 November 1995, pp. 167-169, Estonian Agricultural University, Tartu.
Vipper, H., Põder, I., Lauringson, E. & Kuill, T. 1996. Sustainable agriculture and natural preconditions for its development in Estonia, NJC, Environment and Sustainable Agriculture, Proceedings, II international Conference of Agricultural Scientists from the Nordic and Baltic Countries, 24-25 November 1995, pp. 104-107, Estonian Agricultural University, Tartu.
Westerlund, K. & Loolaid, Ü. 1996, Foreword, NJC, Environment and Sustainable Agriculture, Proceedings, II international Conference of Agricultural Scientists from the Nordic and Baltic Countries, 24-25 November 1995, pp. 7-8, Estonian Agricultural University, Tartu.
Web sites
Acidification, [http://nfp-ee.eionet.eu.int/SoE/a/index_en.htm], 22 February 1999.
Atmospheric Air, [http://www.envir.ee/ehp/air.htm], 22 February 1999.
Biodiversity, [http://www.envir.ee/ehp/biodiv.htm], 22 February 1999.
Economic Instruments, [http://www.envir.ee/ehp/econom1.htm], 22 February 1999.
Environmental Management, [http://www.envir.ee/ehp/impact.htm], 22 February 1999.
Eutophication, [http://nfp-ee.eionet.eu.int/SoE/e/index_en.htm], 22 February 1999.
Fish Resources, [http://nfp-ee.eionet.eu.int/SoE/m/index_en.htm], 22 February 1999.
Forest Resources, [http://nfp-ee.eionet.eu.int/SoE/f/index_en.htm], 22 February 1999.
Legislation in the Field of Environmental Protection, [http://www.envir.ee/ehp/legisl.htm], 22 February 1999.
Mineral Resources, [http://www.envir.ee/ehp/mineral.htm], 22 February 1999.
National Environmental Monitoring Programme, [http://www.envir.ee/ehp/monitori.htm], 22 February 1999.
Natural Landscapes, [http://nfp-ee.eionet.eu.int/SoE/I/index_en.htm], 22 February 1999.
Non Governmental Organizations, [http://www.envir.ee/ehp/noncov.htm], 28 February 1999.
Peat Resources, [http://nfp-ee.eionet.eu.int/SoE/p/index_en.htm], 22 February 1999.
Quality of urban environment, [http://nfp-ee.eionet.eu.int/SoE/u/index_en.htm], 22 February 1999.
The Indicator Concept, [http://nfp-ee.eionet.eu.int/SoE/e/conc_en.htm], 22 February 1999.
Water, [http:// www.envir.ee/ehp/water.htm], 22 February 1999.
<section>4</section>
COUNTRY REPORT ON THE PRESENT ENVIRONMENTAL SITUATION IN AGRICULTURE
- HUNGARY -
Gábor Szabó
Pannon Agricultural University, Kaposvár
INTRODUCTION
The author devotes attention primarily to the events of the 1990s, while fully aware that the roots of agriculture-related concerns in the fields of the protection of the environment and the protection of nature extend back several decades. The events witnessed in the past years verify that the establishment of an eco-social market economy cannot be accomplished within a few years; a more lengthy period will doubtless be required for this. The unequivocal endeavour of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, among them Hungary, is that they should, as soon as possible, gain full entry into the European Union. The country stands in need of external resources and, it appears, that within the scope of endeavours related to environmental protection integrated into rural development, the European Union is prepared to grant certain financial resources, to be available for use in Hungary in the future. The primary condition for this is the impartial exploration of the
conditions prevailing, aimed at maximum objectivity. It is a well-established fact that in the absence of diagnosis there can be no therapy. The author thus regards his work in this as large-scale diagnostics performed on the agricultural environment in Hungary.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSITION AND STRUCTURE OF PROPERTY RIGHTS
Within this section, several consequences of fundamental importance of the change in the political and economic system are discussed.
The effect of privatization and the redefinition of property rights on natural resources
At the end of the 1980s, approximately 10 percent of the total land area cultivated for agriculture was under state control; 70 percent under cooperative, and 20 percent under private control. Thus, in Hungarian agriculture privatization was marked by the transfer into private hands of land and asset property which previously belonged not to the state but to the production cooperatives. By the end of 1998, almost the entire former cooperative land property and the majority of state land property had been transferred to private ownership.
On the basis of the provisions of the Compensation Act, approximately 700 000 individuals have obtained an average of three hectares of agricultural land. The number of landowners has risen very substantially, while the average dimensions of land property have undergone strong deconcentration. (Szcs-Csendes-Pálovics, 1997). Foreign nationals are not entitled to purchase land property; neither are Hungarian cooperatives or any type of company or partnership. Thus, practically no land remains under the ownership of the latter, who are therefore obliged to rent land from private owners of land property.
On examination of this issue from the aspect of sustainability, the following inferences can be made:
* the great disconnection between land ownership and land utilization should, from the aspect of soil conservation, be regarded as an unfavourable development;
* neither does the maximization in the course of 10 years of land rental periods with the exception of plantations provide appropriate assistance towards more widespread good economic practice.
Restructuration in rural areas
The period following 1990 saw a substantial decline in the emphasis on agriculture within the national economy, with respect both to GDP and to the number of actively employed wage earners. The decline witnessed in agricultural production, and particularly in livestock production, occurred is a substantial degree in the agricultural areas of less favourable conditions and natural resources, characterized by a weak infrastructure and industry.
The sustainability of agriculture was seen to weaken considerably: both in general and particularly in the above areas. In the past few years it has become evident within both professional and scientific spheres and to policy makers that the sustainability of rural areas cannot be based merely on agricultural policy taken strictly in the narrower sense (and, within this, the state subsidy system). "The necessity for the interconnection of agricultural policy, rural development policy taken in the wider sense (with particular respect to the development of infrastructure) and environmental policy is now evident" (Szabó, 1998). At the same time, the role of the agricultural producers, in their capacity as the guardians of the landscape, is by no means recognized to such an extent in Hungary as in the European Union. Although, as will be seen in the discussion to follow, the necessary legislative basis is already available, the system of the financial recognition of services for
the protection of the landscape and nature is still to be developed.
Liberalization
Within the agricultural sector, liberalization manifested itself primarily in the freeing of producer and consumer prices and also, parallel to this, in a drastic decrease in state subsidies. The emergence of market prices for materials and energy created the incentive for greater thrift throughout the national economy, including agriculture; the beneficial effect of this on environmental protection has been clearly visible. The data from the Economist presented in Figure 1 demonstrates unambiguously that in Hungary the PSE indicator remains far below that in data corresponding both to the OECD and to the European Union.
Figure 1: Farm subsidies
Source: The Economist, 1998
The development of the economic framework at farm level
The following sections will deal, on the one hand, with characteristics peculiar to Hungary in the agricultural land market and on the other with changes in input and output prices.
Land market
The most important conditions for the creation of a healthy land market may be summarized as follows:
* the prospects for profitability in agricultural production should be of an appropriate level, and should prove stable;
* the legal framework governing the sale and purchase and the renting of land areas should be clear-cut and concise, and should not restrict market forces to an excessive degree.
In addition to the points made above, the condition of the land registry system, the construction of the institutional system of mortgage credit, and other related factors also constitute important preconditions for the normal operation of the land market.
Conditions prevailing in Hungary are, however, unfavourable in some respects. Land market prices are very low in comparison with prices within the European Union, the national average being between 150 000 and 200 000 forints per hectare of arable land (i.e., 600-800 Euros per hectare).
However, there exist substantial differences between land prices in the various parts of the country, depending on the demand for land. Due to interest from Austria, in several places in the Western counties both land rents and land prices amount to several times those prevailing in northern and eastern Hungary.
The development of input and output prices
Between 1990 and 1997 an approximate threefold increase in farm-gate prices for agricultural products was recorded, while the price index for industrial products necessary for agricultural production increased to almost four times their price at the beginning of that period; thus, the gap between the farm-gate price index and the price index of industrial products used in agriculture was observed to widen in the course of less than a decade.
While in the 1970s and 1980s concern arose from the rigidity of the price system and the dominance of prices fixed by the authorities, in the present decade high-ratio price changes by exposure to fluctuations in market demand render any well-considered planning and development of production an incalculable process. (HCSO,^301998). In the past few years, the decline in inputs (agricultural chemicals and energy) has greatly exceeded that of outputs; thus, the conclusion can be drawn that agricultural production has taken on a more extensive, and at the same time less environmentally polluting character. The author will attempt to expound this in greater detail in the following section.
THE IMPACT OF AGRICULTURE ON THE ENVIRONMENT
In Hungary, the agricultural production exerts a multifaceted effect on the environment, since 66.6 percent of the land area of the country is given over to agricultural production. Environmental pollution and the deterioration of the environment resulting from plant and livestock production both demand attention primarily in respect of the protection of the soil and water. Neither should the air polluting effect of agriculture be neglected, while the positive role of agriculture in the shaping of the landscape and in the preservation of biodiversity is, in many respects, of determinant significance.
Environmental degradation caused by agriculture
Agriculture and soil protection
Plant and animal production
Between 1986 and 1990 the NPK balance in soils in Hungary showed a distinctly positive balance for all of the three macroelements cited, but particularly with respect to nitrogen. In contrast, between 1991 and 1995 significant nutrient deficiency emerged. The other main conclusions are summarized in the following (Ruzsányi, 1997; Urfi, 1998):
* in the first period examined, the P and K nutrient reserves of the soil increased considerably, which contributed greatly to the fact that the efficiency of plant production did not decline more markedly between 1991 and 1995;
* between 1986 and 1990, one third of artificial nitrogen fertilizer was utilized in a manner considered wasteful and destined to cause environmental pollution;
* by the latter half of the 1990s, fertilization with phosphorus and potassium had practically ceased, while the use of nitrogen decreased to a third of its former quantity, leading to a substantial moderating tendency in levels of environmental burden.
There are no reliable statistical data available for the 1990s on the total dimensions of the land areas treated with pesticides, or on quantities of pesticide used per hectare of agricultural land. However, it is a thought-provoking observation that "... fewer than 10 percent of farms exhibit plant protection practices judged satisfactory from the professional aspect. Almost a half of all agricultural sites limit treatment to partial, occasional applications which in many cases, serve only to deal with the symptoms. About a third of all farms undertake no genuine activity with respect to plant protection at all" (Láng et al., 1995:30).
From the aspect of environmental protection ,the fact that in 1997 national pig stock numbers amounted to 61.6 percent of those recorded for 1990 represents a considerable decrease in the quantity of highly polluting liquid manure produced. Another beneficial phenomenon is that increasing numbers of livestock production sites are changing over to environmentally sound technology, with stable manure fertilization now regaining prominence. No omission should be made of the concern arising from the fact that a substantial proportion of the liquid manure produced in the past few years is currently still in storage containers, the responsibility for the disposal of this being universally neglected. Interest among farmers in high quality manure has increased in the past few years, this representing a welcome initiative with respect to sustainable soil fertility farming. However, such developments are strongly impeded by the decreases in the numbers of livestock in Hungary,
particularly in cattle stocks.
A cause for concern regarding soil fertility farming is that the agricultural cooperatives, companies and partnerships operate on land which they do not own but merely rent. In most cases, lease contracts are presently signed only for short periods; this represents a considerable obstacle to long-term sustainable farming.
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability at farm level
In addition to the use of agricultural chemicals and fertilizers, melioration activity also influences to a considerable degree both the efficiency of production and the sustainable utilization of land. As a consequence of the fundamental transformation in the conditions of land ownership and land utilization in Hungary, and also because of the decrease in state subsidies for melioration, in 1996 melioration investments were applied to a total of 20 000 hectares of land, compared with over 190 000 hectares in 1985 (HCSO, 1998: pp. 68-71).
Although the amount of land available in Hungary is to be regarded as markedly favourable, the situation today is far from beneficial with respect to quality. That is to say, a considerable proportion of lands are composed of low-yield sandy or alkaline soils. The pH of soils has also fallen progressively in the past few decades as a consequence of the wasteful use of artificial fertilizer. In addition the widespread use of liquid manure technology has caused a significant proportion of agricultural land to be exposed to erosion by wind and water.
A contradictory picture has emerged with regard to mechanization. In contrast to the heavy, power- and labour-oriented machinery formerly used, which were utilized to the detriment of the soil structure, the years leading up to the present time have seen the arrival of smaller, lighter machines; at the same time, the prevailing technical standards have deteriorated in comparison with the (even then alarming) situation of the late 1980s. In the past few years, a great deal of second-hand machinery has appeared in Hungary; the fuel consumption and requirements for spare parts and servicing typical of such equipment exceed per se those of products of modern technology.
Agriculture and water protection
Plant and animal production
Unfortunately the author is obliged to state that there isno reliable statistical data available on water utilization for agriculture in Hungary.
Of the two main branches of agriculture, only estimates can be referred to in respect of livestock production. Between 1990 and 1997, with the exception of horse stock numbers, declines of between 29 percent and 54 percent were observed in stock numbers for the various main species; this was accompanied by a substantial decrease in the quantities of water utilized in livestock production. The 38 percent decline in pig stock numbers, coupled with the repression of the application of liquid manure technology, exerted a beneficial effect on the environmental burden.
With regard to crop production, the Hungarian Central Statistics Office, working on the basis of data issued by the Ministry of Transport, Telecommunications and Water Management, publishes figures for water utilization in plant production. It can be seen clearly from the data that rises were witnessed in every respect until the 1990s, which have been characterized by a declining tendency.
However, cause for concern arises from the fact that statistical evaluation extends only to the various types of agricultural companies, partnerships and cooperatives; no measurements of water utilization are taken either by individual producers or by the population. The reason behind this is that at present approximately 40 percent of arable land and land used for agriculture are used exclusively for collective farming.
In the first half of the 1990s, drought conditions exerted a moderating effect on the previously observed decline in the quantity of water used for irrigation; however, the higher levels of precipitation experienced in the past few years have accordingly led to a decrease in water requirements for irrigation. A concern unconditionally meriting consideration here is that, partly due to climatic conditions and partly as a consequence of inefficient management of water supplies, soil water levels in the area between the Danube and the Tisza have fallen by several metres in approximately fifteen years. The attainment of a solution to this problem ranks among the major tasks to be accomplished in environmental management.
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability at farm level
Changes in land ownership have exerted an influence towards increased thrift with respect to water resources. This development has also been motivated by the fact that water needs have multiplied in the past decade. Within the framework of melioration investments, activity related to soil drainage had practically ceased by the mid-1990s, and the exploitation and replenishment of the capacity of the irrigation systems is also hampered by the present fragmented structure of land ownership.
Agriculture and air protection
Statistical data relating to emissions of air pollutants demonstrate that, with the exception of methane emissions, the contribution to agriculture by total national emissions of air pollutants is of an insignificant level. In the mid-1990s agriculture was responsible for between zero percent and 4.7 percent of emissions per kilotonne of carbon dioxide, oxides of nitrogen, carbon monoxide, solids and non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOC); however, the 15.6 percent contribution of agriculture to methane emissions was of a considerable level, and the latter figures were almost entirely attributable to livestock production.
The author deems important to note that, similar to other sectors of the national economy (with the exception of transport), agriculture has shown a substantial decrease in emissions of air pollutants in the 1990s. There is evidently a close connection between the above figures and energy consumption in the agricultural sector. In 1997, merely 3.4 percent of total energy consumption was consumed by agriculture (including forestry) (HCSO, 1998, p. 170). Sector consumption of every type of fuel was seen to decrease very substantially in the first half of the 1990s in comparison with average values recorded between 1986 and 1990.
With consideration for the protection of the environment and nature, decreases in consumption of both agricultural chemicals and energy bear many advantages. It can, however, be ascertained that in the past few years the primary motivating factor has been not a rational attitude but the difficult financial situation.
An aspect of air pollution of agricultural origin not to be neglected is the effect of smell, levels of which are, as yet, not possible to measure precisely, and which therefore cannot be made subject to sanction. It is largely, but not exclusively, unpleasant smells arising from the incorrect treatment of manure on land in the proximity of residential and resort areas which give particular cause for concern.
Agriculture and its impact on the landscape
Agriculture plays a crucial role with respect to the protection of the landscape. The following are determinant factors related to the effects of agriculture on the landscape:
* conditions of land ownership and land utilization;
* distribution of the respective branches of cultivation and production within the land areas devoted to agricultural activity;
* the structural composition of plant production and animal production;
* intensity of production.
The agricultural processes prevailing between 1960 and 1990 also, in many respects, resulted in a negative effect on the shape of the landscape. Fields of enormous dimensions cultivated by state farms and production cooperatives made the agricultural landscape more monotonous. In the first half of the 1990s, as a consequence of the general economic recession and reductions in investments in production infrastructure, there occurred practically no change in the area of land devoted to agricultural cultivation. However, statistically speaking the changes which occurred were not insignificant, considering that, in the early 1990s, the majority of areas devoted to horticulture were reclassified as land areas withdrawn from cultivation.
The effects on the landscape resulting from agriculture in the 1990s can be divided into two groups:
* a favourable aesthetic change was derived through a more diversified operational structure, produced as a consequence of the deconcentration of the dimensions of agricultural enterprises, though the undoubtedly evocative, attractive sight of the wheat fields edged with poppies represents a step backwards from the aspect of agronomic and economic considerations;
* the substantial growth of areas neglected, uncultivated, or cultivated without due care has a deteriorative effect on the landscape, at the same time raising issues of plant health and hygiene.
Agriculture and biodiversity
Substantial results have been achieved in the field of the protection of nature in Hungary during the present decade (Table 1). In the past few years, a number of studies published have dealt with issues connected with biodiversity, both in general and also in relation to agriculture (Láng et al., 1994, Márkus-Nagy, 1997, Varga et al., 1998).
Márkus and Nagy (1997) found out that the intensification of agriculture has played a significant role in the degradation of agricultural landscape and other habitats, and in the reduction of biological diversity. These authors also stated the opinion that "despite intensification, in Hungary there are still large areas with agricultural habitats of outstanding value with respect to the protection of the natural environment".
Table 1: Protected areas
Number Area, 1000 ha Area protected to an increased degree, 1000 ha Number Area, 1000 ha Area protected to an increased degree, 1000 ha
Areas protected at national level
National parks 5 159.1 27.9 9 422.8 75.4
Landscape conservation areas 46 422.4 56.1 35 319.8 30.4
Nature protection areas 142 35.6 1.5 138 25.4 1.3
Natural relics 1 - - 1 - -
Total 194 617.1 85.5 183 768.0 107.1
Areas protected at local level
Final total 1072 651.8 85.5 1250 804.0 107.1
Source: HCSO, 1998
The authors classify the following types of land among those agricultural systems of significance from the aspect of the protection of the natural environment under conditions currently existing in Hungary:
* extensive areas of arable land,
* rice plantations,
* pasture lands,
* traditional vineyards and orchards,
* mixed farming systems,
* fish lakes,
* reed beds.
Ángyán et al., in concordance with specialists at the Ministry of Agriculture and Regional Development, consider the most important endeavour to be the development of a system designed to consolidate the requirements for the protection of nature and those of land utilization for agriculture. He suggests that the categories to be applied in such a system should be defined in line with the following (Ángyán et al., 1998, p.29):
1. Core areas for the protection of nature.
2. Nature protection buffer zones and areas for the protection of water sources.
3. Transitional zones.
4. Agricultural zones.
5. Areas withdrawn from cultivation.
The panel of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences draws attention to the fact that "substantial changes and damage to the composition of the wildlife of this country have been caused by the incorporation into the Hungarian ecosystem of inappropriate species of plants and animals" (Láng et al., 1994, p. 34).
Effects of environmental degradation on agriculture
The detrimental effects of environmental degradation have resulted in an impact on agriculture primarily via the factors outlined below.
The reduction in soil depth caused by wind and water erosion has both exerted an adverse effect on soil fertility, and increased the risk of eutrophication due to soil being washed into watercourses. The acidification of soils and the fall in their pH values has had an unfavourable influence on most plants yields. It has also been instrumental in the introduction into the food chain of various heavy metals. The adoption of the widespread use of liquid manure technologies has, besides causing soil and water pollution, resulted in the reduction of organic fertilizer produced in livestock production.
With respect to water management, a whole range of negative experience and observations could be reported. In the area between the Danube and Tisza Rivers, underground water levels have sunk to such a degree as to put at risk agricultural production. The deterioration of the water drainage infrastructure made a considerable contribution to the fact that at the beginning of 1999 several hundred thousand hectares of agricultural land remained covered by water for a protracted period of time. It should also be noted that, in addition to causing ecological damage, the diversion of the River Danube in the Szigetköz region in 1992 seriously restricts the development of agricultural production.
THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIETY ON THE AGRICULTURAL ENVIRONMENT
This section will deal firstly with those general issues related to the legal, planning and institutional systems of environmental policy. This will be followed by the discussion of a number of aspects of environmental protection. The author will finally touch upon the role played by non-governmental organizations and other groups within society in relation to environmental protection.
Institutional change within the environmental policy
Results achieved in Hungary in the field of the environmental law
As a result of the rounds of specialized professional, social and administrative discussions and conciliatory sessions spanning a number of years (approximately a dozen versions of the bill having been formulated), in the spring of 1995, the National Assembly passed Act LIII 1995 on general legislation relating to the protection of the environment (HOJ^31, 1995). In the same year, parliament passed Act LVI 1995 relating to product fees for environmental protection (HOJ, 1995); the governmental and ministerial directive connected with this was also issued without further delay. Foreign investors and Hungarian nationals concerned about the environment all noted with approval that, in accordance with the stipulations of the environmental protection act, a governmental directive had been issued in connection with environmental protection impact assessment.
Another package of acts was passed in 1996; this package has a more direct effect than the above legislation on the agricultural economy. The package included: Act LIII 1996 on the protection of nature; Act LIV 1996 on forests and their conservation; Act LV 1996 on the protection of game and on hunting. After lengthy discussions, Act XXVIII 1998 on the protection of livestock was passed in the spring of 1998.
The system of planning for environmental protection
In 1991, the government passed a ruling entitled the "Long- and short-term plan of measures related to the protection of the environment"; however, the urgency of the endeavour to implement the objectives of this plan differed greatly among the individual ministries. The autumn of 1997 saw the passing of a National Assembly ruling on the National Environmental Protection Programme (NEPP).
This latter concept was formulated thus by the legislative body: "The National Environmental Protection Programme represents a six-year interventional plan system designed to result in solutions to, or to initiate the solving of, the present environmental problems of the country, and to endeavour to prevent such future problems" (HOJ, 1997). Each year the government formulates a plan of measures to be implemented, and subsequently reports to parliament on the accomplishment of these measures. In 1995 and 1996, the proportion of expenditure on environmental protection in Hungary amounted to approximately 1 percent of GDP; the NEPP anticipates that this ratio will increase to between 1.7 percent and 2.2 percent of GDP during 2000-2002.
Changes in the administrative system for environmental protection
In 1990, the Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Planning (MEPRP) was formed, whose responsibilities include the following areas: environmental protection, the protection of nature, issues related to building and construction, regional planning, the protection of historic buildings, meteorology.
The above structural framework continued to exist, with only minor changes, until the summer of 1998, when the new government took the decision to transfer regional planning and issues surrounding building and construction to the sphere of authority of the minister of agriculture, and the protection of historic buildings to that of the minister of culture.
In addition to its activity in the protection of the environment and nature the Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP, former MEPRP) now supervises the National Meteorological Service. Twelve environmental protection inspectorates and eleven national park directorates contribute to the work of the MEP in the accomplishment of tasks related to the protection of the environment and nature at the local level. The Chief Inspectorate for the Protection of the Environment and Nature acts as a national authority. Observations based on the experience of six months would not be sufficient to provide a fair evaluation of the effect of the above restructuring.
Environmental policy related to agriculture
Intense activity is currently in progress at the Ministry of Agriculture and Regional Development (MARD) for the purpose of formulating an Agricultural Environmental Protection Programme (MARD, 1998).
Legislative and institutional framework of a national agri-environmental policy
Despite the fact that there can as yet be no consideration of a uniform, comprehensive agricultural environmental protection policy in Hungary, a certain proportion of the legal and institutional conditions necessary are already in place.
In addition to the 1995 Environmental Protection Act, the Nature Protection Act passed in 1996 also bears particular significance in this respect (HOJ, 1996). The act includes the declaration, made in Hungary for the first time, to the effect that: "The preservation of protected natural assets and areas must be supported by means of the provision of state subsidies, the granting of tax concessions, and the establishment of a credit system to promote environmentally sound agricultural activity" (HOJ, 1996).
In addition to the above, recent years have seen the introduction of a number of new acts closely related to agriculture which give prominence to the requirements of environmental protection. These acts are the following: the Livestock Production Act, the Animal Health and Hygiene Act, the Livestock Feeding Act, and the Animal Protection Act. At the MARD, the coordination of agricultural environmental protection is performed by the Department of Agricultural Environmental Protection operating within the framework of the Chief Department of Agricultural Environmental Protection and Plant Health and Hygiene. At the MEP, the investigation of interaction between agriculture and the protection of nature is primarily the task of the Office for the Protection of Nature.
Laws and directives on the use of inputs
On examination of the conditions prevailing in Hungary, no omission should be made of the important fact that in the past decades prices for materials and energy, which were previously kept at artificially low levels by means of state subsidies, have now undergone the transformation to market prices. In practice, with respect to agriculture among the other sectors, this has resulted in considerably higher prices for artificial fertilizers, medical preparations for livestock, energy, water, etc. This encourages increased thrift with regard to the use of materials and energy; consequently, it may be ascertained that in the conditions currently prevailing in Hungary, even the enforcement of market prices has, from the aspect of environmental protection, represented substantial progress towards the establishment of "correct" prices (Szabó, 1997).
However, it would not be correct to assert the principle of the development of "correct" prices independent of the consideration for space and time. That is, due to social-political concerns, great circumspection should be employed in, for example, the further broadening of the range of product fees linked to environmental protection, or the planned establishment and introduction of environmental green taxes. This raises the issue of the completion of, and necessity for, social impact studies.
Meanwhile, the author considers the introduction of surcharges on agricultural inputs above market prices (e.g., that of the nitrogen tax) to be unrealistic for the foreseeable future.
Legislative regulation related to plant protection
The task of plant protection is outlined by Directive 2/1998 (bearing the force of an act) (KERSZÖV Computer, 1998). The above law, together with ministerial directive 5/1988, which was issued for the purpose of its implementation, specifies in detail the tasks to be accomplished with respect to the organization of plant protection, protection against damaging substances and organisms, the distribution and use of certain pesticides, and activity in the interest of plant protection. Particularly strict regulations apply to the inner protection zone of waterworks and places where water is drawn, in that the use of pesticides is prohibited in such areas. In outer protection zones pesticides may be used only with the prior permission of the authorities responsible for water supplies and for public health in the area concerned. This law also provides directives on the treatment of pesticide residues.
One of the current concerns in Hungary is the disposal of pesticide packaging; a pesticide waste also represents a further constant source of danger. Both issues still await solutions, until when the only available alternatives are storage (well or badly arranged) in the best case, and a direct threat to the environment in the worst case. Experts stress that in the modernization of obsolete plant protection machinery, a certain available prominence must be granted to environmentally sound forms of technology. The operation of the state inspection system is performed by specialists employed at the MARD plant health and hygiene and soil protection stations.
Legislative regulation related to the use of yield enhancers
There is no self-contained law in force in Hungary with respect to the use of organic and artificial fertilizers. It is to be anticipated that one of the directives linked to the new Plant Health and Hygiene Act will regulate this range of issues; the Fertilizers Act in force in Germany is to serve as the basis for the formulation of this directive.
As was mentioned in a previous section, 1995 saw the introduction of laws, which are considered to be in conformity to with European Union legislation, relating both to animal health and hygiene and to the production and distribution of animal feeds. These laws provide for far-reaching assertions concerning the requirements for environmental protection and the protection of animals. The Animal Health and Hygiene Act, for example, sets out the highly detailed regulation of the procedures to be followed for animal carcasses to be rendered harmless.
Laws and directives on the protection of natural resources in agriculture
The protection of agricultural land
The sections dealing with land ownership and land utilization in Act LV 1994 on agricultural land (HOJ, 1994) have given rise to great debate, and opinion is truly divided. However, the measures connected with the preservation of the quantity and quality of agricultural land included in this act have been received with almost universal acceptance.
From the aspect of environmental protection, this Act is of particularly significance in that, as compared to former Land Act I 1987, soil protection is featured as a new section in this law, with the soil protection fine being introduced. Due to the unrealistically low price of agricultural land, the above recently passed act decrees that "Where agricultural land is utilized for other purposes a single, once-only land protection fee is to be paid" (act quoted).
As opposed to the concept of the land protection fee, which is payable for legal activity, the endeavour underlying the land protection fine is to sanction practices deviating from the proper use of agricultural land (if, for example, an area under nature protection safeguard is used for unlicensed purposes or for purposes deviating from the branch of cultivation normally performed there). This act prescribes multifaceted obligation in the interest of avoiding erosion, increasing soil acidity or alkalinity, etc.
Evaluation by specialists in soil science is required with respect to, for example: irrigation; the disposal on agricultural land of sewage, sludge and other forms of non-dangerous waste; the disposal of liquid manure. Mention should finally be made of the fact that the tasks of the state with respect to land protection are fulfilled by the Ministry of Agriculture and Regional Development, with the cooperation of the Ministry of Environmental Protection, via the plant health and hygiene and soil protection stations (i.e., authorities).
Legislative aspects of water protection
The National Assembly passed the Environmental Protection Act and the Water Management Act simultaneously (HOJ, 1995); the latter, with consideration to those requirements relating to the protection of the environment and of nature, contains laws and obligations connected with the utilization of water and watercourses, the preservation of opportunities for use, and the prevention of damage. Among other aspects, this Act decrees that, in the meeting of the demand for water supplies, the essential requirements for the protection of nature precede the utilization of water for economic purposes; furthermore, the water consumer is obliged to pay a water resource utilization fee for the water lying beneath the surface of the land used. Such fees have increased substantially over the past few years, thus providing the incentive for greater thriftness.
On 1 September 1997, a governmental directive was introduced which, in connection with the act relating to the management of water supplies, contains stipulations on the protection of water resources (HOJ, 1997). Among others, the limitations and prohibitions also affecting agricultural production feature in this law, primarily in the disposal of liquid manure. In zones set aside for the protection of surface and sub-surface water, strict stipulations relate both to livestock production and to plant production.
National measures for the promotion of ecologically sound agricultural practices
In market economy conditions, in addition to those possibilities provided by legal regulations, the state also has the opportunity to provide incentives for environmentally sound practices by means of subsidies and taxes.
Subsidies constitute important instruments for economic regulators with respect to environmental management (Bai, 1998; Szabó, 1997; Szolnokiné, 1997). During the past few years in Hungary subsidies have been available, for the purposes of agricultural environmental protection, from the Central Environmental Protection Fund (CEPF) and from agricultural subsidy and regional planning resources.
With respect to sources of land cultivation subsidies considered substantial from the aspect of agricultural environmental protection, the following are the characteristic points.
In terms of further advances, the most important task to be accomplished, besides the broadening of the range of subsidies granted and the increasing of the funds available for allocation to such purposes, is to ensure that where state subsidies are granted the stipulation of strict requirements relating to environmental protection, and naturally the monitoring of the adherence to these, should be achieved. Such requirements have not as yet been formulated.
With regard to the tax system, the situation at present is rather ambivalent. A positive example to be cited is that, pursuant to the act on corporation tax preferential depreciation, tariffs (33 percent) apply to heat-producing equipment fuelled by agricultural and forestry by-products. A fact even more particular in nature is that the act on VAT allocates a preferential tax code of 12 percent both in general to fossil fuels and to environmentally sound fuels of varied composition produced from industrial and agricultural waste. An aspect to be evaluated as negative with respect to environmental management is that chemical products for agricultural purposes are exempted from the general tax code of 25 percent. It is at the same time gratifying that in the service sector environmental protection-related planning, expert counselling, agricultural laboratory examinations, the laboratory examination of environmental elements and provisions for animal health and hygiene fall
under a tax code of 12 percent. The clash between profitability and environmental protection is to be seen the most clearly in the provision which enables agricultural producers, within a certain defined framework, to reclaim a substantial proportion of tax included in the price of diesel fuel. (This constitutes a type of "negative green tax".)
The Importance of national environmental associations and organizations to environmental policy
According to some studies, environmental awareness among the population of Hungary has increased in the past few years, while other studies state exactly the opposite. However, experts agree that the more educated and the younger the individual, the greater his or her awareness of the environment. The adult population shows a greatly differentiated, often highly ambivalent relation to environmental risks. A substantial proportion of people are of the opinion that their own role in the origin of environmental pollution is a minor one, while they play a substantial part in the elimination of the consequences. This indicates the lack of an individual sense of responsibility. The results of these surveys verify nevertheless that the decline in the standard of living has led to a parallel decrease in a willingness for financial sacrifice among the population.
On the whole: "The attitude of Hungarian society to the environment corresponds to the position occupied by the country in the world order; that is, members of society are much less aware than their counterparts in the more highly developed countries of western Europe, but more environmentally aware than those in the countries of eastern Europe" (Füzesi-Tistyán, 1998).
The "Green face" of the non-governmental organizations
With the change of the political system in 1989, there occurred an abrupt increase in the number of "green" non-governmental organizations in Hungary. It is difficult to determine precisely the number of non-governmental organizations concerned with the protection of the nature and environment now in operation, since this number is constantly changing, and the registers produced relating to these bodies contain contradictory data. Over a thousand non-governmental organizations are now involved in issues related to the protection of the nature and environment, the scale of these bodies extending from school interest groups to national organizations. The non-governmental organizations have also established loose networks in the fields of, for example, the preservation of air purity, energy, waste matter, and public education. The respective organizations also possess a high degree of functional independence within the networks (MEPRP, 1997).
The "Green Spider" computer network developed by the non-governmental organizations, is one of the most efficient and effective forms of communication. Over two hundred organizations are connected to the network, the only governmental body so far linked to this being the MEP. This network provides an excellent forum for the MEP to announce draft legislation, observations and responses, and invitations for funding applications.
For the purposes of providing the necessary scientific, professional and social background for environmental protection, the National Council for Environmental Protection (NCEP) was formed as a consultant body of the government in April 1996. One third of the members of the NCEP are representatives of non-governmental organizations involved in the protection of the environment. Other members ensure participation in this body from the world of science and the business community.
Of the committees within the Central Environmental Protection Fund, the committee dealing with the allocation of expenditure for public purposes enjoys the highest degree of participation from among the society at large: five of the six committee members are delegates from non-governmental organizations.
NGOs may apply to take part in state tasks pertaining to the specialized government departments with the costs incurred to be covered by the state budget. Via their day-to-day links with the local population and with the local authorities, such organizations may in certain areas act with a greater degree of effectiveness and efficiency than the official bodies.
The "green" non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are generally not particularly interested in agri-environmental issues. Two topics very rarely appear on their agendas: organic farming and bird life preservation on cultivated agricultural land. In Hungary, only one NGO, the Biocultural Association^32, has any serious involvement in agri-environmental concerns. This organization has succeeded in developing organic farming in the country in the course of the past decade.
The Biocultural Association has over 1 500 members, operating in the form of 45 local groups in Hungary and six based in other countries. In Hungary the association is engaged in the further development and the operation of the international monitoring and quality control system. The objective of this activity is to ensure that trade in bioproducts is above board and transparent. Work in quality control in Hungary is undertaken by the independent unit of the association operating under the title Bioculture Control Hungary. Between 1991 and 1998, the total area of land subject to monitoring rose from 2 840 hectares to 21 565 hectares, while the number of enterprises monitored increased almost sixfold.
Crops are now grown on 81 percent of all land included in ecological management programmes. The remaining land is devoted in approximately equal proportions to perennial culture and grassland (meadow and pasture) use. In its journal "Biokultúra" and in other publications, the information centre of the association provides up-to-date information on new findings in organic farming, on the situation in the movement, and on issues related to legislation and financing and to the protection of health. The independent advisors of the association operate a consultancy unit, and also each year organize a number of study trips to destinations in both Hungary and abroad for those interested.
The importance of profit and non-profit organizations
The process of social development was interrupted for several decades, having weathered the stagnation of the 1980s and the transformation and structural crisis of the early 1990s. The economy is now seen to be convalescing. A number of amateur organizations based on non-profit making principles, financed to a greater or lesser degree by community funds, but not operating under state guidance or control, have emerged (Kuti-Marschall, 1991). At the same time in the 1990s, a genuine renaissance of the foundations, associations and other institutions serving public welfare has blossomed. In addition to developments in public health, culture and social services, variegated and fruitful activity can now also be seen in the protection of nature and the environment.
Since the early 1990s the Ecology Information Centre has produced a publication entitled Green Network, which contains listings and brief outlines of organizations and institutions engaged in the propagation and development of the culture of ecology.
At present, registers in Hungary include approximately 300 environmentally or ecologically oriented non-governmental organizations engaged in some kind of registrable activity. About half of these are actively involved in endeavours directed towards firmly set objectives. There remain 10 to 15 organizations of significance in public life, which, via their membership and the media, now exert a perceptible environment-influencing effect (Kiss, 1997). It may be considered a positive development that, since 1998, it has been possible for Hungarian citizens to pledge 1 percent of their personal income tax to, among others, these organizations.
CONCLUSIONS
The state of the environment has, as in other areas of the national economy, including agriculture, been determined to a decisive extent, by the processes which took place in the three decades from 1960 to 1990. It is well known fact that during the quantity-oriented approach which dominated as late as the 1980s at agricultural cooperatives and on state farms, quality-related and ecological issues appeared, at best, as mere propaganda slogans. As a consequence, the democratic civil system inherited an agricultural sector in which the concepts of sustainable development could not be enforced.
The processes and phenomena which have emerged in the course of the 1990s diverge radically from those observed in previous decades. As a result of social and economic changes, agricultural production declined substantially from the early 1990s, subsequent to which modest growth has been seen from 1994 onwards; however, inputs (chemicals used in agriculture, energy, animal stock numbers, etc.) have decreased to an extent greatly exceeding outputs. It follows from this that the material and energy requirements for production have been moderated considerably, which has led to changes unambiguously favourable with respect to the burden on the environment. At the same time, it has also become evident that the agro-ecological potential of the country has not yet been exploited to the optimal degree.
It is an undoubtedly positive development that the middle of this decade saw the introduction of a number of important acts and other legal rules related to environmental protection, all formulated to conform to European Union standards. However, many tasks remain to be accomplished with respect to the institutional system creating the conditions for the enforcement of these laws and to the system of economic incentives.
REFERENCES
Books, articles and papers
Ángyán, J. 1998. A system conforming to EU standards for the harmonization of the protection of nature and agriculture Mezgazdálkodás, vidékfejlesztés és természetvédelem, Zöld Belép, II., p. 29-44., Gödöll, Budapest,
Bai, A. 1998. Relations in the use as energy sources of agricultural and food industry by-products (Ph.D. dissertation), Debrecen, DATE.
Füzesi, Zs. & Tistyán, L. 1997. Analysis of changes in environmental awareness in the period since the change of political system, Zöld Belép, p. 54., Budapest.
Kiss, E. 1997. Environmental awareness and education, Gland, Switzerland and Budapest, Hungary, 1996 IUCN, Nemzeti Természetpolitikai Terv (A környezet- és természetbarát területhasznosítás lehetségei) - IUCN.
Kuti, É. & Marschall, M. 1991. The third sector (studies), Budapest, Nonprofit Kutatócsoport.
Láng, I. et al. 1994. Future environmental prospects for Hungary, Budapest, 1. fázis HAS Társadalmi Konfliktusok Kutató Központja.
Láng, I. et al. 1995. The scientific basis of sustainable development in agriculture ,,AGRO-21" Füzetek, p. 12, Budapest.
Márkus, F. & Nagy, Sz. 1997. Environmental issues and feasibility of introduction with respect to methods of sustainable agriculture, Fenntartható Fejldés Bizottság.
Ruzsányi, L. 1997. Plant production, genetic improvement and protection, A magyar agrárgazdaság jelene és kilátásai, HAS, p. 53-69, Budapest.
Szabó, G. 1997. The effect on the environment of the restructuring of agriculture, Gazdálkodás, XLI. (1.). p. 31-35.
Szabó, G. 1998a. Food economics (university lecture notes) Kaposvár, PATE Állattenyésztési Kar.
Szabó, G. 1998b. Relations of agricultural and environmental policy, with international tendencies, and regulations in Hungary and in the European Union, Zöld Belép Kutatási Program mezgazdasági, vidékfejlesztési és természetvédelemi tématerületeinek 1998. évi összegezése, Gödöll, Budapest, (Témavezet- szerkeszt: Ángyán, József), p. 61-64.
Szolnokiné Karkus, M. 1997. Preventive environmental policy in the food economy, with particular respect to instruments of regulation (Ph.D. dissertation), Debrecen, DATE.
Szcs, I., Csendes, B. & Pálovics, B-né. 1997. Land ownership policy, and main trends in land property policy, Budapest, Agrárgazdasági Kutató és Informatikai Intézet.
Varga, Z. et al. 1998 The state of biodiversity and its preservation in Hungary, Fenntartható Fejldés Bizottság.
Urfi, P. 1998. Some economic consequences of the accumulation and depletion of the soil nutrient content in crop production in Hungary (Ph.D. dissertation), Keszthely, PATE.
Legislation
Kerszöv Computer. 1998. Directive 2/1998 (bearing the force of an act) on plant protection, in a unified structure with the ministerial decree on agriculture (5/1988, 26. IV) issued for its implementation.
Hungarian Official Journal. 1994. Act LV 1994 on cultivated land, No. 69, pp. 2533-2596.
Hungarian Official Journal. 1995a. Act LIII 1995 on general regulations for the protection of the environment. No. 52, pp. 2780-2799.
Hungarian Official Journal. 1995. Act LVI 1995 on the product fee for environmental protection, and on this fee with respect to certain products. No. 53, pp. 2828-2833.
Hungarian Official Journal. 1995c. Act LVII 1995 on water management. No. 53, pp. 2833-2846.
Hungarian Official Journal. 1996. Act LIII 1996 on the protection of nature. No. 53, pp. 3305-3325.
Hungarian Official Journal. 1997a. National Assembly Resolution 83/1997 (26. IX.) on the National Environmental Protection Programme, No. 82, pp. 5816-5846.
Hungarian Official Journal. 1997b. Governmental Decree 123/1997 (18. VII.) on the protection of currently used water bases, potential water bases and water infrastructure serving the supply of potable water, No. 65, pp. 4738-4755.
Publications of statistics
Hungarian Central Statistics Office. 1998a. Hungarian Statistical Pocket Book-1997, Budapest.
Hungarian Central Statistics Office. 1998b. Hungarian Statistical Book-1997, Budapest.
Hungarian Central Statistics Office. 1998c. Data on Environmental Statistics-1996, Budapest.
30 HSCO (Hungarian Central Statistics Office)
31 HOJ (Hungarian Official Journal)
32 Source of information on the Bioculture Association: The Organic Farming Centre
<section>5</section>
COUNTRY REPORT ON THE PRESENT ENVIRONMENTAL SITUATION IN AGRICULTURE
- LATVIA -
Peteris Busmanis
Latvia University of Agriculture
INTRODUCTION
Agriculture and forestry are both parts of the rural infrastructure and their development can be seen as an integral part of the whole of rural development. The rural sphere in Latvia (Table 1) is determined by:
* agriculture - guarantees the independence of the state in the food and raw materials market, provides rural people with jobs;
* forestry - important branch of state economy, including exports, provides jobs and possibilities for alternative activities, maintenance of biological diversity and ecological balance;
* natural resources as a main natural wealth today and in future;
* living and recreation space for Latvian people;
* source of the mentality and traditions of the Latvian people.
Latvia is known for the high level of its biological and landscape diversity. Rare species of flora and fauna are still to be found here as the natural habitat provides ideal living conditions. Large areas of bogs, meadows, wetland forests and coastal lagoons unique in Europe are also a part of the Latvian landscape. Nonetheless, Latvia is known for its environmental "Hot Spots".
The impact of agriculture on the environment since 1990 has decreased, but negative effects still remain. The spontaneous extensification of agriculture in the transition period is no guarantee of a long-term sustainable solution to agri-environmental problems. The solutions to sustainable rural development factors, economic, environmental and social, will be based on wide research and monitoring activities which will allow the establishment of a political, legislative and economic framework for long-term sustainable development in agriculture.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSITION AND STRUCTURE OF PROPERTY RIGHTS.
The effect of privatization and redefinition of property rights on natural resources.
The ownership of land has always been a central question for Latvian farmers. Today, the 4th land reform in Latvia (Table 2.) is ongoing. During the Soviet era, land and other production assets were nationalized. Agricultural production was carried out on large-scale state and collective farms, which by the 1980s averaged 3 000 to 4 000 hectares. There was, however, a strong tradition of farm production on small household plots both for the market and self-consumption. Members of collective farms were allowed to farm small personal plots of around 0.5 hectares of arable land and 0.5 hectares of pastures. In 1990, Latvian household plots produced 62 percent of potatoe production and 45 percent of all vegetables. As at least half of the private farms do not posses the necessary production facilities, they lease the land to more successful farmers. Commercial farming is practised by only 15-20 percent of farmers. Many farms are oriented towards food production for self-supply,
although they partly help to solve employment and social problems in rural areas. The competitiveness of many farms in the future may be problematic.
The privatization process of the Latvian food industry began later than that of the agricultural companies, which has slowed the processes of farming development. Despite the difficulties, privatization was carried out in a relatively short time, and by the end of 1996 (Table 5), the privatization of the food-processing sector was almost completed.
A total of 94 905 individual family (peasant) farms were established by 1 January 1997 (Table 3) based mainly on land user rights. Individual farms started to develop in 1989 (Table 4). As a result of land reform, the number and area of rural farms has changed radically. On 1 January 1998, 95 percent of farm lands were in the possession and use of physical persons, and only 5 percent of farm lands were used by specialized state farms and statute companies. A farm area of juridical persons slightly exceeds 300 hectares on average, but the average size of an individual farm is 13.8 hectares. The privatization of land in the second phase of land reform is progressing. According to the data of the State Land Service, as of 1 February 1998, following decisions by local government Land Commissions, ownership rights to land have been registered for 129 872 landowners with a total land area of 1 965 572 hectares. By 1 October 1998 the register of the Land Cadastre Centre held
518 485 records of land. About two thirds of land was privately used, but less than 45 percent of the total land area was registered in the Land Book (the Legal Register of Land Holdings). The process of the legal register of land holdings is too slow.
50 percent of the forest area remains as state property. Forestry is one of those subsectors more oriented to export. More than 30 percent of private farmland is forest, and the export of their products partly help the farmers to increase their capital. The export of wood and wood products in 1998 made up about 30 percent of Latvia's total exports.
Restructurization in rural areas
Restructurization within the agricultural sector entailed the privatization of state and collective farms, the processing industry and the food sector. This was started in 1992 - 1993, and is now formally complete.
First, the privatization of agricultural and fish state and collective farms was started. The law On the Privatization of Agricultural Companies and Fish Farms established that collective and state farms untill 15 March 1992, had to be transformed into statutory companies (companies with capital shares or limited liability). More than a half of all statutory companies adopted decisions on self-liquidation in 1993. At the beginning of 1998, agricultural products were produced in only 81 state-owned farms using less than 1 percent of agricultural land. The operating state farms and statutory companies (less than 100 in 1998) produce only 20 percent of the total agricultural output.
Land reform resulted in big collective and state farms being transformed into a large number of comparatively small private farms. However, many former collective farm workers lack entrepreneurial skills and market understanding. As at least half of private farms do not posses the necessary production facilities, they lease the land to more successful farmers. Commercial farming is in the hands of only 15-20 percent of farmers. Many farms are oriented towards food production for self-consumption although they partly alleviate social problems in rural areas. The competitiveness of many farms in the future may be problematic.
State agro-service enterprises covering agricultural machinery, agricultural chemicals, land reclamation, construction and other services have been privatized. Also, 125 such units were split up into 800 facilities before being privatized.
During the last three years, food processing accounted for eight to nine percent of GDP and for about 40 percent of GDP in manufacturing. Roughly, around 400 different food-processing plants exist in the country. These employ 3 percent of the total number of employed persons. Meat, dairy and mill processing (140, 73 and 17 respectively) are relatively large. 65 percent of these firms are estimated to employ less than 100 people and only 5 percent have more than 500 employees.
Liberalization
After regaining independence in 1991, wide economic reforms were started:
* price liberalization;
* end of subsidies for production (1991) and the introduction of a new subsidies system from 1998;
* introduction of national currency (Latvian Rouble in May 1992, national currency - Lat in March 1993);
* radical fiscal and monetary policy, which made it possible to decrease the rate of inflation from 959 percent in 1992 to 35 percent in 1993 and to 2.8 percent in 1998;
* structural reforms (privatization, demonopolization, reforms of banking system and trade etc.).
Prior to the economic reforms, prices of goods and services were significantly under the market equilibrium, meaning that demand was substantially higher than supply. The liberalization of prices and tariffs at the beginning of 1990s, caused an initially rapid increase in consumer prices. In 1992, the average consumer price increase, compared to the previous year, reached 951.2 percent However, the strict fiscal and monetary policy of the Bank of Latvia resulted in a significant reduction in inflation, and in 1997 consumer prices went up by only 8.4 percent.
After independence, Latvia adopted a liberal agricultural policy which is reflected in the fact that the Producer Subsidy Equivalent (PSE) was only 4 percent in 1996 and 8 percent in 1997. The only exception was sugar, where relatively high border protection resulted in a PSE of 57 percent in 1997.
The development of the economic framework at farm level
Land market
Delays in land titling seriously constrain the development of the land market. As a consequence, a functioning land market has not really evolved. There is a speculative reluctance to sell land by those who received land during the restitution process but do not want to farm it. As yet the economic perspective of Latvian agriculture is not favourable to the stimulation of the land market. An emerging land lease market provides a temporary solution for farm consolidation and for the more efficient farmers to increase their farm size. The number of farmers using 100 hectares and more of agricultural land is growing.
According to the Land Cadastre Centre, from a total ownership records of 518 485, only 10 707 properties have changed owner by deal. A paradox in the current rural situation is unused land: almost 30 percent of agricultural land in Latvia. Unused land is mainly low productivity land or disadvantageously situated. The current situation in the agriculture product market stimulates land set-aside tendencies. The development of the land market needs to realize certain accepted policy priorities: credit for land purchase and mortgage credit. But this will begin to work only when land is registered as legal ownership in the Legal Register of Land Holdings.
The development of input and output prices
Since independence, both price structures and production costs have changed dramatically. Prices for inputs, such as fertilizers, seeds, pesticides and energy increased significantly which, in conjunction with a lack of liquidity for many farmers, is one reason for the decline in the use of fertilizers and pesticides.
The decrease of the value of agriculture output was mainly caused by the decline of agricultural output price variations in other economic sectors. For example, prices in the national economy between 1990 and 1997, increased 90 times, whereas for agricultural products the increase was only 50 times. The most rapid reduction occurred in the output of cattle livestock (by 60 percent) whereas crop production output dropped by 30 percent (Figure 2).
The decline of agricultural production in the nineties was determined by several factors; both that influenced the total national economy and which were especially unfavourable for agriculture taking into consideration particularities of this sector. The main reasons for this were the sudden narrowing of external and domestic markets and changes in prices unfavourably affecting agriculture.
The given price-cost ratio resulted in serious economic problems in the farm sector. Whereas in 1995 market revenues per hectare (69,06 LVL) still exceeded total expenditure per hectare by 1.78 LVL, in 1996 expenditure was 6.57 LVL, higher than market revenues per hectare. When, in 1997, input and output prices started to decrease, farm gate prices decreased more steeply than input prices. This will put agriculture under even more pressure to adopt more efficient production structures. The continuous increase of production costs, not compensated for by the increase of prices for agricultural products, makes agricultural production less and less profitable. Farmers are not able to accumulate resources to invest in production. Also, possibilities to address problems linked with the quality of agricultural products and growing quality requirements becomes less feasible. Low levels of specialization and technology prevents an increase in production efficiency and a reduction of
costs per one unit of output. This reduces the competitiveness of agriculture in both the domestic and external market.
THE IMPACT OF AGRICULTURE ON THE ENVIRONMENT
Compared to western countries, changes in Latvian agriculture during the 50 years of the Soviet era has been extensive. In technological terms, the conservation and protection of the environment suffered from a number of faults. The former agricultural system could be characterized by the following factors influencing the overall environment:
* centralized planning, without taking into consideration local conditions;
* large scale production with high animal concentration: i.e. 400 800 cows and 745 thousand pigs in one farm;
* establishment of large parcels of land (50-200 hectares) disregarding soil and relief differences;
* fertilization, generally with mineral fertilizers, disregarding the application of different technologies, insufficient use of manure and other organic fertilizers;
* use of different pesticides, disregarding technologies with low quality spreaders;
* use of large and heavy machinery destroying soil structure, especially in wet periods (sowing, harvesting);
* large-scale melioration projects changing hydrological conditions and landscape;
* development of rural villages instead of individual farms so typical of the Latvian landscape and tradition.
Agriculture, food production and forestry are to be the main priorities in Latvia's economic development. Both the economic and social structures have to be transformed and developed so as to respond to a system of sustainable development. Sustainability policy must be simultaneously aimed at three goals: effective production, environmental reproduction and social stability. The environment itself may not be a single focus-point of sustainable agricultural policy.
As a result of a drastic economic fall, agriculture today is "environmentally friendly", but, at the same time, it does not cover the economic needs for Latvia's food self-sufficiency.
Environmental degradation caused by agriculture
Agriculture and soil protection
Latvia's humid climate favours the podzolization and lessivation of automorphic soils. Water accumulation on less permeable soil layers results in soil gleying. The altitude of the land varies from the Baltic Sea level up to 312 m above sea level in the Northeast. That area with an altitude over 200 m covers only 2.5 percent of the total area of the country.
Latvia is still using the former Soviet soil classification system to describe both soil texture and soil groups. The first step is to change this to the international (FAO) classification. According to national (former) soil classification, the main soil types in Latvia are: Sod podzolized (54.5 percent); Sod gley (21 percent); Sod podzolized, gley (8.9 percent); Sod calcareous (6.9 percent); Alluvial (1.5 percent); Organic (7.2 percent).
Soil survey and agrochemical soil mapping started in 1959. The objectives were to monitor the fertility of all soils used in agriculture. This testing was split into several cycles (approximately 5-7 years): The first cycle 1959-1964, the second cycle 1965-1972, the third cycle 1973-1979, the fourth cycle 1980-1985, and the fifth cycle 1986-1991. The new agricultural land monitoring programme was started in 1992 and has been carried out in 12 research units and 190 farms, and covered 20 main soil types and texture groups.
Plant and animal production
The transition reforms in Latvian agriculture have resulted in significant changes in the agricultural sector. Since 1989 agricultural production has declined drastically (Table 6). Agricultural output has dropped by more than 50 percent per capita in the same period. Due to market conditions, Latvian agriculture produced only half of the local meat consumption.
The climatic conditions and soils of Latvia are very suitable for high yield and the efficient cultivation of meadows, pastures and perennial grass, providing excellent opportunities for the development of cattle livestock and, especially, dairy farming. However, this potential is not fully realized. During the last 7 years, the size of cattle herds has substantially decreased, and thus so did cattle outputs. The same tendencies are to be observed in pig livestock.
Because of the difficult economic situation, the influence of agriculture on the environment in the period from 1990 up to now has decreased. The sown area continued to decrease until 1995 when it constituted 930 thousand hectares or 57 percent of the sown area in 1990 (Table 7).
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability at farm level.
Nutrient depletion. Less than 20 percent of farmers in Latvia produce for the market or use modern farming methods in agriculture. Continuing increases in the prices of mineral fertilizers and pesticides have drastically decreased their application (Table 8). For instance, the use of mineral fertilizers in 1997 compared to 1990,decreased by 91 percent, and that of pesticides by 88 percent. Data from the agricultural soil monitoring programme indicates that the negative nutrient balance in farms has lowered the content of organic matter and potassium in soil by 10 percent. The use of organic fertilizers in 1997 compared to 1990 decreased by 75 percent.
Acidification of soils. Most soils in Latvia formed on sand or loamy sand as parent material are, to some extent, acid. A state supported soil-liming programme for arable land decreased the percentage of acid soils from 64 percent in 1964 to 16 percent in 1985. Annually, 180 000-200 000 hectares of acid soils were limed during 1971-1990. Due to the economic conditions after 1992, the arable land treated with lime was only 5 000-9 000 hectares per year^-1. Consequently, there is a rapid increase in acid soils. Soil acidification will not only result in a loss of soil fertility, but also in an increase of the nutrient leakage associated with the lower soil buffering capacity.
Soil erosion. The area of arable land threatened by wind erosion is 230 000 hectares or 14.7 percent of total arable land. Water erosion affects 380 000 hectares or 24.3 percent of the arable land in Latvia. Erosion is caused by wind and water and enhanced by certain forms of land use. The drastic decrease in agricultural production and the area of arable land has resulted in a decrease in the intensity of land management (about 350 000 hectares of arable land was set aside land in 1997). Set aside land is mainly located in areas with undulating and hilly topography and less fertile soils where conditions are not favorable for agriculture. Therefore we can assume that there is a reduction of the impact of soil erosion in Latvia today.
Soil compaction. Farming methods in the previous Soviet agriculture, especially in soil tillage and in the use of heavy equipment on wet soils, caused soil compaction of both the topsoil and subsoil, with subsequent negative impacts on the permeability and fertility of the soil. The results of agricultural soil monitoring indicate that, compared with the collective farming period, the distribution and extent of soil compaction is decreasing. Agricultural machinery today is comparatively old; more than 80 percent of machines were bought before 1990.
Agriculture and water protection
Latvia is situated in a humid and moderately mild climatic region where rainfall exceeds evaporation, resulting in percolation losses in the soil during spring and autumn. The amount of precipitation is 600-800 mm year^-1. Winters are cold with the average temperatures in January varying from -2.6 ^o C along the Western, coast to -7.4^o C in the Northeast. The snow cover has an average duration of 80-90 days. The summer is temperate with the highest average temperatures in July (15.9-17.1^o C).
Surface waters. There are 777 rivers longer than 10 km in Latvia. The total number of watercourses is approximately 12 000. There are more than 3 000 lakes, of which 802 have an area exceeding 0.1 km^2. The available water resources of the total river run-off in Latvia is calculated at approximately 35 billion m^3 (35 km^3) per year.
Ground water. The territory of Latvia is incorporated in the Baltic artesian basin. Latvia is well supplied with groundwater resources - 4 690.7 thousand m^3 per 24 hours. The hydrological regime in Latvia is typical for many of the Eastern-European regions. The maximum run-off usually occurs during the spring flood. About 50 percent of the annual run-off is generated from snowmelt in spring, 30 percent from rainfall, and 20 percent from ground water discharge during low flow periods. The run-off on average is about 250 mm in a normal year. Drainage run-off, mainly in spring and autumn, constitutes 80 percent of the total run-off.
Soil humidity. Soils are overhumid in spring and autumn, and also in the summer with a large amount of precipitation. More than 75 percent of the agricultural land area is overhumid for normal use. A low level of soil humidity is observed from June to August: in an average summer, the water deficit will be 60-150 mm.
Plant and animal production
The total number of livestock has decreased by more than 200 percent since 1990. Animal density is important for the balance between the number of animals on a farm and the amount of land available for spreading organic fertilizers. The average figure for animal density in Latvia shows that it is much higher than is allowed by legislation in EU countries.
Animal production today is carried out on farms which have a wide range in the number of animals kept. More than 40 percent of the total number of milk cows live on farms with one-two heads. Such a structure does not encourage the production of cheap milk and makes it difficult to reach a high quality. A similar situation is found in pig production - near 30 percent of pigs are located on farms with 1-4 pigs (Table 9). The small farms cause pollution problems by uninstalled manure management systems. On large animal farms, especially pig farms, there are problems with manure and slurry handling - animal density per unit of agriculture land is high and causes the pollution of water resources. In previous years, mineral fertilizer and pesticide storage, was an additional source of groundwater pollution.
The drainage of agriculture land is an important precondition for successful farming in Latvia: more than 75 percent of agricultural land needs the control of soil humidity. Large-scale drainage work was done in the period 1960-1980, and today we have 1.6 million hectares of arable land with tile-drains. The total value of built drainage systems today is nearly two million LATs, which is an important foundation for agriculture development. Nonetheless, the drainage system needs maintenance and technical improvement.
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability on farm level
Despite both adecrease in the land area used in agriculture and a decrease in the number of livestock and amount of fertilizer applied, agriculture is still responsible for high nitrogen and phosphorus loads to waterbodies and the Baltic Sea. Despite its declining use in recent years, high nutrient loads in recent decades have led to a substantial nutrient accumulation in the soil in those areas with high livestock density. Animal production has decreased on the former animal farms and many of them have been closed. On the rest of the farms, animal density has increased after the privatization of farmland. Today, practically all former pig farms must be considered as point pollution sources of the environment.
Nutrient leaching is inevitable in Latvia due to the water balance in the soil, occurring in all soils, mostly during spring and autumn. Intensive agriculture coupled with high application rates of mineral fertilizers and soil drainage, might increase the leaching of nutrients. Most sensitive to leaching are light soils and soils with high acidity. The nutrient loses (Table 10) from agricultural catchments and drainage fields are to a large extent the result of the cropping system, soil properties and weather conditions. Management practices, such as soil tillage and nutrient applications, are also of great importance.
With the assistance of the Nordic countries, a network of nutrient run-off monitoring stations has been established in several agricultural catchments in Latvia. The network includes 3 small catchments with drainage fields and areas characterized with large applications of animal manure (pig farms). The size of small catchments varies from 3.7 to 9.5 km^2. The share of agricultural land ranges from 69 percent to 100 percent from the total acreage of these catchments.
Measurements in Latvian small catchments showed relatively small losses (N[tot] 4-17 kg/ha^-1 year^-133) as compared with results under similar conditions in Sweden and Norway, where the losses varied 20-50 kg/ha ^-1 year^-1. These results may most likely be attributed to higher applications of plant nutrients in the Nordic countries.
Nutrient run-off (Table 10) was considerably higher in animal manure application sites (pig farms). Nitrogen losses ranged from 21-239 kg/ha^-1 year^-1. On the Bauska farm, losses from the 50 hectares catchment, where slurry from 10 000 pigs was dumped, was larger than from any of the sites in Latvia (239,4 kg/ha ^-1 year^-1 of nitrogen in 1997 and 6.89 kg/ha ^-1 year^-1 of phosphorus in 1995). On the Ogre farm, pig production was stopped in 1992, but the farm still has a negative effect on the water quality (phosphorus run-off 2-5 kg/ha ^-1 year^-1).
The Surface pollution of waters with pesticides and other chemicals could be minimized by observing protection belts along the watercourses, the preservation of wetlands etc.
Generally, on farms open wells and artesian wells are used for the drinking water supply. Shallow ground water is poorly protected against pollution. The main pollutants in groundwater are slurry, wastewater and agricultural chemicals. Most sensitive to pollution are sandy soils. One of the most important drinking water quality characteristics is nitrate nitrogen coming from agricultural sources. The nitrate nitrogen concentration limit for drinking water is 50 mg/l in Latvia. Studies performed between 1995 and 1997 indicated that water from about 25 percent of wells in rural areas had high iron (naturally increased concentrations), ammonia, nitrate and mineral levels.
The pollution of groundwater un regional level does not occur in Latvia. However, at least 1 000 local sites of contaminated subsoil groundwater have been detected. Primitive agrochemical storage houses and large livestock farms were sources of groundwater pollution in the countryside.
The amount of outdated agricultural chemicals, mainly pesticides, was evaluated to be about 1 500 tonnes in 420 storage sites in Latvia in 1995. They were located in deserted storage of the former state or collective farms. An intermediate storage, in accordance with international safety standards, was established in 1997 in Gardene for the collection hazardous substances from the Western part of Latvia.
Waste water on farms. With the improvement of living standards on farms, water supply and sewage systems will be introduced. In most cases, the wastewater treatment in old farm buildings is very primitive.
Erosion is natural, and has a continuous effect on water quality. Agriculture, like other human activities, might increase erosion. Plant nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorus), together with loosed soil particles, causes the eutrophication of the water sources. Sedimentation of soil particles has threatened the spawning grounds of valuable fish species. Turbid water decreases the recreational value of water sources.
Silage effluent is one of the most concentrated and harmful pollutants. It will be collected, stored safely and then spread onto an area of no more than 50 m^3/ha.
Agriculture and air protection.
In Latvia Emissions per person are lower, and the quality of the air higher when compared with Western Europe. The emission of carbon dioxide (CO[2]) from fuel combustion and industry in Latvia is about 11 million tonnes. Currently carbon dioxide emission does not exceed the net assimilation of CO[2 ]in Latvian forests (sequestration of 20 million tonnes). Today agriculture has a decreased influence on air quality. However, as both the economy and farming start to grow rapidly, emissions from agriculture will become larger unless measures for its reduction are taken. Agricultural activities cause air pollution problems by the emission of various gases, odour nuisance, and smoke pollution. Until recently the present little attention was paid to air pollution from agricultural activities because it was believed that it was not an essential factor in air pollution. At the same time emissions, especially of ammonia, have a negative economic effect on farm practices.
Agriculture and its impact on the protection of landscape and biodiversity
The physical landscape is shaped by a continuous interaction between nature and human activities. Economic, ecological and socio-cultural processes influence its development. In addition to providing wildlife habitats and being a source of economic gain, landscape also reflects cultural heritage and aesthetic values. In Latvia there are practically no more untouched natural landscapes. Landscape and biodiversity in the agriculture of Latvia today are very closely connected, because the landscape is the basic precondition for biodiversity in agriculture.
Biodiversity in Latvia, the composition of plant and animal species, vegetation, and ecosystems were formed during the post-ice age over a period of about 12 000 years. The diversity of flora and fauna is determined by the climate differences between the maritime and more continental areas. The borders of the distribution range of many plant species intersect Latvian territory. Presently, forests cover nearly 45 percent of Latvia's territory. About 22 percent of the forests are on wet soils; about 20 percent are on drained soils. High diversity of forest types and mosaic distribution is characteristic. Relatively large areas are occupied by deciduous stands.
For the maintenance of biological diversity, some very important habitats are semi-natural grasslands, which in Latvia occupy less than 1 percent of the total territory. They can be found mainly in river valleys and in several areas along the seacoast. Freshwater ecosystems cover 3.7 percent of the state's area. Most Latvian rivers and lakes are small. Several shallow coastal lagoon lakes are particularly rich in biological diversity. Lake Engure, Lake Kanieris, the Teici and Pelecare bogs, are the most important wetland territories in Latvia meeting the requirements of the Ramsare Convention. The largest bog areas in Europe have been preserved mainly in the Baltic and Scandinavian countries, Poland and Belarus. Specific plant and animal species, including many post-glacial relicts, are found only in bogs. The total area of bogs in Latvia is 6 400 km2, or 9.9 percent, of which 70 percent are relatively untouched by human activities. About 6.7 percent of Latvia territory has
the formal status of being a nature or landscape protected area (Table 11).
Agroecosystems occupy 38.8 percent of the country's territory, from these: 69 percent are arable lands, and 1 percent is orchards. Owing to the rather low land use intensity during the last 50 years, as well as to natural conditions, agricultural lands play an important role in the whole spectrum of biological diversity of Latvia.
Population dynamics of plants and animals are closely connected with the dynamics of their habitats. Since the thirties, the total area of forests has constantly increased, but the total area of agricultural lands has decreased. In addition, it must be stressed that the most remarkable decrease has been observed in grasslands. All these changes have had an effect on the fluctuations of the whole diversity of organisms and populations. Under the socio-economic system present in Latvia since 1940, when part of the territory was intensely used, but the rest was either used inefficiently or abandoned, ecosystems, biotopes and species were retained which had become or very rare extinct elsewhere in Europe. This fact increases the international responsibility of Latvia for the preservation of biodiversity from the continental perspective.
Biodiversity increases the stability of ecosystems and productivity and is therefore one of the preconditions for sustainable agriculture. As biodiversity is possible only in the diversity of the landscape then both biological and landscape diversity is important. An increase in agricultural intensity will threaten the relatively rich nature of Latvia. The main threats are: pollution (mineral fertilizers, plant protection products, human wastes); impoverishment and destruction of habitats for wild species; interruption of migration routes of animals; lack of information and inventory of landscape destruction.
As the rural landscape is the main general habitat for wild species, animals, insects and different microorganisms providing life conditions, then the strategy of sustainable agriculture should provide measures for biodiversity and landscape maintenance by farmers. Each farm is unique and original and has its own place in the rural landscape. This creates conditions for biodiversity and landscape presentation.
Effects of environmental degradation on agriculture
The impact of agricultural production on the environment is currently much lower than in 1990. The amounts of waste, including hazardous waste water discharge, and the use of agrochemicals have decreased according to economic changes. The former Soviet regime left Latvia with numerous environmental problems.
Agricultural lands in Latvia are relatively free from heavy metal pollution, pesticides, and emissions from transport, industry and energy production. Most soils have a background of heavy metal concentrations. The concentrations of heavy metals in the soils of flooded areas, old apple tree orchards of former large farms, and near highways are higher than the average levels, but they do not exceed the allowed limits.
Rural areas face problems of military origin - former Soviet military areas became polluted over 50 years and still have not yet been cleaned up. The last Russian armed forces withdrew from Latvia on 31 August 1994. More than 300 military units and bases of difference sizes and purposes of the former Soviet Army occupied approximately 100 000 hectares, or 1.5 percent, of Latvia's territory (Hadonina Dz., 1998).
The most serious environmental and economic damage was done to agriculture and forest lands by the former Soviet Army's military firing grounds, airfields, rocket bases, fillingstations and fuel depots. The Russian Army had firing grounds for every kind of weapon in Latvian territory. The buildings in these areas are not usually suitable for conversion to civil use.
The largest Soviet military firing range and aviation targets covered 24 500 hectares of farmland and forest at Zvarde. Diffuse contaminants such as aircraft fuel, burning wastes, and explosives have rendered the soil unusable. Primary observation and assessment of the former Soviet Army areas showed the necessity for long-term remediation measures with large investments.
Raw materials for construction (limestone, gypsum, clay, sand etc.) and peat are the main geological resources of Latvia. Only 20 percent of resource extraction sites are managed in accordance with environmental requirements. About 17 percent of the quarries have unmanaged waste dumps.
Forests are one of the most important natural resources in Latvia. The total standing timber stock is estimated at 490 million m^3. The annual increment of standing stock is 16.5 million m^3, or 6.3 m^3/ha/year. The harvested volume has reached its allowed limits during the last few years. Some problems arise with artificial forest regeneration, especially in private wood lots. Part of unused agricultural lands will also be afforested.
THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIETY ON THE AGRICULTURAL ENVIRONMENT
Institutional change within the environmental policy
In Latvia, the top-level administration of environmental policy is implemented by the "Saeima" (Parliament) and the Cabinet of Ministers through different committees and commissions who operate through separate Ministries.
The year 1993 is a milestone in the development of environmental protection institutions in Latvia; the Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development (MoEPRD) was established. It superseded the Environmental Protection Committee and inherited its functions. The MoEPRD is responsible for the majority of environmental issues. Other ministries are responsible for the administration of certain aspects of the environment: the ministries of Welfare, Agriculture, Interior and Transport. Some power regarding environmental protection is delegated to local municipalities.
The main task of the MoEPRD is to work out and, together with other state administrative institutions, implement the common policy of environmental protection, conservation and rational use of natural resources, regional development, tourism, hydrometerology, construction, heritage development, and subsoil use. The MoEPRD has a well-developed system of subordinated and supervised institutions and a network of regional environmental boards. The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) works out and implements government policy in agriculture, forestry, and fishery. Some 26 regional agricultural departments and six different state inspections are subordinated to the MoA. The Ministry supervises several institutions, e.g. the State Fishery Board and the State Forest Service. The Ministry of Welfare is responsible for, first of all, "indoor" environmental issues, but there are often connections with outer environment quality. The Ministry is responsible for public health and labour
protection (safety) issues. The environmental responsibilities of the Ministry of Interior are fire safety, rescue work, and civil defence. The Ministry of Economics is responsible for energy issues. The Ministry of Transport carries out activities connected with transport of hazardous loads by railway, roads, and sea. This ministry is also responsible for the control of sea pollution from ships and the prevention of shiping accidents.
Municipal governmental institutions are responsible for environmental protection and natural resource use within their administrative territory. They have several important tasks, e.g. to organize the collection and transportation of household and non-hazardous industrial waste; to organize the water supply and sewage treatment. Besides, the council of a city or local municipality, according to the legislation may issue regulations that determine administrative responsibility in certain cases when legal requirements on protection or sustaining public forests, waters and specially protected nature objects, are violated.
During the present stage of national economic development, it is important to balance environmental requirements with the development of modern agricultural practices. Therefore environmental policy in the agricultural sector should be coordinated with national agricultural policies and national programmes for rural development. An interministerial committee of the MoEPRD and the MoA was appointed in 1995 to coordinate those policies relating to the environment and agriculture.
Environmental policy related to agriculture
Legislative and institutional framework for a national agri-environmental policy
The beginning of systematic environmental policy planning in Latvia was the National Environmental Policy Plan (NEPP) accepted by the Cabinet of Ministers on 25 April 1995.
Policy goals have been set on the basis of two main considerations. First, the present quality of the Latvian environment is generally high in comparison with the majority of European countries. While several acute environmental problems however exist, these are mostly in large towns, industrial regions and territories abandoned by the Russian army.
Second, because Latvia is presently in transition toward a market economy, the following must be taken into consideration - resources are limited; living standards are comparatively low; there is an absence of future economic development forecasts; social structures are changing. As a result, society is not aware enough of environmental issues. In addition, legislative acts, regulations and effective implementation mechanisms are incomplete and changing.
The NEPP sets four long-term environmental policy goals:
* significant improvement of environmental quality and ecosystem stability;
* protection of the existing biodiversity and landscape characteristics;
* sustainable use of natural resources;
* integration of environmental policy into all branches and fields of life.
Targets for agriculture in the NEP: by 2010, to reduce the losses of nitrogen, phosphorous and other biogenous substances from fertilizers used on arable lands by up to 50 percent of the amounts lost in 1994, avoiding further agro-chemical and biological degradation of soils. The next step in developing environment policy was in working out the National Environmental Action Programme (NEAPP), which was accepted by the MoEPRD on 1 October 1997. At present, this document consists of several introductions and descriptions of actions to be taken, including the environmental impact of agriculture.
Laws and directives on the use of inputs. There is a considerable amount of environmental legislation in Latvia. Work to fill in gaps and improve legislation has been intensive. Latvia wishes to construct an "environmental legal system". Many statutes have been adopted at different times.
Legislation on air pollution. The chief legislation is the Air Protection Law (1981 and the Regulations on the Protection of the Ozone Layer (1997). The Law is complimented by many standards on air quality, as well as by instructions and other subordinated legislation.
Water pollution legislation. Latvian environmental law includes two aspects of water protection. The first is protection against pollution. The second is protection against extraction and other forms of the physical use of water resources. Most important in practice are the new Water Use Permit Regulations (1997). The Marine Code (1994) includes some restrictions on pollution from ships. Property rights to water resources are regulated in the Civil Law.
Legislation on the control of chemicals. This legal area is in a period of important change, due to harmonization with EC law. New legislation will be adopted beginning with a framework Law on Chemical Substances.
* The Plant Protection Law (1994) aims at the protection of plants, particularly cultivated plants and their harvests, against pests and diseases. The purpose is also to prevent the unfavourable effects of plant protection activities on the natural environment and the accumulation of used-up pesticides in products, soil and water. The landowner is primarily responsible.
* Regulations concerning the Use of Sewage Sludge in Soil Fertilising and Development of Territories (1997) apply to the use of sewage sludge for the fertilization of soil for separate needs. They also include requirements on antropogenic loads and methods as to how to determine and control these loads.
* The draft Law on Fertilization Substances is prepared for the regulation of the market and the use of mineral fertilizers.
Unfortunately, environmental legislation in Latvia still has serious gaps. Until now, there has not existed any legislation regarding basic agri-environmental criteria at the farm level. Legislation regarding livestock density, manure storage, manure spreading, autumn and winter green land and environmental permits must still be elaborated and implemented. Therefore, it is of the utmost importance to develop such laws and regulations. The first step is the Code of Good Agricultural Practice for Latvia prepared in 1999.
Laws and directives on the protection of natural resources in agriculture
Nature conservancy legislation. Nature conservation has specific legislation. The protection of specific geographic land and water areas for nature conservation purposes is administered through:
* Law on Specially Protected Nature Territories (1993), complemented by
* Regulations on General Provisions for the Protection and Use of Specially Protected Nature Territories (1997) and
* Draft Law on the Protection and Maintenance of Landscapes.
A different legal approach is to protect certain species of biotopes in general. Such protection is provided by Regulations on Particularly Protected Nature Objects in the Territory of Latvia, Red Data Book, Hunting Law (1995), and Hunting Regulations (1995).
Legislation on the use and extraction of Natural Resources. This group of statutes regulates rights, restrictions and control regarding the extraction and other uses of natural resources. The chief legislation is:
* The Water Law (1973) was formulated in connection with pollution issues. It applies also to the extraction and other uses of water. One of its goals is to provide for the rational use and protection of water. The function of the Regulations on Water Use Permits (1997) is to determine procedures for the use of water, as well as the rights and obligations of the water consumer.
* The Law on Subsoil (1996) shall provides for a "comprehensive, rational and environmentally safe use of the subsoil". This includes, e.g. scientific research and exploration and also mining and other exploitations of subsoil natural resources.
* The fishing Law (1995) applies to all physical and legal persons fishing in inland waters, and also waters of the territorial sea and the economical zone of Latvia. The objects of the Law are fish and water plants. The law includes both "commercial fishing" and "angling".
* The law on Forest Use and Management (1994) has three fold goals. First, forests shall be protected as ecosystems and renewed. Secondly, forest management and use shall be controlled. Thirdly, the rights of forest managers and users shall be protected.
* The law applies to the "Forest Fund" of Latvia and to land users and managers of the forests of this Fund. The Forest Fund consists of both privately and state owned forests. State forests consist of land owned by the former Ministry of Agriculture according to the situation on 21 July 1940.
* The Law on Agriculture (1996) has as its goal the provision for the development of agriculture as a sector of the national economy. The function of the law is therefore to create preconditions for the development of an economically stable agriculture. However, the law also protects the environment concerned in order to achieve the sustainable use and preservation of the land, waters, forests and other nature resources, as well as to provide for the development of a cultural-historical environment.
The Cabinet of Ministers approves agricultural development programmes for each year. The programme includes both environmental protection aspects and agricultural production quality.
Land and planning legislation
An important component of the legislation concerns territorial planning. This should be regarded as a strategic instrument, providing for guidelines and even binding provisions on how to use, and not use, these territories in the future. The chief legislation in this respect is the Regulations on Territorial Planning (1994) is:
* The Law on Protected Belts (1997) concerns the protection of land and water areas for different purposes: conservation of biodiversity and natural resources, environmental protection, protection against accidents, but also the protection of land appropriate for certain types of exploitation.
* The Land law is closely related to the ongoing privatization of land in Latvia. The privatization and transformation of land often leads to developments that are sometimes in conflict with nature conservation and other protection interests. The Land Law is a comprehensive and complicated legal area. Land Law includes several legislation acts: the Law on Land Reform in Rural Areas (1990), the Land Tax Law (1990), the Law on Land Reform in Towns (1991), the Law on Land Use and Survey (1991), the Law on Land Privatization (1992), and the Law on Restoration of Property Rights to the Land Where Specially Protected Nature Objects are Located (1995).
When assigning land usage, the State Land Service may determine restrictions to promote state and environmental protection interests. Moreover, the legislation contains some general obligations for land users regarding environmental protection.
National measures on the promotion of ecologically sound agricultural practices
In accordance with political decisions and the orientation of Latvia towards the EU and international agreements (HELCOM, etc.), the transposition of EU requirements (directives, regulations, etc.) and the harmonization of Latvian legislation have started.
The long-term "Latvian rural development programme" was worked out and accepted by the Cabinet of Ministers in 1998. For the first time a programme for rural development in Latvia was prepared including all branches: agriculture, forestry, industry, services, and other rural infrastructure. It takes into account all three sustainable development factors: economical, environmental, and social. The MoEPRD co-operates with the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Welfare, and other ministries, as well as with non-governmental farmers' organizations in Latvia in order to facilitate the development of sustainable agriculture and minimize the impact on the environment. Issues concerning HELCOM recommendations for the agricultural sector are being duly addressed. However, a lot needs to be done to comply with the requirements of HELCOM and EU directives (in particular the Nitrates Directive) by ensuring the minimization of pollution and environmental impact from agricultural
fertilizers. To implement the Nitrates Directive, countries must prepare and introduce a special Good Agricultural Practice Code, which causes remarkable difficulties for many Member States. The Latvian Good Agricultural Practice Code was prepared in 1999 in the framework of a Danish-Latvian project, where the Latvian University of Agriculture represents the Latvian side.
Substantial contribution to the control of agricultural pollution is being made within the framework of Cupertino between the Nordic countries and Latvia (BEAROP): the monitoring of agricultural run-off at Mellupite, Saldus district, is the first fully automated monitoring of this kind in the Baltic countries, which is run by researchers from the Latvian University of Agriculture. The Latvian national agriculture run-off monitoring network is currently in development.
Regulations issued by the Cabinet of Ministers on the Compulsory Certification of Food Products, Goods, Perfumery Goods and Toys (1994) determine a list of products and goods that have to be certified by the Certification Centre of the Ministry of Welfare. Products and goods produced or distributed in Latvia have to comply with certain standards concerning safety to human life and the environment. Draft Regulations on the Process of Biological Agricultural Production and Certification of Products have been prepared. These regulations are related to a new certification system for biological agriculture in Latvia. The system determines certification standards. Conformity labels, called "Latvia's Ecoproduct", will be issued by the Certification Centre if the products comply with certain national standard requirements, concerning high food quality and also health and environmental protection. The certification process started at the beginning of 1998.
The importance of national environmental associations and organizations for environmental policy
The "Green face" of civil society organizations
Non-governmental environmental protection organizations (NGOs) have been active in Latvia since the end of the eighties. Besides environmental issues, the green movement at that time had striven for the restoration of Latvia's national independence.
The beginning of the nineties spotlighted both the local and international scale of environmental protection activities - protection of the Baltic Sea, the use of environmentally friendly energy sources and transport, environmental education. One may mention the Ecological Centre at the University of Latvia, the Environmental School for Children, the Environmental Protection Club with its branches all over Latvia, the Latvian Ornithological Society, the Liepaja Green Centre, the Latvian Fund for Nature, and others.
Today the largest non-governmental organization is the Environmental Protection Club (EPC). The number of its members exceeds 3 000; the club has developed a wide network of regional organizations. Since its membership of the Fund for European Environmental Education (FEEE), the EPC, in co-operation with the MoEPRD, has assumed the responsibility for Latvia's participation in the EU Blue Flag bathing water and marine campaign.
Environmental organizations in Latvia have not, as in some other states, developed an efficient voluntary system of certification. However, in July 1997, the Environmental Protection Club-Green NGO established the commission of the VAK Ecofund Green Certification. Its purpose is to administer the Eco label "Friendly to the Environment". The commission will also issue a Production Certificate "Friendly to the Environment". The agencies and bureaus of several prominent international environmental protection organizations also actively operate in Latvia. The World Wildlife Fund (WWF), the regional Environmental Centre (REC), Coalition Clean Baltic (CCB) can, among others be mentioned.
NGOs play a substantial role in the formulation and implementation of the State's is environmental policy through its awareness of the actual situation and by encouraging public support. In Latvia there is the positive experience concerning the involvement of NGOs in drafting and discussing new legal acts. For example, the Packaging Association of Latvia (PAL) has actively participated in drafting the law On the Natural Resources Tax.
The importance of private and non-profit organizations
The liberalization of the economy and of political and social life was accompanied by a reconstruction of farmers' organizations. Aims at political representation and the provision of services to their members, The Latvian Farmers' Federation (LZF) was founded in 1991 and is one of a number of producer organizations. It has approximately 20 000 members. It represents regional farmers' organizations, farmers' co-operatives, co-operative organizations and associations, as well as other farmers' organizations in the whole of Latvia.
The LZF's territorial structure includes 254 parish farmers' organizations and 26 regional farmers' organizations. The LZF's aims and commitments are to represent its members' in political decision making concerning the development of agriculture and to ensure that their member's legal rights are defended. The LZF aims to provide proposals and ideas to the Government, institutions and other organizations in order to favour the development of the rural economy and to promote family farming.
The Latvian Agricultural Advisory Service was established in 1991 in co-operation with the Ministry of Agriculture and with the Danish support and advice, and was converted in 1997 into a non-profit organization. It promotes the formation of other associations and unions (biological agriculture, a centre for rural innovations, agro-tourism). This service plays a key role in farmers' education and the training of agricultural teachers and advisers, including environmental training. Environmental education is a key element in the Law on Environmental Protection. The environment is now a compulsory subject in the agricultural training curriculum at the university level. Environmental training is also provided in agricultural schools.
Important organizations form target groups. These are sections of the public united by some common interest (farmers, consumers etc.), and that as a whole in some way influence an economic and environmental situation as a unified force. A single person may belong to different target groups simultaneously (e.g. a farmer may also be a consumer). As the State cannot solve environmental problems alone, co-operation with all the target groups is important to it, i.e. co-operation with decision makers representing the interests of a certain group, while at the same time representing the interests of the government in the group. Policy goals may be achieved only when all groups in society support the policy. Cooperation with target groups is problematic in a transitional society. Many important groups (e.g. industrialists, farmers, housewives, consumers) are not yet organized enough to be represented on the national level. Thus policy makers do not have adequate discussion partners
with whom to discuss problems, measures and activities.
CONCLUSIONS
1. With a drastic decrease of production, Latvian agriculture today is characterized as environmentally sound.
2. An important basis for Latvian development is an environment with diverse natural resources. The state of the environment in Latvia is remarkably good in many areas in comparison with other European countries.
3. The development of the economy will increase pressure on the environment. For sustainable development all three factors: economic, social and environmental, could be harmonized on the bases of equivalency.
4. At the present stage of sustainable development, the main target of Latvian agricultural policy is to convert agriculture into a sector able to be integrated in the common European market and produce outputs able to successfully competing successfully with products made in other states, both in terms of quality and production costs.
5. There is a need for wide interdisciplinary investigation, data compilation and the acquisition of adequate experience in order to establish a legislative background for sustainable rural development, including agriculture and forestry.
6. The necessity for the introduction of a sustainable farming system demands higher competence in all areas of agriculture: agronomy, engineering, economy and the environment. It can be achieved through education, demonstrations and extension activities.
7. The main goals for agri-environmental research activities in the Baltic Sea Region are:
* to enhance sustainable rural development;
* to improve the water quality of the Baltic Sea and inland water sources.
REFERENCES
Baltic Environmental Forum, 1998. Baltic State of the Environment Report Based on Environmental Indicators, Gandrs, Riga.
Busmanis, P., Carlson, G., et al. 1997. Agricultural Run-off Management, Land Report of Latvia (BAAP), Final Report 1994-1997, Latvia University of Agriculture/Swedish Institute of Agriculture Engineering, Jelgava/Uppsala.
Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia. 1998a. Agricultural Farms in Latvia in 1997, Riga.
Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia. 1998b. Agriculture in Latvia, A Collection of Statistical Data, Riga, 1998.
Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia. 1998c. Monthly Bulletin of Latvian Statistics, several issues, Riga.
Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia. 1998d. Statistical Yearbook of Latvia 1997, Riga, 1998.
Hadonina, D. 1998. Environmental Situation and Remediation Plans of Military Sites in Latvia, In: F.Fonnum et al. (eds.), Environmental contamination and Remediation Practices at Former and Present Military Bases, p. 63-69. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Netherlands.
Latvian State Institute of Agrarian Economics. 1997. Latvian Agriculture: Development, Possibilities, Problems, Proceedings, 1995-1997, Riga.
Latvia University of Agriculture. 1999. Code of Good Agricultural Practice for Latvia (project), Jelgava.
Michanen, G. & Blumberga, U. 1998. Environmental legal system in Latvia, Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development of the Republic of Latvia and Swedish Environmental Protection Agency, Riga.
Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Latvia, Department of Information. 1998. Agriculture in Latvia 1997, Riga.
Ministry of Economy, Republic of Latvia. 1998. Economic Development of Latvia, Report, Riga.
Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development. 1996. National Environmental Action Programme, Riga.
Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development. 1998a. Climate Change Mitigation Policy Plan for Latvia, Riga.
Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development. 1998b. Groundwater Protection strategy, Riga, 1998.
Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development. 1998c. Environmental Protection Policy in Latvia, The Eve of the Next Century, Riga.
ANNEX
The Latvia is one of the three Baltic States, on the eastern cost of Baltic Sea. Latvia gained its independence on 18 November 1998. During the first period of independence, up to 1940, agriculture was rapidly developed and exports of food stuff, flax and timber played an important role. Agricultural production and the food consumption per capita level was comparable with Denmark and Germany. In 1940, Latvia was incorporated into the Soviet Union. In May 1990, the Declaration on the Restoration of the Independence of the Republic of Latvia was accepted. On 27 November 1995, Latvia submitted an application to enter the European Union.
The total area of Latvia is 64.6 thousand km^2, with the following land use structure: forests, 44 percent; agricultural land, 39 percent; bog, 10 percent; water bodies (inland), 4 percent; roads, buildings, 3 percent. There are 2.5 million hectares of agricultural land in the country, including 1.6 million hectares of drained arable land.
The population of Latvia is 2.5 million with a relatively low population density, 38 people/km^2. Nearly one third of the population lives in rural areas. Employment in agriculture and forestry is relatively high - 18 percent. According to official data, unemployment averages 7-8 percent, but in the countryside it is higher.
Table 1: Land reforms in Latvia
No. Period Characteristics
Landlords own main land properties.
Peasants received rights to purchase land. 48% of land owned by farmers.
2. 1920-1939 Land is property, 70% of land owned by farmers.
3. 1940-1988 All land nationalized, collective farming, land is not privately owned.
Stage 1 - Land is transferred for use.
Stage 2 - Private land's property rights guaranteed process would be completed in 10-15 years.
Figure 1: Changes of main land use in 1935-1997.
SLSL
Table 2: Number of farms (on 1 January).
Area Number
Number ha percent 
Peasant farms 94 905 2 238 499 58,6 95 200
Household plots 156 600 1 241 815 32,5 155 700
Private subsidiary farms 16 680 142 406 3,6 61 700
Individual orchards 81 902 7 381 0,2 
Specialized state farms 81 27 483 0,7 59
Statutory companies 487 146 648 3,8 421
Other agricultural needs 631 16 453 0,5 
CSBL
According to the Law of the Republic of Latvia "On Land Reform", private farms located in rural areas are considered peasant farms if the land has been assigned to the users (owners) in conformity with the local government decision, for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a peasant farm. Farms defined as household plots are those with a living house or structures intended for the practise of craftsmanship and belonging to the user (owner) of the land, and the farming itself being of an ancillary character. Private subsidiary farms are rural farms (including kitchen gardens) assigned by the local governments or other legal bodies for a certain duration of time on a lease contract basis to individuals occupying state or co-operative dwellings or houses but having no farmland for permanent use, or its size being too small; provided that at least one of the able-bodied family members has employment outside the subsidiary farm as his main job.
Table 2: Dynamics of peasant farms.
Indices 1990 1995 1996 1997
Number of farms, thousand 7.3 64.3 74.1 94.9
Total area, thousand ha 151.9 1278.7 1460.6 2238.5
Agricultural lands, thousand ha 128.7 777.9 864.9 1297.9
Forests, thousand ha 28.0 390.0 469.0 732.9
Average area of a farm, ha 20.8 19.9 19.7 23.6
Average area of agricultural land in a farm, ha 14.9 12.1 11.6 13.6
Average area of forests in a farm, ha 3.8 6.1 6.3 7.7
CSBL
Table 3: Privatization of Agricultural Processing and Service Companies (May, 1998).
Companies Number Of which privatized Transferred to Privatization Agency
Agricultural service 125 104 21
Grain processing 17 14 3
Dairies farms 15 15 0
Bakeries 14 13 1
Meat processing 14 11 3
Total 185 157 28
MoA
Figure 2: Dynamics of Agricultural Outputs (in percent 1990=100)
CSBL
Table 4: Changes in Latvian agriculture, thousands tonnes.
1989 1998 percent in 1998
compared with 1989
Crop production
Grain (barn weight)
Sugar beet
Potatoes
Livestock production
Milk
Meat (slaughter weight)
Number of livestock (at the end of year)
Cattle
Incl. dairy cows
Pigs
CSBL
Table 5: Sown area crops in Latvia, thsd. ha.
Type of sown area 1938 1990 1995 1996 1997 1998
Total sown area of which:
Cereal crops
Flax
Sugar beet
Potatoes
Vegetables
Fodder crops
CSBL
Table 6: Use of organic and mineral fertilizers, pesticides and liming of soil.
Organic fertilizers, mln.tonns 16.6 13.4 9.6 6.7 5.8 5.1 5.8 4.4
Mineral fertilizers, thsd.tonns 389.5 357.5 213.8 103.8 64.0 21.4 25.6 33.6
Pesticides, tonns 4 366 2 678 1 649 738 471 602 486 493
Liming of soil, thsd.ha 149.2 121.3 29.2 8.5 7.2 3.0 0.4 2.5
LEDC
Table 7: Grouping of all farms by the number of pigs (on 1 July 1998).
Number of pigs
on a farm Farms with the respective
number of pigs Pigs in a group
number in percent number in percent
Total 75 377 100 438 801 100
Table 8: Protected Nature Areas of Latvia.
Category of protected territories IUCN Category Number Total area (ha)
State Nature Reserves I 5 39 261
National Parks II 2 134 840
Complex Nature Reserves IV or V 40 41 646
Botanical Reserves IV 46 4 367
Bog Reserves IV 28 26 889
Cranberry reserves IV 51 21 611
Zoological Reserves IV 15 15 870
Nature Parks II 11 25 602
Protected Landscape Areas V 5 100 018
Biosphere Reserves IX 1 400 000
MoEPRD
Table 9: Nutrient run-off from Latvian agricultural run-off monitoring sites.
Site, level of
monitoring
N[tot], kg ha^-1 year^-1 P[tot], kg ha^-1 year^-1
Small catchments - non-point sources
Berze (intensive farming)
Small catchment
Field drainage
Mellupite (average farming)
Small catchment
Field drainage
Vienziemite (extensive farming)
Small catchment
Field drainage
Animal manure application sites - point sources
Auce (32 hectares of slurry irrigation, approximately 2000 fattening pigs)
Small catchment 60 ha, including 30 ha of slurry application site 31.7 50.4 69.5 0.15 0.10 0.07
Ogre (slurry application from 1977 up to 1992), farm closed
Small catchment 300 ha, of former slurry application site, including lagoons full with slurry 21.8 33.2 5.40 2.41
Bauska (full year slurry spreading on 50 ha, approximately 10 000 fattening pigs)
Small catchment 800 ha, downstream pig farm and slurry application site
Catchment 50 ha
Slurry dumping site from 1993
Latvia University of Agriculture, Jansons V., Busmanis P.
ABREVIATIONS
CEEC Central Eastern Europe Countries
CSBL Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia
ECMC Environmental Consulting and Monitoring Centre, Latvia
EU European Union
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization
HELCOM Helsinki Commission
LEDC Latvian Environmental Data Centre
LLU Latvia University of Agriculture
LSIAE Latvian State Institute of Agrarian Economics
LVL lat, Latvian national currency
LZF Latvian Farmer's Federation
MoA Ministry of Agriculture
MoE Ministry of Economy
MoEPRD Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development
OECD Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development
SLSL State Land Service, Latvia
33 Per hectare and per year
<section>6</section>
COUNTRY REPORT ON THE PRESENT ENVIRONMENTAL SITUATION IN AGRICULTURE
- LITHUANIA -
Alvydas Balezentis
Lithuanian Institute of Agrarian Economics, Vilnius
INTRODUCTION
Due to the ongoing processes of collectivization, land restitution and chemical treatment as well as the enlargement of fields in rural areas, land erosion and pollution has increased tremendously. It has caused the increased pollution of surface-run-off and groundwater. Due to the major construction of buildings for livestock and other types of buildings, new establishments of settlements increased the number of water and soil pollution sources.
In recent times, the territorial structures of rural areas were dismantled with the transformation of the landscape occurring as well. Due to the aforesaid, the ecological situation in the rural areas has aggravated and the attractiveness of the countryside thus diminished. Decrease in the agricultural production volume also led to a decrease in air pollution. However, in the meantime, due to the establishment of market-oriented farms and the development of the processing industry, air pollution has once again been increasing.
The National Agricultural Development Programme defines how Lithuania strives to achieve the compatibility between agricultural production and environment protection goals
With regard to the aforesaid, the National Agri-environment Programme is currently under preparation. The latter programme provides for special measures, which decrease the damaging impact of agricultural activities in the environment. The aim of the programme is to solve problems associated with the impact at agricultural activities have on the environment, such as surface water pollution with nutrient matter due to point-and-dispersed pollution, the disappearance of biodiversity, and the transformed landscape in rural areas and so fourth.
IMPACT OF TRANSITION AND STRUCTURE OF PROPERTY RIGHTS
Privatization and Redefinition of Property Rights on Natural Resources
During the land reform, which started in Lithuania in 1931, the following changes occurred in the use of land:
1. Former large-scale agricultural enterprises (collective farms and state-owned farms) lost the right to land at the end of 1931. According to the Government Resolution, they had to be liquidated (eliminated). In 1932, the large-scale agricultural enterprises were reorganized into smaller corporate farms, which obtained the right to land on the basis of the land tenancy agreements signed with the landowners. Due to the frequent (annual) land restitution claims, national land tenancy agreements are always short term.
2. New family farms are being established on the reclaimed land. These land users have right to establish the homesteads as well as to sell, rent or otherwise dispose of one's own land.
3. Up to 1989, individual families living in rural areas took advantage of the arable land allocated for farming (0.5-0.6 hectares) in accordance with the needs of these areas of land for forage purposes. The proceeding legal acts provide for the extent of land allocated to personal farms: 2-3 hectares of utilized agricultural area. These farms differ from the market-oriented and family farms in the way that their production is consumed within the farm (not for sale).
These main land user groups cover the major part of the agricultural areas. The agricultural areas utilized by the corporate farms decreased (some are liquidated, and new corporate farms are not being established). The number of family farms is increasing; however, a major part of these family farms rent the land to other farmers or corporate farms. The number of agricultural households is decreasing due to the fact that after land restitution they are included in the family farm category. Further changes will be stabilized after land privatization is completed. The number of land users, which use land just for a short period, will decrease too. Agricultural land use dynamics are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Agricultural land use dynamics in Lithuania 1994,1996 and 1998
No. Land user groups
Area, 000 ha
Estimations
1. Agricultural enterprises 157.4 799.7 505.1 500 700
2. Family farms 986.8 1 288.0 1 465.2 2 400 2 500
3. Household plots 862.2 820.3 718.2 500 300
4. Tenanted land 205.6 335.6 634.5 100 -
5. Land not utilized 253.5 660.5 576.6 400 -
Total agricultural area 3 882.5 3 904.1 3 899.6 3 900 3 500
Privately owned land 132.9 782.0 1 191.2 3 300 3 400
In line with land reform, process of the forest privatization is taking place (rehabilitation of ownership rights and purchase of used areas from the state). It is foreseen that the proportion of the privately-owned-and-state-owned used areas will change as indicated in Table 2.
Table 2. Structure of wood areas in Lithuania and future forecasts
Factors Area, 000 ha
State-owned forests 1 997.7 1 944.4 1 887.0 1 700 1 850
Privately-owned forests - 35.1 112.7 500 550
Total area: 1 997.7 1 979.5 1 999.7 2 200 2 400
After regaining independence, failure of the collective-farm system, as well as change in the rural society changes its view toward land. Individuals decided to retain highly fertile land for generations and to produce high quality agricultural products with the efficient use of fertilizers. Mineral fertilizers are expensive and constitute a significant part of farm expenditures. Due to their high cost, farmers and corporate farms buy only the necessary quantities of fertilizers. Moreover, for economic reasons certain parts of the land are not fertilized at all. It frequently occurs that the farmer lacks sufficient knowledge about fertilizers and their rational use.
Restructurization in rural areas
In the past several years, all collective and state farms were reorganized and privatized. As a result, the farming structure showed a tendency to change towards smaller sized private farms. Currently, four different types of land use characterize the Lithuanian farming structure (Table 3).
Table 3. Farming structure in Lithuania during the period of 1994-1997
Farming type 1994 1/1/1995 1/1/1996 1/1/1997
Agricultural companies
Average size, ha
Family farms (000)
Average size, ha
Household plots (000)
Average size, ha
Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry of the Republic of Lithuania
* Agricultural companies (corporate farms). Larger, corporate farming enterprises were created as a result of the privatization and transformation of state and collective farms. Agricultural companies are also involved in food processing and trading activities. Under current law, agricultural companies are not allowed to own agricultural land. The new law on agricultural partnerships facilitates the further transformation of these companies into genuine privately owned operations and will support the consolidation of these which financially and economically seem to be most viable as joint-stock companies.
* Family farms. The first family farms were established before independence through the Law on Peasant Farms, which allowed rural inhabitants to receive user rights on land up to 50 hectares. This process of land allocation continued until September 1991, when the new overall laws for land restitution superseded it. The consolidation of the increasing number of smaller-scale private farms will be the most serious challenge facing the agricultural leadership of the country.
* Household plots (household farms). There are more than 640 000 household plots, averaging about 2.2 hectares in size. These are often operated by the shareholders of agricultural companies or by rural inhabitants in order to supplement their income from other sources.
* Other state land users. A significant portion (14%) of state-owned agricultural land is currently used for thousands of garden plots operated by urban dwellers, as well as by research and education establishments.
Liberalization
The objective of the current policy is to support the development of a competitive farming sector by gradually abolishing price subsidies and support farm incomes through direct payments and investment support as well as reduction in the level of trade protection.
Lithuania has progressed through most of all, of the several steps in the evolution of price formation mechanisms. Beginning from state determined prices and implicit subsidy patterns of the pre-reform period, input subsidies were removed, regulated farm and retail prices were increased, prices were deregulated, quantitative trade restrictions were replaced by tariffs, and domestic market intervention policies were introduced.
Real farm prices have declined substantially, while real retail prices have increased after market liberalization.
A new system of agricultural taxation is being prepared and will be launched with the introduction of a universal income tax system.
Development of the Economic Framework on the Farm Level
Land Market
The land market is constrained by those legal limits restricting land ownership to only physical individuals and to the State, and the setting an upper limit on individually owned land, thereby preventing the use of land as collateral. Only registered land can be sold. There is a quite active lease market, which is expected to increase further as the compulsory leasing to agricultural companies expired in 1997. The most significant land trading activity is related to the purchase from the government of those household plots distributed in rural areas before restitution began in earnest. The current users have priority over former owners who might claim the purchase of their plots. Out of 34 000 household plots, about one third of the owners have already purchased their plots with privatization vouchers. Another third of users have traded land acquired through other means in exchange for the ownership of their plots. The remaining third of the cases are still unsettled.
Development of Input and Output Prices
Between 1991 and 1996, agricultural incomes suffered from a severe price-cost squeeze. This occurred because the prices, especially energy, were liberalized at an early stage in the reform process, while at this stage food processing remained subject to government regulation. The gap between agricultural input and output prices widened sharply between 1992 and 1994, but narrowed again in 1995 and 1996 when the rise in input prices slowed because of falling inflation, while output prices increased as a result of the further deregulation of the agricultural sector.
During the transition period, consumers were affected by the loss of massive consumer subsidies at the same time that real incomes were falling. This resulted in a sharp increase in the proportion of household income spent on food, which almost doubled to 61.5% between 1990 and 1993. In more recent years, with the slowdown in food price increases in 1994/96 and some growth in real incomes, this expenditure share fell back slightly to 57.4% in 1995, and to 56.6% in 1996, and fell further to 52.2% in 1997 [16].
IMPACT OF AGRICULTURE ON THE ENVIRONMENT
Environmental Degradation Caused by Agriculture
Agriculture and Soil Protection
Soil Erosion
Erosion is a soil-breaking process caused by natural factors and human activities. In Lithuania, the most common types of erosion are water erosion and wind erosion. The latter phenomenon especially became common during the existence of collective farms due to the fact that most of the areas of land were utilized for sowing purposes. A massive cut down of bushes and small trees, as well as the tillage of soil, led to these the above mentioned types of erosion. About 15% of utilized agricultural area is constantly being affected by erosion and about 38% of land is exposed to potential risk by erosion.
Water erosion is especially severe during the period of melting snow and heavy showers. There are two types of water erosion especially common in Lithuania: linear (when soil is broken up by the concentrated heavy water flows) and plane (when water is concentrated on the surface of land). Both types of erosion cause a lot of damage.
Wind erosion is not as harmful as water erosion but it should not be underestimated. This type of erosion is common on arable land the size of which is 160 hectares and is especially strong during the snowless winters when the soil is deeply frozen, and in the early spring when the soil dries up very quickly.
Human activities is the main factor causing erosion processes. If there were no soil tillage, only some places would be effected by erosion and would end up appearing as ravines. However, there would almost be no possibilities for linear and plane erosion to appear. Moreover, water erosion is stimulated due to the improper tillage of soil and poor crop alteration in certain places.
Consumption of Mineral Fertilizers
Most of the soil in Lithuania is not very fertile. Moreover, its physical and chemical characteristics are not favourable. The soil is not enriched with potassium and phosphorus.
More than one third of the arable land in Lithuania contain acid. A major part of such land is in the Western and eastern parts of Lithuania it constitutes half of the total arable land. Due to the aforesaid, the conditions for plant growing become worse. As a result, there is an increased need for fertilizers.
The mineral fertilizer industry experienced rapid development in the post-war period. At the same time, the use of fertilizers in agriculture increased too. Special attention was paid to the accumulation of organic materials and to the appropriate consumption. With the purpose of rationally using organic fertilizers, a National Agri-chemical Service was established, and highly qualified specialist have been employed within this system. The agronomic services within each state-owned agricultural enterprise were responsible for the organization and control of fertilization. Despite the newly established systems, only the economically successful farms were capable of the rational use of fertilizers, and in acquiring the necessary fertilizers and guaranty the use, which is safe to the surrounding environment.
The production volume of mineral fertilizers in Lithuania is gradually increasing and has doubled during the last five years. However, the demand for fertilizers has been decreasing. With comparing the consumption of fertilizers between now and during the last decade, it has been noticed that consumption has decreased around ten fold. The latter sector indicates that agriculture is undergoing difficult times. However, from the environmental perspective it is an encouraging fact.
Currently, around 70 kg of mineral fertilizers is used for one hectare of agricultural area. The total annual consumption of fertilizers is 50 thousand tonnes within the country. This number includes 30 thousand tones of nitric fertilizers, 20 thousand tones of phosphorus and potassium. The use of fertilizers in different farms greatly depends on economic reasons.
Despite there is no statistical data on the production and consumption of the organic fertilizers, it is apparent that corporate farms and other types of farms strive for the rational use of fertilizers. Of course, as it was mentioned above, these people lack knowledge on how to use fertilizers properly. For this purpose outside expertise is being sought.
Due to the improving situation in the agricultural sector, it is estimated that consumption of mineral fertilizers will increase in the future. However, to a great extent the situation will depend on further policy implementation and training.
Agriculture and Water Protection
Plant Protection
Pesticides have been used even four hundred years ago. Many people suffered, and the environment was polluted due to a scarce knowledge about their proper use. When using such chemicals, very little was known about the harmful effects they have and, as a result, many people working with pesticides suffered from their damaging effects. Moreover, there was a shortage of health protection measures and pesticides were sometimes used unconsciously.
The 1980s brought with it more intensive agricultural development, and positive results have been achieved. A lot of mineral fertilizers, pesticides and other chemical materials were used in agricultural activities. Intensive technologies for crop growing were applied. Due to the aforesaid, the 1980s achieved the highest level of pesticide use. However, at the same time scientific institutions have been looking for chemical materials which are more effective and less dangerous to human health. They have been looking at alternative materials for plant protection. Most of the agricultural enterprises hired plant protection specialists, the responsibility of whom was to supervise the use of pesticides. Strong control on the use of chemical materials were carried out.
By now there are a lot of pesticides in warehousing, the validity of which have expired. In many cases, the packaging is old and this way threatens the environment.
After regaining independence and the failure of collective farms, the volume of agricultural production decreased. At the same time, the need for and consumption of pesticides decrease. Only the most successful farmers continued to use pesticides. Some of those farms could afford to buy new atomisers or instead repair the old ones. Due to these factors, the quality of spraying improved.
In the meantime, there has been a tendency for the consumption of pesticides to increase; constituting 50 kg of pesticides per 100 hectares of utilized agricultural area. This figure is much lower in comparison to the 1980s. Gradually the process for pesticide registration is becoming stricter. It is forbidden to register pesticides the validity of which has expired and which are not suitable for consumption. Priority is given to pesticides which are more safer for human health and environmentally less dangerous. Companies distributing pesticides on regular basis consult farmers on how to use pesticides in order to cause as little harm as possible.
Currently, chemical use for plant protection purposes is insignificant and it is unrealistic to even decrease this quantity. However, it is estimated that as farms grow the consumption level will also increase. In the meantime, it is very important to seek the rational use of pesticides and to cause as little harm as possible.
Water Protection
At the moment, concentrated pollution has diminished because of industry decline. However, dispersed pollution, the major source of which is agriculture, covered larger areas up to 1995, and only during recent years has it began to diminish. Even today, the flow of nitrate nitrogen dispersed in polluted rivers had not yet decreased to the level of 1990.
The most polluted rivers with nitrate are the Nevis and the Tatula. From 1992-1995 the largest amount of the nitrate in these rivers. The flow of nitrate nitrogen in the Nevis at that time was from 4 327 to 6 300, in the Tatula: 290-300 tonnes annually. Recently, the flow of pollution has decreased in these rivers. However, nitrogen concentrations still exceed permissible limits, especially in the springtime. Phosphate concentration also exceeds permissible limits in the river Tatula.Moreover, in certain cases, it exceeds the limits by up to 10 times. Even though the river Nevis does not display leaps in the level of concentrations, it exceeds the permissible limits all year round.
Underground hydrosphere is characterized by large inertia. In the forage area within the district of Kdainiai, 15 years after removing the farmstead nutrient matter concentration exceeded permissible limits. Therefore, pollution prevention for the quality of ground waters is very important. Moreover, the pollution of underground waters has been determined to cover one-third of the country's territory. Nitrogen and organic matters mainly pollute underground water in Lithuania. Around 800 thousand of the population uses mine-well water, which has nitrate levels way above permissible limits.
The Good Agriculture Practice code helps to decrease dispersed and concentrated water pollution. In the future, there will be support for the development of agriculture preservation. The implementation of international projects will speed-up and stimulate the introduction of technologies for the reduction of water pollution.
Land Improvement
An area of 3 046.0 thousand hectares (77 percent of moist land fund) is being drained in Lithuania; 2 620.5 thousand hectares of it are drained by drainage. The total length of all categories of ditches is 63 372 km. The length of drainage pick-up and drains is 1 603.7 thousand kilometres. There are 70 754 thousand of various hydrotechnical equipment, 105 pumping stations, 721 369 thousand drainage equipment, 264 reservoirs (the area of which is 11 23.1 hectares), 17 487 kilometres of roads and 500 km of protective dykes were built in the draining process. Most of the works were carried out between 1966-1990. 120-140 thousand hectares was drained in different years. This created favourable conditions for the intensification of agricultural production. According to some plant-growing and cattle-breeding data Lithuania has achieved the level of the most developed countries in the world, while the living conditions of its inhabitants has also improved.
Major harm has been caused to the environment by the intensification of agricultural production according to the policy of that time.
The streamlets were controlled, the ditches were sewerage, the shrubs were stubbed and even the forests were felled in some places, unproductive lands were cultivated and the peat bogs were drained in the process of farms enlargement. For this reason, the hydrological regime has changed in Lithuania; the area of swamps, natural meadows and pastures has decreased; field erosion by the wind and water has intensified, the ground water level has gone down, channel erosion in the steep-inclined straightened streamlets has increased, the landscape has changed, the ecological corridor has been broken in many places, and the number of wild animals which are common in the Lithuanian forests (hares, quails, snipes, larks etc.) has decreased. Perhaps the most serious problem is that the spontaneous cleaning of plants from unused material has decreased. The washing off of nitrates through drainage has increased to 15-20 kg/ha within a year and is stronger than in a streamlet. For this
reason, the enlargement of drainage systems not only reduced the ground water level, but also made worse the quality of the water. After the moving of individual farms, the cattle density and manure norms often exceed recommendations around the settlements and large cattle-breeding farms. The distant fields, however, are fertilized only by fertilizers so the soil has begun degrading.
Every year the state decreased grants for the inspection of land-improvement equipment and for the new systems building. It will be difficult to expect support for the inspection of land-improvement equipment. So far and maybe in the future the farmers can gradually promote the inspection of land-improvement equipment. This will by itself stimulate naturalization of some reclaimed areas less suitable for agriculture.
Agriculture and Air Protection
The quality of the air is constantly monitored in ten urban and industrial centres, by 22 permanent air control stations. More than 76 000 air samples are tested annually for dust sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide and specific pollutants related to the chemical industry. Fuel combustion is the most significant air polluter. Air quality in the cities depends mainly on emissions from stationary (industry and energy) and mobile (transport) polluting sources and also on meteorological dispersal conditions. A high concentration of pollutants usually occurs when weather conditions do not allow pollutants to disperse in the higher atmospheric layers.
During the last eight years there has been a decrease in the volume of emission into the atmosphere, but this is related more to a decrease in pollution from stationary sources. The effect of transport on air pollution is constantly growing. Today pollutants from mobile sources make up three-quarters of atmospheric pollutants. The gradual replacement of crude oil with natural gas will continue to diminish pollution from stationary sources will grow in absolute and relative measures.
Agriculture and Its Impact on the Protection of Landscape
The implementation of market principles in the economy has caused changes in the formation of the landscape. The restoration of private ownership of land has increased diversity in land utilization, including the widening of arable areas, logging, construction and so on. In time, the conditions for a more stable functioning of the landscape will materialize. A relative surplus of agricultural produce means that some previously cultivated land is undergoing a re-naturalization process. This process is leading to the revival of natural plants, the rejuvenation of soil formation processes and an increase in the potential productivity of soil.
Land, which is used for agriculture is decreasing to some extent because of the total area of land significant for agricultural production is decreasing (3 000-4 000 hectares per year), while areas under forests are increasing (2.000-3.000 hectares per year). Areas drained have diminished tremendously. At the same time, urbanization is increasing. By 1 January 1997, there were 307 300 hectares of urban land and road areas and 2 469 500 hectares of natural and semi-natural forests, greenery, marsh and water. In other words, the ratio between natural and semi-natural land to urban land now equals 8.04. This indicator is the poorest in the Kaunas (5.35), Marijampol (5.45) and iauliai (6.68) districts, in the regions of Vilkavikis (3.20), Pasvalys (4.37) and Pakruojis (4.83) and in the cities of Panevys (0.11), Marijampol (0.25), and Kaunas (0.50). There is an obvious need for the development of measures to balance urban and green landscapes- primarily in the poorest and most
disturbed areas.
The future dynamics of landscape diversity will depend to a great extent on public efforts to implement a sustainable development strategy.
In summarising the current environmental conditions, it can be said that the situation has improved in comparing to what it had been during the last decade before independence.
Agriculture and Biodiversity
Natural and semi-natural ecosystems such as forests, bogs, grasslands, waters and sand cover one third of Lithuanian territory. The number of species in different ecosystems varies. There are three biogeographical provinces in Lithuania: the East Baltic, Central Europe and Baltic Sea Aquatic.
In order to preserve species and habitats, the Lithuanian Red Book has been compiled as well as protective territories being established. Many territories with high biodiversity are in Lithuanian highlands, sandy plains and valleys.
There have been 32 laws adopted in Lithuania, which directly or indirectly regulate environmental protection and the usage of natural biological resources. The Lithuanian Ministry of Environment is responsible for the preservation of biodiversity. The Lithuanian Ministry of Agriculture as well as the district and municipal institutions, also deals with the preservation of biodiversity.
The Institute of Botany, the Institute of Ecology, the Institute of Forests and other institutes as Vilnius University, Vilnius Pedagogical University and Klaipda University investigate biodiversity in Lithuania. Non-governmental organizations such as the Lithuanian Nature Fund, societies of Ornithologists, Botanists, Teriologists, etc. also work in the field of biodiversity preservation.
During Soviet times, biodiversity was damaged by the draining of reclamed: natural bogs and marshes were drained, small rivers' beds were straightened, small woods in fields and farmstead were cut down, etc. A lot of different chemicals such as fungicides, herbicides, etc. were poured on those crops grown in big arable land areas. The chemical and wastewater pollution of soil, lakes, rivers, the Kuriai Lagoon and the Baltic Sea has increased. The intensive eutrophization of lake has alos started. Because of these processes a succession of flora and fauna, some species of plants, animals and fungus have all vanished. After the abolition of farmsteads, traditional farming was wrecked, irretrievably destroying the genefund of many cultural plants, cattle and poultry.
At present, after the ruination of the collective farm system, individual farms make a considerably lower impact on biodiversity. The means assigned for land reclamation, supervision of mechanisms and reconstruction is decreasing year after year in Lithuania. According to the priorities approved by the Ministry of Agriculture, the construction of new drainage systems is limited. The activities of non-governmental organizations and international agroenvironment funds are developing which prompt attention to be turned to the deteriorating ecological situation in rural areas.
INFLUENCE OF SOCIETY ON THE AGRICULTURAL ENVIRONMENT
Institutional Change within Environmental Policy
The state system of regulating environmental protection has changed a great deal over a short period of time. The Lithuanian Department of Environmental Protection has been established within regard to the order of the Lithuanian Supreme Council in April 1990, less than a month after the regaining of independence. The task, functions, authority, structure and management of this Department were confirmed in July 1990 by law, and was subsequently set up as an institution accountable to the Supreme Council (now the Parliament).
In 1994, therefore, the Department of Environmental Protection was reorganized into the Ministry of Environmental Protection. At the same time, ten regional environmental protection agencies were reorganized into regional departments (Vilnius, Kaunas, Klaipda, iauliai, Panevys, Alytus, Marijampol and Utena). Local environmental protection agencies were established in these municipalities.
Taking into account the experience of many European countries, and seeking to adopt more balanced decisions on environmental protection, the part of territorial planning and the development of housing and technical standardization, urban planning carried out by the Ministry of Construction and Urban Development and the part of forestry regulated by the former Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry were transferred to the former Ministry of Environmental Protection which in spring of the 1998 become the Ministry of Environment. Territorial planning within the Ministry of Environment was to some extent conducive to strengthening environmental protection policies by co-ordinating development interests. Nevertheless, the results of this attempt to co-ordinate environment protection and development interests will only be apparent in the future when it becomes clear whether the parties involved are able to arrive at balanced decisions.
A significantly more complex situation exist, not at a high ministerial level, but in regional and local governments. At the very beginning, district administrations were created as instruments for developing and implementing regional policy. There is still no adequate district partner on environmental protection to participate in decision making on development issues. And, finally, there has been no adequate division of functions and responsibilities between the Ministry, district administrations representing regional policy, and the local environmental protection agencies. It should be mentioned that the EU considers that the creation and implementation of co-ordinated regional policy as a necessary condition for EU membership.
It is very important to foster qualified environmental protection actors in order to guarantee that development is environmentally friendly and beneficial to society. Moreover, decisions made on the local government level often directly affect local community development.
When summarising today's management problems, it should be said that a three-level environmental protection policy should be developed: the Parliament and the Ministry of Environment should be responsible on national basis, and district administrations and local governments should be responsible on regional basis, which will enhance wide spread public participation. At present, national structures are better developed, while regional structures are still being established.
In spite of the frequent organizational and functional changes within the environmental protection system, programme management is used more often and more broadly here than in other state sectors. This type of management is based on the formulation and implementation of programmes and strategies, the most important of which is the Lithuanian State Strategy for Environmental Protection, developed in 1994-1995, which is being implemented gradually. Environmental conditions and environmental protection management is being assessed, the economic growth tendencies are being analysed, long-term goals are being formulated, priorities are set out, a short and middle term action programme is under development, and recommendations for the financial resources are provided. The main aim for the implementation of the Environmental Protection Strategy is to guarantee the country's balanced and sustainable development, which will maintain a healthy natural environment, protect biological
and landscape diversity ensuring the beneficial utilization of natural resources. The priority within this Strategy is the air and water quality.
The first environment-monitoring programme was implemented in 1993. A new State Monitoring Programme was developed in 1997. This Programme encompasses a broader spectrum of observations, which include a more extensive evaluation of environmental components. There are three integrated monitoring stations that provide data according to requirements, which are observed by 23 European countries.
The Division of Land Reclamation and the Environment within the Lithuanian Ministry of Agriculture was established in 1997. Before the Board of Land Reclamation was dealing with Land Reclamation matters, agri-environmental affairs were solved in different divisions.
Environmental Policy Related to Agriculture
Legislative and Institutional Framework for a National Agri-environmental Policy
The Law on Environmental Protection, approved in January 1992, regulates environment protection principles. This law has been prepared taking into account the conditions detected by the period of transition as well as the experience of many countries which have succeeded in improving their national environment protection legislation (Sweden, Canada, Denmark, Switzerland, Austria, Germany and others).
This law was conceived as a framework law for the principal environmental protection statutes and the secondary laws:
* The Law on Protected Areas;
* The Law on Forests;
* The Law on Land Shafts;
* The Law on Plant Protection;
* The Law on Territorial Planning;
* The Law on Environmental Monitoring;
* The Law on Environmental Impact Assessment;
* The Law on Animal Protection;
* The Law on Vegetation Protection;
* The Law on Rare and Endangered Species;
* The Law on Water;
* The Law on Aquatic Environment;
* The Law on Waste Management.
The framework Law also established the Law on Fee for Natural Resource Utilization and Fines for Environment Pollution in the first half of 1991. This Law also serves as a legal basis for the introduction of economic regulatory procedures in the environmental protection system. Separate aspects of environmental protection are regulated in laws on land reform, transport, energy, etc.
The principle laws on environmental protection conform to EU recommendations. The Ministry of the Environment participates in the Programme for the harmonization of national laws with European legislation. It presents revisions of different laws to the Government and Parliament. The Lithuanian initiative, which often goes beyond EU recommendations, has been favourably accepted. For example, EU experts confirmed as acceptable for ratification by the Lithuanian Parliament the Law on Environmental Monitoring, even though EU recommendations do not set out such a separate law.
A significant part of the legal system for environmental protection is composed of decisions made by the Government. Nevertheless, Government- regulated environment protection legal basis is constantly amended. The most significant legal problems to emerge are an inadequate co-ordination of laws, their ineffective implementation and insufficient public participation in considering proposals for legislation.
The Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Environment, and the Water Management Institute have prepared Recommendations for Prevention Means for the Reduction of the Spread Pollutants from Agricultural Sources, which were adopted in 1998. In these Recommendations, prevention means are discussed, which allow reducing pollutants induced by agriculture, especially concentrations of phosphate and nitrogen in water. These Recommendations are the first step to the preparation of the Good Agricultural Practice Code.
The main principle of environment protection policy in the Lithuanian Environmental Strategy is sustainable development. This principle requires economic and social development in a way that would not limit possibilities for future generations to satisfy their needs. The Rio de Janeiro Conference (1992) has consolidated this principle on a world scale and Lithuania has signed the declaration together with other world countries.
The implementation of these strategic principles at the same time should ensure agricultural producers' incomes that correspond to international living standards regarding rural society.
In order to restore the balance between humans and their environment, the following programmes have to be prepared and implemented:
1. Programme on nutrient preservation in agriculture;
2. Programme on the reduction of plant protection means bringing a negative influence on the environment;
3. Programme for drinking water quality improvement in rural areas;
4. Programme on the intensive production of high quality fodder and food products;
5. Programme for the restoration of ethnic landscape and the increase of biodiversity;
6. Programme on the reduction of the use of growth stimulators and antibiotics in agriculture;
7. Programme on the development of rural infrastructure and on the creation of economic and social welfare.
The first three programmes are the most important in striving for reduction of pollution in agriculture.
The main measures concerning the implementation of the Programme on the reduction of nutrient loss in agriculture:
* Identification of zones harmed by agricultural activities and vulnerable to the pollution according to Nitrate directive 91/676/EEC;
* Environment impact monitoring of means decreasing pollution and suggestions to improve political and technical decisions;
* More equal live-stock distribution while seeks to implement live-stock density standard;
* Building of sewage reservoirs and dung-yards in all farms with more than four livestock unites;
* Collection and treatment of silage and sewage;
* Suitable manure and sewage spraying technologies;
* Use of fertilizers taking into account the balance of nutrients;
* Maintenance of the optimal ratio between green areas and arable land;
* Plant rotation for the more equal use of nutrients;
* Introduction of technical means reducing the leakage of biogenic substances;
* New plant species, plant rotation and land cultivation technologies reducing nitrogen mineralization;
* Implementation of alternative farming on less favourable land;
* Preparation and implementation of the Code of Good Agricultural Practice.
The following measures are suggested for the implementation of the Programme on reduction of plant protection means bringing a negative influence on environment:
* Registration and legalization of pesticides;
* Suitable storage and use;
* License system;
* Establishment and implementation of optimal technologies;
* Inspection and testing of sprayers;
* Application of alternative plant protection measures;
* Introduction of more resistant plant varieties and plant rotation.
All measures concerning the first programme are suitable for the implementation of the Programme for drinking water quality improvement in rural areas. Besides that, additional measures are suggested:
* Putting in order protection zones of all drinking water wells;
* Increase extension of agriculture production in sandy soils.
In all irrigated places, where surface or ground water could be extracted and used as drinking water, it is also necessary to implement those measures indicated in the European Union Directive (80/778/EEC) concerning Drinking Water, the Directive (75/440/EEC) concerning Surface Water, theDirective (78/659/EEC) on the Fish Water, and the Directive (80/68/EEC) on the Ground Water.
The measures suggested for the implementation of all three programmes correspond to the European Union, HELCOM, and Agenda 21 for the Baltic Sea Region requirements.
Lithuania has a Plant Protection Law and other legal documents providing for the proper use of pesticides. The Plant Protection Inspection is responsible for the training of farmers concerning pesticide use. It also issues licenses for the purchase of certain pesticides and for trade, as well as carrying out sprayer inspections.
The working group on agri-environment established within the Ministry of Agriculture working on the preparation of an Agri-environmental Programme for Lithuania. The National Agri-environmental Protection Scheme might be a long-term strategy on environment protection in rural areas that the Ministry of Agriculture should follow.
The objective of the Programme is to prepare and implement measures for environmentally friendly farming, reduce the negative impact of agriculture on the environment, restore the ethnic landscape, increase biodiversity and ensure normal living standards for rural inhabitants according to the European Commission regulation 2078/92/EEC.
There will be four schemes in the Programme:
* General Agri-environmental Protection Scheme (GAPS);
* Supplementary Agri-environment Protection Scheme (SAPS);
* Consultation and training Scheme;
* Demonstration projects.
The GAPS will be applied throughout the territory of Lithuania. Farmers participating in the scheme and fulfilling its set of requirements will receive compensation for the loss of incomes and services provided for the environment.
The SAPS supplements measures defined by the GAPS. Farmers wishing to participate in the SAPS must participate in the GAPS too. The GAPS has been established for specific farms or territories, and includes for the restoration of the landscape and the preservation of traditional biotops.
The Lithuanian Agricultural Advisory Service, together with education and research institutions, will provide training and consultation concerning agri-environmental schemes and their implementation.
Demonstration projects can include demonstrations of new environmentally beneficial cultivation techniques, demonstrations of new measuring techniques to assist in designing the good agricultural practice, demonstrations of treatment practices for agricultural runoff waters, and demonstration of landscape management techniques and promoting biodiversity, etc.
There are plans that next year the Government will adopt the Programme. A Lithuanian application to SAPARD for the co-financing of an Agri-environmental programme in a given pilot area might be presented in 1999. The integrated administration and control system according to the Council Regulation 3508/92 and 729/70 for Agri-environment Programme as well as for all other agricultural measures should be established by the year of 2000.
Protection of Natural Resources in Agriculture
The creation and development of nature conservation measures and the system of protected areas is one of the most important and exceptional achievements of the Lithuanian environment protection system. A proposal adopted in the resolutions of the 4^th World Congress on National Parks and Protected Areas, which took place in Caracas in 1992, called for the expansion of the network of protected areas in every country during the next decade. This should encompass no less than 10% of a country's territory. Within the nature protection scheme, which had been developed in 1986, by 1992 the system of protected areas had been completed. Lithuania, along with a number of other countries (including the Scandinavian region) has systematically developed a system of legally protected areas. Today, the network encompasses 11.2% of state land. It is designed to preserve all types of landscape including those which are internationally recognised: five state strict reserves, five national
parks, 30 regional parks, 290 state and 94 local government reserves and nearly 700 protected objects. Currently the total protected area is more than 734 000 hectares. There are plans for the creation of an additional 18 state reserves within military grounds used during the former occupation.
Table 4. Protected areas in Lithuania
Category No. Size % of overall territory
State strict resources 5 23 508 0.4
Conservation areas 1 120 -
National parks 5 138 070 2.0
Regional parks 30 380 880 5.8
Natural reserves 920 176 390 2.7
Municipal reserves 94 15 065 0.2
Protected natural objects 688 - -
Total: 1 113 734 033 11.2
In the most strictly preserved state reserve zones, forests cover less than half of the territory and nearly 63% of areas included within the most important areas, such as national parks.
National Measures on the Promotion of Ecological Sound Agricultural Practices
In 1997, the Rural Support Fund was formed under a Government resolution (amended in 1998) which provides for the procedure of distribution of the Rural Support Fund. The Organic Farming Programme and the "Tatula Programme" are both financed from this Fund.
The Ministry of Agriculture approved the Organic Farming Support Programme and decided to finance it from the Rural Support Fund. Its aim is to develop organic farming, to establish for it a favourable infrastructure, to create conditions for the production of organic products which are highly demanded in local and foreign markets.
* Under this Programme, up to 25% of investment expenses for organic farming or its infrastructural development is compensated for from the Rural Support Fund, but the amount should not exceed 50 000 Lt.
* For the first 3 years the certified organic farms get subsidies for areas under crops.
* 75% of certification work is carried out by the public institution "Ekoagros" and financed by the Rural Support Fund; the farmer covers 25% of the fee.
In 1993 the "Tatula Programme" has established for the protection of underground water from pollution, and the development of organic farming in intensive karst regions. The Rural Support Fund provides the means for fulfilling this programme.
The main types of activities of the programme are:
* ecological education;
* research;
* monitoring of the environment;
* reorganization of farming transferring from traditional methods to ecological farming and the conservation of natural resources, agricultural production processing, and the search for the new markets;
* measures for the prevention of point pollution. Environmental protection measures for point pollution ceasing in farms are 100% compensated.
The self-governmental structure of "Tatula Programme" contains 153 members: 104 farmers, 21 food processing plants and other organizations, 10 co-operative agricultural companies, 18 physical individuals. The highest concentration of organic farms is in the karst region. This Programme sets a good example for the establishment of other programmes in vulnerable areas such as the Nemunas Delta Region, Middle Lithuania Region, etc.
According to the Law on the State Regulation of Economic Relations in Agriculture, adopted in 1994, specialized institutions, upon receiving a license from an institution authorized by the Government, shall issue licenses for the produce grown on organic farms and shall control its quality. According to this law, organic farms are controlled and inspected by the public institution "Ekoagros", which has been established by the Ministries of Agriculture and the Ministry of Health. "Ekoagros" and the Swedish organization of certification, KRAV, signed an agreement according to which Lithuanian agricultural organic products can be sold abroad as organic. At present, "Ecoagros" has applied for international accreditation.
For the production, processing and selling of organic agricultural products, Organic Farming Regulations (confirmed in 1997) are applied, which have been prepared with regard to the EU Council Regulation on organic production (2092/91/EEC) and the International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM) standards. At present, there are 60 certified and 84 transitional organic farms in Lithuania with the total area of organic production being 4 006 hectares.
Importance of Parties, National Environmental Associations and Organizations
The "Green Face" of Political Parties
The highest environmental upsurge in Lithuanian society came ten years ago. Actions against environmental polluters coincided with Lithuanian revival actions.
Political parties tend to raise environment protection problems during election campaigns. The environmental protection aspects within the programmes of the largest political parties are faceless. The Lithuanian Green Party is not very active or efficient and currently has no representatives in the Parliament. The most important role this party plays is in public education.
The Political Importance of Private and Non-profit Organizations
The main objective; achieving a balanced sustainable development, led to the need for public education on environmental protection issues. It is important:
* to transfer knowledge and experience which reflects mankind's all-round achievements in environmental protection;
* to foster and develop skills for solving environmental protection problems;
* to strengthen public responsibility and emphasize the need to preserve the environment for future generations;
* to propagate a healthy public lifestyle based on the principles of sustainable development;
* to implement a policy on the free flow of information on environment protection subjects;
* to increase public competence in the sphere of environmental protection and to stimulate participation in the decision making process.
Public education and the demonstration of world experience in the agri-environmental protection sector along with the stimulation of environmental protection initiatives, is one of the most important tasks of the country.
Agricultural schools train a growing number of specialists an understanding of environmental protection.
Non-governmental organizations can effectively support environmental protection initiatives. There are several hundred NGOs in Lithuania concerned with the environment, but only few dozen of these are active. In 1995, NGOs signed a long-term agreement with the Ministry of Environment.
During the process of agricultural reform, four major organizations have emerged. The Lithuanian Chamber of Agriculture is a traditional institution with roots in the pre-Soviet era which presents all agricultural production segments. The Lithuanian Farmers' Union is the major organization representing private farmers, which provides an advisory service and information. The Association of Farm Owners has a modest membership and influence. The Association of Agricultural Companies was formed by the successors to the former collective farms. There are many other smaller organizations - members of the Lithuanian Chamber of Agriculture, including a new Dairy Farmers Association. Most of these associations were established after the regaining of independence and their political influence was relatively small during the period of 1991-1994. In 1994-1995, however, these groups, and especially agricultural producers, influenced the introduction of many new commodity support policies
and subsidies provided to certain sectors.
The Ministry of the Environment informs NGOs as to its activities and documents prepared. It also prepares publications and provides the financial support for creating the NGO projects.
CONCLUSIONS
The report on the Present Environmental situation of Agriculture in Lithuania indicates the following tendencies:
* Weather, water, and soil are of good quality and progress has been made in improving it.
* The Establishment and development of the protected territories system is a great Lithuanian achievement.
* The basic laws on the environment satisfy the most important recommendations of the EU.
Basic measures for soil protection and the decrease of dispersed pollution must include the regulation of soil use, the increase of afforestation, and the application of harmless agriculture technologies.
The flow of rain with sewage, manure, smelt and float solid waste has not been cleaned. Therefore, one of the main measures of country environment has been cleaning of flow and waste.
One of the basic principles must be to differentiate between agricultural production and territorial agri-environmental measures, if we want to solve environmental problems in the rural areas.
The agricultural production surplus together with agricultural waste has become a big problem in Lithuania. These problems are common to the Western European countries too. The Common Agricultural Policy of the EU was revised and it has been decided to use agri-environmental schemes according to EU recommendations.
A National Agri-environmental Programme should include environmentally friendly farming, which reduces the negative impact of agricultural activities on the environment, restores ethnic landscape, increases biodiversity, and ensures normal economic and social living conditions for the rural population according to the Council Regulation 2078/92/EEC on agricultural production methods compatible with the requirements forthe protection of the environment and the maintenance of the countryside.
A balanced rural development policy should co-ordinate economic, social, environmental, and ethnocultural developments. It is important to solve these problems and endeavour to find a balance.
REFERENCES
EEC. 1991. Council Directive (EEC) No 91/676 of 12 December 1991 concerning the protection of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agriculture, OJ No L 375.
EEC. 1992. Council Regulation (EEC) No 2078/92 of 30 June 1992 on agricultural production methods compatible with the requirements of protection of the environment and maintenance of the countryside, OJ L 215.
European Commission (DG VI). 1998. Agricultural Situation and Prospects in the Central and Eastern European Countries, Lithuania, Working Document.
Fischler, F. 1995. CAP (Common Agricultural Policy) working notes, pp. 38-44, Bonn.
Kisieliauskas, A. 1998. Improved land and land reclamation equipment, emtvarka ir melioracija No. 2, p. 15, Vilnius.
Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Lithuania. 1999a. Agrienvironment protection programme for Lithuania (project), Vilnius.
Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Lithuania. 1999b. Rural support fund: documents regulating forming and order of usage of the Fund. Vilnius.
Ministry of Environment of the Republic of Lithuania. 1998. Annals of water quality1986-1997, United research centre, Vilnius.
Ministry of Environment of the Republic of Lithuania. 1999. Water quality annals of 1992 of Lithuanian rivers, p. 11,Vilnius.
State Land management institute. 1998. Formation of land resources information system for the long-term land use, Technical report, Vilnius.
&#138;ileika, A. S., Gaigalis, K., Milius, P. & Kutra, G. 1998. Research of water pollution with nutrients in Graisupis river basin, Vandens kio ininerija. Volume 4 (26), Vilainai.
&#138;ileika, A.S. 1997. Prevention measures for reduction of diffuse source pollution from agriculture, Recommendations, pp. 4-9,Vilainai.
UNDP. 1998. Lithuanian human development report, Vilnius, 1998.
<section>7</section>
COUNTRY REPORT ON THE PRESENT ENVIRONMENTAL SITUATION IN AGRICULTURE
- POLAND -
Zbigniew M. Karaczun
Warsaw Agricultural University, Department of Environmental Protection
INTRODUCTION
Historywise Poland is an agricultural country, where arable land is the dominant factor in the land structure. Therefore this branch plays a key role in the national economy, especially since a quarter of Poland's population lives in the rural area. This paper shows some data, which the author considers the most important, on agriculture and its role in realizing the environmental policy of the state. It must be understood, however, that many crucial problems have been merely touched upon, others had to be ignored. The most important data about Polish agriculture is presented in the Annex.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSITION AND STRUCTURE OF PROPERTY RIGHTS
The effect of privatization and redefinition of property rights on natural resources
After 1945, the Polish agriculture was the only one in Eastern Europe to maintain its character including the ownership aspect. Private ownership was dominant: individual farmers managed around 75 percent of arable land. Changes after 1989 began the process of privatization both in agriculture and in agro-food enterprises. In the years 1991-98 about 13 percent of land that had earlier belonged to the state was sold. The state land privatization process will continue. There is a danger, however, that as the arable land gets sold, high value natural land will become private, too. New owners are usually not interested in maintaining it, thus, it may be subject to destruction. Since there is no tradition of ownership of valuable natural land, there are no regulations in this field (Karaczun, Grzekiewicz1996, Karaczun 1997).
Restructuring processes have also occurred in the food industry. As of the end of 1997, more than 50 percent of state enterprises operating in the food industry and undergoing ownership changes were transformed into State Treasury companies. The remaining enterprises were liquidated (15.4 percent) or privatized (33.6 percent). A change in the structure of economic entities operating in the food industry sector is illustrated by the data presented in Table 1.
Polish farmers paid a high price for keeping private ownership. As the state tolerated only small farms and would discourage young people from running them, the majority of the already existing farmsteads are technically backward and fragmented. Towards the end of the 1980s, the average farm size was about 6.5 hectares, and more than 30 percent of farms were less than 2 hectares. At the same time agriculture gave jobs to 27 percent of professionally active people (Nowicki 1993).
Table 1: Structure of entities operating in food industry (Praca zbiorowa, 1998)
Entities No. per Year
State enterprises 448 429 365 260 214 176
Commercial companies 1 999 2 509 2 967 3 367 3 678 3 913
Civil law companies 3 073 5 783 6 379 6 250 6 597 6 917
Cooperatives 562 579 583 567 566 570
Total 6 167 9 377 10 360 10 499 11 094 11 612
Restructurization in rural areas
The beginning of the 1990s was extremely difficult for agriculture. The situation forced the government to join the restructurization process of this sector. Firstly, state aid was aimed at, among others, getting private farms out of debt by buying out overdue investment credits and determining preference conditions of repayment, granting modernization credits as well as credit subsidies for buying and managing the land. There was also the possibility of earlier retirement for farmers.
In order to support the agricultural policy and restructure Polish agriculture, the government set up several institutions. The most important are: the Agriculture Restructuring and Modernization Agency, the Agency for Agricultural Markets, and the State Treasury Agricultural Property Agency. The Agency for Agricultural Markets (Agencja Rynku Rolnego - ARR) was established in 1990. The major tasks of the Agency are aimed at conducting the state intervention policy of stabilizing the agricultural markets and protecting agricultural producers' incomes. The State Treasury Agricultural Property Agency (Agencja Wlasnosci Rolnej Skarbu Panstwa - AWRSP) is a state organizational unit established in 1991 and is mostly involved in the restructuring and privatization of State Treasury. The Agriculture Restructuring and Modernization Agency (Agencja Restrukturyzacji i Modernizacji Rolnictwa - ARiMR) was established in 1994. The Agency conducts the government policy related to
agriculture and rural areas and is aimed at improving living standards in rural areas through improving production effectiveness and quality and helping farmers become competitive on domestic and foreign markets.
Liberalization
In liberalising the agricultural sector, the government lifted special preferences for the state-owned companies, withheld subsidies from public farms, and made it possible to set up private agro-food enterprises. Due to the liberalization of international trade, cheap imported food started flooding into Poland, this made it difficult for Polish farmers to sell their products. The negative aspect bound up with the market liberalization was that the ties between producers and retailers were discontinued. It became more and more difficult to sell the crops. Therefore the system of minimal prices for particular agricultural products was introduced. The intervention process is determined by the President of the Agency for Agricultural Markets, taking into account the level of minimal and market prices. The President also defines the periods in which intervention prices are in force (intervention periods). According to the amended act of establishing the ARR, the scheme of
intervention activities is limited to annual programmes, accepted by the Council of Ministers. The intervention in 1997 was limited to the following markets (MRIGZ, 1998): cereals, skimmed milk powder, honey, potato starch, hops and wool (only sales of the stock).
An element of liberalization is the development of an agricultural market infrastructure, particularly through the establishment of agricultural stock exchanges (currently in Poznan, Olsztyn and Lublin) as well as through the creation of wholesale markets (currently in Poznan).
According to the Rzad Polski's opinion (MRIGZ, 1998), the level of liberalization in Polish agro-food sector is far greater than in the EU Member States. About 75 percent of budgetary funds regarded as a support for agriculture is actually transferred to the farmers' Social Insurance Institution. Export subsidies, except for small amounts of sugar, are practically not applied, and border protection against excessive imports of subsided agro-food products has also been less strict than in EU countries. It should be expected that during the process of integration the existing level of agro-food market liberalization will be reduced.
The development of the economic framework at farm level
Land market
In 1996, there were more than 3 million farms in Poland, of which 2 million were individual agricultural farms. The average farm size was 7.8 hectares of land, including 6.9 hectares of agricultural land. Between 1988 to 1996, the total farm size increased by 0.86 hectares and the agricultural land by 0.72 hectares. There were 2 000 farms in the public sector. The average size of these farms totalled 779.5 hectares whereas the average agricultural land area amounted to 619.6 hectares. The size structure of individual and public farms in 1996 is presented in Table 2. (Praca zbiorowa, 1998). As a result of the system changes occurring after 1989, the number of individual farms declined by 5.8 percent, agricultural cooperatives by 8.0 percent and state farms by 44.4 percent.
Table 2: Size structure of individual and public farms in 1996 (Praca zbiorowa 1998)
Percentage
of farms Farm size groups (ha)
up to 1 1.1-4.9 5.0-9.9 10.0-
Individual farms 3.0 20.5 25.5 17.7 10.2 13.5 9.5
Public farms 0.3 1.2 3.0 2.4 14.5 78.6
The real land market in Poland was created by establishing the State Treasury Agricultural Property Agency (AWRSP) in 1991. One of the main tasks of AWRSP was reconstructure and privatization of State Treasury property used for agricultural purposes. Since the establishment of the Agency, it has incorporated into State Treasury Agricultural Property Stock about 4.6 million hectares of land, including all of the former state farmland. Of this, AWRSP managed to sell only 581 thousand hectares. There are 3.9 million hectares of land remaining in the State Treasury Agricultural Property Stock. This land was disposed through lease (3.6 million hectares), administration (237 thousand hectares) and management and perpetual use (117 thousand hectares). There are 639 thousand hectares remaining to dispose of in the State Treasury Agricultural Property land. The Agency sells the State Treasury Agricultural Property land through legal tenders to natural and legal persons. Natural
persons have purchased almost 3/4 of the sold land. There are two main reasons why AWRSP has been able to sell only about 580 thousand ha: first the shortage of financial sources of the farmers in Poland, and second the small profitability of agricultural production. Small interest in buying agricultural land from AWRSP by individual farmers can be a lost chance for field consolidation^34 (Leopold, Zientara 1998, Karaczun 1997).
To increase the pace of land consolidation as well as the size of individual farms, the setting up of the Land Bank is being planned (MRiGZ, 1998b). Farmers who will make a decision to give their land to the bank will, in return, receive an agricultural pension within Agricultural Social Insurance Companies or use the obtained financial means for other purposes (e.g. setting up his/her own enterprise).
The development of input and output prices
The 1990s is a period of high inflation in Poland. Increase in prices in the years 1990-98 reached the level of about 800 percent. Such high inflation had a very bad impact on the farmers' welfare. Sums obtained in one year from selling crops were not sufficient to purchase means of production in the following year.
Table 3: Index of input and output prices by individual farms (GUS 1998a).
previous year = 100% 1980= 100% 1990= 100%
Output prices:
Plants
Animals
Input prices:
for consumption purposes
for actual production purp.
for investment purposes
Data presented in Table 3 show the economic situation of farmers worsened. This was because the increase in input prices was higher than that in output prices. Data presented in Table 4 show that, in the 1990s, the economic conditions got better in crop production but worsened in animal production.
Table 4: Relation between output to input prices in agriculture
Prices of means of production ( a=dt of wheat; b=kg of pork)
Polish tractor "Ursus" - 1 piece a 583 364 371 560 520 420
b 4 702 4 617 5 440 5 423 7 127 7 973
Norway nitre 34% N - 1 dt a 2.2 1.1 0.86 1.1 0.95 0.68
b 18.0 13.6 12.7 10.3 13.0 13.0
Pesticide "Zolone" - 1 l a 1.7 1.4 1.2 1.4 1.2 0.82
b 13.6 17.3 17.5 14.0 16.7 15.6
Hard coal - 1 t a 7.8 5.4 5.6 7.3 6.1 4.9
b 63.1 68.7 82.2 70.8 83.5 93.3
Concentrate feeding "Provit"-
1 dt a 4.1 2.6 2.4 2.7 2.2 1.7
b 32.8 33.4 34.8 26.5 30.1 31.4
Wheat (seed) - 1 dt a 1.6 1.2 1.5 1.6 1.3 1.3
b 12.8 15.1 21.2 14.1 17.9 20.8
Bull - 1 piece a 41.9 37.2 32.6 52.4 43.6 39.8
b 339 472 478 507 598 756
Source: GUS 1998
THE IMPACT OF AGRICULTURE ON THE ENVIRONMENT
Environmental degradation caused by agriculture
Agriculture and soil protection
There are 18.5 million hectares of agricultural land in Poland. This represents 59.1 percent of the total area of Poland. Poor quality soils (IV and worse classes) are dominant. Their total area exceeds 6 million hectares, that is more than 34 percent of total agricultural land (Table 5). High and very high quality soils in Poland (I and II class) comprise only 600 thousand hectares. About 78 percent of agricultural land represents arable land and orchards, and 22 percent - pastureland. Out of total land area, 92 percent is used by the private sector. About 12.5 million hectares of arable land are under production.
Table 5: Quality of agricultural land in Poland
Soil valuation classes Area (%)
Total Arable land and orchards Grass land
I 0.4 0.4 0
II 2.9 3.3 1.5
III 22.3 24.9 13.4
IV 39.8 39.1 42.5
V 22.7 20.3 31.3
VI 11.9 12.0 11.3
Source: Praca zbiorowa 1998
In terms of soil protection, the soil use structure in Poland is disadvantageous. There is too much arable land and too little perpetual use land. The level of afforestation in Poland is less than Europe's average. Forests take up 28.2 percent of the country's area. When combined with the majority of sandy soils, the agriculture soils are in danger of degradation, especially erosion, soil exhaustion and chemical degradation.
Plant and animal production
The most common danger for soil coming from agriculture is erosion. Almost 28 percent of the land area is endangered by wind erosion, 27.9 percent by water erosion and 18.2 percent by gullying (Table 6). Arable land situated in central and eastern Poland (85 percent of the total area of Lodzkie Province) is mostly endangered by wind erosion; northern and upland districts by water erosion (71 percent of the total area of Bielskie Province) (GUS 1998). Despite the measures undertaken, the danger of this form of degradation has not decreased and it should be expected that it will continue to be the basic form of degradation of soils in agricultural use.
Table 6: Vulnerability of soils to erosion in Poland, 1997
Kind of erosion Total area endangered Degree of hazard
(% of Polish area)
km^2 % of Polish area Low Medium High
Wind 88 431.0 28.2 17.4 9.8 1.0
Water 87 440.3 27.9 13.6 10.8 3.5
Deep (rill) 56 852.0 18.2 2.8 15.0 0.4
Source: GUS 1998
Another form of degradation is soil exhaustion, the reasons being: simplified crop rotation, long-term monoculture, reduced organic fertilizing, using the same fertilizers and plant protection chemicals repeatedly. Reduction of organic fertilizing also leads to decrease of humus. In the first half of the 1990s, the ongoing process of dehumidification of soils was caused by their excessive drying (Rzad Polski 1997). The total area of soils which underwent this kind of degradation is unknown. It should be expected, however, that the intensification of agricultural production may magnify the process. One of the kinds of chemical degradation of soil bound up with crop production is salinity. Agricultural soil salinity results from improper fertilizing and irrigation, especially with sewage. The amount of fertilizers used in Poland as well as the area under irrigation has decreased since the 1990s. The amount of sewage used for irrigation has considerably dropped (Table 7.).
This, in turn, reduced the danger of this kind of degradation. It should be expected, however, that the intensification of agricultural production will result in a larger area under irrigation, which will increase the salinity danger.
Table 7: Irrigation in agriculture
Years
Area of irrigation (thousand ha) 340.0 301.5 201.1 144.9 134.1
Numbers of installations 2 100 1 659 1 443 1 125 1 087
Water intake (hm^3 ) 450.0 518.8 208.9 137.9 114.0
including sewage (w hm^3 ) 50.0 53.1 6.0 5.9 4.4
Source: GUS 1998
Acidification of soils is a crucial problem in Poland. Although it is caused mainly by natural factors as well as industrial emissions, the use of physiologically acid fertilizers speeds up the soil acidification process.
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability on farm level
Erosion and soil acidification are the most troublesome for Polish farmers. Much as it is possible to fight slight and medium erosion e.g. by applying proper agrotechnical methods and crops, preventing acidification is more difficult and requires expensive work. Despite the fact that the cost of liming is being subsidized from the state budget, the amount of fertilizer used is insufficient for Polish conditions. The fact must not be ignored, as research shows that soil acidification is an ongoing process (IUNG 1989). When cultivated on acid soils, plant intake of heavy metals is considerable, even if their concentration in soil is insignificant. Erosion, acidification and exhaustion bring about reduced crops and, as a result, may lead to the intensive use of fertilizers and plant protection chemicals.
Lack of sufficient infrastructure poses an important problem for a balanced development in rural areas and makes it difficult for individual farms to function properly. Most rural districts have not worked out any system of collection and utilization of waste. Only about 34.5 percent of farms dispose of their waste in legal dumping sites, 65.5 percent animal farms dispose of their waste on their own (GUS 1998), which is very often hazardous for the environment (burning, disposing of in forests etc.). This, in turn, poses risk for the local soils and other elements of the environment^35.
Stored products and fodder on the farms lose part of the nutrients contained in them as a result of rotting, dispersal, leaks etc. Part of nitrogen and phosphorous lost in this manner is accumulated within the farm or around it, and some is carried away. There are no studies regarding the dispersal of nitrogen compounds in the environment from agricultural products and semi products stored on the farms. Losses, especially of nitrogen from animal waste stored in the farms are known much better (Sapek 1997). Currently the manner of manure storage in Poland evidently promotes soil and water pollution. In over 95 percent of farms, the manure is stored directly on the ground, frequently well permeable. The manure water infiltrates the ground and flows to the nearest water flow or drainage ditch. The liquid manure is usually stored in small leaking tanks which also promotes the pollution of soil and water. The amounts of non-organic nitrogen compounds collected in the soil profile
is presented in Table 8.
Table 8. The content of nitrogen compounds in a ground profile near a manure pile on a farm located in the Szczecin area (Sapek 1997)
Depth (cm) N-NO^3 (mg/dm^3) N-NH4 (mg/dm^3)
Source: GUS 1998
An important factor that poses a threat to the condition of soils is the bad economic situation of farms. Producers, looking for ways to increase their profits, are ready to use a simplified crop rotation system, use the cheapest possible fertilizers or pesticides (not always proper ones) or overexploit the soil with the hope of gaining higher profits. Despite the measures undertaken to improve the infrastructure and raise the level of education in rural districts, the situation is worsening. It should also be expected that, if plans concerning the intensification of agricultural production and the setting-up of big, industrial farms are put into practice, and with present farmers being replaced by the new generation, the soils will be much more endangered in the future.
Agriculture and water protection
The protection of surface and groundwater against territorial contamination is very complex and has not been fully solved yet (Bogacka et all, 1993). Mineral and organic fertilizers, chemical plant protection substances, and, to a lesser degree, animal farm pollution are considered to be typical sources of territorial contamination. The most dangerous of these are biogenic compounds and pesticides. The importance of the problem results from the amount of the nitrogen and phosphorus flow from the territory of Poland into the sea and the share of the territorial sources (around 60 percent of nitrogen and 30 percent of phosphorus) (Smorowski 1996). Counteracting these threats can be made possible through applying proper agrotechnical measures based on soil condition evaluation and supported by legislative measures within the regulations on fertilizers and plant protection chemicals (Kowalik 1994). These measures should coincide with efforts made to diversify the structure of
the agricultural landscape. Thanks to Ryszkowski's team's long-term work (1988, 1991, 1997) the feasibility of these measures in Poland has been determined.
Table 9: Water consumption and waste water emission from agro-food enterprises, 1997
Water intake
(w hm^3 )
Treated sewage (hm^3 )
Treated Untreated
Total mecha-
nically chemi-
cally biolo-
gically
Meat processing 23.0 4.2 0.3 0.8 3.1 0.4
Fish processing 2.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1
Fruit and vegetable processing 27.5 7.7 1.2 6.6 1.7
Fat and oil production 8.0 4.8 4.3 0.5 0.1
Milk production 29.4 12.2 0.1 12.1 0.7
Drink production 31.8 4.6 0.6 4.0 0.2
Sugar production 16.4 5.7 1.0 4.7 0.4
Other 22.8 1.1 0.1 0.8 0.6
Total 160.9 40.5 7.7 0.8 31.9 4.2
Source: GUS 1998
An agro-food industry consumes a considerable amount of water and largely contributes to its contamination (Table 9). The fact is that, in spite of there being some improvement, 10 percent of sewage coming from agro-food plants still remains untreated, and about 18 percent undergoes only mechanical treatment.
Plant and animal production
In order to identify the loss of nutrients and pollution of water, nutrient balance can be calculated. The balance is drafted on the assumption that the income is the amount of nutrients from outside and outcome is the amount of nutrients sold from the farm or taken away in some other manner subject to control. The balance figures cover the period of one year which corresponds to the production cycle in agriculture. The nitrogen and phosphorous balance in Poland was estimated for years 1984 - 1994 (Sapek 1997). The main results are presented in Table 10.
Table 10: Nitrogen (N/ha) and phosphorous (P/ha) balance in Polish agriculture
Agricultural year 1984/85 1990/91 1991/92 1993/94
N P N P N P N P
Inputs
Commercial fertilizers 65.4 20.5 39.4 9.7 33.0 5.2 40.3 5.6
Imported fodder 9.3 1.3 3.6 0.5 7.6 1.1 6.7 1.0
Legumes 15.7 14.8 10.7 10.4 
Atmospheric deposition 17.0 17.0 17.0 17.0 
Biological fixation 10.0 10.0 10.0 10.0 
Total inputs 117.4 21.8 84.8 10.2 78.4 6.3 84.3 6.6
Outputs
Plant production
incl. Cereals
Potatoes
Animal products
incl. Meat
Milk
Total outputs 
Surplus (kg/ha) 
Surplus (thousand tonnes)
Source: (Sapek 1997)
If the nitrogen and phosphorous surplus is converted into the prices of mineral fertilizers, a figure of about US$500 million is obtained. There are no estimates of material damages to the environmental caused by the dispersed nitrogen and phosphorous.
Animal production has decreased significantly during the last ten years but it is still one of the main sources of water pollution. The waste resulting from animal production amounts to over 125 million tonnes annually (Table 11). This constitutes the greatest threat to the quality of waters from agricultural sources. This mass is easily biologically transformable, contains huge amounts of nitrogen and phosphorous and is rich in various bacteria generating illnesses (Sapek 1997).
The biggest danger to the quality of water resulting from nitrogen and phosphorus overfertilization occurs in central Poland, stretching from the Baltic Sea's east coast to Lower Silesia and taking up 25 percent of the country's territory (Johnson et all, 1997).
Table 11: Production of animal waste in Poland in 1994 and its nutrient content
Kind of wastes Total tonnage (millions) Nutrient content (thousand tonnes)
N P K
Faeces 87.6 356 108 149
Urine 41.7 263 15 471
Poultry faces 0.3 4 2 2
Total 129.6 623 271 747
Source: Sapek 1997
The problem of agriculture pollution is not only important regionally in Poland, but also assumes international significance through its effects on the Baltic Sea. Poland's two principal rivers, the Vistula and the Odra, empty into the Baltic Sea after draining basins that cover almost (97 percent) the area of Poland. Poland contributes substantially to Baltic Sea pollution (Table 12).
Table 12: Annual pollutant load of Vistula and Odra rivers to Baltic Sea in 1991 and 1996
Pollutants Annual pollutant load
Vistula River Odra River
BZT5 (thousand tonnes) 142,9 140,7 71,2 72,8
Nitrogen (thousand tonnes) 59,0 152,4 50,4 79,8
Phosphorous (thousand tonnes) 11,3 11,4 6,0 6,2
Cd (tonnes) 43,0 4,0 30,9 1,8
DDT (kg) 101,0 40,0 367,0 110,0
Source: GUS 1998
Agriculture also leads to water condition disturbances. After 1945, in order to enlarge the acreage of land under cultivation, intensive melioration works took place. At first it was only drainage and land reclamation, the result of which was the drying of the majority of swampy and waterlogged areas. Soon, that led to decreased retention and accelerated water outflow from agricultural areas. The water deficit^36 occurs especially in the central Polish lowland, taking up the area of 120 000 km^2 (Kleczkowski, Mikulski 1993).
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability at the farm level
As has been already said, one of the sources of water pollution is the wrong way of animal waste storage. The elimination of manure disposal on ground and construction of a manure pad leads rather slowly to the improvement of water quality since accumulated elements are washed out with difficulty from the soil. Animal husbandry and the abundance of products within the farm account for the pollution of groundwaters near the farms, which is well illustrated by the analysis of drinking water from the farm wells. In 1997, research done by public services shows that more than 70 percent of farm wells have bad quality drinking water (GUS 1998). Another investigation (Sapek 1997), done at the beginning of 1990, shows that the concentration of nitrate was higher than standard (10 mg N-NO[3]/dm^3) in 50 percent of the samples, and in 15 percent of the samples the concentration exceeded 40 mg N-NO[3]/dm^3. Pollution of potable water with nitrate is usually accompanied by pollution
with phosphorous, potassium and chloride; frequently concentration of these elements was dramatically high (i.e. up to 1813 mg K/dm^3 and up to 1 166 mg Cl/dm^3 (Sapek 1997)).
Farms not equipped with sewerage systems are a problem in Polish rural districts. About 1 943.8 thousand buildings have a water supply system (as opposed to 887.5 thousand in 1990), but only 129.1 thousand have sewerage systems (as opposed to 39.1 thousand in 1990)! This means that 79.8 percent of individual farms use a water supply system (51 percent water mains, 28.9 percent local water supply systems) but only 5 percent can take advantage of a sewerage system. Since, as has been mentioned in the previous chapter, the service network is poor in rural areas, farmers have problems getting rid of the waste. Therefore, such practices as loosening cesspools, disposing of sewage into the ground, drainage ditches or even unused wells have become popular with farmers. This considerably contributes to the worsening of ground and surface waters.
Agriculture and air protection
With respect to pollution emissions from the agricultural sector into the air, the case of the emission of greenhouse gases has been worked out best. Agricultural production in Poland brings about the following kinds of emissions (Rzad Polski 1997): CO[2 ](coming from the use of energy carriers in farms and production activities), CH[4] (coming from breed animals' enteric fermentation and animal excreta), N[2]O (the use of nitrogen fertilizers).
Table 13: Changes in CH[4] and N[2]O emissions from agriculture, 1988 - 94
Annual Emission in Gg
CH[4] N[2]O CH[4] N[2]O CH[4] N[2]O CH[4] N[2]O
Enteric fermentation 806 nd 793 nd 647 nd 596 nd
Animal excreta 56 nd 55 nd 56 nd 49 nd
Agricultural soils nd* 43 nd 41 nd 32 nd 30
Incineration of agricultural waste 1 0 2 0 1 0 1 0
Total 863 43 850 41 704 32 646 30
Source: Rzad Polski 1997
* - data not available
The decrease in methane emission from animal breeding results from a lower cattle and sheep population in the 1990s (Table 13). Reduction of nitrogen peroxide from about 30 percent in the years 1988-94 is bound up with reduced nitrogen fertilizing from 82.0 kg N/ha in 1988 to 46.6 kg N/ha in 1994. The emission of this gas is expected to grow in the years to come together with the increased use of nitrogen fertilizers.
The estimated CO[2] emission resulting from the use of fuels in farms amounts to about 32 million tonnes a year and has maintained a steady level for several years. Since the use of solid fuels has been decreasing, the respective emission of this origin should decrease as well (Table 14).
Table 14: Annual consumption of energy carriers in agriculture, 1993 - 97
Kind of energy carrier Units Total annual consumption in
Solid fuel thousand tonnes 8 500 8 480 8 400
Liquid fuel thousand tonnes 1 670 1 730 1 850
Gaseous fuel mln m^3 340 350 400
Source: Rzad Polski 1997
* - author's prognosis
Another source of agricultural pollution emission into the air is the agro-food industry. Table 15 shows that this source of emission decreased by over 20 percent in the years 1993-97 as far as ashes are concerned, and by 30 percent in the case of SO[2 ]. The reduction is closely bound up with the change of energy carriers and the smaller amount of sulphur in coal.
Table 15: Changes of dust and sulphur dioxide emission from agricultural plants, 1993 - 97
Kind of activity Annual emissions (thousand tonnes)
Dust SO[2] Dust SO[2]
Meat processing 2.0 3.1 1.6 2.4
Fruit and vegetable processing 2.1 3.2 1.8 2.7
Fat and oil production 0.7 1.0 0.4 0.6
Milk processing 3.4 5.9 2.9 4.9
Drink processing 1.8 2.9 1.4 2.7
Sugar production 12.3 18.5 9.1 12.3
Other 
Total 23.1 35.8 17.5 26.2
Source: GUS 1998
Summing up it needs to be said that agriculture does not contribute to air pollution to a considerable extent. The share of this sector in the total pollutant emission into the air varies from 1 percent in the case of ashes and SO[2 ]emissions from agro-food plants and 9 percent in the case of carbon dioxide emission coming from fuel use and production activity in farms, to 25 percent in the case of methane emission coming from breed animals' enteric fermentation. The situation is not expected to change in the years to come.
Agriculture and its impact on the landscape
Poland's most characteristic landscape is heritage countryside: small plots with various cultivations, divided by forests with numerous tree varieties. This kind of landscape is the dominant one in the central, northern and eastern districts of Poland where small, individual farms prevail. After 1945, the landscape was destroyed in northern and western districts where state-owned farms had biggest share of agricultural land, managing vast areas. The collapse of the state farms as well as setting up of the land turnover market, brought about new dangers connected with taking over farmland for non-agricultural use and especially for housing and recreational development. The danger occurs mainly in the surroundings of big cities and in the areas of high natural, tourist and landscape values.
The beginning of legal protection of high value areas goes back to the 1980s. It was not, however, until 1991 when a new bill on environmental protection was passed, that the problem was fully regulated. The basic possibilities of landscape protection are the following: national and landscape parks, protected landscape areas and landscape reserves. The possibility to set up so-called ecological farmlands is an important innovation introduced in 1991 (Table 16). Small, field tree plantings, ox-bow lakes, peatbogs, waterlogged areas etc. are protected in this way.
Table 16: Areas of special landscape protected in different forms, 1990 - 97
Area (thousand ha)
Landscape parks 1215.4 1930.8 2082.0 2129.1
Areas of landscape protection 4574.8 5782.7 6612.5 6757.3
Landscape reserve 34.2 35.0 35.6 35.7
Ecological land 0 17.0 25.4 31.7
Source: (GUS 1998b)
Although protective functions are dominant in the area of national and landscape parks, agricultural activity is present here as well. The high participation of agricultural areas in the total acreage of protected land shows the importance of agriculture for these areas (Table 17). Therefore it is crucial that agriculture in these areas remain extensive as well as environmentally and landscape friendly. It is necessary, among others, to determine legal forms of protection and management of tree plantings, ecotones and small ecological farmlands (especially wet and water biotopes), which occur in the agricultural landscape and are not protected otherwise.
Table 17: Share of agricultural land in national parks, landscape parks and land- scape protection areas
Area (ha)
Total thereof agricultural land
National parks 305 401.1 41 557.7
Landscape parks 2 187 748.0 778 584.6
Areas of landscape protection 6 821 334.7 3 264 027.2
Source: GUS 1998
In summary up, present dangers for the Polish landscape result from non-agricultural activity - first of all the growing fragmentarization of high value natural areas due to building industry pressure and the threat of the building of a highway and expressway network. Basic threats from agriculture are those bound up with pressure for its intensification, enlarging farm acreage and production unification.
Agriculture and biodiversity
Considerable natural diversity has been maintained in Poland. The species, ecosystem and landscape diversities are one of the highest in Europe. The character of Polish agricultural landscape, rich in ecotone zones and the insignificant use of artificial fertilizers and pesticides are conducive to maintaining high biodiversity. Poland signed (1992) and ratified (1995) the Convention on Biological Diversity. The Convention, as well as other signed and ratified regulations, including national natural and environmental protection regulations, makes a cohesive set of regulations which protects biological diversity in a complex and relatively effective way. Poland participates also in determining the European network of protected areas (Nature 2000 and ECONET), and participates in UNESCO's "Man and the Biosphere" programme, within which 7 biosphere reserves have already been set up (Rzad Polski 1997).
The measures to protect biological diversity are undertaken in situ and ex situ. The majority of high value natural areas, which are the mainstay to biodiversity, have been taken under legal protection in Poland. The system of protected areas comprises (GUS 1998): 22 national parks (0.94 percent of Poland's total area), 1 201 nature reserves (0.4 percent of the country's total area), 105 landscape parks (6.6 percent of the country's area), 334 protected landscape zones (18.5 percent) and over 4 000 other objects with other forms of protection (0.1 percent of the country's area). Species protection comprises 111 plant species and 125 animal species, which are legally protected across the whole country. In order to protect biodiversity it is crucial to maintain the domestic species. In Poland, due to traditional forms of farming, numerous old cultivable plant varieties, animal breeds and other wild plant species (e.g. weeds) have been preserved. In recent years much has been
done to maintain that state.
The main dangers to the biodiversity in Poland do not seem to have anything in common with agricultural activities. New dangers occurred with suggestions to privatize state-owned forests or claiming the expropriated land (before 1989) to enlarge properties. It should be expected that the realization of the government agriculture development project - especially in the field of agricultural production intensification and farm acreage enlargement will bring about an increased threat to species diversity (e.g. as a result of liquidation of ecotone zones, intensified use of chemicals). Research clearly proves the likeliness of the threat: in the years from 1986 to 1992 the number of endangered plant species increased by an average of 5 percent. About 470 plant species and 19 animal species are considered to be in the process of extinction (GUS 1998).
Polish farmers' customary straw burning poses a threat for numerous species of fauna and flora. Despite intensive educational efforts, undertaken by environmental protection services, agricultural advisory centres and fire department, the total area where straw is being burnt has not changed for years.
Effects of environmental degradation on agriculture
Limitations in agricultural production due to the degradation of the natural environment are usually bound up with the land being taken over for non-agricultural use, its contamination, limited resources and water degradation, as well as the disposal of waste in the landscape and not in properly secured dumping sites.
The arable land acreage that has been excluded from agricultural use from 1980 to 1997 was 942 thousand hectares. The land was usually taken over for afforestation purposes or infrastructure development (GUS 1998). It should be expected that the area of the land excluded from agricultural production will not increase.
Managing agricultural enterprises is made difficult by intense soil acidification. The phenomenon has its origin in natural conditions (formerly afforested areas), and coincides with the effects of human activity - improper use of mineral fertilizers (which are physiologically acid) and the process of sedimentation of acidifying substances. Although in the 1990s almost all rainwater pollution indices were twice as low, their reaction was still between pH 4.0-4.5. In the same period, 0.5-2.0 tonnes of S-SO[4]/km^2/year and 0.3-1 tonne of N-NO[3]/km^2/year infiltrated the ground. As a result, high acidity soils (pH [KCI ]<4.5) make up about 23 percent of arable land in Poland and acid soils (pH [KCI] <5,5) reach the value of 22 percent. In order to neutralize the acidity it is necessary to do medium liming (approximative 250 kg CaO/ha/kg). Last year, however, the total value of liming amounted only to 139 kg CaO/ha/year. According to the Ministry of Agriculture, due to the
soils being contaminated with heavy metals, 40 thousand hectares should be excluded from agricultural production and some vegetable cultivation should be limited on another 800 thousand hectares (Michna 1993). In 1996 monitoring research was done on some Polish soils. The results show that, apart from the above mentioned areas, the heavy metal contamination level is insignificant, less than in the West European countries. It has been found that only the levels of Cd, Zn, Ni and Pb were slightly high, which was usually the case in the surroundings of large industrial plants with exclusively local impact. Another local source of soil contamination is improper waste storage. About 10 percent legal and all the "wild" dumping sites are of poor sanitary - technical condition and pose a threat to local soils and groundwaters. Successive limiting of industrial pollutant emissions as well as improvement of waste storage standards contribute to the reduced acreage of land undergoing
degradation.
As it has been mentioned before, Poland is a country of high water deficiency. In many districts of the country, precipitation does not satisfy the needs of crops. Usage of surface waters for agricultural purposes is made difficult or impossible due to their contamination. Monitoring research (GUS 1998) shows that in 1997 only 11.5 percent of river water was clean enough to be used in agriculture, 88.4 percent of rivers were beyond any water contamination classes. The condition of lake water is not better. Groundwaters (deep-water) are of better quality (52.5 percent high quality water) but are usually not used for irrigation purposes - only as drinking water, in agro-industry and for watering animals.
In conclusion, although rural areas in Poland are under industry's pressure and there is limited capacity for the agriculture to develop because of the degraded environment, the level of the natural habitat transformation in rural areas is generally less advanced than in Western Europe.
THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIETY ON THE AGRICULTURAL ENVIRONMENT
Institutional change within the environmental policy
In 1991 the Parliament of the Republic of Poland ratified the document entitled: "National Ecological Policy" (MOSZNiL 1991). The document formalized measures undertaken in the field of environmental protection, and determined short, medium and long-term objectives as well as basic rules for ecological policy. Together with the introduction of the Ecological Policy for Poland, institutional changes concerning environmental protection management system were untertaken. Of the institutions that were set up at that time, two appear to be the most important^37: National Environmental Protection, the Water Management Fund (Narodowy Fundusz Ochrony Srodowiska i Gospodarki Wodnej - NFOSiGW) and State Environmental Protection Inspection (Panstwowa Inspekcja Ochrony Srodowiska - PIOS). The first institution is the most important one^38. as finances environmental protection investments in Poland and works on three levels: the central fund as well as province and rural district funds.
Investments within rural environment protection are supported to a large extent with province and rural district funds. Creating an effective system of environmental protection financing made it possible to increase expenditure on pro-ecological institutions from about 1.1 percent of the GDP in 1990 to 2.0 percent in the years 1996-97 (which means expenditures of approximative US$2.1 billion). In 1997, as many as 1 267 sewage treatment plants were built (including 875 individual farms treatment plants) with a total flow capacity of more than 2 500 m^3/24hours, over 400 hectares of degraded land was recultivated and 3 562 sewerage terminals were built (GUS 1998). Gaining access to EU adjustment funds should increase the total amount of expenditures on environmental protection in Poland.
One of the main tasks of the State Environmental Protection Inspection is to monitor the execution of environmental protection regulations. Every year the PIOS employees carry out several thousand inspections in industrial plants. According to the regulations they have the right of admission into any plants across the whole country in order to carry out their controlling and monitoring procedures. Should any irregularities be found, they are authorized to fine the unit under control, apply for legal suit to the public prosecutor's office or issue an order to quit the activity. PIOS is also responsible for monitoring the environmental condition in Poland as well as taking part in new investment localizing procedures.
During the 1990s, several foundations which are interested in sustainable development of rural areas have been established. Some of them offer training and education programmes, others support financially different investments. The most important foundations, that with offer grants or preferable credits, and which are active in the environmental protection fields on rural areas are:
* EcoFund Foundation (The EcoFund receives its financial sources from the "eco-conversion" or "debt-into-environmental protection swap") - increased control over contamination and eutrophication of the Baltic Sea (waste water treatment, also from agricultural activity), protection of biological diversity;
* Foundation for Water Supply of Villages - sewage collection and treatment;
* European Fund for Development of Polish Villages. Counterpart Found - rural/municipal waste landfills, gas supply system in rural areas;
* Agency for Municipal Development - water supply, sewage collection and treatment, waste management, power, gas and heat supply;
* Agency for Restructuring and Modernization of Agriculture - water supply and sewage collection systems in rural areas;
* Environmental Know-How Fund - water and air protection, waste disposal;
* Polish - Germany Cooperation Foundation - sewage collection and treatment, water supply and others;
* Polish Agency for Regional Development - technical infrastructure projects (Phare - Rapid).
Environmental policy related to agriculture
In the National Ecological Policy (NEP) not much attention seems to be paid to agriculture. NEP's only indirect goal referring to agricultural production is the priority concerning the necessity of withdrawing agricultural production from overpolluted areas. It needs to be stressed, however, that executing other NEP's goals may have a direct impact on the level of agricultural production development. Very little attention is paid to environmental protection in the documents concerning the agricultural policy. The government's assumption project on agricultural policy by the year 2000 (MRIGZ 1994) determines the most important objectives for agricultural policy integration and environmental protection:
* protecting agriculture against the consequences of environmental degradation in Poland;
* optimal soil liming in order to eliminate the effect of its acidification;
* realizing investments concerning creation of a rural communal economy and
* making potable water improvement programmes widespread in farmsteads.
The document brings up the question of creating conditions for land afforestation in watershed areas or areas with no importance to agriculture.
The document ratified by the Government in 1998 and entitled "Medium-term Strategy for Agriculture and Rural Areas Development" (MRIGZ, 1998) does not touch upon/address the necessity of implementing the goals of the environmental protection policy. A lot of attention is paid to the integration of Polish agriculture with the EU, social help for farmers and rural area inhabitants as well as supporting the intensification of Polish agriculture. The question of environmental protection, however, is omitted.
Legislative and institutional framework for a national agri-environmental policy
In the "Medium-term Strategy for Agriculture and Rural Areas Development" (MRIGZ, 1998) objectives and priorities for agriculture and food economy as well as rural areas are as follows:
* improvement of farmers' income situation;
* enhancement of competitiveness domestic and foreign markets;
* improvement of living and working conditions of rural area inhabitants and
* preparation for integration with the European Union.
As it has already been mentioned, the document does not include any information concerning necessary planned measures to integrate agricultural and environmental policies.
Because of an exceptional importance of the legislation harmonization process as a preliminary condition of EU integration, the Minister of Agriculture and Food Economy established special teams, the Working Groups (WG) on harmonization of Legislation (MRIGZ 1998). At present, there are sixteen groups, of which nine deal with the regulations on the market in particular products and seven with other problems. WG XI working on the agriculture and the protection of agricultural environment issues, WG X on the structural funds and rural development (MRIGZ 1998). The task of Working Groups' members is to review the EU law and to initiate necessity changes in Polish legislation.
Laws and directives on the use of inputs
The following legal acts adapting the Polish legal system to that of the Community are in the process of being developed or agreed upon (MRIGZ, 1998):
* a law on fertilizers and fertilization (it implements six EU legal acts);
* an amendment to the seeds law (it implements 30 EU legal acts);
* an amendment to the law on crop protection (it implements 14 EU legal acts);
* a draft legal act - a feedstuff law (planned implementation of 79 EU legal acts).
The Ministry of Agriculture is also preparing a draft law on the food quality and an amendment to the regulations on food labelling.
Laws and directives on the protection of natural resources in agriculture
Both the nature protection and forestry regulations are relatively or highly compatible with the regulations of the EU. Detailed work is being carried out in order to determine fire regulations with respect to forests, which are based on 2158/92/EEC regulation.
Steps have been taken to make the following EU directives compulsory:
* 79/409/EEC on the protection of wild birds;
* 92/43/EEC on the protection of the natural ecosystems of flora and fauna; and
* EEC/348/81 directive the protection of sea mammals.
Until the amendment on protecting and shaping the environment was passed, Polish law lacked regulations similar to the 90/220EEC directive concerning planned release of genetically modified organisms into the environment. At present, regulations on that matter are being prepared.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Economy together with Ministry of Environment Protection are working on the modification of the existing State Programme of Enhancing Afforestation to conform with Council Regulation EEC/2080/92. It would be one of the elements in solving the structural problems in Polish agriculture by excluding some land from agricultural use and securing alternative sources of income for farmers.
National measures on the promotion of ecologically sound agricultural practices
Supporting ecological methods in agricultural production is carried out through (Duczkowska - Malysz 1996):
* Preference credits for purchasing means for ecological methods of food production and adjusting farms to this kind of production; and
* Educating those who express interest in it.
At the same time, however, no active forms were undertaken to promote or organize distribution of ecological products in the market, which MRIGZ documents had provided for (MRIGZ, 1994). In addition, in spite of the government's declaration to support ecological agriculture, producers face enormous problems when applying for preference credits or trying to sell their crops. This, in turn, makes farmers less interested in ecological production.
Table 18: Ecological farms certificated by ECOLAND
Year Numbers of certificated farms Area (ha)
Total Average
Source: Ekoland 1998
As it can be seen in Table 18, in Poland, there are not many farms having ecological certifications. The number of farms with certificates received from the ECOLAND Association was the most substantial. ECOLAND is the Association of Ecological Food Producers. It was established in 1989 by farmers and researchers promoting alternative farming. The Association operates based on the IFOAM ecological farming criteria and the EU disposition No 2092/91. Besides the farms certificated by ECOLAND, there is a group of farms having certificates from the Polish Ecological Association, and a group of farms with a SCAL certification provided by a Dutch organization certifying strawberry production.
The importance of national environment associations and organizations for environmental policy
The "Green face" of civil society organizations
According to the research of the Institute for Sustainable Development (Instytut na Rzecz Ekorozwoju 1997), ecological problems are not perceived by Polish society as particularly important or threatening and the interest in these matters has actually decreased in the last few years.
The period of the ecological non-governmental organizations' (ENGO) highest activity was at the turn of the 1980s. At that time, several hundred organizations appeared declaring their willingness to work for environmental protection. As time passed, ENGO became less and less active. Although there are several hundred social organizations working for environmental protection, only about a dozen are really active. The main fields of activity of the Polish ENGO is environmental protection, promoting alternative models of life and consumption, solving local problems bound up with ecology. Very few organizations deal with the problem of balanced development of rural areas.
The importance of private and non-profit organizations
There are three main fields in which ecological organizations play an important role in balanced development of agriculture:
* direct work done to develop balanced agriculture and rural areas. The EKOLAND association plays an important role in this field. Not only does it promote ecological farming, but it organizes professional training, issues materials on ecological farming, organizes fairs and the sale of ecological products, as well as promoting agro-tourism.
* financial support of infrastructure development in rural areas. There are numerous foundations working in this field (Chapter 4.1), based on either Polish or foreign capital.
* action undertaken in order to change ecology-related policies, including efforts to draw attention to the importance of both rural areas and balanced agriculture for the proper functioning of Poland's natural system. There are several Polish nation-wide ENGO's e.g., Polish Ecological Club, League of Nature Protection etc.
Apart from the above-mentioned organizations, there are many others which support the development of agriculture by doing market analyses, scientific research, offering advisory and consulting services. Some of them e.g., the Foundation of Assistance Programmes for Agriculture (FAPA) were set up by the Ministry of Agriculture, others, such as the Institute for Sustainable Development, were set up by individuals. In recent years the role of agricultural trade union organizations has increased. It seems, however, that they are more interested in maintaining their status quo in agriculture than supporting its sustainable development.
Following an Act from 14 December 1995 regarding agricultural chambers, agricultural self-government was established in Poland. Agricultural chambers have a legal status and associate all farmers that pay agricultural taxes as well as members of agricultural production cooperatives. They participate in setting and carrying out agricultural policies. According to the decentralization of Polish administration it should be expected that the role of Agricultural Chambers will increase.
CONCLUSIONS
The analysis shows that the role of agriculture in Poland is crucial. Farms are managed on about 60 percent of the country's total area. Agriculture gives jobs to a considerable number of professionally active people. The extensive character of Polish agriculture, the fact that it is broken up into small farms, and the small amounts of chemicals used in the process of cultivation, makes Polish agriculture relatively safe for the natural habitat. At the same time, however, it makes Polish agriculture technically backward and rural inhabitants impoverished.
Polish agriculture will have to undergo certain changes. This is necessary because of Poland's aspirations to join the European Union, the EU's single market requirements, the opening of the Polish market to international competition, and the necessity to ensure the rural inhabitants a proper standard of living. The changes that the Polish government has planned are mainly concerned with enlarging middle-size farms and the intensification of agricultural production. This may lead to agriculture's stronger pressure on the natural environment which, in turn, could result in negative changes of the environment.
REFERENCES
Bogacka, T., Taylor, R., Niemirycze, E., Makowski, Z. & Borkowski, Z., 1993. Opracowanie metodologii i metodyki monitoringu ladunku zanieczyszczen obszarowych, stanu zasobow wodnych i migracji zanieczyszczen pochodzacych z rolnictwa w nawiazaniu do potrzeb monitoringu krajowego, regionalnego i lokalnego w zlewniach ekologicznego rolnictwa z uwzglednieniem wynikow badan Ekologicznych Laboratoriow Zywnosci, Maszynopis, Proj. UNEP/WHO, Warszawa.
Duczkowska, & Malysz, K., 1996. Rozwoj obszarow wiejskich, Raport, MRIGZ, Warszawa, p. 84.
GUS, 1998a. Rocznik statystyczny, Polska 1998, GUS, Warszawa.
GUS, 1998b. Ochrona srodowiska 1998, GUS. Warszawa.
Instytut na Rzecz Ekorozwoju, 1997. Agenda niespelnionych nadziei, Raport, Warszawa.
IUNG, 1989. Ocena stanu zagrozenia gleb kraju z punktu widzenia produkcji pelnowartosciowych plodow rolnych, Maszynopis, Pulawy.
Johnson, S.R., Foster, W.E., Gordon, S.C. & Sapek, A. Setting the stage: incentives, regulation, and community participation in developing agriculture and protecting the environment [in] Sustainable Agriculture and rural area development, pp. 100-114, Institute for Land Reclamation and Grassland Farming, Falenty.
Karaczun, Z. M., 1994. Policy of air protection in Poland, Report 6/94., p. 68, Institute of Sustainable Development, Warsaw
Karaczun, Z. M. & Grzekiewicz, R., 1996. Ownership transformation in agriculture vs ecology, Institute of Sustainable Development, Report 2/96, p. 82, Warsaw.
Karaczun, Z.M. 1998. Privatization of Polish Agriculture and Environment Protection, Annals of Warsaw Agricultural University, No. 19., 1998, pp.73-85, Horticulare (Landscape Architecture), Warsaw.
Kowalik, P. 1994. Zanieczyszczenia przestrzenne w rolnictwie, Zesz. Spec. pp. 12-19, Wiad. Mel i £ak., Warsaw.
Leopold, A. & Zietara, W. 1998. AWRSP, Biuletyn Informacyjny MRiGZ oraz AriMR, 9/98 pp. 15-19, Warsaw.
Michna, W. 1993. Proekologiczne zorientowanie polityki rolnej w Polsce na przelomie XX i XXI wieku, Synteza, IERiGZ, p. 60Warszawa.
MOSZNiL. 1992. Polityke ekologiczna panstwa, p. 42,Warsaw.
MRIGZ. 1994. Zalozenia polityki spoleczno - gospodarczej dla wsi, rolnictwa i gospodarki zywnosciowej do roku 2000, MriGZ, p. 59, Warszawa.
MRIGZ. 1998a. Information ,,Progress in the adoption of the agricultural and food sectors in preparation for integration with European Union", MriG, Warsaw, p. 32.
MRIGZ. 1998b. Przyszlosc wsi i rolnictwa, Wyzwania i szanse, p. 32, Warsaw.
MRIGZ. 1998c. Medium-term Strategy for Agriculture and Rural Areas Development, Document approved by the Council of Ministers on 21 April 1998, MriG,¯ p. 30, Warsaw.
Nowicki, M. 1993. Strategia ekorozwoju Polski, ARW Grzegorczyk, p. 182.Warsaw.
Praca, Zbiorowa. 1998. Agriculture and food economy in Poland, MriG, p. 78, Warsaw.
Ryszkowski, L. 1988. Zarys strategii ochrony zywych zasobow przyrody w Polsce, Zaklad Biologii Rolnej i Lesnej PAN, p. 98, Poznan.
Ryszkowski, L. & Balazy, S. 1995. Strategia ochrony srodowiska i przyrody na obszarach wiejskich [w] Zasady ekopolityki w rozwoju obszarow wiejskich, ZBSRiL, pp. 49-64, Poznan.
Ryszkowski, L. 1991. Obszary intensywnego rolnictwa [w] Ekologiczne podstawy gospodarowania srodowiskiem przyrodniczym, Zeszyt CPBP 04.10 nr. 77. SGGW, pp. 36-63, Warsaw.
Rzad, Polski. 1997a. II Raport rzadowy dla Konferencji Stron Ramowej Konwencji Narodow Zjednoczonych w Sprawie Zmian Klimatu, p. 70, Warsaw.
Rzad, Polski. 1997b. Agenda 21, Sprawozdanie z realizacji w latach 1992 - 96. NFOS, p 144, Warsaw.
Sapek, A. 1997. Risk of water pollution as a result of agricultural activites [in] Sustainable Agriculture and rural area development, Institute for Land Reclamation and Grassland Farming, pp. 79-99, Falenty.
Sejm, RP. 1991. Uchwala Sejmu w sprawie Polityki Ekologicznej Panstwa.
Smorowski, C. 1996. Udzial rolnictwa w zanieczyszczeniach obszarowych [w] Ochrona i zrownowazony rozwój srodowiska wiejskiego, pp. 64-78, Wyd. SGGW.
Witek, T. 1993. Rolnictwo na glebach zanieczyszczonych metalami ciezkimi [w] Proekologiczne zorientowanie polityki rolnej w Polsce na prze³omie XX i XXI wieku, Pod red. W. Michna, Instytut Ekonomiki Rolnictwa i Gospodarki Zywnosciowej, Warsaw.
ANNEX
Table 1: Total agricultural production growth, 1990 - 97 (Praca zbiorowa 1998)
Specification 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997
Previous year = 100
Plant production 97.2 78.8 123.2 85.1 112.2 101,7 95,8
Animal production 99.6 95.9 88.9 99.3 108.7 99.2 103,8
Total 98.4 87.3 106.8 90.7 110.7 100.7 99.1
Table 2: Areas planted and yields of major commodities (Praca zbiorowa 1998)
Area planted (thousand ha) Yields
(dt/ha)
Area planted (thousand ha) Yields
(dt/ha)
Winter wheat 1 752 36.2 1 822 32.5
Rye 2 285 23.2 2 298 23.1
Spring barley 968 27.5 1 131 31.0
Oats 642 22.9 626 26.1
Triticale 650 30.0 630 29.2
Mixed grains 1 284 25.5 1 429 28.7
Potatoes 1 694 161 1 306 159
Hay 2 319 47.9 2 598 51.8
^1 - annual averages
Table 3: Livestock numbers (Praca zbiorowa 1998)
Thousand heads Year
Cattle
of which: cows
Pigs
of which: sows
Sheep
of which: ewes
Horses 1 076 787 569 558
Chicken 53 383 38 246 44 142 49 286
^1 - annual averages
Table 4: Use (pure nutrient) of pesticides, artificial and lime fertilizers (GUS 1998b)
Annual Amounts
Artificial fertilizers (NPK) tonnes/ha 175.2 95.1 71.4 84.5 88.3
Nitrogen fertilizers (N) tonnes/ha 66.1 39.9 43.5 47.6 49.9
Phosphorus fertilizers (P2O5) tonnes/ha 47.3 22.3 15.0 16.9 17.3
Potassium fertilizers (K20) tonnes/ha 61.8 32.9 17.9 20.0 21.1
Lime fertilizers (CaO) tonnes/ha 139.4 139 108.9 124.4 139.0
Pesticides (active substances) kg/ha 0.8 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.7
34 According to the Act of the Parliament of 26^th of March 1988, a special land exchange and consolidation programme has been established. The work is conducted by the specialized geodetic units acting within the framework of the state voievodship (province) administration financed from the State budget. In 1997 only on an area of 10.5 thousand ha was the work on improving the land structure finished (MRIGZ 1998).
35 Agro-food industry is another source of waste, as little as 75 percent of waste from this sector is used, the rest, amounting to 623.8 thousand tonnes in 1997 is disposed of in dumping sites.
36 The reasons for the deficit, apart from agriculture, are also other forms of human activity as well as climatic conditions
37 Both institutions came into being in the 1980s. At the beginning of the 1990s, however, their character and operating rules were considerably changed.
38 The system of environmental funds in Poland has three tiers. At the top is the National Fund for Environmental Protection and Water Management. NFOSiGW is interested in supporting big projects which are of national interest. Priority areas of environmental protection investments financed by the National Fund of Environmental Protection and Water Management are the following:
· Water resources protection by providing financial support for the construction of water and wastewater treatment plants, water saving technologies, construction of closed water circulation and multiple use systems;
· Air protection by supporting modern technologies, particularly in the field of reduction of energy consumption and elimination of harmful emissions, rationalisation of heating systems, production and installation of pollution abatement installations, the use of unconventional sources of energy and the encouragement of modern technological improvements in reducing the environmental impact of road transport;
· Protection of land surface and waste management by supporting low and non-waste generating technologies, utilization and neutralization of industrial and municipal wastes, handling of hazardous wastes including hospital wastes, ecological utilization of wastes at their sources of origin, reclamation and re-cultivation of degraded soils;
· Mining and geology by financing the following activities: geological and hydro-geological research, development of mining technologies and the processing of minerals, collection and purification of mining waters, re-cultivation of areas degraded by mining activities;
· Conservation of nature by providing financial assistance for projects in regions under particular protection, projects focused on organization and management of these regions, on teaching, training and research centres (scientific facilities) in national parks, restitution and reintroduction of endangered species, protection of forest stands and biocenosis, restoration of natural heritage in parks and palace gardens registered as historical sites;
· Environmental education by supporting educational and training projects, radio and television educational programmes, supporting of interactive education programmes on a national scale;
· Monitoring of the environment by providing financial support for the implementation of projects resulting from the National Environmental Monitoring Programme as well as projects helping to reduce the environmental impact of extreme threats.
· Next to the National Fund comes the Voivodship (province) level, at which 16 Voivodship Funds for Environmental Protection and Water Management operate. The Voivodship Funds support mainly projects with regional significance. The existing system of environmental funds is supplemented by 2 500 municipal (local) funds which support local, municipal projects.
<section>8</section>
COUNTRY REPORT ON THE PRESENT ENVIRONMENTAL SITUATION IN AGRICULTURE
- ROMANIA -
Luiza Toma
Institute for Agricultural Economics
Romanian Academy, Bucharest
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this study is to emphasize the relationship between agriculture and environment and related policy/institutional issues, mainly the government/NGOs role and the effectiveness of their current attempt to address the environmental issues.
Agriculture may have damaging as well as beneficial effects on the environment. Both aspects have to be considered in order to understand the shortcomings but also the potential of farming activities vis-à-vis the environment. The environment conditions agriculture both by providing the indispensable natural resources and by influencing the quantity and quality of its products.
The promotion of sustainable development should be a major objective of the environmental policy that will require enhanced political support. Improvement of institutional structures and management, both at central and local level, should enable achieving an integrated approach to the environmental issues, establishing and implementing environment management plans. Environmental NGOs have been perceived, recently, as the most dynamic field in the Romanian civil society.
The remainder of this study is organized as follows. In Chapter 2, we introduce the impact of transition and structure of property rights. In Chapter 3, we present the relationship between agriculture and the environment. Chapter 4, gives a description of the institutional change within environmental policy, environmental policy related to agriculture and the importance of national environmental associations and organizations. Finally, Chapter 5 presents the conclusions.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSITION AND STRUCTURE OF PROPERTY RIGHTS
The economic reform programmes address macroeconomic issues (determining international trade, the national budget situation, private investments, wage policies, income distribution, etc.) and major sectoral issues (e.g. agricultural productivity, industrial development, energetic consumption, etc.). In the majority of the cases, the reform programmes do not specify how these economic policies affect the environment. Still, there is a strong link that should be considered in the decision-making process. The positive impact of economic reform on the environment creates the premises for its development on the same bases. The possible negative effects should be analysed, monitored and neutralized. While in some cases the trend of environmental effects is predictable, at other times it is more complex^39.
Price liberalization and the elimination of economic constraints contribute to both economic growth and environmental protection. The land reform (through clarification of land property rights) and development of better access to financial and social services create premises not only for agricultural growth and better living standards in rural areas, but also for establishing a motivational framework favourable to the environment. Macrostabilization measures include environmental policies, while economic instability affects the sustainable use of natural resources. A low inflation rate leads to reliable price forecasting and determines economic agents to invest in. These premises are essential for encouraging sustainable economic development with favourable environmental impacts. Increasing economic efficiency, reduction of waste and the correct evaluation of natural resources lead to decreasing negative environmental effects.
The effect of privatization and redefinition of property rights on natural resources
With 20 percent of GDP and 35 percent of employment, generated by agriculture Romanian agriculture is relatively more important than in any other country in Central and Eastern Europe. Romania is not strongly urbanized and almost half of the population lives in rural areas. Romanian agriculture is undergoing a process of structural transformation meant to overcome the crisis originated before 1989, a crisis mainly related to: the underuse of the production potential, preservation of uncompetitive agrarian structures (a high level of labour force employed in agriculture, a high fragmentation of land property, a low level of working capital), a weak growth of markets and market institutions, and the managerial crisis. One of the main objectives of the reform process during transition was to decollectivize agriculture and to re-establish private property rights. The movement of state-owned properties into private hands ("privatization") provides an important opportunity to
transform Romania's environmental objectives into reality in a direct way. Romania should consider the environmental measures to be taken into account in the privatization process and in the subsequent sale of properties between private parties. An environmental audit at the time of selling an enterprise would be considered essential by foreign investors and by potential local stockholders (e.g. the likely costs required to make the enterprise saleable in an environmentally-acceptable form).
With the disorder in production, the Romanian environment is cleaner in the 1990s than it was in the 1980s. Some major polluting sources have been forced to decrease production by between 30-50 percent and, as a result, there has been a dramatic decline in the formation of industrial waste and energy consumption. Emissions are directly proportional to production. With further closures of inefficient production lines (or of some entire plants), and with the increasing pressure to become more efficient and competitive, we can expect a further reduction of pollutant emissions. The Government policies that now oblige producers to compete in open markets should lead in time to restructuring away from heavy industries and towards generally less-polluting lighter industries and services.
Restructurization in rural areas
The basis of the rural economy is agriculture. Half of the rural population is over 60 years old due mainly to rural-urban migration before 1989. There are significant differences between the rural communities placed within the eight macroregions of Romania. Over half of the Romanian communes (covering 70 percent of the rural population and 65 percent of the rural area) present a medium economic level. One fifth of the communes are characterized by a good or medium economic situation and have resources for a diversified rural economy. The remaining 30 percent present a weak economic situation and have predominantly agricultural potential.
Strategic objectives regarding the restructuring of rural areas address different issues. The environmental issue should be one of the most important ones. Environmental problems in the rural areas are generally of a more diffuse, long-term nature than those that occur in urban areas. With the exception of the most intensively affected spots, the main environmental task in the rural areas is different from urban-industrial zones - namely, to conserve or restore existing natural and agricultural areas, rather than to protect public health. Since Romania has a large agricultural sector, this also means the conservation of a large segment of its economic base and of the countryside that provides food and support to cities.
Liberalization
Starting February 1997, agricultural policy has had in view a gradual decrease of all kind of subsidies in favour of direct payment schemes (i.e. the voucher scheme). Prices of all agricultural products have been liberalized. Price reform and tariff reduction were meant to improve diversity and quality of local goods, to restore the profitability of the repressed export sector and to stimulate production among efficient import competitors. Agricultural exports have been totally liberalized, eliminating all trade barriers, aiming at the stimulation of production growth, increase of efficiency and competition among producers. Proper pricing and incentives offer the possibility of substantial resource conservation. Diversification of agricultural production and the creation of incentives for ecological production will also occur as foreign trade develops (exploration of new foreign markets and increased competition on the domestic market). The ecological product market is still
in its early stages, but certainly there are premises for its development.
The development of the economic framework at farm level
Land market
Land reform was initiated in 1991. Putting land and other farm assets into private ownership or private management led to a high degree of fragmentation of land ownership and farms. In reality, the structure of production is less fragmented than the structure of ownership. A limit of 10 hectares was set up per household, the average size of most farms being about 2.5-3.0 hectares. About 15 percent of privately-owned land was operated by formal farmers' associations; 13 percent have represented family associations and the remaining 72 percent have represented small family farms. About a fifth of the farmland has been managed by state farms. At present almost 30 percent of the total surface managed by the state farms has been transferred as shares to private owners.
Due to its restrictive character (it banned rural land sales, gave pre-emption rights to a Rural Development Agency), the legislative framework was amended by some new measures (starting 1997) that modified and completed it (with regards to the increase of the land ownership limit).
The objectives regarding the land market that should be realized in the near future are completing land registration and the distribution of property titles and clarifying the issue regarding land managed by state farms. The current institutional and legislative framework for the land market does not firmly address the impact of private/state land ownership on the environment. Land privatization can provide dynamic incentives to improve land, but is also consistent with optimal resource degradation and the continued existence of externalities among owners.
The development of input and output prices
Due to the high rate of inflation and an imprecise market information system, the price monitoring process has been raising methodological questions. Before price liberalization in 1997, Romania applied the minimum guaranteed price system for agricultural inputs and outputs. Following the drastic declines in real incomes since 1990, Romanians have spent on average 60 percent of their income on food. Due to this fact, the Government intervened extensively to control food prices (trying to keep consumer prices low and producer incentives high) as a form of social policy. In addition, high import (tariff) barriers sustained inefficient production and processing activities at a high cost to the budget and to consumers. The economic, environmental and budgetary costs of these interventions were ultimately unsustainable. Moreover, the policies did not succeed in protecting the consumer much, and resulted in large losses and continued inefficiency in agricultural enterprises. In
order to maintain low agricultural prices, state-owned agricultural processors had their margins controlled. The low price farmers received for their output was a disincentive to produce and to buy the best quality seeds and fertilizers. Although they preferred to deliver to the free market, they were given no real choice since highly subsidized credit and subsidized inputs were channelled through state integrators.
Starting 1997, prices were liberalized and driven by the world price trend. After 1993, the ratio between Romanian and EU producer prices for most of the main agricultural outputs and inputs has shown an increasing trend. In 1997, the administered prices for fertilizers were eliminated and fertilizer companies have been allowed to sell at relevant parity prices. Input prices increased faster than output prices leading to lower farmers' income, decrease of the use of good quality inputs (e.g. consumption of certified seed decreased, since most small private farmers use seed from own production). In view of these developments, since 1997 the voucher scheme has been applied to supply farmers with an extra amount of inputs. The increasing gap between input and output prices should be counterbalanced by future liberalization of the land market and legislative reform in the rural financing system.
THE IMPACT OF AGRICULTURE ON THE ENVIRONMENT^40
Environmental degradation caused by agriculture
Agriculture may have damaging as well as beneficial effects on the environment. Both aspects have to be considered in order to understand the shortcomings but also the potential of farming activities vis-à-vis the environment. According to local conditions and to the way they are carried out, farming activities can, for example, favour or combat erosion, increase or reduce biodiversity.
Agriculture and soil protection
Much of Romania's cultivable land has been developed for large-scale agriculture with huge areas under intensive arable cropping and irrigation. Virtually, the whole of the Danube Valley has been reclaimed for agriculture. In the mountainous areas of the Carpathians, the landscape turns to upland hill pasture and upland forest. Over half of the Romanian land area is classified as agricultural land and about 67 percent of this, or 10 million hectares, is cultivated annually (see Annex 1, Table 1).
The evaluation of agricultural soil quality consists of the identification and characterization of the factors limiting its productive capacity. Romanian soils can be classified in capability classes (the integration of soils in one capability class is done according to the ratio between the cost of land improvement and farming efficiency) (see Annex 1, Table 2).
Out of the total of 16 million hectares of agricultural land, 12 million hectares are affected by factors such as erosion, water and salt excess, compacting, acidification, chemical pollution with pesticides, heavy metals, fluoride, oil, etc. Only about 3.7 million hectares out of 10 million hectares of arable land are actually suitable for sustainable and efficient agriculture.
The most important problem refers to the erosion phenomenon that affects about 6.3 million hectares of agricultural land and shows an increasing trend. Wind erosion, phenomenon recorded on almost 380 000 hectares shows a propensity for extension due to deforestation. Investigations show that about 150 million tonnes of topsoil, which includes 1.5 million tonnes of humus, 0.4 to 0.5 million tonnes of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium and large amounts of nutrient elements (calcium, manganese, zinc, molybdenum), are lost through erosion. Additionally, about 0.7 million hectares are affected by landslides. Investigations show that this very dangerous erosion process is increasing. While there is no measure of loss of productivity, research in Romania has shown yield improvements of six to eight times where soil conservation has been practized on severely eroded lands. Erosion also has an economic impact through siltation. Apart from a loss of aquatic life due to turbidity, at
least 14 natural reservoirs have been wholly or partially silted up.
Soil compacting was recorded on 6.5 million hectares. Other aspects refer to the level of nitrogen (deficient on 4.8 million hectares), those of phosphorus (deficient on 6.2 million hectares), and also deficiency of other microelements (zinc, iron, calcium, magnesium). Strong and moderate acidification was recorded on 3.3 million hectares. About 220 thousand hectares are polluted by 300 million tonnes of solid waste. Oil and salty water affect other 50 thousand hectares. Chemical pollution affects 900 thousand hectares. Out of these, 200 thousand hectares are totally unproductive for agriculture. Very acid soils due to acid rain (sulphide oxides and nitrogen oxides) were found in the neighbourhood of chemical plants producing fertilizer (ammonium nitrate), sulphide acid or non-ferrous metals.
Irrigation is another factor that put agriculture in the position of aggressor of the environment. Soils can also be polluted during irrigation by water from very polluted rivers like the Olt, Arges, Mures, Siret, Prahova, and Trotus. This will be a major problem in the future. Although the area presently equipped with irrigation infrastructure covers 3.2 million hectares, less than 2 million hectares is actually irrigated because of system deterioration. It is unlikely that more than 70 percent of the former area will be restored because of high pumping costs. As a result, the negative impact of irrigation and particularly waterlogging is therefore likely to be somewhat reduced. In areas with irrigation systems and no drainage systems, soils get salty (about 1.2 million hectares). Soil fertility has been affected in this way on over 600 thousand hectares. Salinization is met especially in the steppe. Water evaporates and salts are concentrated on the ground. Irrigation in
excess leads to changes in soil, meaning that the level of the groundwater rises and salt concentration in soil increases. Water losses from irrigation (about 40 percent of the total use of water for irrigation) lead to an excess of water in soil on large surfaces (about 5.5 million hectares).
Pesticides are significant sources of chemical pollution in soils. Pollution due to pesticides is a phenomenon whose intensity, although decreasing rapidly to 25 percent of the EU level, has still exceeded maximum allowable limits (0.1 ppm^41) for some organochlorine insecticides, such as HCH in six counties and DDT in eighteen counties. Although herbicides have a much shorter persistence in the soil, their residues were found both in soil and groundwater near the manufacture plants regardless of their product. On the whole, while there is no comprehensive system to detect pesticide pollution, and packaging and instructions for use need to be improved, the use of pesticides does not appear to be a major environmental issue, at present; however, there is a need for pesticide application equipment and protective clothing to be available on the market. Among soil-polluting pesticides, organochlorine compounds are especially persistent. In many cases, concentration of
organochlorines of about one ppm were found (this being a very high value). The problem should be no longer serious, since the use of HCH and DDT was forbidden years ago and we have had to cope with their persistent residues.
Animal farms are an important pollution source to all environmental factors. Removing animal residues from animal farms pollutes first the water and, if water is not decontaminated, it affects soils, too. Part of animal waste is used as natural fertilizer. Waste management had to deal with 11.3 million tonnes of manure from livestock farms. Residues from animal farms affect 900 hectares. About 76 percent of this amount was used by anaerobic fermentation, composting and administration of agricultural land. In 1994, due to decreasing use of pesticides, about 6 190 tonnes of pesticides expired, exceeding by 68 percent the quantities registered in 1992.
Currently, soil pollution is not monitored on a regular basis. The Ministry of Agriculture and the Academy of Agricultural and Forestry Sciences undertake a sampling as part of their normal operations, but their sampling is not particularly directed at detecting any measuring of polluting substances and the information that is gathered is not necessarily passed on to the Ministry of Water, Forests and Environmental Protection.
Agriculture and water protection
The direct discharge of wastes into natural watercourses is the main cause of their deterioration. It was estimated that streams in Romania receive nearly 6 875 million tonnes of pollutants per year, out of which chlorides, suspended substances, organic substances, ammonia, nitrates, phenols, sulphured hydrogen, phosphorus, cyanides, detergents, and pesticides are the most prevailing.
The deterioration of natural water quality has also caused great difficulties in the water supply, and an increasing cost of water to industry. Water use in Romania is estimated at about 36 billion m^3/year - about 27 percent of total water available. Of the water used, inner rivers and lakes provide 13 billion m^3/year (36 percent); the Danube River, 20 billion m^3/year (56 percent); and groundwater, three billion m^3/year (8 percent). The per capita water demand is relatively low, being about 890 m^3/capita/year (1990), while for the USA it is 2 650 m^3/capita/year. In the short term, water use is expected to decline with the major reduction in industry and energy. With the recovery of the country's economy, water demand is expected to increase again. With the introduction of incentives for more efficient water use -economic pricing of water for industrial, agricultural and municipal consumption - there is great potential for reducing unit water consumption in the future.
Romania has developed ambient water quality standards (see Annex 1, Table 3) and these are generally satisfactory. These standards have been used more to classify the rivers according to their present state rather than for desirable present or future state. At the national level, the global quality of the river water in Romania presents a high degree of territorial non-uniformity both from basin to basin and within basins, from one area to another.
There are four main categories for water quality: category I (clean drinking water); category II (less clean water used for fisheries, town planning, recreation); category III (water used for irrigation, power plants, industrial purposes); category D (polluted). Taking into account the national hydrological network of 70 000 km, the water qualitative level is established on river sectors representing a total length of 20 500 km (see Annex 1, Table 4).
Pollution from agricultural sources affects both surface water and groundwater. It is mainly due to nitrates, phosphorous, pesticides, and run-off of silage effluent and slurry. The hydrographic basins are polluted annually by about 6.5 million tonnes of pollutants, including chloride, organic substances, ammonium, suspension particles, phenols, phosphor, cyanide, detergent, and pesticides.
The main sources of nitrates and phosphorous are mineral fertilizers and effluent of livestock, in particular animal manure. Nitrates and phosphorous can lead to the eutrophication of fresh and coastal water and the contamination of groundwater, threatening the quality of drinking water. Animal farms are an important pollution source to water. For instance, for an animal to gain one kilogram inweight, it produces between six and 25 kilograms of residues. Their removal and the cleaning up of the cowsheds utilizes huge quantities of water that have to be decontaminated. About 70 million m^3 of water per year (1994) is used this way in the livestock industry (the pig industry is the greatest polluter). These residues affect mainly the Somes, Mures, Bega-Timis, Vedea, Arges, Ialomita, Siret, and Prut rivers.
Pesticide residues in the different water bodies may often affect biodiversity especially in the case of aquatic ecosystems, but also in the case of terrestrial ecosystems linked to water. This is also a potential threat to water quality, which leads to increased costs for drinking water distribution.
Agricultural activities also have significant effects on the quantity of water, especially where irrigation is required. In particular, excessive abstraction can lower the water table and increase the desertification and salinization by the intrusion of seawater. The water within certain irrigation systems on a surface of about 200 000 hectares does not meet quality conditions, thus leading to land degradation and to crop reduction on these surfaces. Lakes are classified mostly in the first two quality categories. Nevertheless, some Delta lakes present a high degree of pollution (e.g. Matita, Puiu, Rosu). Lakes like Techirghiol, Balta Alba, and Amara are also polluted through bad quality water from irrigation systems.
Romanian rivers are being polluted by wastewater discharge estimated at about 10 billion m3/year. Out of this quantity, only 10 percent is adequately treated, 60 percent is partially treated, and 30 percent is discharged without treatment. The major pollution sources are industrial waste, agricultural run-off, animal waste and municipal waste. Of these, industrial waste is the most hazardous to health. Extreme water pollution is generally a local phenomenon concentrated in river lengths downstream from industries and larger municipalities.
The environmental quality of the Danube River Basin is under great pressure from a diverse range of human activities. Urban populations are generating pollution from largely inadequate waste treatment and solid waste disposal facilities. Solid waste is another area of concern, as waste management legislation is almost non-existent. The concept of hazardous waste has not been defined and incineration is only intermittently practized. The modernization and intensification of agricultural practices and livestock production are the major sources of non-point source pollution of surface and ground water in the Danube River Basin. The Danube currently delivers 60 000 tonnes of phosphorus per year and about 340 000 tonnes of inorganic nitrogen per year to the Black Sea. Additionally, coastal settlements discharge their sewage directly into the sea, a situation even further exacerbated by the discharge of industrial wastes (e.g. the phosphate effluent from a single fertilizer
factory in Romania is estimated to be equivalent to 13.4 percent of the load from the Danube).
Most of the inhabitants in peri-urban and rural areas (about 46.8 percent of the population) depend on groundwater for their drinking water source. In some areas, groundwater is heavily polluted with nitrates, pesticides, heavy metals and other toxic substances. In 1988, the Institute of Hygiene and Public Health conducted a nation-wide survey of the nitrate pollution of shallow wells. Out of a total of 12 554 wells surveyed, 4 558 wells (36 percent) showed nitrate concentrations exceeding the minimum acceptable standard of 45 mg/liter. The total number of people relying on these polluted wells for their water supply was estimated at about four million. Extreme nitrate concentrations reaching 1 500 mg/liter were detected from a sample in Cernica, the rural vicinity around Bucharest. Although the exact cause of this pollution remains to be confirmed through further investigation, it appears that the main sources of nitrate pollution are agricultural run-off and livestock
waste. At present, the ground water network has shown a lower content of pollutants than in previous years.
Non-point source pollution due to fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides on agricultural land has decreased during the last four years. At the hydrographic basin level, the average concentration of these substances in water was below the maximum allowable limit in the mentioned period.
The Ministry of Environment has a nation-wide monitoring system comprized of: a) 275 slow (monthly) and 65 fast (daily) monitoring stations for surface water; b) 55 seasonal monitoring stations for lakes; and c) 280 seasonal monitoring stations for groundwater. To some extent, the Ministry of Environment also monitors industrial discharges but, with inadequate supporting legislation, low fines and a shortage of equipment and staff, enforcement is limited. Although there are more than 2 000 stations for cleaning bad quality water, almost half do not function properly. At present, water pollution phenomena have been confirmed, and this has implied the need for careful monitoring and a proper legislative framework.
Agriculture and air protection
As in other Eastern European countries, air pollution is highly localized and severe. It is estimated that about 1.8 million tonnes of pollutants are emitted into the atmosphere each year. Among these are: about 1.76 million tonnes of sulphur dioxide, 8500 tonnes of ammonia, 5 500 tonnes of carbon sulphide, and 2 300 tonnes of phenols. Nonferrous metal compounds, such as chlorine, fluorine, and suspended and sedimentary particles, also are discharged into the air.
Among economic sectors, agriculture has the highest weight as regards emissions of methane (CH[4]), nitrogen protoxide (N[2]O) and ammonium nitrate (NH[3]). Livestock farming is responsible for emissions of ammonia and - especially in the case of ruminant breeding - methane. About 26 percent of total methane emissions in Romania comes from agricultural activities. This contributes to the greenhouse effect. Land application and the storage of manure are other important sources of ammonia emissions. Methane and ammonia have environmentally negative effects regarding the greenhouse effect and the acidification of soils and water respectively. Livestock farming emissions present strong regional variations, which can be explained by differences in feed availability and livestock keeping methods. The emissions coming from burning straw and other vegetal residues are also polluting the air. The use of fertilizer can also result in ammonium nitrate emissions, which contribute to the
greenhouse effect. Pesticide drift can cause long-distance pollution and their residues can contaminate rainwater. In addition, in some rural areas agricultural activity leads to unpleasant smells in the countryside.
One of the worst effects of atmospheric pollution is acid rain. Acid rain can be caused by nitric oxides from both large chemical fertilizer plants and power stations. Romania lacks special installations to convert the sulphur dioxide present in burned gases into sulphur trioxide and subsequently into sulphuric acid.
Agriculture can contribute to the protection of the natural environment against specific forms of pollution or degradation, e.g. it contributes to counteracting the greenhouse effect as it provides an important CO[2] sink.
The emission of pollutants in the atmosphere decreased in Romania after 1989, not only due to the closure of many animal farms, but also due to the application of pollution abatement technologies. Nevertheless, air pollution phenomenon is still present and implies the need for careful monitoring and proper legislative framework.
Romania is fortunate in having an extensive air-monitoring network. However, with the Ministry of Environment and the Ministry of Health conducting monitoring, there is duplication and overlapping between the agencies. Air pollution monitoring has been done in the Semenic, Fundata, Stana de Vale, and Rarau stations (for background pollution) and in another 750 stations (for pollution impact assessment).
Agriculture and its impact on landscape
The Romanian rural landscape has been shaped by human activities and especially by agriculture. By shaping the landscape, agriculture has also differentiated it. Aesthetic value attaches itself to these cultivated landscapes with all their traditional features, including buildings, field boundaries and watercourses. Traditional semi-natural landscapes are very often essential to a sustainable balance between agricultural activities and the environment. These semi-natural habitats can be preserved only if agriculture is continued.
Still, intensive agriculture had some negative effects on the landscape and it destroyed some features that traditional agriculture has contributed to create in previous centuries. Major examples of its impact are reparcelling with the removal of hedgerows and stonewalls and the clearing of woods; realignment of watercourses and abandonment of terraces. Romanian rural landscape has changed during the last five decades mainly in peri-urban areas, due to the "industrialization" of villages. Still, we cannot speak of an irreversible process of landscape degradation in Romania, since traditional values have started to be given more and more importance in several rural areas. Governmental and private parties have initiated programmes for reviving local cultural inheritance, and maintaining the landscape in some rural areas.
Agriculture and biodiversity
Romania is a country with a rich biodiversity (ecosystems, species and genetic diversity) and a high percentage of natural ecosystems - 47 percent of the land area of the country is covered with natural and semi-natural ecosystems. Since almost half of all forests in Romania (13 percent of the country) have been managed for watershed conservation rather than production, Romania has one of the largest areas of undisturbed forest in Europe. The natural integrity of Romanian forest ecosystems is indicated by the presence of the full range of European forest fauna, including 60 and 40 percent of all European brown bears and wolves respectively. Europe's largest wetland, the Danube Delta (one of the World Natural Heritages) also lies predominantly in Romania. Major grasslands, caves and an extensive network of rivers add to the ecosystem's richness. The high level of geographic diversity in Romania has produced a floral diversity that includes over 3 700 species and a fauna
diversity estimated to be more than 33 802 species. These figures include a large number of endemic and subendemic plants (228) and animals (1 000) specifically adapted to local conditions and only found in Romania. Species that once thrived in many parts of Europe are now only found, or found in large or significant populations, in Romania.
Although rich in biological resources and important as a corridor for the movement of species (biogenetic material), Romania has suffered the consequence of human activity. Historically, human activities have significantly modified the Romanian landscape. These modifications have reduced the abundance of certain elements in the ecosystem (most notably steppe grasslands) and also added new components. Pollution, the damming of rivers, hydrological works, industrial agriculture, the overexploitation of natural resources, among other factors, have all taken their toll in decreasing biodiversity.
Today, arable land comprises 39.2 percent of the country's surface and a large area of natural grasslands has been formed - primarily in the mountains and hills. In total, it has been estimated that in the last fifty years, there has been a permanent loss of 250 000 hectares of forest and grasslands and that an additional 280 000 hectares has been temporarily or at least only partially lost. The continuous deterioration of grasslands has been caused by increasing the number of grazing animals without consideration to the carrying capacity or organization of grazing cycles and rotations.
In the past the draining of wetlands was promoted in order to create arable land for agriculture. A total of about 400 000 hectares of wetland habitat, much of it along the Danube River and in the Danube Delta (about 80 000 ha), has been permanently or partially lost as it was converted to agricultural use. This trend is likely to increase if appropriate measures to reduce the effects of pollution and of economic pressures connected with the overexploitation of natural resources are not to be undertaken.
Air, water and soil pollution have been, and continue to be, major threats to biodiversity. Agriculture run-off is a major pollution factor in some areas. Part of the surface water that could sustain a rich biological diversity is polluted and the high nutrient load (with a high contribution from agriculture) of the Danube River has caused eutrophication in the Danube Delta lakes where several species have consequently been reduced.
Following the political changes of 1989, there has been a net return of people to rural areas. Traditional harvesting and grazing practices present an opportunity to support a sizeable rural population, which lives within the limits of the available biological resources. Agri-tourism could be developed to provide rural communities with additional sources of revenue while offering incentives to retain or revive traditional practices that are sustainable, or to develop new means for using natural resources sustainably. There is a great potential to develop ecological tourism activities in many of Romania's natural areas. A newly formed association of ecological tourist homes and farms is currently promoting this idea. Private land ownership, among other factors, brings both new threats as well as new opportunities for biodiversity protection.
Some species disappear because of the destruction of their natural habitats due to fertilization, pesticides, eutrophication, drainage, irrigation, reparcelling, agricultural land improvement, the abandonment of traditional farming practices or of specific crops and animal productions. Wild fauna suffered both directly and indirectly from the use of insect-fungicides on agricultural fields. Research done after 1990 noted the presence of pesticide residues in tissues collected from wild animals. Although DDT and HCH use was forbidden over ten years ago, their residues remain long after and were found especially in tissues of rabbit, deer, wild boar and mainly near large agricultural fields. Wild species living in different ecosystems are an excellent indicator of environmental pollution. Except for pesticides, wild animals have been contaminated with heavy metals and nitrates. The maximum allowable limit (MAL) was much exceeded for some substances (e.g. cadmium, chrome, and
lead). The most polluted specie is the wild boar (e.g. a case study done few years ago in Calarasi County found that lead contamination of wild boars was exceeded 10 times). Since wild boars are frequently encountered in several parts of Romania, they could be used in the process of chemical pollution monitoring.
Agro-ecosystems are more polluted than forests. Agriculture, over the centuries, has influenced biodiversity by introducing and/or selecting new plant and animal species or by creating new habitats. Maintaining traditional farming with extensive crops and grasslands, in particular in wetlands, steppe areas and mountains contributes to the conservation of endangered species of flora and fauna. By maintaining such biodiversity, agriculture can ensure the survival of genetic resources. Genetic diversity is of crucial importance: it is a cultural heritage that designs our societies and it is the tool to reform agricultural practices towards more viable forms of production.
Taking into account these significant problems, Romania has an active governmental and non-governmental commitment to reverse the trends of biodiversity loss. A large number of areas (4.8 percent of the country's land area) have been designated as protected areas (see Annex 1, Table 5). Romania has signed most international conventions and regional environmental agreements. However, a coordinated and effectively managed system of protected areas does not exist and institutional arrangements for nature conservation and protected area management have not yet been clearly defined.
In order to prevent the reduction of biodiversity in agro-ecosystems, the Priority Objectives for Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Use of its Components in Romania distinguish:
* The protection, conservation and restoration of the terrestrial and aquatic biodiversity outside protected areas through (1) reducing the negative impacts of pollution, natural resources overexploitation and inappropriate land-use practices and (2) restoring altered ecosystems and habitats;
* The protection, conservation and restoration of biological diversity specific to agro-systems through the implementation of the technologies which favour sustainable agriculture. Priority actions should focus on (1) the assessment of the economic and social value and of the costs and benefits of biological diversity in the agro-ecosystems used for production and (2) the elaboration of patterns of sustainable management of agro-ecosystems with representative bioclimatic zones and layers in a manner consistent with the principles and actions required under the Convention on Biological Diversity.
Effects of environmental degradation on agriculture
The environment conditions agriculture both by providing its indispensable natural resources and by influencing the quantity and quality of its products. According to the environmental situation, 4.4 percent of the communes within Romanian rural areas are situated in polluted areas (all the analysed factors^42 show a high and very high degree of pollution), 49.6 percent are placed in less polluted areas (at least one factor shows a high pollution degree and/or the others are more or less affected by pollution) and the rest, 46 percent of the communes, are placed in nonpolluted areas (all environment factors show an insignificant degree of pollution).
The communes that are situated in polluted areas are affected mainly by industrial pollution factors (petrochemical, chemical and metallurgical factories, power stations, mines). The obvious disadvantage of placing these communes in the neighbourhood of some industrial areas would be counterbalanced by the possibility of decreasing pollution, not only through the closure or decreasing production capacity of some industrial agents and installing abatement pollution equipment in the efficient ones, but also through the help of forestland that plays the role of a barrier against pollutants.
Although most of the counties are characterized by a medium ecological situation, this does not represent a sign of significant environment degradation in the rural area. In Romania there is only local pollution and not all environment factors are equally affected in a specific area. A significant degree of pollution has been recorded in Ialomita, Prahova, Brasov, Cluj, Mures, Dolj, Gorj, Iasi, Suceava, Neamt, Salaj, Sibiu, and Timis counties (28 communes show a high and very high degree of water, air and soil pollution and 8 communes presented high pollution of all environment factors). According to the geographical location, most of the communes situated in the Carphatian, Subcarphatian and hill area are nonpolluted, while the majority of those placed within plains and depressions are more or less polluted. Among the last ones, the most polluted communes (high population density) are situated in Baragan and Transylvania plains (soil is mainly affected by quality limiting
factors on a large area, like salt excess and erosion).
Communes within the Romanian rural space were classified in four categories according to soil quality. Out of the total number of communes, 14 percent have undamaged soils, 37 percent, moderately damaged soils, 44 percent, highly damaged soils, and 5 percent, extremely damaged soils. The first two categories (undamaged soils, moderately damaged soils) are found mainly in the mountainous and hill areas. Out of the total number of communes characterized by highly damaged soils, 2.5 percent have soils polluted by industrial waste (communes located in Bacau, Gorj, Neamt, Prahova counties); 8.5 percent have soils polluted by suspension particles (communes located in Arad, Buzau, Dolj, Galati, Giurgiu, Mehedinti, Olt, Teleorman, Vrancea, Braila counties); 7 percent have soils polluted by animal waste (communes located in: Brasov, Neamt, Prahova, Arges, Vaslui, Iasi, Timis, Satu-Mare, Bihor counties); 5 percent have soils polluted by salty water and oil (communes located in Arad,
Bihor, Dambovita, Satu Mare, Timis, Vrancea counties); 9 percent have soils polluted by pesticides (communes located in Alba, Bihor, Calarasi, Dolj, Giurgiu, Gorj, Teleorman, Mehedinti, Valcea counties); the rest of the communes classified in this category have soils affected by other quality limiting factors (erosion, salt excess, acidification etc.) and are placed within 35 counties.
Out of the total number of communes characterized by extremely damaged soils, 7.5 percent have soils polluted by industrial waste and suspension particles (communes placed in Dolj, Olt counties); 53.5 percent have soils polluted by animal waste, salty water and oil and pesticides (Teleorman, Giurgiu, Dambovita, Ilfov counties); 39 percent have soils affected by other quality limiting factors (erosion, salt excess, acidification, compacting, deficiency of microelements, alkalinity, periodic water excess, etc.) and are placed in Mehedinti, Dolj, Olt, Giurgiu, Ilfov, Galati, and Arad counties.
Communes are classified in four categories subject to their water quality: communes placed on rivers of category I (36 percent from the total number of communes), category II (34 percent), category III (20 percent), polluted (3 percent) and communes placed within non-monitored areas (7 percent). The presence of micro-pollutants in water bodies can disturb many agricultural activities: directly, by affecting the cycle of certain plants and indirectly, by compromising the health quality of the agricultural products.
Communes are classified in three categories depending on their air quality. 16 percent of the total number of communes are placed in the neighbourhood of some main polluters and show a high frequency of exceeding the maximum allowable limit (MAL) for pollutant content in the atmosphere (polluted areas), 21 percent are affected by pollutants with a low frequency of exceeding the MAL (less polluted areas) and the rest of 63 percent are affected by pollutants below the MAL (non-polluted areas).
There has been a high air pollution degree in rural areas placed in the neighbourhood of chemical and metallurgical plants: heavy metals pollution (lead, zinc, copper, cadmium) in Maramures, Sibiu, Olt, and Alba counties; pollution with organic and inorganic substances in Prahova, Neamt, Arges, Arad, and Brasov counties; pollution with nitrogen and ammonium oxides in Ialomita, Valcea, Teleorman, Dolj, Galati, Mehedinti, Cluj, Bacau, Constanta counties. There has also been a high degree of air pollution in rural areas placed in the neighbourhood of power stations in Gorj, Giurgiu, Iasi, Dolj, Bacau counties.
THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIETY ON THE AGRICULTURAL ENVIRONMENT
Institutional change within the environmental policy
Environmental policy in Romania is accomplished mainly by the Ministry of Water, Forests and Environmental Protection (MWFEP) which has elaborated the Strategy for Environmental Protection, Strategy for Water Management, Strategy for Sustainable Growth of Forests and Strategy of the National Commission for Nuclear Activities Control. These strategies have a dynamic character and should be actualized and improved according to new variables, the main one being EU accession.
Since 1990, the National Programme for Environmental Protection has been established in order to ensure the approximation process and the enforcement of harmonized legislation. The main objectives of an environmental protection strategy would be: improving institutional capacity and legislation in the field of environmental protection; strengthening the relationship between the state administration and non-governmental organizations, the mass-media, and the population; promoting environmental legislation; improving the educational system; integrative monitoring of all environmental factors; modernising pollution abatement measures, especially in hot-spots; improving waste management; sustainable agriculture; strengthening forest importance in protecting the environment, biodiversity conservation, natural reserves and parks conservation (Danube Delta, Black Sea, Retezat, etc.), etc.; developing economic and financial mechanisms for the promotion of environmental protection
measures; strengthening scientific research and directing it towards specific environmental problems; accomplishing tasks induced by international conventions and programmes; institutional and legislative harmonization caused by the EU accession process. Romania has a Strategic Action Plan (adopted in December 1994) that deals with strategic objectives like decreasing agricultural and industrial pollution, water management, sectoral environmental policies, preserving wetlands, etc.
Romania is a member of several conventions and multilateral and bilateral agreements that represent the main criteria for ranking its environmental policies' objectives.
In Switzerland in 1993, all Central and Eastern European countries committed themselves to establish the National Environmental Action Programme (NEAP) through the common effort of the central and local governments of each country, the European Commission, international organizations, financial institutions and private investors. This should be the key document, the basis for developing environmental policies, and institutional reforms and investments. NEAP includes selected specific environmental projects. At the beginning about 1 200 projects were identified that would cover almost entirely the environmental problems in Romania. The value of the associated investments was calculated as equal to about US$15 billion that would exceed drastically the part of GDP directed towards the environment. Therefore, these projects have been selected and designed for the short and medium term. Among the major pollution factors, agriculture was assigned - according to the number of
environmental project proposals within NEAP - to third place (after industry and population) on the short-term and the second place (after industry) on the medium term. In transforming the NEAP from plan into action, the government will initiate the following actions and policy measures: to enhance environmental regulation, and move more quickly towards EU standards, to reduce industrial pollution, to improve water waste and solid waste management, especially in large municipalities, to establish a National Environmental Fund, financed partly by pollution taxes and partly by the state, to implement the new privatization law which requires investors to provide either financial guarantee or a commitment to meet environmental standards, and to promote public awareness on environmental issues.
A National Biodiversity Strategy has been prepared, while a framework law on environmental protection consistent with EU directives and regulations in this area was adopted in 1995. Unfortunately, this framework law has not been upgraded with legislation dealing with specific aspects of environmental protection. In addition, enforcement of the legislation is rather poor because of, among other reasons, a lack of incentives, poorly defined property rights, old and wasteful production technologies, low public environmental awareness (although the participation of NGOs in the process of the development of environmental policy is increasing) as well as the lack of financing and human resources.
The promotion of sustainable development should be a major objective of an environmental policy that will require enhanced political support. Restructuring the institutional framework, aimed at implementing environmental policy both at the central and local level, should enable a structured dialogue between experts of the Ministry of Water, Forestry and Environmental Protection and other ministries, departments, agencies, and organizations that have responsibilities in the field of the environment to create a better coordination of the measures and actions assigned to the institutions involved. Improvement of institutional structures and management, both at the central and local level, should enable the achievement of an integrated approach toward environmental issues, to establish and implement environment management plans. Economic ministries have their own strategies for restructuring and modernization that include a special chapter dealing with the environmental effects
of their actions.
Environmental policy related to agriculture
Legislative and institutional framework for a national agri-environmental policy
The cooperation and coordination between the Ministry of Water, Forest and Environmental Protection (MWFEP) and the Ministry of Agriculture and Food (MAF) when dealing with environmental issues is important for both of them since a significant part of environmental problems is generated by activities that are under the MAF's jurisdiction, which, therefore, responsibilities in this field, too. For encouraging rational behaviour towards environmental protection, the MAF created a special environmental department for cooperation with the MWFEP and other ministries related in any way with environmental issues.
A large part of the acquis communautaire to be harmonized within agriculture is closely linked with the environment, mainly that part related to legislation in the sanitary-veterinary, plant health, animal nutrition (admissible standards for living animals - preparation, transport, checking and marketing of animal products - seeds and planting material, plants health, animal feeding, pesticides residues, ecological and lasting agriculture) and agricultural markets (quality standards and trade mark requirements). The effective administration of the agri-environmental acquis will require massive investment, combined with a redefinition of administrative responsibilities and targeted training courses. Very important efforts will be needed, including massive investment and the strengthening of administrative capacity for the enforcement of legislation. Full compliance with the acquis can only be expected in the long term and will necessitate increased levels of public
expenditure.
On the other hand, the Ministry of Water, Forest and Environmental Protection has to harmonize in the first phase within the National Programme for the Adoption of the Acquis Communautaire 58 directives and regulations in key areas, such as the radioactive contamination of foodstuffs, genetically modified organisms, agricultural waste management, air pollution, and the control of ozone depleting substances. Of short term relevance should be these rules which enhance the investment potential of Romania, such as land and forest protection concerning the agricultural and forest industries.
The agri-environmental approximation process should be an important part of the pre-accession strategy of Romania with a view to attaining EU standards. Therefore, it should be integrated in the transition process that our country is undergoing. The convergence of agri-environmental policies and the approximation of agri-environment legislation are essential components for the integration of Romania's domestic market into the European single market. The integrated approach of environmental issues is vital for the long-term sustainability of agricultural policies.
Laws and directives on the use of inputs
Due to the high prices, the consumption of agricultural inputs has decreased sharply during the last years. The total importation of inputs has witnessed a sharp decrease during the last few years. The seasonality of input imports, liberalization of the exchange rate regime, market the liberalization and other factors represented the main determinants in the decline of imports in recent years. This has led, on the whole, to decreased agricultural pollution.
Many private farmers neglect the importance of using certified seeds (Annex 1, Table 6). In order to spend less, they use low quality biologic material resulting in a loss of seed genetic potential and (also because of lack of pesticide treatment) low yields. For instance, more than 50 percent of maize and wheat seed for 1997 production was uncertified despite the Ministry of Agriculture and Food's partial subsidies on certified seed.
Starting in 1990, fertilizer consumption decreased steadily (Annex 1, Table 7). Whilst before 1990 it was 1.2-1.3 million tonnes annually, after this year it decreased to 330-540 thousand tonnes annually. For instance, 1997 fertilizer consumption represented 23 percent of that of the previous year. The average nutrient consumption has been less than 50 kg/ha. The optimal consumption would be 2.2 million tonnes annually. The main causes for decreasing fertilizer consumption are that the input market has not been adjusted to fit the current ownership structures in agriculture; industrial prices increase faster than agricultural produce prices; agricultural producers were decapitalized; market information is not available to all agricultural producers. The main results are lower yields and lower farmers' incomes.
Of the total consumption of pesticides, 65-70 percent is represented by the state sector and 30-35 percent, by the private sector. From 1990 to 1997, pesticide consumption decreased from 26 372 tonnes to 9 071 tonnes (therefore by 34 percent).
The main trends within the legislative framework are due to the ongoing process of harmonization with EU legislation. It is necessary, as a premise for integration into the Single Market, in the sanitary-veterinary, animal nutrition and plant health areas, to establish, apart from legal approximation, the institutional framework adequately structured and furnished with skilled staff capable of enforcing the legislation properly, relying on a uniform basis. In this respect, it is necessary to update the institutions for agricultural input testing (fertilizers, pesticides, seeds, seminal material) and the institutions that undertake market control.
The programme of legislative harmonization was partially achieved in the plant health area (control of seeds and planting material; plant protection and plant health quarantine; testing and registration of varieties of agricultural plants); veterinary science, the animal nutrition area, and in the field of testing and trade with genetically improved animals.
In the short term, it is necessary to reinforce the institutional and administrative capacity in the field of seed and plant material control. In order to achieve this goal, the ISCSMS (Information System of the Territorial Network for Certification and Control Authority) will be set up. At the same time, the procedure for issuing the official documents that approve the seeds and the planting material will be reorganized. In the area of legislative harmonization in the plant health field, all the necessary assistance will be granted to drafting eight regulations on seeds and planting material, plants and products from plants, as well as products for plant protection.
In the medium term, the establishment and strengthening of the administrative and institutional capacity in the plant health area, primarily regarding customs facilities, represent a major target. In this respect, technical assistance will be provided on the expert training and upgrading of the technical endowment of the Central Laboratory for Plant Health Quarantine, andof the territorial and customs control laboratories. Within these institutions it is intended to create a more proper infrastructure for plant health notification, monitoring and certification. Another measure for the fulfilment of this objective refers to the establishment of an integrated information system for territorial and customs plant quarantine.
Phytosanitary rules regarding seed imports have been partially harmonized; still to be harmonized are standards and testing procedures at the border. There is still inappropriate protection for intellectual property rights (weak rules, weak enforcement). A law project regarding plant variety protection following UPOV provisions was drafted and placed in the waiting list to be amended. The current legislative measures on inputs use are presented in Annex 2.
Laws and directives on the protection of natural resources in agriculture
The Romanian legislative framework on the protection of natural resources in agriculture include basically the following:
* A new law for environmental protection (Law 137/1995) passed in December 1995 is a framework law that is intended to be followed over the next few years with additional specific laws relating to protected areas and other environmental issues. The law contains important regulations on the prevention and control of the deterioration of the environmental quality status, the ecological reconstruction of the deteriorated areas; protection and conservation of natural habitats, terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, of wild plant and animal species; the regime of the natural protected areas and of nature monuments; introduction of non-autochthonous species; trade with species of wild flora and fauna.
* Land Law 18/1991 amended by Law 167/1997. This establishes the legal framework for areas that are the object of a special measure of ecological protection as natural reserves, national parks and nature monuments. It also establishes the necessary measures to be taken for the identification of degraded land and for undergoing some work for ecological reconstruction and improvement.
* Governmental Decision no. 834/1991 concerning the establishment and assessment of some land owned by commercial societies with public capital, completed with the criteria established by the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Affairs. It establishes that the land owned by the state, on which there are nature monuments, together with the neighbouring protection areas, are the object of a special protection organization.
* Forestry Code no. 26/1996. This coordinates the organization of administration, protection, and reconstruction of the forestry fund; protection of forest vegetation and forest ecosystems; organization of the exploitation of vegetal and animal biological resources of the forestry fund.
* Law no. 26/1976 concerning the economy of game species and hunting. It manages: the administration, protection, and conservation of the hunting fund; the organization and administration of the cynegetical fund; the species of interest for hunting and the conditions in which hunting may take place; the conditions necessary to obtain the hunting permit, and the rights and obligations to the hunters.
* Law no. 12/1977 concerning fishery. This manages the administration and exploitation of the fishery potential of natural waters and artificial reservoirs. Governmental Decision no. 971/1994 regarding penalizations for contravention of fishery norms.
* Decree no. 114/1975 concerning the improvement of the production of medicinal and aromatic plants.
* Governmental Decision no. 921/1995 regarding the stimulation of apiculture and bees protection. This manages the phitosanitary treatment for the protection of bees and other species of pollinating insects.
* Law no. 5/1982 concerning crops and forest protection and the pesticide regime. This manages the coordination of activities concerning pest and weed control in agriculture and forestry and measures to reduce their risk.
* Law no. 85/1995 for validation of Governmental Decision no. 4/1995 concerning the production, trade and use of phitosanitary products in the fight against pest and weeds in agriculture and forestry.
* The common Order issued by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food, the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Water, Forest and Environmental Protection concerning the approval of the Statute of the Interministry Commission for the Certification of Phitosanitary Products Use. This establishes the procedures for pesticide certification.
There are also some project laws, such as:
* A Project law for the protection of plants, forests, phitosanitary quarantine and phitosanitary products regime which was elaborated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food in 1998.
* A Project law for supporting less developed areas which was elaborated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food in 1998.
* A Mountain Project law which was elaborated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food in 1998.
The main institutions that share responsibilities for the enforcement of the above presented legislative measures are the Ministry of Water, Forest and Environmental Protection, the Ministry of Agriculture and Food, the authorities of central and local public administration, the Romanian Academy through the Commission for Nature Monuments Protection, the Ministry of Public Affairs, the Romsilva Agency with its territorial branches, the National Sanitary-Veterinary Agency, the Romanian Water Agency with its territorial branches, the county inspectorates for plant protection and phitosanitary quarantine, the Ministry of Health, the Academy of Agricultural and Forestry Sciences, and the Ministry of Trade and Industry.
National measures on the promotion of ecological sound agricultural practices
Ecologically sound agricultural practices have represented a recent preoccupation in Romania. Research institutes have initiated several studies on ecological agriculture and some project proposals have been prepared as well.
The Ministry of Water, Forests and Environmental Protection and the Ministry of Agriculture and Food have started to include this issue in their strategy during the last couple of years and mainly in the parts related to environmental and agricultural policies from the National Programme for the Adoption of the Acquis Communautaire. Nevertheless, very little has been done in this field so far. Most activity in this field has been carried out by non-governmental organizations.
Farmers would gain by protecting the environment since it is in their own economic interest to preserve natural resources for the future. It is more profitable to preserve resources than to repair the damage. Environmental measures could be considered marketing instruments since they can create new markets for ecological agricultural products.
On the one hand, Romanian farmers are not yet in a position to care about ecological farming, although they practice it somehow due to different reasons - lack of funding to buy inputs. The products they sell on the peasant market are considered somewhat ecological and sold at better prices than products sold in some state or private stores. Nevertheless, farmers are not obliged to label their products and testify in any way that their products are ecological, meaning that they did not use any chemical fertilizers or pesticides or treated seeds etc. On the other hand, Romanian consumers have not been educated to appreciate ecological food in such a way as to pay more for it. So far, they spend more than half of their income on food and it appears that the situation will not change much in the future: they would not pay more for the extra work involved for the farmer to produce ecological food. Once the economic situation improves and consumers become aware of environmental
problems, the demand for ecological products will increase and thus determine the supply.
Protecting the environment and natural resources implies extra work and higher costs for farmers that should be compensated accordingly. There should be economic motivations for practising environmentally friendly agriculture.
The importance of national environmental associations and organizations for environmental policy
The "Green face" of civil society organizations
Civil society is a relatively recent social phenomenon in Romania. Starting in 1990, the NGO sector in Romania had continuous growth. In March 1998, around 27 000 NGOs were identified, out of which 59 percent are associations and 32 percent foundations, the remaining 9 percent being unions or federations. The economic, social and cultural features of the different regions of the country influenced the development of the non-profit sector, both in terms of number and capacity. At the same time, 92 percent of the NGOs are placed in urban areas. A characteristic of the Romanian NGOs is the diversity of activities performed by one organization, since only 9 percent of the NGOs deal with only one type of activity.
The constitutional basis for establishing an NGO is article 37 of the Constitution, which stipulates the right to associate in chapter II, regarding "The fundamental rights and liberties". The feature of the constitutional norm regarding the statement concerning freedom of association, places the associative act on the highest legal level, meaning that, apart from a number of constraints imposed by the Constitution to the right of free association, no other restriction can be imposed through organic or ordinary laws completing the constitutional text. In Romania's legislation, the term NGO is not defined. However, the framework Law no. 21/1924 defines associations, foundations, unions or federations as being types of NGOs^43. Although Law no. 21/1924 is the framework law for NGOs, a number of associations have been established by Government Decisions (e.g. the Regional Environmental Center for Central and Eastern Europe that is operating in accordance with Government
Decision No. 194/1992). Recently the Government Ordinance no. 36/1998 was passed according to which NGOs can be beneficiaries of sponsorship if their activities are cultural, scientific, environmental, etc. Government Ordinance no. 40/1998 provides that any organization that uses at least 80 percent of its income for realising its own objectives is not obliged to pay tax on profit.
Environmental NGOs were perceived recently as the most dynamic field in Romanian civil society. There are about 300 NGOs at the moment dealing mostly with environmental issues, unevenly distributed all over the country. Most of them are located in Transylvania (40 percent) and Bucharest (25 percent), and these are also the most competitive in terms of access to funds and information.
The main financial support of environmental NGOs has come since 1992 from the Regional Environmental Center for Central and Eastern Europe - Local Office Romania (REC Romania), while the Environmental Training Project (USAID funded) ensured training for 3 years to NGO members in general non-profit management and specific environmental issues.
According to the assessment performed in 1997, a typical Romanian environmental NGO is created and registered after 1990; it is located in a large city; has between 10 to 50 (active) members; is a local environmental citizens' organization or a group of environmental professionals; does not operate at the international level; has as its main areas of activity environmental education and/or environmental fieldwork; evaluates its effectiveness as "partially successful"; operates with a budget under US$500 per year; is based on foreign and international grants; cooperates with local authorities and does not cooperate with central authorities.
The most important problems faced by these organizations are insufficient funding; capacity building and technical assistance: specific environmental topics (e.g. local environmental action plans, sustainable development, impact assessment, domestic waste management, public participation in environmental decision-making); problems with official registration; imperfection of the country's legislative framework; limited access to communication means; tension with central governing bodies; poor management of the NGOs; lack of volunteer support and full time staff; and excessive taxation.
Together with local, regional, and international governments and agencies and institutions, NGOs have also often organized or participated effectively in cooperative projects in the interest of environmental protection. In the Danube Delta, the organization Pro Delta, the Danube Delta Institute, the Biosphere Reserve Authority and the World Wilde Fund for Nature, have together undertaken the restoration of wetland areas unsuccessfully drained for agriculture.
The importance of private and non-profit organizations
Legally, the partnership between the governmental and the non-profit sector is based on Government Decrees concerning the function of different ministries and on Law 60/1991 on public administration, modified through Law no. 24/1996. There did not exist a governmental policy for partnership with NGOs before the second half of 1997, when the Office for the Relationship with NGOs was established within the Government.
NGOs have a good relationship with local governments, closer than their relationship with central government that fails mainly due to bureaucracy. There is a relatively good but fragile relationship between NGOs and the private business sector and a much weaker one between NGOs and state enterprises. State enterprises are less interested in supporting NGOs because of non-stimulative conditions in the sponsorship law. The media is the sector to which the NGOs are most connected (almost 60 percent of NGOs evaluate their relationship with the media as good). Below average is the cooperation of NGOs with the banks. The weakest relations are those with political parties. The cooperation with foreign NGOs is almost satisfactory, while the relationship with international institutions is not fully developed due to difficulties in dealing with the large number of Romanian NGOs (over 27 000 registered at the moment). In the academic sector, because of the lack of resources (including
financial) to achieve better quality in the educational process, universities and research institutes created their "own" NGOs that prepare proposals and raise fund for projects directly related with academic activity. Private think-tanks are quite few in number and are just emerging.
The World Bank's recommendation for improving the general framework of the non-profit sector is related to the following domains: modification of the legal framework of NGOs; increasing the partnership with public administration; contracting services to NGOs by public authorities, promoting collaboration in service providing and simplifying the related procedures; increasing the direct support of public authorities to the non-profit sector; improving access to public information by approving the Law of access to information; and encouraging volunteering.
Despite the poor ability of the state to support social welfare, there were a number of attempts to initiate certain governmental collaboration programmes with civil society organizations that grew out of the special concern of some particular public authorities (e.g. the ministry's competitive funding programmes; direct material support granted by local administrations - offices, equipment, land plots for buildings etc.). There are some projects funded by international institutions and programmes (EU Phare, USAID, World Bank) that have involved NGOs' participation (for instance, the Danube Delta Bio-Diversity Project, the Industrial Pollution Abatement Project, the Integrated Protected Areas and Conservation Management Project).
Environmental NGOs have started to influence more the quality of the Romanian environment, but at present, we cannot speak of their being so powerful as to actually influence environmental policy.
CONCLUSIONS
The economy and the state of the environment are in transition. Romania has started a promising macroeconomic adjustment programme to change its economy from a centrally planned one to a market economy. A Ministry of Environment was created in 1990 and a new environmental law was approved in December 1995.
All environmental components in Romania are seriously affected by pollution. Without an environmentally friendly development strategy, the costs of the restoration of the natural environment in the future will be prohibitively expensive. Current Romanian policy has started to adopt an approach towards sustainability based on the integration of the environment into sectoral policies and the reshaping of social and economic behaviour through the use of a broader range of instruments and by promoting the principle of shared responsibility. Moving from "pollution reduction" to "pollution management" requires in-depth research and policy cooperation. Pollution prevention measures are not easy to implement because they need special efforts and financing; nevertheless, they must be established. Wider cooperation is also necessary between all organizations and institutions interested in the development of an unpolluted environment. The process of increasing environmental awareness
has started and has been linked to the EU pre-accession process and Romania's being part of world conventions on environmental issues. Romania's institutions and legislation in the agri-environmental field have been harmonized gradually according to the current international framework, and the process is to continue in the long-term. Coping with environmental problems in Romania will require mainly financial means, cooperation between all responsible governmental and non-governmental institutions, and a stronger public awareness on environmental issues.
REFERENCES
Alcamo, J. 1992. Coping with Crisis in Eastern Europe's Environment, Carnforth: Parthenon Publishing Group.
Environmental Training Project for Central and Eastern Europe. 1997, Romanian NGO Catalogue, Data basis, Bucharest.
European Commission, DG VI. 1998. Agricultural situation and prospects in the Central European countries, Romania, Working document, Brussels.
Florian, V., Rusu, M., Sarbu, A. & Toma, L. 1998. Rural Space Diagnosis - Economic, Social and Ecological Criteria, Volumes I, II. Research report - PHARE Programme on Rural Development, I.E.A., Bucharest.
Gavrilescu, D. 1997. Agriculture restructuring and rural transition in Romania, Coresi LTD Publishing House, Bucharest.
Ministry of Agriculture and Food, Institute for Agricultural Economics. 1998. The Trend of the Romanian Agrifood Sector, Report, Bucharest.
Ministry of Water, Forest and Environmental Protection. 1995. National Environmental Action Programme, Report, Bucharest.
Ministry of Water, Forests and Environmental Protection. 1996. The National Strategy and Action Plan for the Biological Diversity Conservation and Sustainable Use of its Components in Romania, Report, Bucharest.
National Commission of Statistics. 1998, Romanian Statistical Yearbook 1997, National Commission of Statistics Publishing House, Bucharest.
Ognean, T., Vadineanu, A. 1992. Quality of the environment in Romania, In Coping with Crisis in Eastern Europe's Environment, Carnforth: Parthenon Publishing Group.
Popescu, M. 1997. Agriculture and Pollution, Unpublished dissertation, Romanian University, Faculty of Geography, Bucharest.
Romanian Government, Dept. for European Integration. 1998. The National Programme for the Adoption of the Acquis Communautaire, Report, Bucharest.
Russell, J. 1991. Environmental issues in Eastern Europe: Setting an agenda, Energy and environmental programme, Royal Institute of International Affairs, London.
Toma, L. 1996. DEA Models for Measuring Environmental Performance: The Case of Agricultural Pollution in Romania, M.A.I.Ch., Greece.
Toma, L., Xepapadeas, A. 1997. The Romanian Agriculture in an Ecological Paradigm, Rural Local Economies, Bucharest: AGRIS Publishing House.
Toma, L., Xepapadeas, A. 1998. Ecological Perspectives of the Romanian Agriculture, Romanian Economic Review, No. 1, Bucharest: Romanian Academy Publishing House.
Toma, L. 1998. Inputs Regulation and Trade in Romania, World Bank, Trade Support Programme, Report, Washington D.C.
Vadineanu, A. 1992. Priorities for Environmental Protection in Romania, in Coping with Crisis in Eastern Europe's Environment, Carnforth: Parthenon Publishing Group.
World Bank, Resident Mission in Romania 1998, NGO Stock-Taking in Romania, Report, Bucharest.
ANNEX 1
Table 1: Agricultural area by use (1996)
Agricultural area
(thousand ha) (%)
Total Private sector Total Private sector
Total 14 788.7 10 693.6 100.0 100.0
Arable 9 338.9 7 808.9 63.2 73.0
Pastures 3 391.7 1 077.3 22.9 10.1
Hayfields 1 498.5 1 404.8 10.1 13.1
Vineyards and nurseries 289.0 218.3 2.0 2.1
Orchards and nurseries 270.6 184.3 1.8 1.7
Total area provided with
irrigation facilities, of which: 3 190.6 2 165.0 100.0 100.0
Agricultural 3 095.6 2 120.7 97.0 98.0
Arable 2 921.4 2 040.1 91.6 94.2
Data source: National Commission of Statistics (1998), Romanian Statistical Yearbook 1997. Bucharest: National Commission of Statistics Publishing House.
Table 2: Distribution of Agricultural Land by Suitability Classes (1996)
Suitability Class Total
agricultural
land
Arable land Pastures and meadows Vineyards and
orchards
thou. ha (%) thou ha (%) thou ha (%) thou ha (%)
Total area of which: 14 788 100.0 9 339 100.0 4 890 100.0 559 100.0
I suitability class 410 2.8 355 3.8 54 1.1 1 0.3
II suitability class 3 656 24.7 3 353 35.9 220 4.5 83 14.8
III suitability class 3 081 20.8 2 363 25.3 596 12.2 122 21.8
IV suitability class 3 607 24.4 1 718 18.4 1 751 35.8 138 24.7
V suitability class 4 034 27.3 1 550 16.6 2 269 46.4 215 38.4
Data source: National Commission of Statistics (1998), Romanian Statistical Yearbook 1997. Bucharest: National Commission of Statistics Publishing House.
Table 3: Selected Romanian river water quality standards (mg/l) in 1992
River category TDS Cl COD-
Mn NH4 Phenol Cn Cd Cr Cu Fe Mn Ni Pb Zn
I 750 250 10 1 0.001 0.01 0.003 0.05 0.05 0 0.1 0.1 0.05 0.03
II 1 000 300 15 3 0.02 0.01 0.003 0.05 0.05 1 0.3 0.1 0.05 0.03
III 1 200 300 25 10 0.05 0.01 0.003 0.05 0.05 1 0.8 0.1 0.05 0.03
Data source: Toma, L. (1996), DEA Models for Measuring Environmental Performance: The Case of Agricultural Pollution in Romania. M.A.I.Ch., Greece.
Table 4: Evolution of the surface water quality (% of the reference length)
Year Quality category 
I II II D
Data source: National Commission of Statistics (1998), Romanian Statistical Yearbook 1997. Bucharest: National Commission of Statistics Publishing House.
Table 5: Protected areas
Number Area (ha)
Biosphere reservations 3 583 600
National parks 14 376 423
Scientific reservations 40 52 951
Reservations for nature preserving 573 118 161
Natural monuments 180 2 712
Data source: National Commission of Statistics (1998), Romanian Statistical Yearbook 1997. Bucharest: National Commission of Statistics Publishing House.
Table 6: Certified seed production and consumption for main crops (thousand tonnes)
Production Consumption
Autumn wheat 653 641 794 322 420 260
Autumn barley 103 96 146 52 67 65
Oats 9.4 5.5 5.1 9 10.7 13
Maize 40.4 19.7 28.8 21 12 7
Sunflower 6.3 5.2 2.7 2.8 3.6 1.8
Soybean 22.3 21.3 16.8 12 3.6 7.3
Peas 5.8 2.6 4.2 3.2 1.6 2.5
Oil flax 0.8 1.3 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.3
Fodder 1.7 1.6 1.8 - 0.4 0.3
Data source: Ministry of Agriculture and Food, Institute for Agricultural Economics, (1998), The Trend of the Romanian Agrifood Sector. Report, Bucharest.
Table 7: Fertilizer consumption (thousand tonnes)
NPK 1 245 1 355 464 421 538 479 470 430 329
Including N 829 906 275 258 346 313 306 266 235
P[2]O[5] 361 354 145 133 164 149 150 147 80
K[2]O 55 95 44 30 28 17 14 17 14
Data source: Ministry of Agriculture and Food, Institute for Agricultural Economics, (1998), The Trend of the Romanian Agrifood Sector. Report, Bucharest.
ANNEX 2
Current legislative framework on seed use:
* Law no. 75/1995 amended according to Law 131/1997 - regarding the production, control, trade and use of seeds and plant material and certification of seed varieties;
* Order of the Minister of Agriculture and Food no. 79/1995 regarding authorization for commercial companies, individuals and institutions to produce, process and trade seed and plant material;
* Order of the Minister of Agriculture and Food no. 95/1995 regarding the validation of the institutions authorized to ascertain and apply sanctions according to Law 75/1995 amended by Law 131/1997 - regarding the production, control, trade and use of seeds and plant material and certification of seed varieties;
* Order of the Minister of Agriculture and Food no. 65/1997 regarding the agreement on technical norms for production, certification and trade with seeds and plant material;
* Order of the Minister of Agriculture and Food no. 89/1997 regarding the establishment of quality and phytosanitary control for seed and plant material's imports and exports;
* Law no 64/1991 regarding invention patents on new seed varieties (that states that the breeder is the only person authorized to reproduce, multiply, trade and give permission (through legal contract) to anybody else to produce and trade that variety).
Current legislative framework for mechanical services.
* Law 62/1997 for approving the Government Ordinance 6/1997 regarding the establishment of a 550 billion lei fund for mechanical services financing. The Ministry of Agriculture and Food was the administrator of the fund and granted special credits for some main crops (wheat, barley, maize, sugarbeet, sunflower, soybean, potatoes, vegetables, vine and fruit trees).
* Current legislative framework on pesticides use.
* Ministries Council Ordinance 352/1952 regarding phitosanitary quarantine - it is also on the short-term list for harmonization with EU legislation;
* Law 9/1973 regarding environmental protection;
* Law 3/1978 on population health safeguard;
* Law 5/1982 regarding plant protection, forests and pesticide regime - it is to be harmonized in accordance with EU legislation (sent for approval to the Commission since March 1998). It will reorganize the plant protection system and create a new framework for trading and the certification of pesticides;
* Law 2/1987 regarding forest preservation, protection and development, rational exploitation and ecological balance maintenance;
* Law 85/1995 regarding the production, trade and use of phitosanitary products in agriculture and forestry;
* Government Ordinance 4/1995 regarding the manufacture, trade and use of plant protection products for disease, pests and weed control in agriculture and Forestry.
Current legislative framework on feed use.
* Law 8/1971 regarding the organization, management and use of pastures, seed and planting material plots, commune stations for natural insemination (to be amended by the Parliament in short-term; draft law);
* Law 2/1982 regarding the organization, production and rational use of feed resources - amended by Order 50/1982.
* Input vouchers scheme.
* Government Ordinance 6/1997 regarding the initiation of the input vouchers scheme valuing some 1,300 billion lei to partially support agricultural producers for purchasing agricultural inputs during the 1997 autumn campaign;
* Government Ordinance 9/1998 regarding the continuation of this vouchers scheme during 1998 (2,800 billion lei).
39 For instance, decreasing fertilizer and pesticides use after 1990 due to high prices led to a decrease in soil pollution. During the economic reform process, farmers' situation may improve and agricultural inputs' consumption will increase. The impact on the environment will depend on environmental legislation that is to be more or less harmonized with the EU legislation, development of ecological products markets, etc., meaning a complex of factors that would be more difficult to forecast.
40 The problems of either non-availability of data or confidentiality problems are still common (and this is not very surprising taking into consideration that, before 1990, all the important environmental data, if measured, were kept secret). Due to the fact that before 1990 only a few case studies were done in very polluted areas and not for a long period of time in the same place, time-series data about pollution in agricultural areas are not available. To have the means (namely, time-series data) to quantify the changes (in better or worse) which might occur in the environmental performance of different agricultural areas would add relevant information.
41 Parts per millimeter.
42 Water, soil, air and forest.
43 The above mentioned law stipulates that "associations and foundations having no lucrative or patrimonial aim, created and organized by individuals" will obtain legal status, and that associations and foundations are legal entities based on private law with no lucrative or patrimonial aim. The law has distinct sections that cover definitions and legal treatment applied for associations, foundations and federations. The fact that the law does not define the term "non-governmental" is due to the fact that it was not used at the time the legal act was drawn up.
<section>9</section>
COUNTRY REPORT ON THE PRESENT ENVIRONMENTAL SITUATION IN AGRICULTURE
- SLOVAKIA -
Pavol Stehlo
Research Institute of Agricultural and Food Economics, Bratislava
and
Karol Ková,
Plant Production Research Institute, Pieany
INTRODUCTION
Slovakia was the poorer and more rural part of the former Czechoslovakian Federation (CSFR), which was known as one of the richer countries before World War II. Based mainly on imports of raw materials and energy from the Soviet Union the communist regime promoted the industralization of the Slovak parts of the Federation´s teritory and this lead to an equalized regional distribution of national economic activities. At the time of the fall of the communist regime in November 1989, the Czechoslovak Federation was a relatively poor country (compared to the members of the EU). Still embedded in the framework of the CSFR, the most important initial reforms towards a market oriented economy undertaken were: liberalization of prices; liberalization of trade; privatization; the establishment of economic institutions and adjustment of legislation.
After the Slovak Republic became a sovereign state on 1 January 1993, it had to cope with various difficulties from the former federation, such as: political instability; a lack of a broad census of the path of economic reforms; and fiscal and external imbalances as a consequence of the withdrawal of transfers from the Czech Republic. Nevertheless, this dissolution also brought about some positive aspects. In particular, Slovakia inherited: relatively low external debts; relatively low inflation; and a relatively consistent and adjusted macroeconomic policy.
After a rapid decline in the first transformation period, the Slovak economy shows recovering indicators of economic performance.
The increased pressure on natural resources, water and soil in particular, the wide changes in agricultural policies and practices, the improved recognition of environmental problems, the globalization of the economy, and the need for fair social and socio-economic balances, have made it necessary to rethink the issues of development. The concept of sustainable development in Slovakia has therefore been introduced and widely accepted. In the case of agriculture, this concept has particular implications for the relationships between agricultural activities, environmental preservation and resource conservation, and is also grounded in the strategic goals of Slovakian agrarian policy (Table 1).
THE IMPACT OF TRANSITION AND STRUCTURE OF PROPERTY RIGHTS
Since 1990, the process of transformation in Slovak Agriculture has been seriously constrained by low levels of capital investment. The investment rate in the agricultural sector has been at approximately 60 percent of the average investment rate for other sectors of the economy. The resultant undercapitalization in the sector affects the competitiveness of Slovak agricultural production, both in foreign and domestic markets. This has resulted in a worsening of the terms of trade and seems to be one of the most critical factors in the future development of the sector.
However, it is unrealistic to believe that agriculture will be able to continue to play this role. The good 1995 macro-economic results for the Slovak Republic should be seen against dramatically worsening economic and social conditions, especially in rural areas. If there is a further decline in agriculture, the problems associated with rural Slovakia will become a striking issue. The government has therefore stressed the importance of a balanced development to prevent rural unemployment and massive urban migration. The strategic role of agriculture in Slovak society is obvious also from the fact that 43 percent of the population live in rural areas, where until recently land was the main source of income.
The following passages of Chapter 2 are mainly based on the report of the European Union "Agricultural Situation and Prospects in the Central and Eastern European countries: Slovak Republic" which was prepared by the Research Institute of Agricultural and Food Economics of Bratislava.
The effect of privatization and the redefinition of property rights on natural resources
The privatization process of Slovakian enterprises was a very consequential step towards the restructuring of the whole economy. A sell-off of state assets has been pursued through two privatization waves. The privatization process started in 1990 during the CSFR period with "small-scale privatization", and was completed in 1992 with about 10 000 shops, businesses and enterprises being auctioned off. As a second phase of the first privatization wave, "large-scale" privatization was launched in 1992 and was completed by mid 1993. There were about 750 enterprises involved with book value of about 166 billion SKK. In this process the shares of 503 companies amounting to 80 billion SKK were distributed through a voucher-based "mass privatization".
In September 1994, the second wave of privatization started with the distribution of vouchers, but was then put on hold until June 1995, when the government announced a new privatization policy. The voucher privatization scheme was replaced with a scheme based on direct sales to strategic investors, including sales by installments to managers and employees (MEBO; the Management Employee Buy Out Scheme). Within the new privatization policy, a law relating to state interest in companies came into force in 1995. It lists 29 companies, which will not be privatized, mainly in infrastructure, telecommunications, armaments and agriculture. The law secures a majority share for the state in a further 45 companies of the mentioned sectors. A restitution fund was established by the National Property Fund (NPF) in 1993 to provide financial compensation to those whose claims could be met by the return of property. The privatization of the farm sector had a high priority in the policy
framework of Slovakia.
Restructurization in rural areas
As result of privatization, collective farms and nearly all state farms disappeared and cooperative and large private farms emerged, most organized as corporate farms. As a result of the restructuring following privatization, cooperatives split up into corporate farms. Individual private and household plot farming remained a rather marginal activity occupying just 7 percent of total agricultural land with an average size of 7.7 hectares. However, despite this small percentage, their contribution to agricultural output is high. More than 60 percent of potato production took place on this farm type, and smallholders are the main producers of fruit and vegetables. However, dominated by the big cooperative and corporate entities, Slovak farm sizes, which formed as the result of transition, are amongst the largest in Europe. The re-assignment of property rights has been a difficult task as the land register had to be updated and re-adapted to the emerging ownership structure. The
primary production sector made much better progress than the food industry in restructuring and the adaptation to a market economy. Farms could immediately increase their production if they received profitable prices from the downstream sector.
Liberalization
Transition in the agrarian sector is to be completed as part of the general economic reform, including important macro-economic changes. The most influential factors related to performance and operations in the agrarian sector are the following three important elements. First, price liberalization and the removal of the negative turnover tax and subsidy. This subsidy, under the conditions of the planned economy, was used to provide cheap food. Consumer food prices were subsidized enabling consumers to have access to cheap food products. Such a policy created a high level of food consumption. The removal of the subsidy resulted in a sharp decline in food consumption. As viewed by farmers, a negative consequence of price liberalization was a more rapid growth in input rather than output prices. Second, currency devaluation was accomplished in two steps. The first devaluation was in former Czechoslovakia, when the exchange rate of 17.2 Ks/1USD (January 1990) was changed to
28 Ks/US$1 (December 1990) and the second in the Slovak Republic to 32 SKK/US$1. The underdevaluation of the currency supported the export of agricultural products that were in excess of domestic demand. However, the production of agriculture in European Union countries made exports very difficult, if not impossible. And third, creating conditions for competition: economic reform followed a policy of demonopolization and the creation of a competitive environment, but this process has been difficult because of the structure of the planned economic system.
The development of the economic framework at farm level
Due to the process of privatization and changes in the structure of business entities, the total area of agricultural land farmed by cooperatives and state farms decreased (the number of employees and the value of fixed assets decreased in a similar manner). Commercial farming enterprises recorded a growth in all major indicators. Even though all types of farming entities are burdened by excessive debt, the situation in farming cooperatives is still critical, mainly because cooperatives assumed various financial obligations in the process of transformation. The number of bank loans increased, particularly in the case of commercial farming enterprises, which represent the most creditworthy clients in the sector (due to their low indebtedness and positive economic performance). Subsidies decreased on smaller farms and increased on bigger ones. The 501-1 000 hectares category of farms achieved the best economic results: their losses declined further and the growth in revenues
exceeded the growth in the amount of expenses.
Land market
In order to restore and put in place a system of land ownership, Slovakia adopted Act No. 330/1991, which regulates the process of land consolidation, and prescribes procedures for the settlement of ownership rights. In 1995, based on this act, a series of land consolidation projects began.
On 14 June 1994, the government decided (Resolution No. 572) that all questions concerning titles to agricultural and forestland must be resolved by the end of 1998. According to the law and the government policy, the process is handled jointly by the Office of Geodesy, Cartography and Land Registry of SR (OGCLR) and the Ministry of Agriculture (MASR).
These entitled persons received back land, and their ownership was thereby reinstated. For the 15 754 hectares of land retained by the Land Authorities, pursuant to § 11 of the Land Act, entitled persons received 22.83 million Crowns in compensation. Similarly, the Land Authorities handle the settlement of restitution claims which individuals enforce through various associations (of land and forests owners, etc.).
Some of new owners began farming, some sold their land, but most of them leased the land to the bigger farmers, at 1.5-2 percent of the land value.
The stagnation of land market development still remains. The whole situation may be described as follows:
* Supply and sale is mainly in the smaller acreage plots of average and lower land quality;
* Supply is higher than demand and building lots are mainly sold inside the built-up area.
Land market stagnation have been influenced by the following factors:
* unfinished identification of land ownership;
* disintegration of land ownership;
* low profitability of agricultural capital; and
* the payment disability of farming subjects.
The development of input and output prices
Transition had a strong impact on agricultural output. The disparity of prices between agricultural products and inputs depressed farm profits. Production was compelled to adjust to the slow-down of financial flows and the poorer availability of investment and operating capital due to a declining support for agriculture.
The disparity in the performance between input and output prices had a very negative impact on profitability. Input prices doubled in the first two years of transition from 1989 to 1990, whereas output prices virtually remained unchanged. Until 1997, the prices for agricultural products increased only slowly to 160 percent of the 1989 level. At the same time input prices had skyrocketed to 350 percent. Slovakian producers were severely affected by the widening of the cost-revenue scissors (Graph 1).
The decline in overall input value was less marked than the decline in overall output value. The disparity in the development of input and output value was mainly due to the rapid increase of input prices and the high share between fixed costs. The disparity of prices of agricultural products and inputs widened rapidly in 1991 and 1992 and provoked heavy losses in the whole agricultural sector. Since 1993, the gap narrowed slightly again and since 1994 input and output value has increased more or less in parallel (Graph 2).
THE IMPACT OF AGRICULTURE ON THE ENVIRONMENT
Environmental degradation caused by agriculture
In Slovakia, the environment suffers basically from the same problems caused by agriculture inmost other CEECs. In Slovakia, the most serious problem is water pollution caused by the unsustained high application of fertilizers and the inappropriate treatment of animal waste during the socialist era. In particular, ground water basins and limnic ecosystems, such as lakes and rivers, are still heavily polluted by an overload of nutrients. Despite the massive extensification in fertilizer application since the beginning of transition, this problem is likely to remain a long-term problem. For this reason, the selection of indicators of resource use and potential environmental impact is very important and has been based on issues of non-sustainability rather than on those of general definition. These effects might be classified into: the use of non renewable resources (fossil energy, phosphorus), the impact on the farm's natural basis for production (the soil), and the impact on
the surrounding environment, i.e. the conditions under (groundwater), over (atmosphere) and around (surface water environment, wildlife) and the farm respectively.
Negative effects on biodiversity are partly mitigated by the very large area of Nature Reserves (5 National Parks with 200 000 hectares and 16 protected areas with altogether 700 000 hectares, of which 137 000 hectares are agricultural land), and the counterbalancing impacts of forests. However, in the intensively cropped plains of Slovakia, biodiversity is negatively affected by agriculture.
Agriculture and soil protection
With a total area of 49 035 square kilometres, Slovakia is a bit bigger than Denmark. Half of the area of Slovakia, or 2.45 million hectares, is agricultural land of which arable land makes up 1.45 million hectares. Forests cover over 40 percent of the country (1.99 million hectares), most of which is hilly or mountainous. About 963 000 hectares are grassland. The latter is mainly located in the northern, mountainous parts of the country. Intensive agriculture, partly including the growing of vegetables and of other intensive crops, in particular that of wine, is developed in the Podunajská and Východoslovenská Lowlands and adjacent hills (Map 2). Regions under irrigation, the area of which has been decreasing in recent years, dropped to 54 000 hectares in 1995. In the early 1990s, some 200 000 hectares of land were under irrigation. There is 0.46 hectares of agricultural land and 0.27 hectares of arable land per capita. During transition, land use remained rather unchanged
for most of the basic land use categories. There was only a small shift from arable land to permanent grassland.
The most important degradation processes in agriculture are water and wind erosion. In Slovakia, more than 576 thousand hectares of arable land are affected by water erosion. The damage was caused mostly by the wrong use of land, especially by improper plant rotation, very large plots, unsuitable agro-techniques and the improper conversion of grassland to arable land. The average amount of washed away best parts of soil takes 2.8-3.0 million tonnes per year. Water erosion in the mountains is accelerated by the conversion of grassland to arable use.
Roughly 390 000 hectares of arable land are affected by wind erosion in Slovakia. The damage, like that of water erosion, is caused mostly by unsuitable infrastructure and land use, improper tillage, and the insufficient building of windbreaks. Researchers have proved that a loss of a 10 mm layer of humus horizon results in a 2-4 percent loss in yield. Crop yields decline on slightly eroded lands by 20 percent, on medium by 40 percent, and on heavily eroded land up to 70 percent.
Land acidification is, in addition to acid rains, also caused by using physiologically acid fertilizers. In the most fertile soils of the Podunajská and Východoslovenská lowland basins, alkalization is also apparent. This is caused by improper irrigation in localities with an intensive evaporation regime. Irrigation is also limited with high levels of mineralized underground waters. The area of saline land in Slovakia is 70 000 hectares.
In Slovakia more than 700 000 hectares of agricultural land suffers from compaction which is caused by improper agrotechnics (crop rotation, tillage), and especially by the incorrect use of agricultural technology. Biological soil degradation is mostly occasioned by high chemical dosages and soil contamination by other sectors (industry). Nevertheless, certain adverse influences on soil fertility (erosion, contamination of soil and ground water, etc.) continue, for which reason it is necessary to intensify the protection of land through support from the State Fund for the Protection and Cultivation of Agricultural Land (SFPCAL). Since 1995, SFPCAL has released hundred of millions SKKs in support of fertilization measures. However, this still falls short of being sufficient to ensure noticeable progress (as no funds were released for this purpose previously).
Plant and animal production
The rapid diminution of the agricultural land area engendered the replacement of arable land by the so-called supplementary reclamation. From 1945, the agricultural land area shrunk by 300 000 hectares, of which 88 percent was arable land. The supplementary reclamation was often also done on unsuitable terrain where the high costs were not justified by economic return, and the ecological and environmental damage was tremendous. The introduction of large-scale techniques in plant production favoured the technical and economic aspects, which was followed by plot interface. From the view of area dimensions, in Podunajská lowlands had stem 100-200 hectares plots. The introduction of large-scale production in animal production was reflected in the construction of large stables; for cows per 1 000-2 000 pieces, for pigs per 10 000 or more pieces. This was accompanied with the big problems of covering these huge capacities with feed, but much bigger to manage the manure itself,
which caused land degradation.
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability on farm level
The land is a production source of national wealth. In the sense of AGENDA 21 (Rio de Janeiro 1992) it should be used sustainably. The new economic and social conditions from 1990 to the present, do not provide any conditions for the principles of the sustainable exploitation of the agricultural landscape, including use of land. Shortcomings are mostly reflected in following land use areas:
* Decrease of nutrient contents: The nutrient content is below the level which is agronomically or environmentally unacceptable, reflected in lowered land production potential. It is caused mostly by low manure production (rapid reduction of animal numbers, for example cows by 50 percent compared with 1990), lower application of industrial composts, sales of straw and also lower ratios of mineral fertilizers. In 1995, 42 kg NPK in industrial fertilizers were applied to one hectare of agricultural land, which represents only 17 percent of the 1989 level. The continuation of this trend will endanger our food self-sufficiency.
* intensive water erosion: Only during the last 20 years, from slopes above five degrees has average 110 mm layer of soil been washed away. According to some authors, the yields on less eroded fields become lower roughly by 20 percent, on fields with medium eroded fields by 40 percent, and in most eroded lands by 70 percent and more.
* land compaction: This is caused by heavy machinery, what is manifested in increased land resistance, due to cultivation and also in increased fuel consumption. A high degree of land compaction is also an obstruction for the broader implementation of land protective technologies (no till technology).
* land acidification: This is caused by use of mineral fertilizers, mostly nitrogen. Land acidification is also increasing by a reduction of manure rations. Moreover, acid atmospheric depositions (imission falls) cause land acidification which has mostly a regional character.
* land alkalization: This is a result of irrigation mostly in locations with evaporation regime and is also limited with the closeness of under ground mineral waters. The area of saline land in Slovak Republic is around 70 000 hectares.
* land sustainability: The land as an important natural source is also weakened by pollution with various contaminants. They are represented by:
* anorganic (non-degradable) contaminants: represented by heavy metals and metalloids accumulating in the soil. In the Slovak Republic, there is 56 percent non-contaminated agricultural land, which is found in those regions with the most productive land. 48 percent of land is indicated as being at risk (exceeding at least at one harmful element A, A1 hygienic limits of MoA No. 531/1994). In the Slovak Republic, roughly 425 000 hectares of agricultural land is under emission pressure. Of this area, 151 000 hectares are manifestly influenced by contaminant immissions which have an acidification influence. The acidification of agricultural land caused by the deposition of SO[2] and NO coinfluenced with physiologically acid fertilizers covers as much as 80 percent of agricultural land.
* the organic (degradable) contaminants: coming from used pesticides, also from crude oil breakdowns and industrial agglomerations.
From the viewpoint of environmental improvement and the protection of agricultural land, the MoA SR specified the objectives of its environmental policy in a document entitled " The concepts and Principles of Agricultural Policy in Slovakia", which states the following main goal:" to cultivate and protect agricultural land, to promote environmental management and to prevent the penetration of alien substances into the food chain". The priorities are to:
* sow grass on steeply sloping and erosion-endangered arable land;
* utilize damaged soil for the production of non-food crops;
* implement an organic method of farming on agricultural land; and
* support entrepreneurial activities aimed at improving the condition of agricultural land.
In the past few years, the ministry managed to fulfil its intentions in the field of environmental protection. Farmers received millions of SKK in subsidies towards seeding steeply sloping and erosion-endangered soils with grass, while the SFPCAL also released millions of SKK to cover the cost of eliminating alien substances from the food chain. The monitoring of alien substances in the soil covers the entire territory of Slovakia. In 1995, monitoring expanded to include the movement of heavy metals in the soil and plants. The first monitoring cycle was completed and evaluated in 1996. The second cycle began in 1997, and also included for the monitoring of forestland. For strengthening sustainability at farm level, support is give to organic production, which began in Slovakia in 1991.
Agriculture and water protection
The loss of nitrogen, (N) from livestock farms may contribute to the increase in the nitrate content in ground water used for drinking water and in the eutrophication of lake waters, thus reducing the biodiversity and the amount of consumable fish. Phosphorus, (P) is not presently leacheding in significant amounts in Slovakia, but can be lost via surface erosion to streams and lakes where it causes eutrophication. The sustainable use of water resources in agriculture is one facet of sustainable agriculture. The main water use is for agricultural production, and secondary uses are those for human and farm activities. Water use for crops comes from both rainfall and irrigation, but human intervention is mainly oriented to irrigation. Water quality is a growing problem. Surface waters become more polluted: low dissolved oxygen, heavy metals and increased faecal coli-forms. This is mainly caused by affluents from industry and urban settlements. However, agriculture is also a
cause of pollution, particularly groundwater pollution.
The hydrosphere is an indispensable part of agroecosystems. From the ecological viewpoint, a surplus or shortage aggravates the situation in biocenozis and plant production. The long-term drainage volume of 460 000 hectares of agricultural land in Slovakia cannot be rated as an improvement of ecological production conditions. The drainage of bogs or meadows in lowlands and hills, the drainage of the Výchoslovenská Lowland, and total arable lands and meadows with local springs in hilly regions reduced production and potential soil functions and bio-diversity.
Water sources in Slovakia are unevenly distributed. The average long-term annual capacity of water sources of the country represents an approximate drainage volume of 12.9 billion m^3. The volume of border streams flowing through Slovak Republic territory can be added to this amount, but their utilization is limited by international agreements. The applicable capacity of surface water sources remaining after deduction of the essential (from ecological viewpoints) flow volumes in the watercourses (excluding the Danube, Morava and Tisa) is 90.4 m^3 s^-1.
Scenarios for the development of long-term average drainage volumes from selected regions of Slovakia for the years 2010, 2030 and 2075 have shown that a decreasing trend in water volume is far more probable than the continuity of the status corresponding to that several decades ago, and that any improvement on that past status is even less probable. The decisive factor seems to be the expected growth of temperature in climatic scenarios. According to these, the southern regions of Slovakia, particularly their lowland areas, would be more influenced by drainage and possibly even become extremely arid zones. A moderate reduction or insignificant change of water volume could be expected in the northern Slovak Republic regions, with their lower locations being more vulnerable. In general, vulnerability in the north of Slovakia would be most apparent in the form of minor changes in the volume of precipitation. With the growth of average temperatures being the key factor.
Plant and animal production
As a result of certain measurements, ground water quality in 1996 was shown to be anthroponically affected in all observed regions, except for regions with low industrial agglomeration density and regions unsuitable for agricultural exploitation. Water eutrophization is frequently caused by qualitative changes of surface river flows and water reservoirs contaminated with household and industrial outflow, but especially by fertilizers removed by rain or erosion. The most important are nitrates and phosphates, and to a lesser degree potassium. This process, which is a reflection of agricultural or communal pollution, is very frequent in irrigation and drainage canals, fishponds and also in bigger reservoirs. Water with a higher chlorophyll content (above 25 mg.m^-3) is defined as strongly eutrophycated, and in 1996 this concentration was excessive in the water reservoirs Kráová nad Váhom, Zemplínska írava, Toky, J Jakubov, and J atín Stráe. Water contamination with nitrates
involves many agro-climatic and hydrologic factors and has a regional character with cyclical seasonal alternations. The fountain of anorganic nitrate is outflow from agriculturally used and with mineral nitrate manured soils, atmospheric precipitation and some industrial outflow waters. The source of organic nitrate is often waste wash, dung wash waters, silo outflow and decomposed organic waste. In Slovakia, shallow horizons in lowland regions are mostly endangered. High nitrate concentrations above 50 mg/litre^ were found in water sources in the Povaie and Ponitrie regions, and also in the Východoslovenská Lowland. In the 1980s, the nitrate content in water sources increased yearly in these regions by more than 4 mg/1iter.
The nitrate presence in potable water sources engender many medical and technical problems. A relatively high nitrate ration in fertilizer batchings in the past was examined in connection to participation in water sources pollution. More than 83 percent of potable water has its origin in underground waters, which are predominantly located in regions with intensive agricultural production. Research between 1980 and 1985 showed that in water pollution caused by agricultural production, square pollution was more prevalent than dot pollution. The following three factors are dominant in square pollution:
* high, and often unnecessary, dosages of mineral and organic fertilizers in the soil, including a wide range of pesticides, mainly herbicides (period before 1989);
* water erosion on arable land caused not only by geomorphological conditions, but also by unsuitable plant choice, plant rotation and agrotechnics; and
* incorrect plant choice and rotation in Hygienic Protection Bands No. 2 and also in plains, from the viewpoint of potable water protection, usually in the river.
From research, is has been found that the trend of increasing nitrate contents in underground waters from 1982 has not stopped, even after 1993 when the use of nitrate fertilizers plummeted (28,4 kg N/ha^ of agricultural land).
Pesticides can also be transported to ponds, rivers and underground waters by the wind. Long term effects are developed with the constant use of pesticides which are not degradable.
Until 1989, animal production was characterized by a high intensity with up to industrial dimensions of production (poultry, pigs and also cows). More than 75 percent of laying chickens and broilers was raised on large capacity farms with a concentration between 0.2 and 0.5 million birds; pig breeding more than 35 percent in concentrations above 1 000 (up to 15 000), and more than 20 percent of cows were raised on large capacity farms. All this very heavily damaged our environment. Litterless, cattle and pig houses in animal production were used also in ecologically very fragile regions such as in itný ostrov (Wheat Island), which is the biggest aquifer in Europe. For example, in the Hygienic Protection Bands of this region there were more than 90 000 cattle houses. A big burden was also the 79 high capacity pig farms with over 3 000 pigs each. In Slovakia, 11 million tonnes of fresh manure was produced yearly, and the problem was more serious with pig manure, because the
houses were built without outlying agricultural land.
Hundred tonnes of silage fodder creates roughly 20 tonnes of silage liquid, which contains 200-300 kg N - substances and 200-300 kg of organic acids. Before 1989, Slovakia produced ca 1.4 million tonnes of silage liquid which was put into the environment. In the "Project for high capacity farms and agro-centres situated in the Slovak Republic", 3 660 farms were evaluated, of which only 266 was satisfactory from the viewpoint of environment protection. Some capacities were built in places which were later promulgated as a Hygienic Protection Band.
The negative sides of high capacity animal production technologies on water pollution were manifested:
* with water contamination by manure and manure heaps, stable outflows, silage liquid, veterinary medicines, bio-factors etc.;
* with the incorrect application of fluid and solid organic fertilizers, and the consequent flow or leakage of nutrients into potable water sources.
At the present time, the amount of excrement in Slovakia has fundamentally decreased because of a reduction in animal numbers. Most litterless cattle houses have been reconstructed and replaced by other more ecological and ethological friendly technologies.
As mentioned, pollution with nitrogen and the high use of pesticides are considered major environmental problems in connection with Slovak agriculture. The high use of pesticides is also connected to livestock farming, since crop production is considered as an important and integrated part of most livestock farms. One way to look at these problems is to look at the trade-off between e.g. the input of nitrogen and the level of production. This can be done in a classic agricultural experiment. The problem, however, is that a livestock farm is very complex and there is a huge number of combinations of input factors. It is therefore very resource demanding and time consuming to create knowledge solely through experiments within existing agricultural systems.
In organic farming, synthetic fertilizer and pesticides are not used. A crop rotation including perennial and N-fixing crops, together with the use of fertilizer of organic origin, is regarded as fundamental for an environmentally friendly and productive farming system. Organic farming therefore offers a better framework for obtaining knowledge and doing research than conventional farming systems do. This, in combination with the increased general interest in organically produced food, has resulted in research efforts within organic production systems in Slovakia for the purpose of producing knowledge about sustainable agriculture systems.
Factors affecting productivity and sustainability at farm level
Agriculture in the Slovak Republic contributes about 40 percent to the pollution of watersources (Gábri at all, 1998). At the moment, about 65 000 sources of area and spot water pollution (mostly plant production) are registered.
The economic function of water (function of sustainability) lies in the use of it in industrial and agricultural production (specially in food processing). In the Slovak Republic 1994, 25 372 l.s^-1 of water was used (of this 19 301 l.s^-1 in industry). Of the estimated underground sources in Slovakia, roughly half is used. In 1995, 382 849 th.m3.r^-1 was used for irrigation. Recently, the use of irrigation is decreasing, mostly due to water quality, which is becoming a serious problem. The amount of water of first class quality (suitable for irrigation) represents 31.6 percent; of second class (conditionally suitable for irrigation) 43,1 percent, and of third class (water unsuitable) 25,3 percent. The purest irrigation water is located in the Danube River Basin. The water used in animal production is obtained mostly from private wells which cover 80 percent of consumption. In recent years, not only around the world but also in Slovakia, the situation of the water balance in
rural regions is worsening.
The reasons for the worsening water balance are the following:
* changes in natural and climatic conditions;
* changes in land use (from 1965 to 1990, 90 000 hectares of meadows and pastures were ploughed and changed into arable land. Perennials represent a significant eco - stabilizing factor in the landscape, mostly from the point of view of water retention and water protection from pollution in the agricultural landscape); and
* human use of water without respecting the rules of energy flow and hydrological cycles.
The ecological landscape system in Slovakia, from the hydrological point of view, was influenced by the construction of hydro-melioration devises (irrigation on 320 000 hectares, drained land on 458 500 hectares (Húska, 1998).
The positive impacts of hydro-melioration equipment influencing productivity (sustainability) are:
* stabilization of agricultural production at wetter supply, production of fodder and consequently animal production;
* higher manure production which positively influences soil fertility and sustainability;
* higher economic efficiency of production and of agricultural subjects (economic dimension of sustainability);
* stabilization and higher incomes for employers in agriculture (mostly in the previous regime); and
* more effective use of national water potential.
The negative impacts are:
* disregard of environmental functions;
* deterioration of conditions for water birds (biodiversity reduction);
* destruction of wood vegetation; and
* change in the original vegetation and worsening conditions for moisture-looing fauna (impoverishment of zoocenoses).
The problems identified above call for new innovative issues in water management in such a way that development not only sustains the fast growing and urbanized population, but is also sustainable, i.e., resource preserving, environmentally non-degrading, technically appropriate, economically viable, socially acceptable and human oriented.
Assuming the challenges above, the following aspects need to be considered as first priority:
* evaluating the potential of irrigation as a means for environmentally sustainable land use and food production, as well as the potential adverse environmental impacts resulting from neglecting or abandoning irrigation systems;
* the development of appropriate tools for assessing and controlling the impacts of using low quality water irrigated agriculture, and appropriate techniques for the maintenance of waste water systems;
* improve land evaluation criteria and methodologies for irrigation planning to include the assessment of the impacts on the environment.
Water quality management needs to concern:
* water quality monitoring, including the development of reduced cost methods of assessment and standards for chemical, physical and biological loads, and the aspects relative to pollution from agro-chemicals;
* economic and effective mechanisms for the disposal or reuse of drainage water, and agricultural wastes, particularly in arid and semiarid lands;
* appropriate methods for waste water treatment for agriculture reuse;
* better management practices to minimize water quality degradation in irrigated agriculture.
High priorities should be given to those technical aspects oriented toward modernizing irrigation and drainage systems; top development of locally adapted water-efficient on-farm irrigation technologies; integrated irrigation and fertilizer management including fertigation, chemigation and irrigation scheduling; enhanced methods for field evaluation of on-farm and off-farm system performances and systems; monitoring, including water supply, water quality, salinization; and environmental, economic and social impacts. Innovative issues are required to make water management effective. They concern the mechanisms to improve the user's participation and to strengthen the institutions involved in water resources planning and management, as well as the laws and regulations relative to water policies.
Agriculture and air protection
The emissions of greenhouse gases in Slovakia reached their highest level in the late 1980s. In the period 1990-1994, this level dropped by 25 percent and from 1994 we are registering a slight increase. The use of fossil energy is of interest because it is a non-renewable resource and because combustion contributes to global warming. Air pollution is caused by a high energetic input in the form of fossil fuels, releasing the greenhouse gas carbon oxide (CO[2]) and also emissions of methane and ammonia. Greenhouse gases released by agricultural activities include methane, carbon oxide and nitric oxide. A very important greenhouse gas is methane (CH[4]), which is generated by the anaerobic decomposition of organic substances. In the environment, it is naturally released in bogs. In agriculture, it is also created in cow and sheep digestive tracts and also in all operation outlets with an imperfect combustion of organic substances. One methane molecule from animal production
causes 40 times more danger in its greenhouse effect than carbon oxide. The fundamental portion of CH[4] comes from animal excrements. The multitude of methane emissions from animal production depends on: the intensity of animal production; the way of animal placed; manure holding; and the method of manure application.
The step up in milk production and the transition to literrless technology after 1990, decreased the production of greenhouse gases (by number reduction, and more intensive energy exploitation). A gas reduction of 20-90 percent is caused by manure management (technology, time, soil type and plant). Qualified judgement showed that in 1988 animal production produced more than 180 Gg CH[4].
In 1997, the Slovak agricultural contribution to all greenhouse gases emissions was around 7 percent. Most methane is produced in agriculture: 46 percent. The other pollution gas is N[2]O, which is generated by a mineral nitrate surplus in the soil as a result of a combination of intensive field manuring by industrial manure and a poor air regime in the soil. The release of nitrate gases from the soil into the air is a part of the natural mechanisms of N in nature. It is generated as a result of biological processes in the soil (de-nitrification, nitrification). Every year, on average 4-7 Gg A-N[2]O is released in Slovakia, which is only 0.09-0.016 percent of the whole world's production of A-N[2]O from agricultural land. The amount of deposited N in Slovak Republic in 1995 was 2 500 tonnes.
Agriculture and its impact on landscape
The activities of intensive agricultural production in the former economic regime have had more negative impacts on agriculture landscape. The semi-natural grass-covered grounds which for many hundreds of years were environmentally managed (such as mowed meadows and pastures) represent the highest diversity of species and plant societies in agricultural land in Slovakia.
In the last few decades, the meadow ecosystems in Slovakia have been considerably changed. Natural meadows in the alpine zone are significantly endangered by global climate warming. Copses in higher mountain ranges are also endangered. The abandoning of traditional farming methods, and the pasturing of enormous sheep and cattle herds, which were considerably reduced in size after 1990, resulted in the degradation and reduction in species diversity. In this way, mountain ranges in regions of the Lower Tatras, Poana and Eastern Karpaty, and others (Uhliarová, Kritín, at all. 1998) were changed. In the last 40 years, many semi-natural meadows and pastures were transformed into intensive grass fields and the original species composition was substantially changed. In the sub-mountainous and mountainous regions of Slovakia, there are an increasing number of abandoned meadows. The meadows are often extremely steep and not reachable by mechanization, and thus for the owners they are
economically worthless. The tilling of meadows also contributed to the loss of natural copses. The semi-natural meadow ecosystems, particularly mezofilic meadows and meadows on the flood plains of lowland rivers, should be listed among the most endangered plant societies in Slovakia.
It is extremely important to save our gene fund because there are many precious, endangered, endemic and relict plant and animal species. They are very important also from the standpoint of anti-erosion land protection. In the last few decades, large areas of xerotherm vegetation have been ruined. The main factors causing this situation were tilling, afforestation with non-native trees (locust tree, pine), cutting and constructing recreational houses.
In the most intensive lowland areas, where large-scale technology was most disseminated (enterprises with 3-5 000 hectares of agricultural land), the former varied landscape changed into a uniform landscape type; the "agricultural type" or "cultural steppe". Large-scale intensive agricultural production left enormous environmental damage in the agricultural landscape. It was manifested by joining plots and the removal of functional fresh vegetation, without consideration in landscape configuration and the principal ecological linkages. Plot enlargement was done without respect to the criteria of land and ecological anti-erosion protection. This situation in principle still exists.
Taking into account agriculture-related problems, the following improvements seem to be desirable in order to make farming systems more sustainable:
* "ecologization": prevention and/or minimization of environmental pollution through overall management in the use of agricultural inputs;
* production of more "nature" and (bio)diversity on farms;
* ensure stable and fair income for farmers allowing them to maintain their dignity and function in society;
* a higher degree of ethical and political acceptability; and
* overall farm management and yields should be improved.
Agriculture and biodiversity
The results of an analysis on agriculture in Slovakia show that there are new threats to biodiversity. These are: production intensification, destruction of biothopes, and changes in the environmental conditions in agricultural landscape. All the above mentioned categories lead to a reduction in natural and semi-natural areas, to a retreat of the key, precious and endangered species, and also to genofund reductions in cultural plant species and varieties and domesticated animal breeds.
The protection of ecological stability and biodiversity in the agricultural landscape is strongly dependent on schemes of natural resource exploitation and also on agricultural landscape management. Intensively managed ecosystems of type "ager" on the arable land in the Slovak Republic are focused on large-scale crop production, and they occupy the largest portion of agricultural land in lowland regions. They are characterized by minimal biodiversity. In comparison with the lowlands, the biodiversity of mountainous and sub-mountainous regions in the Slovak Republic is much higher. Participating there are many secondary ecosystems, such as meadows, rationally exploited pastures, orchards, vineyards and others which arose as a result of human activity in original climax forest associations. To sustain their ecological stability, additional efforts are needed (for example mowing) to prevent secondary succession. Also meadows, pastures and orchards in sub-mountainous and
mountainous regions significantly participate in global national biodiversity.
From the viewpoint of plant and animal biodiversity, probably the richest was the traditionally managed agricultural landscape, which endured in Slovakia until the beginning of the second half of the 20th century. The large number of species and areas of diverse plant associations and their associated animal groups secured:
* a great variety of agricultural systems and proceedings;
* prevailing extensive and semi-extensive exploitation of agricultural land;
* low inputs of additional energy (chemicals fuels) and manure with organic manure; and
* accommodation of plants to existing natural conditions without expressive interactions to ecological conditions.
With agricultural intensification (connected with high additional energy and material inputs, mostly chemicals) and also with industrial development after World War II on Slovakia's territory, land, air, ground, and surface water pollution increased, and at the same time rapidly reduced the diversity of vegetation and animals. In this process of environmental pollution, agriculture, as well as industry, played a conspicuous role. Ecosystem modifications on agricultural land resulted in more plant species and their associations being put on the list of endangered species and associations. In the Red Book Flora Base of 1993, there are 934 endangered species of wild plants (37,45 percent), 902 species of mosses (48,3 percent), and 1493 lichens (39,0 percent).
The agricultural landscape belongs to eight of the most important groups of animal biotopes (habitats) in Europe, where it is dominant and covers around 50 percent of the continent's area (5 million km^2). This habitat is the environment for the reproduction of 173 endangered bird species, of which 70 percent has unfavourable protection status in Europe. Development in Europe has led to traditional schemes of landscape exploitation on smaller areas being abandoned, which has resulted in a reduction in, and a loss of, ecologically rich areas. Some exceptions are areas in Slovakia which were not suitable for large-scale exploitation, mostly because of their very broken terrain or harsh climatic conditions (for example Juné Podpolanie, Orava, Kysuce).
Among the most endangered European birds that depend on agricultural land, the following are found in Slovakia: Species category Spec.1; species living in Europe and generally endangered. Of four species in this highest endangered category which are found in Slovakia, three depend on the agricultural landscape: Aquila heliaca, Crex Crex and Otis Tarda. Species category Spec.2 consists of the species concentrated in Europe which are endangered, and whose survival depends on the extreme protection of their habitats. 15 species in this second highest endangered category are significantly bound to the agricultural landscape. There are also other bird species which are not concentrated in Europe that are strongly influenced by negative agricultural factors (species Category Spec. 3.). They are species which feed and nest in the agricultural landscape. To this group belong Falco, Perdix perdix, Coturnix coturnix, Bubo bubo Jynx torquilla, Picau canus and others. These constitute
another 18 species, which together with the previous 31 endangered species, (that is almost 10 percent of Slovakia's avifauna), are strongly under negative agricultural influence.
High performing mechanization also significantly caused biotic components of agroecosystems. Agro-technique, together with chemical application, reduced edafic groups of small invertebrates, amphibious animals, reptiles, birds and mammals, whose bionomy is immediately connected with land environment. Mechanization has resulted in significant changes in the population dynamics of some species, primarily in changes of natality, mortality, migration and feeding regimes. For those reasons, biodiversity protection must solve those conflicts between agricultural activities and nature and landscape protection. One complex solution calls for system changes and the integration of agricultural and environmental policy.
Effects of environmental degradation on agriculture
Striving to assess natural resources and functions from the point of view of the economy, brings us to the concept of environmental capital. It consists of all natural resources, functions and processes supporting life while, at the same time, enabling human society to produce food, clothes, and shelter, as well as other products for human consumption. Evidently, only a society which can direct its economics without continuously exploiting this environmental capital can survive into the future. This society can be called "sustainable".
In Slovakia, the demand for raw material sources of the best quality has resulted in their intensive exploitation in the past, with no regard to the environmental situation of regions. Energy consumption in the metallurgical and chemical industries and in the production of cement and construction materials was very high per capita in Slovakia during the previous regime, and mostly used lower quality coal with a high production of SO[2] (i.e. 4 times more than in Austria). The generated acid rain destroyed the mineral and organic components of the soil. The movement of toxic elements is rapid and rises in concentration in soil solution (Mn, Al, Fe, Ca). In this way acid rain facilitates the absorption of these elements into food chains; it increases soil erosion, and the quality of agricultural and forest soils frequently falls.
Metalization causes the worst contamination of soils. It is very difficult to remove, and itsconsequences will be lasting, even after its removal from the air. In Slovakia, measurable quantities of mercury, cadmium, chromium, and lead are found in the soil. The influence of heavy metals on soil fertility and the bio-energetic quality of soils and phytocenosis depends on their specific properties and soil type, and also on the quantity of heavy metals. The highest accumulation is observed in hard soils. In the sand, soils' heavy metals have penetrated into ground layers and down to the ground water. Research results have proved the relationship between the quality of absorbent heavy metals and soil acidity. In the Institute of Soil Fertility in Bratislava and in the University of Agriculture in Nitra, this problem has been studied very intensively.
THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIETY ON THE AGRICULTURAL ENVIRONMENT
The necessity of finding asolution to environmental problems requires social recognition. The aim is to achieve cooperation between various interest and power groups. There are four major groups: governmental institutions, non-governmental organizations, the business sector and local administration. From this point of view, the position of traditional nature conservation starts to be gradually replaced by cooperative efforts of the parties concerned to safeguard it and to make natural resources sustainable.
Institutional change within the environmental policy
An important step forward in the protection of natural resources was the establishment of the Slovak Commission for Environment (SKZP) by the Act of SNR No. 96/1990 Digest. The SKZP has become the central authority of state administration for environmental protection and nature conservation, the protection of the quality and quantity of waters and their rational use, the protection of air, territorial planning and housing regulations, the treatment of the solid wastes, the providing of a unified information system on the environment and monitoring in the territory of the Slovak Republic. By the Act of SNR No. 453/1992, the SKZP was transformed into the Ministry for Environment which also became the central authority of the state for geological research and survey. In 1992, the Ministry of Forestry and Water Management fused with the Ministry of Agriculture and Alimentation, whereby a new Ministry of Soil Management was established.
Following the central authorities of state administration, there has also emerged a new system of territorial authorities. An important contribution was adopted by the Act of SNR No. 595/1990 on the State Administration of the Environment, establishing a specific system of territorial authorities of an interdisciplinary character, enabling administration in the line with the requirements of the respective central authority, that is the Ministry of Environment. State administration concerned with the conservation and protection of the environment in the territory was exercised by the district bureaus for the environment, municipal bureaus for the environment, Slovak inspection of environment and the municipalities. Expert organizations, the founder of which is the Ministry of Environment, are: the Administration of national parks of the Slovak Republic, the Administration of Slovak Caves, the Slovak Agency for the Environment including also the administration of Protected
Landscape Areas, the Slovak Hydrometeorogical Institute, and the Geological Service for the Slovak Republic.
Environmental policy related to agriculture
Agriculture is narrowly linked with economic, social, cultural, and rural development. Lately, many of the social and economic securities of rural inhabitants diminished, due to the influence of social and economical transition. They were represented by the job opportunities security in state supported agricultural enterprises and in cheap communication to industrial enterprises.
The Ministry of Agriculture in connection with the Governmental Programme Declaration supports the existing and up to now coordinated initiatives of rural development by establishing the Rural Development Agency, and subsidising those farmers who farm under less favourable natural and climatic conditions (a system of subsidies, including sheep premiums; compensation for a permanent change of crops; and support of supplementary activities).
One of the goals of the Agricultural Policy is to preserve farming in less competitive areas in order to preserve the landscape by preserving the former settlements and creating new jobs for them. Clearly, small private farmers in these areas depend on government support, particularly in the form of subsidies. This solution conforms with the type of support provided to farmers in the EU.
Because the number of beehives is falling every year, and we will thus have to face a reduction in fruit and vegetables yields by insufficient pollination, a support is paid to beekeepers. The number of beehives in 1995 was 4.06 percent lower than in 1994, and in 1996 lower by 13.7 percent than in 1995.This support will run counter to efforts to support fruit and vegetables growing and is at variance with the National Health Support Programme.
Apart from the regionalization of the country, pursuant of EU criteria, it is necessary to prepare specific development projects for individual, newly defined regions, including appropriate legislative measures for their implementation. Due to heavy losses in viticulture, growers uproot vineyards rather than investing in their (extremely costly) restoration and maintenance. The growing and production of varieties of vine strains has been substantially reduced, which causes changes in traditional regional landscape. Excise tax payable on the entire wine output represents SKK 300 million annually. The ministry suggested that 50 percent of the money paid in excise taxes on wine be transferred from the state budget to the budget of the MA SR who would redistribute it to support the vintner's investments in vineyards and help them overcome the recession that viticulture has been in for several years.
Legislative and institutional framework for a national agri-environmental policy
According to the Constitution of the Slovak Republic, of natural resources in the ownership of the state, only mineral resources, groundwaters, natural health resources and water flows remained.
In the sector of agriculture, the role of state administration is fulfilled by the Centres of Regional Land and the Information Service, as the organizational entities of the Ministry of Soil Management. The changes in the ownership of natural resources were brought about by adoption of Act No. 229/1991 on the Regulation of Ownership Relations to Land and Other Agricultural Property. The Act was adopted in order to alleviate some property injustices from the past. The tasks of the state concerned with the restoration of property rights and the regulation of land ownership are performed by the land bureaus.
On 24 July 1996, two important acts were brought into force: the Act of NR SR (National Council of the Slovak Republic) No. 221/1996 on the Territorial and Administrative Division of the Slovak Republic and the Act of NR SR No. 222/1996 on the Organization of Local State Administration and the change and amendment of certain acts. In this way, the reform of state administration was enforced. The reform of municipalities administration is prepared as of an act on higher territorial entities which will determine their position, relation to state administration, and their bodies. In terms of the approved Act No. 221/1996 the Slovak Republic has been divided into 8 region and 79 districts.
The specific position of the specialized state administration for environment / the bureaus for the environment and forestry commissions - was abolished and these have been included into the district and regional authorities as separate departments. However, we believe, that the present state of the environment, its protection and, after many years of economic growth preferences without the protection of the environment, demands supra-departmental, independent decision-making, separate from other activities in the area.
Laws and directives on the use of inputs
Input prices for materials and energy, which in the former regime were kept at low levels by means of state subsidies, have now undergone transformation to market prices. The disparity between prices of agricultural products and production inputs to agriculture depressed profits. Production was compelled to adjustment by the slow-down of financial flows and the poorer availability of investment and operating capital. A lowered demand also called for a change in the output structure, as well as a more streamlined utilization of resources, which became more difficult to get for agricultural producers.
The disparity in input and output prices had a very negative impact on agriculture in general. To avoid an unwise future use of inputs with the aim of intensifying production, the following laws and regulation were accepted:
* Act No. 61/1964 Development of plan production (specifies principles for field crops);
* Regulation of MA SSR No. 5000/1962 Digest, Resource protection (assigns principles of mineral N and organic fertilizer application in areas of water sources and saves them from agricultural pollution);
* Regulation of MA SSR No. 5001/1982 (manipulation and fertilization with slurry and liquidation of silage juices);
* Czechoslovakian state standard CSN No. 465810 relates to aerial field crop care and fertilization;
* Standard No. 73 6992, Irrigation with washout waters and slurry; and
* Act of fertilizers, and the Act of land erosion are under preparation.
Laws and directives on the protection of natural resources in agriculture
The protection and cultivation of agricultural land is provided through legislative, agro-technical and organizational measures, namely Act 307/1992 (The Agricultural Land Protection Act). Further to this act, the MA SR issued Resolution No. 531/1994-540 (dated January 1995), which prescribes acceptable levels of deleterious substances in soil and stipulates the institutions entitled to measure the levels of these substances. Later, the government issued Resolution No. 152/1996, regulating the rate of compensation for the withdrawal from cultivation of agricultural land, which took effect on 1^st June 1996. These legislative measures have curbed the shrinkage in the total amount of agricultural land in recent years.
The environmental policies of the state are based on the Constitution of the Slovak Republic of 1 September 1992, containing a separate part on the rights and duties of all subjects to the environment. For nature conservation, paragraph 6 of Chapter II is the most important. In 1993, the government and the parliament approved an important document, the "Strategy, Principles and Priorities of the State Environmental Policies of the Slovak Republic" which briefly characterizes the present state of the environment in Slovakia and proposes 70 short-term aims (to 1996), 59 aims for the period 2000-2010 and 33 general and partial long-term (2010-2030). This document defines five fundamental priorities of state environmental policies.
In the Slovak Republic, more than 700 regulations of different legal force are concerned with the field of the environment, of which more than 600 are related to the protection of specific areas and objects. One hundred further regulations have a wider scope, e.g. mining law, forest law, etc. Although before November 1989 the environmental law already existed, of environmental law legislation since that time developed in an extraordinary way. In 1994, in connection with and tied to the UNCED and AGENDA 21, the Act of NR SR No. 287/94 Digest on Nature and landscape protection was approved, as a basis for farming and exploitation of agricultural land in protected areas.
Other important acts adopted in Slovakia since 1989 are:
* Act No. 17/1992 on the Environment in reading of further amendments;
* Act of NR SR No. 127/1994 on Environmental Impact Assessment;
* Act of NR SR No. 287/1994 on Nature and Landscape Protection in reading of the Act of NR SR No. 222/1996 on the Organization of Local Government and on the supplementing of some acts;
* Act No. 309/1991 on the Protection of Air Against Polluting Substances in reading of further regulations (complete reading No.31/1995);
* Act No. 238/1991 on Wastes in reading of further amendments;
* Act of SNR No. 307/1992 on the Protection of Agricultural Land Fund;
* Act No. 131/1991 on the State Fund of Forest Enhancement;
* Act No. 318/1991 on the State Fund of Water Management;
* Act No. 240/1998 on Agriculture;
* Act No. 224/1998 on Ecological agriculture and bio-food production; and
* Act No. 309/1991 on Air protection.
National measures on the promotion of ecologically sound agricultural practices
Act on Nature and Landscape Conservation
The corner stone of legal regulations of nature and landscape conservation is the Act of NR SR No. 287/1994 on Nature and Landscape Conservation. The Act introduces the system of nature and landscape conservation, of their components and their elements. It establishes the principles for the care of nature and the landscape and their relationship to the protection of specific natural components, the basic duties of juridical and physical persons, as well as the components, duties and policies of state nature conservation authorities. It decreases the number of categories of protected areas in accordance with international categorization (national park, protected landscape areas, nature reserves, national nature reserve, nature monuments, national nature monuments). The classic economic tools, such as prohibitions, orders, dues and fines are applied e.g. in the acts on the protection of air, on waste, on nature, and landscape conservation, on offenses, and in the act on local
dues.
The "State Fund for the Protection and Enhancement of Agricultural Land" (SFPEAL)^44 provides support in line with those priorities established in 1996, which were later rectified to reflect the needs of primary agricultural producers. SFPEAL administers some 1 billion crowns and provides funds to support:
* the completion of soil improvement and reclamation projects in progress, the necessary reconstruction and restoration of major related facilities owned by the state , or construction of new facilities;
* the restoration of irrigation systems, purchase of irrigation installations, or reconstruction of existing obsolete installations;
* soil sweetening, which farmers most frequently request as soil-improvement;
* increased contents of organic substances in soil;
* initiation of a concise programme of anti-erosion measures; and
* solutions for long-term waterlogged soils (e.g. to be set aside as ecological areas).
The importance of national environmental associations and organizations for environmental policy
Financial resources from the state budget for environmental conservation and enhancement were divided among the allocations to the individual departments. Since January 1997, separate allocations of the state budget provide for the budgets of regional authorities, including the resources for environmental conservation and enhancement. The municipalities themselves have no independence in creating their own resources for coping with environmental problems (especially for ecological infrastructure), for this reason a very important role belongs to the civil society organizations.
The "Green face" of civil society organization
After the political change in the country, many green non-governmental organization appeared. It is difficult to determine precisely the number of these organizations because this number is under constant change. Some of most important are enumerated:
* Slovak Union of Nature and Landscape Conservationists (SZOPK);
* Strom ivota (Tree of life);
* Society for Sustainable Living (STUZ);
* Association of National Parks and Protected Landscape Areas;
* Slovak River Network;
* Forest Association VLK (WOLF);
* Association of the nature conservationists of North - Eastern Slovakia - the POLA; and
* Carpathian Nature Conservation Association of Altruists (KOZA).
The importance of private and non-profit organizations
In Slovakia, there is a multitude of other organizations mostly acting at the local level. As the existing tax-system does not sufficiently support sponsorship, most of the Slovak foundations finance almost exclusively only their own activities. The conditions of their functioning are now strictly limited by the new Act on Foundations. Nature and environment conservation-oriented NGOs are the organizations least endowed by the state. They may send their grant proposals to e.g. the Fund for the Environment and the Fund for Culture Pro Slovakia, as well as to certain Ministries (the Ministry of Education, the Ministry for environment, the Ministry for Culture). Although environmental organizations, due to a lack of financial resources and supportive economic tools, struggle with inadequate material, technical, spatial and economic conditions, they represent a significant proportion of civil society which deserves much higher support than they receive today. They are:
* the Sosna Foundation supporting conservation movements in Eastern Slovakia, concentrates on ecological education and green publications.
* the "Return to the Country" Foundation supporting historic buildings of the country, concentrates on the economic and cultural revival of the village.
* Zelená nádej (Green Perspective) Foundation solving the problems of the Torysa and Topla river catchment-basins.
* the Zelená alternatíva (Green Alternative) Foundation (since 1997 The Living Planet civic association) protecting valuable territories in the Pieany region, activities against the Winter Olympic Games, as well as publishing green literature on global issues.
* the Ecology and Life Foundation which issues a quarterly bulletin of the same name, devoted to significant global and local environmental problems, tries to integrate science and ethics.
* the Slovak environmental computer network SEPS promotes electronic communication between various subjects devoted to the protection of the environment.
* the Foundation for energy savings and the protection of the environment in the villages organizes seminars and lectures for village and town inhabitants concerning energy savings.
* the Daphne Foundation concerning applied environmental research, applies scientific knowledge in nature conservation, successful work includes the protection of Morava River's surroundings.
CONCLUSIONS
Agricultural research should prepare an experience/knowledge base for the consistent transformation (restructuring) of agricultural production in respect to specific land and ecological conditions, implementation (by the EU for example) of measures on applying special farming systems in sensitive regions (including financial reimbursement for loses), and also steps for the evaluation of the effects of agricultural production. Research is also obliged to prepare other recommendations for lowering inputs and increasing the effectiveness of agricultural production.
The reorientation of agricultural policies will create the need for re-instrumentation. Traditional agricultural policies, heavily biased towards price support, are going to be phased out. Direct payments will have to become better targeted, more cost-efficient and de-coupled from farm production or factors of production. If these conditions are fulfilled, they could provide an important tool to respond to the multifunctional role of agriculture, in particular in relation to the environment and sustainable agricultural and rural development. Finally, there is also the need for better assessment of policy developments that have taken place in CEEC´s those under way, and policy alternatives in the future. The growing interdependencies of developments in the agri-food sector means that more emphasis will have to be placed on the optimal policy mix. This includes the need to analyse impacts on farm incomes, structural adjustment, environmental quality, rural development, trade
and the functioning of the agricultural world markets.
REFERENCES
Blass, G. 1997. Agricultural Policy in Slovakia, unpublished manuscript.
Boik, M. 1998. "AGENDA 2000" and its impact to Slovak agriculture from the EU Common Agricultural Policy point of view.
Ková, K. 1996. Steering towards sustainable development in Slovak Agriculture.
Ková, K., Hrako, J., Lacko-Bartoová. 1998. Sustainable Agriculture.
Ková, K. 1998. Biodiversity Protection and Ecological Agriculture in EU Agri-environmental Programmes.
Ková,K., Krajovi,V. 1998. Agri-environmentálny programme pre Slovensko, I. Analýza environmentálnej situácie, IUCN, Svetová únia ochrany prírody, AVALON Foundation
Uhliarová, E., Kritín, A. Biodiverzita vegetácie a zoocenóz v ponohospodárskej krajine, In: Ková, K., Krajovi,V. a kol.: Agri-environmentálny programme pre Slovensko.
Gábri, . et al. 1998. Ochrana a tvorba ivotného prostredia v ponohospodárstve, Nitra.
Húska, D. 1998. Environmental Issues related to Land and Water Management in Slovakia, Workshop, Agriculture and rural development, Poznan, Sielinko.
OECD. 1997. The Agro-Food Sector on the Treshold of the 21^st Century, Long-Term Policy Issues and Challenges for Agro-Food, Paris.
Hronec, O. 1995. Exhalats and their Consequences on the Soil and vegetation in the Condition of Slovakia, Food Research Institute, Bratislava.
Ministry of Agriculture of Slovak Republic. 1996. Report on Agriculture and the Food Industry in the Slovak Republic (Green Report), Bratislava.
Ministry of Agriculture of Slovak Republic. 1997. Report on Agriculture and the Food Industry in the Slovak Republic (Green Report), Bratislava.
Ministry of Agriculture of Slovak Republic. 1998. Report on Agriculture and the Food Industry in the Slovak Republic (Green Report), Bratislava.
Ministry of Agriculture of Slovak Republic. 1996. Report on water management in the Slovak Republic (Green Report)), Bratislava.
Ministry of Agriculture of Slovak Republic. 1997. Report on water management in the Slovak Republic (Green Report), Bratislava.
Sabo, P., Tothová, Z. & árska, H. 1998. Nature Conservation in the Kysuce Region and Collaboration in its sustainable Development, IUCN Foundation, The World Conservation Union, Slovakia, IUCN European Programme.
Stehlo, P. 1992. Agricultural policy trends in Eastern European Coutries from OECD viewpoint, Agroeconomics, No. 3-4, pp. 106-107 and 157-158, Bratislava.
Stehlo, P. 1992. Economic Aspects of Alternative Agriculture, Aagroeconomics, No. 3, p. 135-136, Bratislava.
Stehlo, P. 1993. Projects of Ecological Agriculture for Coop-farms: Daov Lom, Plavé Vozokany, Topoany.
Stehlo, P. 1994. Economic and organizational tasks of alternative agriculture development in Slovak Republic, Habilitation paper, Agricultuiral University in Nitra.
Stehlo, P. 1994. Economic Evaluation of different production technologies in Slovakia, RIPP Pieany.
Stehlo, P. 1995. Development of organic agriculture in Slovakia, International Seminar on: Organic agriculture in selected Danube and Baltic countries, Gronjan, Croatia
Stehlo, P. 1996. Economic evaluation of different production technologies, Study for Pesearch Institute for Plant Production in Pieany.
ANNEX
Table 1: Importance of agriculture
GDP % change -2.5 -14.6 -6.5 -3.7 5.0 7.0 6.9 6.5
Agricultural Output % change -7.5 -6.9 -11.9 -6.0 3.3 0.3 3.4 2.0
Share of agriculture
on GDP * % 3.2 2.7 3.1 3.2
Share of agriculture on
GDP ** % 5.9 6.0 5.1 4.7 4.4
Share of agriculture on employment % 10.7 8.7 8.1 7.3 6.4 6.3 6.0 5.8
Share of agro-food
exports on total exports % 6.8 5.9 6.3 5.0 5.0
Share of agro-food
imports on total imports % 9.4 9.4 8.9 7.8 8.1
* Excluding forestry, share of agriculture expressed in gross value added from agricultural account
** Data from Slovak Statistical Office, excluding forestry and intrasectorial intermediate consumption in agriculture
Source: SBS, VUEPP, DG VI calculations
Table 2: Land use in Slovakia
1 000 hectares 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997
Total area 4 904 4 904 4 904 4 904 4 904 4 904 4 904 4 903 4 903
Forests 1 979 1 986 1 989 1 990 1 991 1 992 1 992 1 992 1 993
Utilized agricultural area 2 454 2 449 2 449 2 447 2 446 2 446 2 446 2 445 2 445
Arable land (harvested) 1 503 1 509 1 509 1 516 1 500 1 503 1 497 1 474 1 459
Permanent grassland 783 777 776 780 805 810 814 817 831
Vineyards 24 24 23 23 22 22 23 22 19
Kitchen gardens 78 78 78 78 78 78 78 78 78
Other land 66 61 62 51 41 33 34 54 57
Source: EU Working Document 1998: Agricultural Situation and prospects in the Central and Eastern European countries.
Table 3: Farm structure 1996/97 compared to 1989/90
Cooperatives State farms 
number of farms
average size (ha)
total managed area (1 000 ha)
share in total agricultural area (%)
average annual labor forces / farm
Source: EU Working document 1998: Agricultural Situation and prospects in the Central and Eastern European countries.
Table 4: Fertilizer consumption
1990 1993 1995 1996 1997 (e)
NPK use, total 1 000 t 582 95 102 111 117
nitrogen 1 000 t 222 65 70 74 78
phosphorous 1 000 t 168 16 18 20 21
potassium 1 000 t 192 14 15 17 17
NPK use per ha arable land kg/ha 401 66 72 78 82
nitrogen kg/ha 153 45 49 52 55
phosphorous kg/ha 115 12 12 14 15
potassium kg/ha 132 10 10 12 12
Use of barn manure t/ha 6.7 5.6 5.3 5.1
Source: VUEPP/RIAFE, data SBS
Graph 1: Development of food retail price and farm-input and output prices
Source: EU Working Document 1998: Agricultural Situation and prospects in the Central and Eastern European countries
Graph 2: Development of farm input and output
Source: EU Working Document 1998: Agricultural Situation and prospects in the Central and Eastern European countries.
44 Proposals for the operation of SFPEAL (founded by Act 307/92) are based on the Principles and Guidelines No. 1075/1995-320 of the Ministry of Agriculture.
<title>REU Technical Series - 61. CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPEAN SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE NETWORK: first workshop - </title>
COUNTRY REPORT ON THE PRESENT ENVIRONMENTAL SITUATION IN AGRICULTURE
- UKRAINE -
Lidia Hryniv
Department of Economics, Lviv State University
INTRODUCTION
Ukraine has a quarter of the world's chernozems and 56.6 percent of all land in the country is used as arable land, while in the neighbouring counties, such as Moldova and Belarus, such agricultural lands take up 52 percent and 30 percent of the territory respectively. Ukraine has 7.5 percent of the agricultural lands of the CIS countries, 15.1 percent of their arable lands, 6.2 percent of their meadows and 1.6 percent of their pastures. At the same time Ukraine produces over 20 percent of the grain harvested in the CIS countries and about 25 percent of the meat and milk. However, ecological and economic problems in Ukraine have an ever-growing impact on agriculture.
Nationalized agriculture was not able to resolve the problem of food supply and did not ensure any increase in the efficiency of this sector of the economy to the level of the advanced nations of the world. The technocratic concept of the development of the national agriculture complex based on the quantitative growth of technical, hydro-technical, meliorative, and agrochemical factors of intensification of agricultural production, on the application in it of industrial technologies and the maximal utilization of land resources, did not ensure an adequate increase of its effectiveness, crops growth, productivity of livestock, and the improvement of product quality. Instead, it has predetermined excessively negative anthropogenous loads on the environment, and undermined reproductive, sustainable and self-regulating opportunities of the latter.
Conducting modern, ecologically unsubstantiated and biosphere-incompatible agriculture is, as a matter of fact, a destruction and depletion of soil and natural potential in general. Such agriculture, to a large extent, is a source of a great number of diseases caused by the contamination of potable water and produce by agrochemical substances, and by the poor ecological quality of agricultural produce. All this, undoubtedly, requires an entirely new approach to the further development and intensification of production in the national agriculture complex so as to ensure its transition towards the model of sustainable, ecologically safe, and efficient functioning.
THE IMPACT OF TRANSITION AND STRUCTURE OF PROPERTY RIGHTS
The effect of privatization and redefinition of property rights on natural resources
A detailed study of the concept of the denationalization and privatization of enterprises, land and housing facilities in the country, a review of the laws of Ukraine "On Privatization of the Property of State Enterprises", "On Investment Activities", "State Programme of Privatization of State Enterprises" and many other legislative and standard regulations permit us to come to a number of undisputed conclusions: namely that the provision's of these documents contain no indications of even slightly oriented approaches aimed at the elaboration of a general economic strategy and programme for the regulation of the relations pertaining to the use of natural resources and the contamination of the environment.
Among state enterprises subject to privatization there are not only those which have a great effect on the development of the consumer goods market, but also those which have a great effect on the state of the environment. Principles of privatization connected with the free transfer of a share of state property to every citizen as well as the privatization of state property by means of the sale of privatization papers, seem to be rather implausible.
The purchase by individuals of privatization papers, without taking into consideration the cost of contamination, possible ecological consequences, and costs for the maintenance of the relevant nature-protecting equipment, will mean that the population of Ukraine voluntarily consents to take over all the problems connected with the state of the environment and relieves governmental agencies of the responsibility for these problems on the understanding that these agencies will ensure the population's enrichment and well-being through privatization. That is, ecology has been omitted from privatization processes, which causes special concern in connection with the superficial and rather thoughtless attitude towards this integral part of the national treasure.
An appraisal of the aims of privatization shows that the value of property does not include the real cost of the plots of land, subsoil and other components of the environment, and this is the most essential defect of privatization in Ukraine.
Restructurization in rural areas
The transformation of the forms of property and economic activity as a pre-condition for the establishment of a competitive market medium in Ukraine must be implemented as a stage-by-stage process guided and supported by the state.
The demonopolization of state property for land in the share, which was passed into the property of non-state agricultural enterprises and farms, and also into the property of citizens, has been carried already out. This fact is confirmed by the following operations data of the State Land Committee of Ukraine. By 14 November 1997, the denationalization of lands, with the passing of them into the collective property, took place in 9 700 non-state agricultural enterprises. Members of 98.3 percent of the collective agricultural enterprises have received the certificates for land share rights and 5 767 200 citizens have become the owners of such certificates.
The ecological aspect of development is oriented, first of all, towards the renovation of soil covering as the main means of production in agriculture, the preservation of the environment and natural resources, and the improvement of the quality and ecological safety of food products. The problem of balancing branch markets of agricultural products and means of production is combined with several major issues: an improvement of the structure and models of economic activity, an improvement of the usage of nature potential, material, labor and financial resources. As a structural analysis of those initial factors in the formation of the market shows, cardinal changes of payment balance of agriculture first of all depends on the appropriate usage of land resources. The existing state of agriculture testifies to the irrationality of the system of land utilization (Table 1).
Up to 89 percent of agricultural land and over 90 percent of arable land is concentrated in the first group of farm enterprises. Such farms on average have 2 344 hectares of agricultural land, including 1 980 hectares of arable land. At present, this sector has varying estimates of the efficiency of its production, but the high marketability of its produce is its advantage. The private sector of agriculture - horticulture and vegetable gardening - takes up to 10 percent of agricultural land, and accounts for the largest number of farming units. Private plots of land cover 3 323 000 hectares of land, collective orchards 172 000 hectares, vegetable gardens 254 000 hectares, which means that a single average private plot of land has 0.23 hectares; 0.07 and 0.09 hectares respectively. By comparison: a German farm has 31.9 hectares of land including 19.2 hectare of arable land.
The number and size of agricultural enterprises in the collective sector, which were formed in the past in conformity with the concept of concentration and the specialization of production, must be changed under present conditions in favor of the new models of management. Only those agricultural enterprises which produce the greatest output per unit of land resources can be considered as large-scale ones.
Liberalization
The transition to market structures in agriculture in Ukraine takes place against a background of the deterioration of the economic situation in the agricultural subcomplex as a whole. In 1992, the produce revenue to the state budget decreased, which negatively influenced foodstuff supplies for the population. The purchase of grain did not exceed 14 million tonnes (while 17-18 million tonnes are required) and decreased in comparison with the previous year by 0.5 million tonnes. Accordingly, the state lessened the purchase of sunflowers, sugar beets, potatoes, vegetables, watermelons and grapes. The same tendencies were observed in the livestock-breeding sector of the agricultural subcomplex. During 1992, the state reduced the total number of cattle in the collective subsector by 1 392 000, pigs by 1 541 000, sheep by 806 000, and poultry by 23 million. Moreover, as a consequence of the reduction of imports of veterinary preparations, the loss of cattle and poultry increased.
Certainly, it is not possible to stop these tendencies of production recession without radical land reform. That is why the state initiated land reform by the adoption of a number of the legislative and standard regulations and by making an inventory of land of all categories. Relations connected with the establishment and activity of peasant (farmer's) households are stipulated by laws "On Ownership", "On the Priority of Social Development of a Village and Agroindustrial Complex in the National Economy", "On Business Undertakings", "On Collective Agricultural Enterprise", by the legislation on land, other legislative acts, as well as by the law "On Peasant (Farmer's) Household".
By the beginning of 1993, there were 14 500 peasant (farmer's) households established in Ukraine, to which over 290 000 hectares of agricultural land was allotted. The Ukrainian State Fund for the Support of Peasant (Farmer's) Households was apportioned money for this. Part of this money was used to help farmers to purchase equipment, seeds, plant protection means, etc. The following market structures are functioning: 6 agroindustrial stock-exchanges, 143 broker's offices, 20 consulting and other intermediary organizations, joint-stock commercial agroindustrial bank "Ukraine" with acorresponding network of institutions on sites (26 boards of directors and more than 500 branches).
The Conversion of the collective farms into collective agricultural enterprises (CAE) did not give the expected results, as this process was a formal one. But the fact is that the former collective farms just "changed their signboards" and the old methods and forms of management remained. At present, a number of consulting firms are working in the sphere of privatization and the restructurization of agrarian enterprises, among which are the "Ronko" company and the International Finance Corporation (IFC).
The project of agricultural land sharing, which is being undertaken by the consulting corporation "Ronko", is carried out on the basis of the interstate agreement between Ukraine and the USA, and is financed by the US Agency of International Development (USAID) The project was started in Sumy province in October 1995. Now about 500 agricultural enterprises participate in the programme. Its strategic tasks are the issuance of state regulations on private property rights for land to the employees of the enterprise, and the creation of the optimal system of land use; solutions to the problem of debts in the former enterprise with the subsequent establishment of a new economic structure of market type; and the provision of an enterprise with working capital by looking for money sources within the enterprise and through outside (home and foreign) investments. The realization of the privatization of the land project, and the reorganization of the CAE was commenced by the
International Finance Corporation in November 1995 in Donetsk province. About 30 farms, now take part in the project; financial support is provided by the British Fund "Know -How" - a governmental organization established with the aim of providing the countries of Central and Eastern Europe with technical assistance. But it should be mentioned that financial injections into the farms, acting on the basis of the projects of these companies, are not made as "Ronko" and the IFC provide only consulting services. The process of farm reorganization is being conducted in conformity with their methods with the assistance both of their specialists and Ukrainian professionals on agriculture, land resources, taxation administration, etc. The programmes function within the limits of the legislation of Ukraine currently in force.
The development of the economic framework at farm level
Land Market
There is no land market for agricultural purposes in Ukraine yet. According to existing legislation, agricultural land cannot be considered as an object for mortgage, nor can it be an object of buying and selling. According to the Presidents decree, it is permitted to privatize lands of non-agricultural purpose (i.e., the lands for industrial and other economic sites). The lack of an agricultural land market has adverse affects in Ukraine. It is an unfortunate that the prospects for optimism in the near future are very poor as the communist majority in the Ukrainian Parliament is vetoing the required legislation. The existing farmsteads have been organized using reserve lands as well as land sharing. It means that the farmers have to work on a land of worse quality and thus the indices of their effectiveness are actually distorted.
With the adoption in 1992 of the Ukrainian Law of Ukraine "On Peasant (Earner's) Households", the legal status of a free businessman farmer was ensured. But Ukrainian farming has its specific traits; first of all, concerning the provision of the main means of production, the majority of farms got their initial production potential in the form of obsolete (sometimes written off) means of production when they separated from the collective farms in the process of privatization. The problems of land privatization and the legislatively limited dimensions of plots of land have not been solved yet. The establishment of a farm demands a considerable "starting" capital. But the majority of those potential farmers does not have it, and money previously saved was reduced as a result of inflation. So, in addition to the property share, the farmer may count on a banking credit when he leaves the collective farm. But the existing rates of interest are too high. That is why, while
determining the basic trends of the agrarian policy, scientists warn against "all-round farmerization" as it may lead to a decrease in the national commodity production. An investigation of the prerequisites and methods of farming development testifies to the following three trends its in formation:
1. on a new basis (on the specially allotted plots of land);
2. on the basis of the subsidiary small-holdings of the population by way of the expansion of their plots of land; and
3. on the basis of the property and land shares of peasants, derived from the Collective Agricultural Enterprises, state farms and other enterprises.
Legislative favours the establishment of peasant (farmer's) households on a new basis. But, taking into consideration the lack of sufficient financial, material and technical resources, the development of farming started by way of their establishment on the basis of the subsidiary smallholdings of the population.
The improvement of land relations and the development of new forms of economic activity is the main problem of economic reform in the agricultural sphere. As the analysis shows, in 1991-1995 there have been no essential changes in the structure of land usage. Up to 10 percent of the total area under crops was used in private households. The ratio of rural farms (farmsteads) is insignificant. They used up to 500 000 hectares of arable land. A characteristic feature of the private sector of the agricultural economy in the last four years is the growth of areas under grain crops: from 194 to 841 000 hectares in farmsteads, and from 4.3 to 334 000 hectares in private farms. At the same time, grain crop productivity, naturally, was lower in the public sector. A comparative analysis of land use for grain production does testify in favour of private farms (farmsteads) (Table 2).
The situation in livestock breeding is somewhat different: the ratio of the private sector in 1994 attained 42 percent and 35 percent of the level of 1991. While there was a total reduction in production by 26.6 percent during this period, the growth in private sector attained 30.9 percent. If in 1991 the farmsteads were developing more intensely in western regions then in 1992 the center of development moved to the eastern regions, namely Mykolayiv (2 059), Odessa (1 285), Kherson (657), also Donetsk (870) and Dnipropetrovsk (768). This testifies that farming is developing in all regions of Ukraine.
In January 1997, the number of rural farms (farmsteads) in Ukraine attained 35 400 legal entities, which is 600 more than in early 1996. Farmers used 835 000 hectares of agricultural land (or about 2 percent of total land), including 765 000 hectares of arable land. Out of more than 35 000 farms in Ukraine, about 38 percent of them are located in the southern Mykolayiv, Odessa, andKherson regions. On average, one rural farm (farmstead) in Ukraine has 24 hectares of agricultural land, including 22 hectares of arable land.
Of increasing importance in Ukraine is the acquisition of private farming units run by individuals on the basis of the free transfer into the individual's private ownership of plots of land with an area ranging from 0.6 to 1.0 hectare in conformity with the Decree of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine "On the Privatization of Plots of Land" dated 26 December 1992.
In recent years, the area of land in these farming units has increased significantly, as has the output of produce. While in 1990, 6.5 percent of arable land used by farming units owned by individuals produced (in comparative prices of 1996) 24.8 percent of total national gross output of crop production and 34 percent of livestock production, or 29.4 percent together, in 1997 14.2 percent of such arable land yielded 48.6, 65.4, and 55 percent of production respectively (Table 3).
The development of input and output prices
The liberalization in the Ukrainian economy caused the formation of free prices for agricultural production as well. According to article seven of the Ukrainian Law "On prices and price-forming", free prices and rates are introduced for all kinds of agricultural production, with the exception of that regulated by the government when it comes under governmental ordering or governmental contract. The governmental regulation of prices is performed through the fixing and application of governmental financial and regulated prices and rates. Within the realm of free price functioning, there is control of their authorized application, as well as the necessity to adhere to the requirements of antimonopoly legislation in Ukraine. Those agricultural products sold in Ukrainian food markets depend on the demand, and the proposed input prices of these products are transformed into output prices due to market regulation. However, existing legislation, far from being perfect, distorts the
process of the market regulation of prices for agricultural products. Thus, the legislation needs improvement. In the agriculture of Ukraine, the level of prices for products, for Work, and for services should be in accordance with the necessity to recuperate production expenditure as well as to at least guarantee the income needed for continued production. Thus, today it is urgent to adopt changes and some additions to the Ukrainian Law "On prices and price formation". These changes should envisage using a system of the governmental regulation of prices, specifically the introduction of supporting (mortgaging) prices as well as equivalent prices for agricultural products. Prices for agricultural products should be based on the principle of combining the market with governmental regulation. Moreover, the share of barter operations has increased due to the deepening of the payment crisis in Ukraine. Barter operations are carried out with considerable economic losses due to
the artificial "winding" (increasing) prices for fuel, fertilizers, etc. by the agent companies. An effective means of acting against the increase of barter operations should be the market of material and technical resources.
The introduction of a commercial mechanism for the linking of commodity producers with suppliers and traders, direct contacts with the processing enterprises, commodity stock-exchanges, fairs, and auctions become an important trend in the development of the market for foodstuffs and the market for agricultural products and inputs.
A key role in this process is played by the Ukrainian Universal Stock-Exchange, which was entrusted with the task of establishing market prices for agricultural raw-materials and foodstuffs; material and technical resources for the agricultural complex; the development of foreign economic connections; and the establishment of joint-ventures with foreign partners.
THE IMPACT OF AGRICULTURE ON THE ENVIRONMENT
Environmental degradation caused by agriculture
The land area of Ukraine is 60.4 million hectares. Predominantly rich fertile soils and favourable climatic conditions have ensured a very high degree of economic development in 92 percent of the territory. The area of agriculturally developed lands exceeds 70 percent, and this index is one of the highest in the world. The same applies to the arable land area (56 percent). Ukraine has the world's greatest area of chernozems.
Due to a shortage in reserves of vacant land, the allocation of agricultural lands for production facilities continues. For this reason the overall loss of farmlands in the last 30 years has exceeded two million hectares.
The intensification of agriculture, an increased technogenous load on land resources, and the uncontrolled use of chemicals with a low level of technological culture has resulted in an accelerated degradation of the soil and a decline in its fertility. In 25 years, the humus content in soils in Ukraine dropped from 3.5 to 3.2 percent, the area of acid soils increased by 30 percent, and that of saline and leached soils increased by 25 percent. Nearly 200 000 hectares of land are destroyed annually; the level of their recultivation is inadequate.
Land is being polluted with heavy metals and other components of industrial waste, and the residues of fertilizers and pesticides are accumulating in the soil at a high rate. According to our calculations, agriculture pollutes about 60 percent of land resources and approximately 45-48 percent of reservoirs. Its "contribution" to general the pollution of the atmosphere fluctuates at between 35 and 40 percent.
More than 4 million tonnes of fertilizers and 175 000 tonnes of chemical pesticides are used annually in agriculture. Of 170 pesticides used in Ukraine, 49 are particularly harmful as highly toxic, supercumulative and stable. The tendency towards a decrease in the use of chemicals and an increase in the use of biological plant protection has begun to appear in recent years. The Chernobyl accident resulted in the contamination by radionucleides of 4.7 million hectares of farmland, including 3.1 million hectares of arable land. Thus, the current stage of the development of agriculture in Ukraine is characterized by complications in the ecological situation: from 1961 to 1995 eroded arable land on farms of all categories increased by 31 percent (from 8.1 to 10.6 million hectares); humus content in soils decreased, other crisis phenomena were observed (swamping and souring of soils, over-concentration of the upper stratum of soils, contamination of the environment by
agrochemicals, harmful matters, etc.).
In accordance with the data on land use, in 1995 eroded (washed away) agricultural land in all categories of farms in Ukraine made up 13.3 million hectares (31.8 percent of their total square), including slightly eroded - 66.5 percent; and medium- and strongly eroded, 33.5 percent. Degraded land extended by 19.4 million hectares (46.2 percent of their total area), their main area being concentrated in the southern (41.7 percent), and northern and central Steppe (33.1 percent). Due to the lack of protection, 450 million tonnes of soils (16.6 t/ha of total eroded lands) are being lost in Ukraine annually because of water and wind erosion. According to our estimates, economic losses from the erosion of soils of all categories make up KRB 22.6 billion in accordance with the adduced expenditures, and KRB 2 billion in accordance with the value of the loss of conventional net profit. To overcome the harmful impact of erosive processes, now they master soils protective systems of
farming, which include contour-land-reclamation the organization of territory, complexes of anti-erosive measures, rational crop rotations, systems of fertilizer application, special soil processing technologies, and integrated plant protection from pests and diseases in all natural zones of Ukraine.
Agriculture and soil protection
The problems of rational utilization, protection from contamination, increasing productivity and the improvement of physio-chemical properties in soils is becoming more and more acute in Ukraine. The exhausting use of lands and the large-scale application of high-power agricultural machinery have had an adverse effect on the mechanical structure of soils, reducing humus content and soil fertility. The condition of agricultural land has deteriorated due to the low quality of land reclamation works. Of special concern is the contamination of agricultural lands with chemical compounds, technogenous materials, etc. This is the reason for the accumulation in soils of great amounts of toxic substances, which have a negative effect on the quality of plant growth and livestock farming. This problem has become much more urgent in recent years due to the increased influence of human activity on the soil covering, particularly due to large-scale land reclamation, the uncontrolled
application of mineral fertilizers, chemical agents, methods of pest, plant and animal diseases control, and increased physical loads on soils from agricultural machinery. It should be noted that soils in Ukraine are characterized by a high natural productivity, and it is extremely important to preserve these soils for future generations.
Within this context special stress needs to be placed on the issue of the governmental support of biological farming in Ukraine. It should be noted that at present the attitude towards the problem of biological farming in the country is rather reserved. While only five years ago some coordinated research in various aspects of biological agriculture was still conducted, now there is no such universal scientific programme for the solution of this problem. Moreover, this task in general is not regarded any more as a first priority problem. Yet almost 25 percent of the population in Ukraine is in need of ecologically pure food products due to the consequences of Chernobyl disaster.
Thus, it has now become necessary to create by Government resolution favorable conditions (including governmental subsidies) for farmers to produce ecologically clean produce. It is desirable that "biological" farmsteads should specialize in the production of vegetables, potatoes, buckwheat, and raw materials for the manufacture of baby food. A network of speciality stores should be established for the sale of biologically clean products.
The optimization of the ratio between crop- and livestock production is the most important condition for the development of agricultural production in Ukraine. A prerequisite for the establishment of a strong fodder base, which could ensure a year-long supply of biologically sound, nutrient-balanced and cheap fodder for the needs of livestock breeding, is the introduction of a sustainable system of agriculture. This system has acquired its greatest development in those farmsteads in Ukraine which, in order to protect the soil, used bean cultures and lupine in the production of fodder.
On the whole, there are very few "biological" farmsteads in Ukraine. First of all, this is connected with the fact that such mixed farmsteads, maintaining in their activity a balance between crop and livestock farming, do not have the appropriate governmental support.
In addition, a very serious obstacle the way to the balanced development of farmsteads is the absence of a stable market for trade and procurement-supply links. While farmsteads in the south of Ukraine specialize mainly in vegetable growing and have stable relations with processing enterprises, such relations still remain a problem in other regions of the country, particularly in the mountainous regions of Ukraine, with widely spread dairy and livestock-fattening farms. Private farmsteads much too often face problems with the sale of their products due to the shortage of mini-dairy processing or cheese-making companies, wool-processing enterprises, etc.
An analysis of scientific work carried out in 1992-1997 concerning the implementation of biological methods in farming in the activity of farmsteads, made it possible to find reserves for the sustainable development of these farmsteads in Ukraine.
1. In livestock breeding farms with a considerable ratio of eroded lands, it is expedient to keep reserve fields permanently under perennial grass, especially alfalfa. This will help to avoid expenses for annual soil tillage and grass planting, and without reducing the productivity of the land will ensure the use of the valuable agrotechnical, ecological and phytosanitary properties of perennial grass.
2. The use of reserve fields, of corn for green fodder and silage, and their location, as well as the location of other fields closer to the livestock breeding farms, will enable a reduction in expenses for the transportation of organic fertilizers and fodder containing a high level of moisture to be reduce by about 200 percent. Immediately adjacent to the farms, reserve corn fields released previously can be used for winter cultures and green fodder. This will create a green conveyor with minimal transport expenses.
3. For small grain and grain, and beet producing farmsteads, purchasing manure is an effective measure for increased soil productivity, and the use of straw for fertilizing will also help to save resources. In such case, the need for manure and mineral fertilizers to ensure the planned level of crops and the stabilization of soil fertility will be reduced correspondingly by 50 percent.
4. In larger farms with sufficient volumes of production of manure, high production intensive grain-tillage rotations should be provided on those soils located in the vicinity of livestock breeding farms for growing the most valuable profitable cultures. Taking into consideration a high saturation with tilled cultures of these crop rotation and compensation for sharply negative balance of humus, high doses of manure are applied (17-20 t/ha) - practically all organic fertilizers are produced in the farm. Under such conditions, along with the balanced volume of humus in soil, the optimal balance of nutrient matter is created, while the need for mineral fertilizers is essentially reduced.
5. It is necessary to apply agrotechnologies with a maximal use of biological nitrogen through both the balanced use of bean cultures in crop rotation, especially of perennial grass, and through the increased application of biopreparations for improving the nitrogen fixation and crop yield of grain cultures, for example by 3-5 centner/ha at minimal expenses.
Agriculture and water protection
Ukraine is among those European countries with the lowest water reserves. Potential local resources of surface and underground water total 60 cubic km, decreasing in recent years due to low rainfall to 37 cubic km, and on account of run-off from adjacent territories, 94 and 63 cubic km respectively. The specific index of water availability from local water resources in Ukraine is one of the lowest in the ex-USSR: about 1 000 cubic m per year per capita.
River flow is unevenly distributed over time and area. The Donetsk-Dnieper and southern regions, which account for nearly 60 percent of the population and where the most water-consuming sectors of the national economy are located, receive less than a third of the entire local run-off. A cascade of six large man-made water basins on the Dnieper river built between the 1950s and 1970s has created a reserve of water supply for the industrial centres of the Donbas and Kryvyy Rih regions and for the irrigation of large land masses in the Black Sea coast and Crimea areas. This, however, has also brought about enormous adverse consequences. Over 500 000 hectares of fertile land have been inundated and thus taken out of agricultural use. Moreover, the lands adjacent to the water basins (about 100 000 hectares) became underflooded. Besides, these basins are deteriorating by stagnation processes, the build-up of harmful substances, waterplants, and the deterioration of banks (a length
of 1 400 km of banks are in need of stabilization). The all-round chemicalization of agriculture in Ukraine has caused the most appreciable damage to the surface and underground resources and springs. A heightened content of nitrates, pesticides and herbicides is observed in practically all reservoirs, and many open reservoirs suffer from eutrophication. In other words, there are blue-green water-plants intensively developing in them.
The radiological contamination of ground water, which in its turn has an effect on the contamination of agricultural produce, has had a very negative effect on the general ecological situation in Ukraine. For this reason, more than 119 hectares of forage lands were withdrawn from agricultural use.
However, the results of scientific research show that chernozems as high quality soils have the highest "immunity" against radiation contamination in the sense that the produce grown on such soils has the lowest indices of such contamination regardless of the level of contamination in these zones of ground water or air.
Agriculture and air protection
A trend towards a decline in the quantities of the emission of pollutants into the atmosphere has emerged in recent years, but their quantities are still high enough to result in an increased level of air pollution in many regions of Ukraine.
Regretfully, a lack of forested areas and the operation of numerous metallurgical and thermal power plants in Ukraine have turned the country into one of those which burn up the planet's oxygen. From 1986 to 1994, over 100 million tonnes of harmful substances were emitted into the air by all sources of pollution. Major sources of such pollution are the power industry, metallurgy, coal, chemical and petroleum-chemical industries, as well as motor transport. The problem of the retention of gaseous and liquid substances remains rather serious: 29.9 percent of them from stationery pollution sources are retained, while the ratio of retention of solid pollutants is as high as 93.2 percent.
Emission of harmful substances into the atmosphere by stationery sources of contamination in agriculture in Ukraine, in 1996 made up 51 400 tonnes, which in comparison with 1995 decreased by 18 800 tonnes. On average, one stationary source in agriculture emits 17.7 tonnes of harmful substances into the atmosphere. The proportion of gaseous and solid substances in these emissions makes up 77 percent.
Agriculture and its impact on protection of landscape
The main condition for ensuring the sustainability of agriculture is the full compliance of agronature use with landscape-zonal peculiarities of nature organization. As a result of erosive processes and a lack of biofertilizers, contemporary agrocoenoses have a negative balance of energy, organic matter, some important elements of nutrition, and above all, of nitrogen and phosphor. This leads, as stated above, to the degradation of soils, and thus to the deterioration of agrolandscapes stability potential. On the whole, it should be noted that during recent years the qualitative parameters of practically all oils in Ukraine have become markedly worse. The deterioration in quality of the most valuable and widely distributed Ukrainian varieties of chernozems is of major concern. Investigations show that they are very susceptible to techno-anthropogenous impact.
So, as a result of protracted destruction, the humus content declines, its mobility increases, the content of waterproof aggregates decreases in the humus horizon, and the soil structure turns from a granular into a clotted-powdery texture.
Through incorrect agroecosphere use, 11 million tonnes of humus, 0.5 million tonnes of nitrogen, 0.4 million tonnes of phosphor and 0.7 million tonnes of potassium are taken away with soil annually. Each year ecological-economic losses from the erosion of soils make up 9.1 billion hryvnyas or US$2.3 billion.
The topicality of this problem became aggravated during recent years as a result of the increase of the negative impact of agroecosphere use on the ground surface, namely the large-scale introduction of sprinkling and dry land reclamation, the uncontrolled application of mineral fertilizers, the application of chemical means and methods in combating agricultural plant and animal pests and disease control, and increasing the physical loads of agricultural equipment on soils. The theoretical and practical essence of the ecologically optimal bioproductivity of agrolandscapes and the sustainable development of the entire agroecosphere consists, in our opinion, of four large blocks of problems: the cognition of the biochemical organization of agroecosphere; the regulation of anthropogenous loads on the basis of the ecological-agrogeochemical division of agricultural territories; the determination of maximum permissible levels of various pollutants; and the setting up of
geoinformation and expert-modeling systems for the management of bioproductivity. As the agroecosphere appears to be an essential (major) part of the biosphere, the preservation of its sustainability is equal to the preservation of the sustainability of the biosphere in general.
Thus, the sustainable development of agriculture can only be achieved on the basis of the theory of ecologically optimal bioproductivity, and on the basis of its practical application. Firstly, the optimization of crops cultures is based on the criteria that predicted ecological losses from the pollution of the environment permits the redistribution of subsidies which ensure stable profits in agricultural regions. Secondly, the natural biochemical cycles of various elements permit the selection of the most optimal regions for growing a particular type of crop. Thirdly, agricultural production on the basis of the parameters of ecologically optimal bioproductivity, which combines ecologically required yield with a minimization of negative ecological effects, preserves soil as the main natural resource of agrolandscapes.
With the aim of preventing soils from dehumification of soils soil-protective systems of farming, optimal crop rotation, etc have now been applied. To increase the balance of nitrogen in soils, thus ensuring their stability, biohumus is used as an ecologically safe fertilizer, generated by way of the bioconversion of manure and other organic waste by earthworms. Contour-land reclamation and the mosaic organization of the territory, as well as biologization which takes into consideration bioclimatic potential and soil-landscape factors, are the peculiarities of soil-preventive systems of farming in mountains.
In general, the optimization of agricultural land structure and the formation of highly-productive, ecologically stable agrolandscapes is more and more topical. For this reason the destruction of arable lands has declined to 50 percent, the proportion of meadows, hayfields and pastures has increased to 17-20 percent, forested areas to 20 percent and the of nature reserves have reached the world's average level (5 percent).
Agriculture and biodiversity
Determining the degree of protection necessary not only for the genofund, but also for the coenofund of the biosphere, stipulates the development of agroecosystem research, which makes provision for the inventory and valuation of agroecosystems in accordance with natural resources and the diversity of life in the system. Preservation and an efficient system of reproduction of biodiversity in agroecosystems is the pledge of achievement of ecological stability and high productivity.
Great harm to biodiversity and the ecological stability of the phytocoenoses in planting in Ukraine was caused by technogenous-intensive systems of agrarian production. The mass use of agrochemicals, high tonnage equipment and pesticides, and ignoring the close connections between the phytosphere, zoosphere and pedosphere led to a considerable deterioration in biodiversity and, as a result, to the appearance of a pronounced ecological disbalance and the reduction of agroecosystem productivity. The use of ecologically harmful agrochemicals has had a negative impact and a decrease in the biodiversity in the phytocoenoses of meadows (fields), and, correspondingly, on the deterioration of their stability and the quality of cultivated forage for livestock breeding and its produce.
In this aspect we should talk not only about ecological, but also about socio-economic loss. This became apparent in the all-round contamination of subsoil waters by stable residua of pesticides, heavy metals, and highly active fluorine plus an increase of toxicological danger from cultivated agricultural produce for the whole biota, and above all for human beings. Grasshoppers, butterflies, and bumblebees disappeared as a resdult of the phytocoenoses.
Effects of environmental pollution on agriculture
Radiation pollution, caused by the consequences of the Chenobyl accident, exposes agriculture and the population to a great danger. The main contributor to radiation in the nearest zone (Kyiv, Zhytomyr regions) is made by cesium; 134-137 isotopes; over 80 percent. Beyond the bound of the 30 kilometers zone, on the territory of "cesium spots", the contribution of these isotopes is close to 100 percent. General square of pollution of Ukraine by cesium-137 the levels higher than I ci/km^2, makes up approximately 37 000 km^2, including from five to 15 ci/km^2 - 1960 km^2, from 15 to 40 - 820 km^2, over 40 ci/sq.km^2 - 640 km^2 among the polluted territories; agricultural lands make up 3.5 million hectares, forests - 11 million hectares; 32 districts of six regions suffered from radiation to different extent. Average content of cesium - 137 in soils exceeds 5 ci/sq.km in 150 inhabited areas, in 22 of them it attains 15 ci/km^2.
Special concern is caused by the contamination of agricultural lands by chemical compounds, and technogenous substances from industry. As a result, toxic substances which have a negative impact on the quality of vegetable and animal produce accumulate in soil stratum. In many districts in Ukraine, the productivity of the land has been markedly reduced owing to the bad quality of sprinkling and dry land reclamation.
Sprinkling land irrigation has a negative impact on chernozems. It leads to consolidation of the humus horizon, the alkalization of water extract, and an increase in Ph value of 8-8.5, secondary already salinized stratum with gradual increase of toxic salts content, increase of extremely toxic soda content, secondary superficial salinization while watering with sewage, etc. As a result of industrial activity in Ukraine, there are about 12 million tonnes of mountain rocks and industrial waste accumulated on the ground surface, which occupied 100 000 hectares of lands lost by agriculture. A number of specific industrial establishments led not only to reduction of agricultural land areas, but also caused a loss of considerable areas of agricultural lands, and forests and the removal from the latter of arboreal resources from agricultural circulation. These are, first of all, the so-called protective zones of transport communications and of pipelines, and electricity
transmission lines of international significance.
All this has a negative effect on the level of ecological safety of agricultural products and, therefore, on the state of the Ukrainian population's. Health should be noted that this population is informed very little about the contamination of agricultural products due to the inefficient work of relevant governmental agencies. Thus, while the level of radiation contamination of agricultural products is regularly monitored by Sanitary-Epidemiological Stations, which have their branches at every food market, the level of contamination by chemical compounds and technogenous materials is rather insufficiently checked by governmental agencies. Only public ecological organizations work in this sphere.
THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIETY ON THE AGRICULTURAL ENVIRONMENT
At present, there is no integrated ecological policy at the national level in Ukraine, which would ensure the sustainability of agriculture. Some separate ecological measures as to the development of agriculture were unessential and, thus, inefficient. Only on 5 March 1998, by the Resolution of the Supreme Council of Ukraine No. 188, were the Main Directives of the state policy of Ukraine in the branch of environmental protection, natural resources use, and ensuring ecological security, confirmed. In these the ecological problems of agriculture were considered.
Institutional change within the environmental policy
After the declaration of Ukrainian independence, the Ministry of Environmental Protection was established, which, together with the Ministry of Agriculture, dealt with partial ecological problems in agriculture. In 1995, the Ministry of the Environmental Protection and Nuclear Security of Ukraine was established.
Environmental policy related to agriculture
A number of legislative regulations, which regulate safe nature use in agriculture have been adopted in Ukraine since 1991. These are as follows:
* Law "On the Environmental Protection" of June 25, 1991;
* Forest Code of Ukraine;
* Code of Ukraine on Mineral Resources;
* Water Code of Ukraine; and
* Land Code of Ukraine;
No. 785 provisions on the State Monitoring of the Environment; confirmed by the Resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine on 23 September 1993; No. 81 provisions on the Public Control in the Branch of Environmental Protection; Confirmed by the order of the Ministry of die Environmental Protection of 4 August 1994; Law of Ukraine: "On the Legal Regime of the Territory which Suffered from the Radioactive Pollution as a Result of the Chernobyl Accident" of 27 February 1991; Law of Ukraine "On Ecological Research" of 9 February 1995;
Law of Ukraine "On Payment for Land" of 19 September 1996; Law of Ukraine "On the Protection of Plants" of 1998; Decree of the President of Ukraine "On the Guidelines for the Development of the Agroindustrial Complex of Ukraine" of 29 April 1998. Unfortunately, these documents do not even mention the issue of ecology in agriculture, and say nothing about its sustainable development.
However, against a background of radical changes in land relations, the system of control over the ecologically safe and economically effective use and renovation of the top soil, has almost completely disappeared in the country. In fact, now the State does not have any influence upon the methods used in the utilization of land which is State, collective or private property. They have not, as yet, determined legislatively the responsibilities of owners, users and tenants of the plots of land as to how to temporarily set aside eroded and other degraded land in order to ensure its protection and the resumption of its productivity. The law "On Payment for Land" does not work in part of use of means which are received by the national and local budgets from payment of land tax, for land protection, preservation, and the resumption of soils' fruitfulness. Payers of land tax are still not informed as to what this tax is spent on.
In conformity with the resolutions No. 661of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine of 20^ August 1993; "On the Confirmation of the Provisions on Soils Monitoring" of 23 September 1993; No. 785; "On the Confirmation of the Provisions on the State Monitoring of the Environment", by the Decree of the President of Ukraine No. 1118/85 "On All-Embracing Agrochemical Passport System of Lands of Agricultural Destination" of 2 December 1995, and as a result of the realization of these works, a considerable amount of information has been stored. Nevertheless, the provision of scientific methodology, as well as the analysis of the results of the information obtained, and the creation of corresponding databases is still insufficient.
For the improvement of activities concerning soil monitoring, and their ecological state, and for the elaboration of standards, technical conditions, norms of agrochemical application, criteria for the evaluation of the ecological-agrochemical state of soils, generalization and analysis of the results obtained, the Ministries of the Agroindustrial Complex should organize a comprehensive system of the monitoring of the state of the environment and the productivity of the soil. For the fulfilment of the decree of the President of Ukraine (No. 34/96 of 17 February 1996) and the instructions of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine (No. 22-1633/2 of 19 August 1996) the State Committee on Land elaborated the draft of the National Programme of Land Protection for 1996-2010. But with current organization dispersed between institutions which are not able to implement the system, without a complex approach towards the solution of this complicated problem, it is not possible to realize
this programme. That is why for the elaboration of the scientific-methodical and practical-technological basis of protection, it is necessary to organize the Department of Soils Protection. The law on payment for land must be the financial basis of the Department. In conformity with this law, considerable funds have been received by the State on different levels.
The problems of financially ensuring the ecologization of agriculture in Ukraine today are very serious. In 1997, only 58.3 percent of the anti-epizootic measures were financed, 38.4 percent of the State programme of selection in planting, 49.3 percent of the State programme for selection in livestock breeding, 26.3 percent of pre-root improvement of lands, 27.8 percent of the replenishment of the Fund for support of farms, and 6 percent of the support of the production of livestock breeding produce of the annual amount put into the State budget.
Though in general the existing legislative basis has already created a comparatively favorable legal field for the activization of the ecologization of agrarian policy, it can not be considered to be perfect and reliable enough. In addition to the laws concerning agrarian policy which are currently in force, it is extremely important to introduce amendments into the Land Code of Ukraine which would accelerate a solution for environmental problems on an up-to-date basis.
National measures
In conformity with the Main Directives of Ukrainian state policy in the branch of environmental protection, natural resources use and the ensuring of ecological security (1998), the following is stipulated:
* Carrying out of those requirements concerning ecological security in the system of agricultural land use;
* ensuring a broadened resumption of the productivity of soils by means of the formation and realization of a system of soil and nature protection measures; ensuring the ecologically sound use of pesticides and agrochemicals; the formation of a mechanism for the economical, administrative and criminal responsibility of those who violate ecological regulations;
* and the elaboration of nature protection measures on the basis of the requirements of international legislation and the intensification of their role in agriculture.
The following is necessary for the achievement of these goals:
* to carry out a complex ecological-economic evaluation (regional) of the territory of Ukraine with the marking out in its structure of the nature-protecting complexes, including the territories and objects of the natural-reserve fund, lands for the highly intensive conduct of agricultural production; to ensure the fulfilment of the National Programme of Land Protection for the period up to 2010; to prepare and to implement the branch schemes for the preservation and resumption of land, water, biological namely, fish and forest mineral sources, sources of raw materials and other natural resources;
* to make water-protecting zones along the banks of rivers, storage-ponds, lakes and pools, to purify them from ooze, to form highly efficient hydrological systems;
* to ensure an active transition to biological methods of farming and the production of ecologically pure produce;
* to improve the localization of agricultural production with the aim of the most rational use of local natural conditions and resources.
The strengthening of state support for domestic agricultural production is expected in the following directions:
* use of the World Bank's loan for the restructuring of agriculture and its ecologization;
* reconsideration of the customs tariffs for the importation of some kinds of agricultural produce and foodstuffs;
* changes in the pricing policy, orientating it towards the achievement of parity in commodity exchange, and the realization of a free price formation together with the State regulation of prices for enterprise-monopolist producers;
* relaxation of taxation, which will make it possible to cut agricultural production costs and improve its competitiveness.
However, proceeding from an investigation in the problem of ensuring sustainability in agriculture, and proceeding from the realities of the financial and economic crisis in Ukraine, in our opinion the following major steps should be envisaged:
1. To reduce the area of arable land at the first stage through strongly eroded and degraded lands, which will enable a concentration the resources of more fertile lands and to obtain a maximal profit from their use.
2. To adjust the structure of cultivated areas and areas of crop rotation towards an increase in bean cultures, grain crops, and especially perennial grass, and, on the other hand, towards a reduction of tilled areas, especially under sugar beets. Yet in each particular case, this matter should be resolved depending on soil-ecological and socioeconomic factors.
3. To use more effective technologies for the utilization of waste from crop and livestock farming, from other non-traditional organic fertilizers, including refuse from communal services, grain straw, green manure crop, and achieving the application of organic fertilizers by 8-10 tonnes per one hectare of arable land, the equivalent of 100-120 kg/ha NPK.
4. To implement the application of bacterial preparations facilitating nitrogen fixation and phosphorus mobilization to 5-6 million hectares. This will ensure saving up to 10-20 kg/ha of mineral fertilizers.
5. To reduce power consumption, to prevent erosion processes, and in order to increase the coefficient of usage of precipitation, it is necessary to shift to soil-conservation minimal tillage with surface mulching using plant remains and a periodical deep aeration in crop rotation.
6. To ensure through the legislative procedure the protection of soil from water and wind erosion - one of the main factors of degradation of soil and the loss of nutrient materials. For this purpose, it is necessary to adopt the law "On the Protection of Soil" as a necessary condition for providing the population of the country with food products and for the establishment of competitive sustainable agriculture.
Importance of party, national environmental associations and organization for environmental policy
In 1991, the Association "Zeienyy Svit" was established. In 1994, the Green Party was established, which has a considerable number of representatives in the Supreme Council. In addition, the agrarian sections of Narodnyy Rukh and other parties of Center-Right orientation, and also the Peasant Party of Ukraine, are dealing partially with problems concerning the improvement of the ecological state of agriculture.
The Ukrainian Association for the Protection of Plants and the State Committee for the Protection of the Rights of Consumers were established in Ukraine in 1996. These agencies control the level of ecological safety of agricultural and imported products. The Commission of Biosafety under the Ministry of Science set up in 1997, is engaged in providing scientific support for the biosafety of the population.
But, for the time being, in Ukraine there are no organizations which could realize purposefully the concept of sustainable development in the sphere of agriculture.
CONCLUSIONS
Both objective and subjective factors cause a lack of modern sustainable development in agriculture, in Ukraine. The lack of norms and legislative acts with regards to the formation of the agricultural land market and the development of market relations, as well as the breaking of the ecological balance due to incorrect managing of the economy, brings about an urgent need for improvement and for studying the foreign experience of ensuring sustainability and its introduction in Ukrainian agriculture.
REFERENCES
Danylyshyn, B.M. 1997. Ecological and economical problems of ensuring of sustainable development of productive forces studies of Ukraine (in agrarian-industrial complex' case), Kyiv.
Hryniv, L. 1997. Methodological problems of sustainable development of the State socio-ecosystem, Lviv.
Hryniv, L. 1998. Structure, entropy and development of regional socio-ecosystems, Republican Scientific Journal "Regional Economy", No. II.
Hryniv, L. 1998. Entropy of the ecological-economical processes, Lviv
Tarariko, A. 1994. New approaches for agro-ecosystems optimization analysis of Landscape Dynamics, pp. 137-144, Kyiv.
UAAN. 1991. Methods recommendation, Prediction of possible losses of soil due to wind erosion in the steppe zone of Ukraine, p. 82, Kharkiv.
UAAN. 1991b. Methods recommendations for conducting biological agriculture, p.73, Kyiv.
UAAN. 1994. Methods of complete soil-agrochemical monitoring of farmlands of Ukraine (Edited by Academicians of UAAN O.O. Sozinov and B.S. Prister), p. 159, MSGP &, Ukragrokhim, Kyiv.
***. 1991-1995. Reports of the Ministry of Statistics of Ukraine, Kyiv.
***. 1991-1998. Registers of the Supreme Council of Ukraine, Kyiv.
***. 1992. Growing ecologically pure crops (edited by V.F. Sayko, M.S. Komiychuk, E.G.Dehodyuk), p. 309, Kyiv.
***. 1992. Ukrainian National Report Conference on Environment and Development, Brazil-92. Kyiv.
***. 1995-1998. Bulletin of Agrarian Science, Kyiv.
***. 1995-1998. Economy of Ukraine, Kyiv.
***. 1996. Agrarian Legislation of Ukraine, Kyiv, Yurinkom.
***. 1998. Ecological and Land Law of Ukraine, Kyiv, Yurinkom.
***. 1998. Main Directive of the state policy of Ukraine in the branch of environmental protection, natural resources use and ensuring of ecological security, Kyiv.
ANNEX
Table 1: Structure and number of farms by the use of land (Ukraine,1995)
Type of Farm Number of farms Ratio % Arable land ha per farm Ratio %
Collective farms 13 810 0.1 1 980 88.2
Private farms 6 500 0.4 7.62 1.6
Private plots 10 700 000 67.0 0.26 8.9
Household vegetable gardens 2 700 000 16.9 0.09 0.7
Household orchards 15 978 810 15.6 0.07 0.6
Total 100.0 1.94 100.0
Source: Report of the Ministry of Statistics of Ukraine. Kyiv, 1995.
Table 2: Land use in agriculture of Ukraine, hectare/ton conventional grain units *.
Years 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
All forms of farming 0.376 0.358 0.312 0.373 0.394
Household plots 0.377 0.323 0.286 0.357 0.382
Farmsteads 0.521 0.562 0.425 0.571 0.620
Source: according to Reports of the Ministry of Statistics of Ukraine. Kyiv, 1991-1995.
Table 3: Ratio of Agriculture produce by categories of Farms, %
Farm types
years
Agricultural land In gross output
Total Incl.
Crop Farming Livestock Farming
1. Public Farms 
2. Individual private
Farms
3. Farmsteads 
Source: according to Reports of the Ministry of Statistics of Ukraine. Kyiv, 1991-1997.
Figure 1: Qualitative description of agricultural lands
Source: Ukrainian National Report. Conference on Environment and Development, Brazil-92.Kyiv "Chas", 1992.
Figure 2: Disturbed, exhausted lands and their recultivation
Source: Ukrainian National Report. Conference on Environment and Development, Brazil-92.Kyiv "Chas", 1992.
<title>REU Technical Series - 61. CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPEAN SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE NETWORK: first workshop - </title>
<section>1</section>
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
1. Mr Alexi Alexiev
Agricultural University
Mendeleev str. 12
Plovdiv 4000 Bulgaria
Tel.: 359-32-612-4561
Fax : 359-32-633-157
Email: a.alexiev@au-plovdiv.bg
2. Ms Nelly Bentcheva
Agricultural University
Mendeleev str. 12
Plovdiv 4001 Bulgaria
Tel: 359-32-612-4557
Fax: 359-32-265-920
Email: nellyb@au-plovdiv.bg
3. Mr Stoytcho Karov
Agricultural University of Plovdiv, Agroecological Centre
Mendeleev str. 12
Plovdiv 4000 Bulgaria
Tel: 359-32-265-909
Fax: 359-32-265-909
Email: skarov@au-plovdiv.bg
4. Ms Zdenka Berak
Ministry of Agriuclture and Forestry
Ulica grada Vukovara 78
Zagreb, Croatia
Tel: 385-1-610-6655
Fax: 385-1-610-9202
Email: zberak@mps.hr
5. Ms Ramona Franic
Institute of Agricultural Economics
Svetosimunska str. 5
Zagreb 10000 Croatia
Tel: 385-1-239-3757
Email: ramonaf@agr.hr
6. Mr Zoran Grgic
Institute of Agricultural Economics
Svetosimunska str. 5
Zagreb 10000 Croatia
Tel: 385-1-239-3760
Fax: 385-1-239-3746
Email: zgrgic@agr.hr
7. Mr Tomas Ratinger
VUZE
Manesova 75
Prague 12058 Czech Republic
Tel: 42-2-2200-0410
Email: ratinger@agrec.cz
8. Ms Ulle Roosmaa
Estonian Agriucltural Universtiy
Kreutzwaldi 64
Tartu 51014 Estonia
Tel: 372-7-466-140
Fax: 372-7-466-120
Email: roosmaa@eau.ee
9. Ms Beate Hotthusen
Humboldt University of Berlin
Luisen str. 56
Berlin 10099 Germany
Tel: 49-30-2093-6229
Fax: 49-30-2093-6497
Email: beate.holthusen@rz.hu-berlin.de
10. Ms Renate Judis
Humboldt University of Berlin
Luisen str. 56
Berlin 10099 Germany
Tel: 49-30-2093-6145
Fax: 49-30-2093-6497
Email: renate.judis@rz.hu-berlin.de
11. Mr Konrad Hagedorn
Humboldt University of Berlin
Luisen str. 56
Berlin 10099 Germany
Tel: 49 30 2093 6305
Fax: 49-30-2093-6497
Email: k.hagedorn@rz.hu-berlin.de
12. Ms Antonia Luetteken
Humboldt University of Berlin
Luisen str. 56
Berlin 10099 Germany
Tel: 49 30 2093-6231
Fax: 49-30-2093-6498
Email: a.luetteken@rz.hu-berlin.de
13. Mr Ferenc Laczo
Center for Environmental Studies
Angyal u. 15/B
Budapest 1094 Hungary
Tel: 36-1-216-3077
Fax: 36-1-216-0911
Email: laczo@ktk-ces.hu
14. Ms Dorina Minoiu
FAO/SEUR
Benczur utca 34
Budapest 1068 Hungary
Tel: 36-1-461-2023
Fax: 36-1-351-7029
Email: dorina.minoiu@fao.org
15. Ms Melinda Nerath
Ministry of Environemnt, National Authority for Nature Conservation
Kolto utca 21
Budapest 1121 Hungary
Tel: 36-1-355-145, 395-2605/125
Fax: 36-1-395-8880
Email: nerath.melinda@ktmdom2.ktm.hu
16. Mr Gabor Szabo
Pannon Agricultural University
Guba S. u. 40
Kaposvar 7400 Hungary
Tel: 36-82-319-8644
Tel: 36-82-316-705
Email: szabogab@atk.kaposvar.pate.hu
17. Mr Stjepan Tanic
FAO/SEUR
Benczur utca 34
Budapest 1068 Hungary
Tel: 36-461-2011
Fax: 36-351-7029
Email: stjepan.tanic@fao.org
18. Mr Geza Varga
Gaia Foundation
Fo utca
Galgaheviz Hungary
Tel: 36-30-921-9952
Fax: 36-28-460-014
19. Mr Laszlo Podmanicky
Gödöll University of Agricultural Sciences
Pater K. u. 1
Godollo H-2103 Hungary
Tel: 36 28 410 131
Fax: 36 28 415 383
Email: podma@svr-sun.ktg.gau.hu
20. Mr Jozsef Angyjan
Gödöll University of Agricultural Sciences
Pater K. u. 1
Godollo H-2104 Hungary
Tel: 36 28 410 131
Fax: 36 28 415 383
21. Mr Jose Maria Caballero
FAO
Via Delle Terme di Caracalla
Rome 1000 Italy
Tel: 39-06-570-55045
Fax: 39-06-570-55107
Email: josemaria.caballero@fao.org
22. Mr Peter Busmanis
Latvian University of Agriculture
Liela lela 2
Jeglava LV-3001 Latvia
Tel: 371-30-22464
Fax: 371-30-27238
Email: peterbus@cs.llu.lv
23. Mr Alvydas Balezentis
Lithuanian Insitute of Agrarian Economics
V. Kudirkos 18
Vilnius LT-2600 Lithuania
Tel: 370-2-614-526
Fax: 370-2-614-524
Email: laei@post.omnitel.net
24. Mr Darko Znaor
ETC
P.O. Box 64
Leusden 3830 AB Netherlands
Tel: 313-34-943-086
Fax: 313-34-940-791
Fax: darko.znaor@etcnl.nl
25. Mr Zbigniew Karaczun
Warsaw Agriculture University
Nowoursynowika 166
Warsaw, Poland
Tel: 48-22-843-9041 ext. 1287
Fax: 48-22-847-16215
Email: karaczun@alpha.sggw.waw.pl
26. Ms Luiza Toma
Institute for Agricultural Economics
Calea 13 Septembrie no. 13 Sector 5
Bucharest, Romania
Tel: 40-41-00776
Fax: 40-41-00776
Email: ltoma@ines.ro
27. Ms Florica Bordanc
Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Rural Development Division
Carol I Avenue 24 - Sector 3
Bucharest, Romania
Tel: 40 1 311 03 78
Fax: 40 1 311 03 78
Email: flavius@newsys.ro
28. Ms Magdalena Lacko-Bartosova
Slovak Agricultural University
Tr. A. Hlinlew 2
Nitra 94976 Slovak Republic
Tel: 421-87-601-205
Fax: 421-87-411-451
Email: bartosov@afnet.uniag.sk
29. Mr Pavol Stehlo
Research Institute for Agriuclture and Food Economics
Cesta pd Zlatym vrehom
Nitra 94901 Slovak Republic
Tel: 421-87-512-180
Fax: 421-87-512-180
Email: vuepp1@uniag.sk
30. Ms Lidia Hrynev
Lviv State University
18 Svobody avenue
Lviv, Ukraine
Tel: 380-322-721-070, 342-753
Fax: 380-322-744-146, 223-400
Email: lshryn@ext.franko.lviv.ua
