<title>Empres Transboundary Animal Diseases Bulletin No. 11</title>
<section>1</section>
RIFT VALLEY FEVER
PREDICTING RIFT VALLEY FEVER
NASA scientists use satellite images to help track a disease and keep it under surveillance (NASA Press Release 99-81).
Using weather satellites to spot the early signs of an El Niño, scientists may be able to help save East Africans and their livestock from Rift Valley fever, a mosquito-borne disease that can be fatal to humans and animals. NASA and United States Department of Defense researchers have determined that rising sea-surface temperatures in the western equatorial Indian Ocean, combined with an El Niño in the Pacific, can lead to abnormally heavy rains in East Africa. These rains create a favourable habitat for the mosquitoes that carry the Rift Valley fever virus, spreading it to humans and animals. Researchers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the Department of Defense-Global Disease Infections System, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Washington, DC, studied nearly five decades of data to produce these findings.
According to their report in the 16 July issue of Science, satellite data can help predict Rift Valley fever outbreaks up to six months in advance.
According to Anyamba, the decisive factor is the warming of the Indian Ocean along with the Pacific, which has occurred in two out of five El Niños over the last 17 years. "When the western equatorial Indian Ocean is similar to the eastern Pacific Ocean in sea-surface temperature, there is likely to be a large-scale outbreak of Rift Valley fever following heavy rainfall over large areas of East Africa," he said. "What is interesting here is that satellite data can provide advance warning of conditions suitable for Rift Valley fever outbreaks and then identify the actual areas affected," said Compton Tucker, a Goddard biologist who has used satellite data to study vegetation in Africa for more than 20 years. Satellites provide synchronous measurements of ocean temperature and vegetation conditions. The close relationship between ocean temperature, rainfall and land vegetation helps scientists determine which areas received the most rain and are greener than normal, making
them likely habitats for the mosquitoes that carry the Rift Valley fever virus. This virus is passed into the eggs of Aedes mosquitoes. The mosquitoes lay their eggs in moist soil when floodwaters recede. The young insects hatch when the area is reflooded and feed on local livestock. A second kind of mosquito, the genus Culex, then causes the large outbreaks by contracting the virus from infected livestock and spreading it rapidly. Culex mosquitoes are only prevalent when there are excessive rains. Heavy rains typically hit the area over eastern Africa when both oceans are warmer than normal. The virus causes death in livestock populations and produces influenza-like symptoms that can be fatal to humans. Linthicum suggests that insecticides placed into the soil months before the mosquito season will stop production of Aedes mosquitoes. "If you know when the outbreak is going to happen, you can treat areas near domestic animals and human populations," he said. According to
Linthicum, there are safe ways to treat the soil to prevent the mosquitoes from hatching. There are also vaccines for livestock.
NASA's research into the El Niño phenomenon and the subsequent study of Rift Valley fever are part of the NASA Earth Science Enterprise, Washington, DC, which is dedicated to the long-term study of how human-induced and natural changes affect the global environmental system. Scientists first successfully predicted El Niño from satellite data in 1997 and helped save the United States Government billions of dollars by giving officials advance warning of the potential for severe weather.
What is the El Niño Southern Oscillation?
The El Niño Southern Oscillation is the result of a cyclic warming and cooling of the surface ocean of the central and eastern Pacific. This region of the ocean is normally colder than its equatorial location would suggest, mainly owing to the influence of the northeasterly trade winds, a cold ocean current flowing up the coast of Chile and the upwelling of cold deep water off the coast of Peru.
At times, the influence of these cold water sources wanes, causing the surface of the eastern and central Pacific to warm up under the tropical sun - this is an EL NIÑO event. This results in heavy rainfall in South America, but severe droughts in eastern Australia. The more intense the El Niño, the more intense and extensive the Australian droughts.
At other times, the injection of cold water becomes more intense than usual, causing the surface of the eastern Pacific to cool - this is a LA NIÑA event. This results in droughts in South America and heavy rainfall, even floods, in eastern Australia. In this way, Australia experiences its characteristic cycle of droughts and floods - all caused by the El Niño/La Niña cycle described above.
Why are "El Niño" and "La Niña" so named?
"El Niño" is named after a Peruvian Christmas festival where the warming of the waters off Peru is said to occur near the birthday of "The Boy" (El Niño), or the Christ child. Meteorologists thus named the phenomenon the "El Niño Southern Oscillation", or ENSO for short. The reverse phenomenon, the cooling of the eastern Pacific waters, was at first called "Anti-El Niño", until it was realized that this literally meant the Anti-Christ! To avoid this unfortunate connotation, it was renamed "La Niña" (or "The Girl").
RIFT VALLEY FEVER IN EASTERN AFRICA CHIEF VETERINARY OFFICERS (CVOS) WORKSHOP TCP/RAF/8821
Under project TCP/RAF/8821 (Emergency analysis and control of Rift Valley fever and other vector-borne diseases in eastern Africa), a workshop gathering CVOs of Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, the Sudan, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda was held in Kampala from 30 August to 3 September 1999.
It provided a most valuable opportunity to gauge the current status of transboundary animal diseases (TADs), especially those which are flood-related. The CVOs participated enthusiastically in presenting and discussing the many problems that beset them, the progress made in resolving them and future challenges. They described the serious weaknesses, which they are seeking to rectify, in TAD control in the region and in preparedness for animal disease emergencies. In common with many meetings concerning the control of transboundary animal diseases in developing countries, the main preoccupations were: insufficient recognition of the major contribution that livestock makes to national economies, food security and the welfare of rural communities, and the severe impact that transboundary animal diseases have on them; and the attrition of central veterinary executive authorities by structural adjustment programmes which impose unqualified decentralization of veterinary services.
This is particularly acute in eastern Africa at present. The CVOs endorsed the desirability and inevitability of the restructuring process, involving decentralization and privatization of veterinary services. However, they stressed the need to differentiate between clinical service delivery with related activities, which are appropriate for privatization and decentralization, and the statutory responsibilities of national veterinary services, including the surveillance and control of transboundary animal diseases and disease emergencies, which are essential core national veterinary service functions, as is practised in industrialized countries. They expressed their grave concern that the statutory/regulatory element, and especially the surveillance and progressive control of TADs, has not been appropriately addressed in national policies and some national and regional projects that are being implemented by international agencies and donors.
FAO was requested to take the lead in bringing these concerns to the attention of the World Bank, regional development banks and other international agencies involved in livestock development, by convening a specific meeting for this purpose and by employing the services of FAO country representatives. In relation to animal disease emergencies, CVOs recommended that national governments should incorporate such eventualities in their national disaster planning and national veterinary services should undertake animal disease emergency preparedness planning as a core function. National veterinary services were recommended to develop the disciplines of risk analysis and economic appraisal to demonstrate the importance to national economies of livestock and transboundary animal diseases. FAO was requested to provide support through the provision of guidelines and training in these disciplines.
The International Bureau for Animal Resources (IBAR) of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and FAO were requested to assist in establishing and implementing an Eastern African Commission for the Control of Transboundary Animal Diseases to assist in developing harmonized regional policies, expertise and infrastructure and in the progressive control of transboundary animal diseases. With regard to Rift Valley fever (RVF), national governments were advised to strengthen national and regional capacity for its diagnosis, surveillance and control, including the establishment of a regional early warning system. The importance of support from FAO and donors was stressed.
<section>2</section>
FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE
FMD IN PANAY ISLAND, THE PHILIPPINES
(Text of an e-mail received by the International Office of Epizootics (OIE) on 17 September 1999 from Dr Teodoro A. Abilay, Director, Bureau of Animal Industry, Department of Agriculture, Quezon City, the Philippines)
1. On 6 September 1999, the National Foot-and-Mouth Disease (FMD) Task Force received a long-distance call from the regional diagnostic veterinarian of Western Visayas reporting a suspected case of FMD in a backyard farm in Iloilo City. On the same day, the FMD Task Force immediately sent a veterinarian to Iloilo City. The affected pigs presented typical FMD lesions. Active surveillance was immediately conducted and seven of the 11 pigs in the holding pen at the Iloilo City abattoir were found to be affected.
All these animals were immediately condemned and incinerated. An all-in all-out policy was then imposed at the abattoir to prevent healthy animals from incubating the disease. All animals brought to the abattoir must be slaughtered at once. No animals are allowed within the premises between 11 p.m. and 4 a.m. (i.e. after slaughtering hours). The premises are thoroughly disinfected on a daily basis.
2. To date, two backyard farms (14 animals), one stockyard (37 animals affected) and one commercial farm (140 sows) have been confirmed as affected. The distance between the affected backyard farms and the affected commercial farm is approximately 30 km. Initial investigations show that the main factor of disease transmission is movement of affected or incubating pigs. Infection at the commercial farm was traced to a breeding boar that was bought from an agent who kept the animal at the stockyard before taking it to the farm.
3. Epithelial samples examined at the laboratory revealed FMD type O virus strain. Samples are being sent to the FAO/OIE World Reference Laboratory for FMD (Pirbright, United Kingdom) for subtype identification. So far, the virus seems to be similar to the porcinophilic type virus circulating in Luzon. To date, no cases have been reported in other species.
4. Control measures have been set up. The whole island of Panay is under quarantine. Quarantine measures have been imposed within the island. Checkpoints have been set up between the affected province and the non-affected provinces. Vaccination will start within one week. This was not introduced last week since we were considering imposing a stamping-out policy but, because of the number of animals affected, we would be unable to provide compensation for all the condemned animals. The policy of condemning animals will be imposed on all animals illegally moved and found to be affected or suspected of incubating the disease. No compensation will be paid to the owners.
5. A meeting of the Provincial Veterinarians in Panay Island (Iloilo, Capiz, Antique and Aklan), the Department of Agriculture regional office and the livestock producers' association was held on 8 September 1999. An action plan has been formulated to contain the spread of the disease. All islands in Visayas and Mindanao have been informed about this outbreak.
<section>3</section>
AFRICAN SWINE FEVER (ASF)
ASF IN BOTSWANA
The initial detection of this outbreak was made on 4 June 1999 with an estimated date of first infection being 31 May 1999.
Diagnosis. Pigs were dying in large numbers, showing inappetence, recumbency and nervous signs.
Epidemiology. The origin of the infection seemed to be related to pigs that had broken through the fence and mixed with warthogs. There is no adjacent pig farm.
The control measures consist mainly in the restriction of the movement of pigs into and out of the affected property.
<section>4</section>
BLUETONGUE
BLUETONGUE EMERGENCY IN BULGARIA, TURKEY AND GREECE
The initial action in Bulgaria was efficiently coordinated by the National Veterinary Services, in cooperation with FAO (AGAH including the European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease), the European Union (EU), OIE and IAH. The first coordinating meeting with the participation of veterinary officers from Bulgaria, Greece, OIE and IAH took place in Burgas on 4 August 1999. The FAO mission verified the situation immediately (5-6 August 1999). The EU declared their immediate availability for supporting the preliminary consultancy missions (entomology), the cost of reference diagnosis, the procurement of disinfectants, insecticides and spray equipment. FAO is finalizing the preparation of an emergency Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) project, "Emergency Control of Transboundary Diseases of Livestock in Southern and Eastern Europe", to cover bluetongue and other transboundary animal diseases and to include Balkan and southern European countries. The issue
related to bluetongue and other priority infectious diseases of livestock and poultry in the region will be addressed by the First Balkan Conference of Microbiology (Microbiologia Balkanica 1999), Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 5-9 October 1999, with the participation of FAO/AGAH speakers.
<section>5</section>
RINDERPEST
FOOD PRIZE FOR CATTLE SAVIOUR (EXTRACT FROM BBC NEWS)
The World Food Prize - often described as the Nobel prize for food research - has been awarded to a scientist whose work has helped save farmers worldwide from starvation and economic ruin. British veterinary researcher Walter Plowright developed a vaccine against rinderpest, the most lethal of cattle diseases.
Rinderpest is highly infectious and is spread by direct contact and by drinking-water that has been infected by the dung of sick animals. Infected cattle develop a high fever; red patches with discharge from around the eyes, nose and mouth; frothy saliva from the mouth; constipation followed by diarrhoea. It takes just a few days for a sick animal to die. An outbreak of this viral disease can wipe out whole herds.
An epidemic in the 1890s killed 80 to 90 percent of all cattle in sub-Saharan Africa. More recently, another rinderpest outbreak that raged across much of Africa in 1982-84 is estimated to have cost at least US$500 million.
Animal and human welfare
Thanks to Plowright's work, this disease is now largely under control and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) is aiming to eradicate it entirely by 2010.
Dr Plowright began his work on rinderpest in Kenya in the 1950s and his achievement was to produce a vaccine that was cheap, effective and could survive in the tropical conditions where rinderpest was rife. The vaccine has been so successful that rinderpest is now confined to isolated pockets in sub-Saharan Africa, parts of Pakistan and the Near East. But FAO is confident that, with the help of the Plowright vaccine, it will be the first animal disease to be wiped off the face of our planet.
The World Food Prize was first awarded in 1987 and recognizes people who have advanced human development by improving the quality, quantity or availability of food in the world. Past winners of the US$250 000 prize have included agriculturists and financiers, but this is the first time someone working in veterinary science has been honoured, thus recognizing the importance of animal health to human welfare.
PRESENTATION OF THE 1999 WORLD FOOD PRIZE LAUREATE
Walter Plowright, DVS, FRCVS, FRS, CMG
It is said that humankind is the most destructive species the earth has ever known. True or not, it is a characterization that is perhaps better reserved for a notorious animal virus called rinderpest. Causing havoc since the time of the Roman Empire, rinderpest has destroyed countless millions of cattle, caused staggering economic losses, and has contributed to famine, social unrest and even war. Also known as cattle plague, just one outbreak of rinderpest during the 1980s in Nigeria was responsible for losses of more than US$2 billion. Add thousands of recorded outbreaks since AD 375 and the scale of devastation wrought by rinderpest becomes unimaginable.
But with the dawn of a new millennium, the scourge of rinderpest may finally be banished by its global eradication. This year's winner of the prestigious World Food Prize has spent many years of his professional life pursuing what has eluded researchers for more than 1 000 years, a universal vaccine to rid the world of rinderpest. Not only has this man succeeded where many failed, but his effective, safe and affordable vaccine has made possible the elimination of rinderpest from many regions of the developing world - particularly in Africa and Asia. His research has provided a practical means to remove a menace dating back 16 centuries. And for this incalculable contribution to world food security, Dr Walter Plowright, 76, has been named the 1999 recipient of the World Food Prize.
The economical, technical and humanitarian benefits derived from just under 40 years of use of the Plowright vaccine are immense. It has proved to be of extraordinary significance in ensuring the supply of high-protein food to poorer nations in Africa and Asia. The financial benefits of rinderpest control can be measured in terms of the value of additional production of milk, meat and hides as a result of reduced mortality in cattle. FAO estimates that the additional production in India alone from 1965 to 1998 amounted to US$289 billion. Corresponding estimates for Africa during the same period amounted to US$47 billion; and these are just two major examples. Billions of dollars have no doubt also been generated in other countries, such as Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran and Turkey. The protection of cattle in sub-Saharan Africa, the Near East and Asia has brought vital security, leading to the following benefits:
- Preservation of both food and income streams for hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of pastoral people and small farmers.
- Avoidance of famine caused by catastrophic cattle losses in rinderpest epidemics.
- Reduced sociopolitical upheaval resulting from impoverishment of prime food resources.
Sixteen centuries of devastation
More than 1 500 years ago rinderpest emerged to take its toll on humankind's domesticated animals. It is the only animal disease credited with changing the course of history. A fragile virus that is spread by contact and nearly always fatal to cattle and hoofed animals, rinderpest was first recognized as a distinct plague (the cattle plague) in AD 376-386.
During the following centuries, rinderpest ravaged livestock populations in Europe and Asia, occurring as a by-product of every major military campaign with extensive cattle movements. The disease brought disaster and famine that accompanied the fall of the Roman Empire, the conquest of Christian Europe by Charlemagne, the French Revolution, the impoverishment of Russia and the colonization of Africa. In the eighteenth century, 200 million cattle were killed in Western Europe alone. This devastation was one of the major factors leading to the founding of veterinary science - with the establishment of the first Veterinary School in Lyons, France, in 1762.
The disease was spread by the expansion of international cattle trade in the nineteenth century, by sea as well as by land. Hardly a continent or country has not been affected by rinderpest. While only one outbreak has been recorded in North and South America (in the 1920s), other areas of the world have been much more severely affected.
One particularly severe outbreak began in northeastern Africa in 1887 in what would later become Plowright's area of operation. The disease is said to have entered Africa at the Red Sea port of Massawa, spreading west to the Atlantic and south to the Cape. It is estimated that more than 90 percent of the cattle and game animals, particularly buffaloes, dedu, eland and wildswine, died of the disease. Pastoral tribes were devastated and those such as the Masai were so weakened as to change the balance of power for ever. In Europe and elsewhere, it became clear that livestock production and trade could only be safeguarded by controlling rinderpest. To this end, the International Office of Epizootics (OIE) was established in Paris in 1924, and FAO, which was established in 1945, also treated rinderpest as an initial priority in animal disease control.
Journey to Africa
Walter Plowright was born in 1923 in Lincolnshire on the east coast of England. His family were small farmers; his parents had five children and he was the second of three sons. He progressed through local schools, state and grammar, where he formed the ambition to become a veterinarian rather than remain on the farm. His father eventually accepted the break with tradition and he entered the Royal Veterinary College in London at the age of 17 in 1940.
After graduating in 1944, Plowright was commissioned in the Royal Army Veterinary Corps towards the end of the Second World War. His wartime postings sent him in 1945 to Kenya, a country for which he formed a deep affection. In 1948 he began two years as a junior lecturer at the Royal Veterinary College, London, but then decided to enter the Colonial Veterinary Service in Africa. He was posted to Kenya as a pathologist where he began to familiarize himself with a multiplicity of animal diseases, including rinderpest. From Kenya, Plowright went to Nigeria for a tour of 20 months before returning to the Muguga Laboratory of the East African Veterinary Research Organization, where he worked for more than 15 years. The development of cell-culture vaccine and its widespread application to field use all took place in the Muguga Laboratory, primarily in the years 1956 to 1970. While the World Food Prize acknowledges Plowright's work on rinderpest, he also made a significant
contribution to research on a number of other animal diseases of viral origin. These included African swine fever, malignant catarrhal fever, other rinderpest-like diseases, ungulate poxviruses and herpesviruses.
THE WORLD FOOD PRIZE
A prize for the world
The World Food Prize is the foremost international award recognizing - regardless of race, religion, nationality or political beliefs - the achievements of individuals who have advanced human development by improving the quality, quantity or availability of food in the world.
The prize recognizes contributions in any field involved in the world food supply - food and agricultural science and technology, manufacturing, marketing, nutrition, economics, political leadership and the social sciences.
The World Food Prize emphasizes the importance of a nutritious and sustainable food supply for all people. By honouring those who have worked successfully towards this goal, The prize draws attention to what has been done to improve the world food supply and to what can be accomplished in the future.
The laureate receives US$250 000 and a sculpture created by world-renowned designer Saul Bass.
Why the World Food Prize was created
Norman E. Borlaug, winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970 for his work in world agriculture, envisioned a prize that would honour those who have made significant and measurable contributions to improving the world's food supply. Beyond recognizing such people for their personal accomplishments, he saw the prize as a means of establishing role models who would inspire others. His vision was realized when the World Food Prize was created in 1986.
The prize programme
The World Food Prize is sponsored by businessman and philanthropist John Ruan and is administered by The World Food Prize Foundation in Des Moines, Iowa, United States. The foundation is guided by a Council of Advisors in the establishment of policy and in the annual review of the prize. Iowa State University College of Agriculture in Ames, Iowa, serves as secretariat for the prize. Each year, more than 4 000 institutions and organizations worldwide are invited to nominate laureate candidates. The secretariat reviews all nominations for appropriateness and completeness and forwards them to the Selection Committee, which decides on the candidate most worthy of the award according to the prize's objectives.
The Selection Committee is composed of nine distinguished individuals who are experts in various aspects of nutrition and food production, processing and distribution, including research, policy development and business management. Members of the Selection Committee remain anonymous, with the exception of the chairman, Norman Borlaug.
Research and discovery
Plowright records that "in the early 1950s, when I first began working in Muguga on rinderpest, the general view was that a very satisfactory situation existed so far as the vaccines were concerned." In fact, they were far from perfect. They often induced fever, diarrhoea and relapse to other diseases in inoculated animals, and a mortality rate up to 2 to 5 percent was still regarded as acceptable. The difficulty was greatest in highly susceptible breeds, such as Ankole and Ndama.
The production and testing of the old vaccines was costly since it required use of animals - cattle, goats or rabbits - that are sometimes difficult to procure in developing countries. There were also difficulties in isolating the animals securely and determining whether or not experimental cattle or goats were immune, as a result of previous infection with the rinderpest virus.
Plowright quickly deduced that many of the problems in rinderpest research and control could be resolved by developing methods for growing viruses in monolayer cultures of cells on glass - methods already made available for research on poliomyelitis, varicella and measles viruses by the Harvard group, headed by John F. Enders, a Nobel Prize winner. While stationed in Vom, Nigeria, in 1955, Plowright made an attempt to culture rinderpest virus but had to terminate the work for lack of adequate facilities.
In 1956, on transfer to the Muguga Laboratory in Kenya, he began a series of studies on cell cultures that would change history; here the Plowright rinderpest vaccine became a reality. Often known as tissue culture rinderpest vaccine (TCRV), it provided a number of advantages. Animals of any age or breed and cattle in varying conditions of health, including pregnant cows, could be inoculated. The vaccine was genetically stable, produced no significant clinical reaction, was easily standardized, economical to produce and adequately stable when freeze-dried. Most important, inoculated cattle were immune for at least ten years, if not for life. A universal standard vaccine for the elimination of rinderpest, the lethal cattle plague, had arrived on the world scene.
Significance of achievement
The new vaccine offered new hope, particularly for nomadic pastoral peoples and small farmers in developing nations.
Although Western countries tend to regard cattle simply as a source of food, other cultures depend on cattle literally to sustain life itself. In many developing countries, particularly in Asia, cattle are also still used for traction, cultivation and even load carrying. For many people cattle are the only ready source of cash and in many parts of Africa, for example, cattle are indeed a measure of a person's wealth. Essentially, they provide a capital reserve for the family, their numbers being built up in good times and then consumed for celebrations or when crops are poor. They may be sold off or traded when a family faces major expenses, such as providing a marriage dowry.
The manure and urine, regarded as pollutants in developed countries, serve as vital fertilizers for crops or as fuel and building materials. Cattle, in turn, consume by-products of arable crops such as millet or maize that would ordinarily be waste. Vast areas of savannah grasslands or high-altitude pastures and steppes both in Africa and Asia can only support a nomadic pastoral system.
Cattle are a vital source of income for small rural farmers and the demand for cattle as food is increasing rapidly in developing countries, especially in urban areas where populations are growing dramatically. Between the early 1970s and the mid-1990s, meat consumption grew by over 70 million tonnes in developing countries. This "livestock revolution" can be expected to continue well into the new century.
The successful raising of cattle can increase and stabilize income and employment. Moreover, it can help to feed growing world populations, assuming that rinderpest can be conquered. It becomes obvious in such a scenario just how crucial and effective rinderpest vaccine is in today's world.
The next ten years
Thanks to the development of the Plowright vaccine, the world stands on the verge of total elimination of rinderpest. FAO officials report that the disease now persists only in parts of the Sudan, Somalia and Pakistan. Assuming that other areas do not become infected, FAO further predicts that it may cost as little as US$3 million to eradicate the virus completely.
In 1994, FAO initiated an international programme, the Global Rinderpest Eradication Programme (GREP), to coordinate final global eradication of rinderpest by the year 2010. It is the first priority of a wider programme, the Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases (EMPRES), which is intended to deploy resources quickly in disease control and has emerged as a good example of how countries and people can act together to control threats such as rinderpest and help secure the world food supply.
While rinderpest may be close to eradication, many other diseases continue to threaten the world's livestock. Although Plowright's work has brought one global menace, rinderpest, to its knees, there are dozens of other microbial pathogens to take its place. Fortunately, through Plowright's efforts, and the awareness generated by the World Food Prize, there will be scores of other researchers eager to follow his good work and take on the challenge.
[Ed. note: Walter Plowright was the keynote speaker at the 1998 EMPRES technical consultation on GREP where he presented a paper entitled, Global professional commitment to the success of the Global Rinderpest Eradication Programme. He was nominated by FAO for the World Food Prize.]
CURRICULUM VITAE
Walter Plowright
Born in Sutton Bridge, Lincolnshire, United Kingdom, 20 July 1923
Education
Royal Veterinary College, London, 1944
D.VSc., University of Pretoria, South Africa, 1964
Honorary degrees
D.Sc., University of Nairobi, Kenya, 1984
D.Sc., University of Reading, UK, 1986
Professional profile
Commissioned Officer, Royal Army Veterinary Corps, 1944 - 1947
Demonstrator in Pathology, Royal Veterinary College, London, 1948 - 1949
Veterinary Research Officer, Veterinary Research Laboratory, Kabete, Department of Veterinary Services, Kenya, 1950 - 1953
Veterinary Research Officer, Federal Veterinary Laboratory, Vom, Nigeria, 1954 - 1955
Veterinary Research Officer, later Principal Scientific Officer and Senior Principal Scientific Officer at the East African Veterinary Research Organization, Muguga, Kenya, Head of Department of Pathology, 1956 - 1964
Senior Principal Scientific Officer, Animal Virus Research Institute, Pirbright, Surrey, UK, 1964 - 1971. Seconded to the East African Veterinary Research Organization, Kenya, as Head of Department of Virology, 1966 - 1971
Chair and Head of Department, Veterinary Microbiology and Parasitology, Royal Veterinary College, London, 1971 - 1978
Head of Department of Microbiology, Institute for Research on Animal Diseases, Compton, Newbury, UK, 1978 - 1983
Other professional appointments
Chairman, Rinderpest/Distemper Working Team of the WHO/FAO Programme on Comparative Virology, 1968 - 1976
Member/Chairman, Herpesvirus Working Team of the WHO/FAO Programme on Comparative Virology, 1968 - 1979
Nominated Member for the United Kingdom, Scientific Veterinary Committee of the Commission of European Communities, 1981 - 1990
Member, Dangerous Pathogens Advisory Committee of the Dept. of Health and Social Security, 1984 - 1987
Member, Veterinary Advisory Committee, Horserace Betting Levy Board, UK, 1984 - 1995
Member, Institute of Zoology, Scientific Committee of the Zoological Society of London, 1986 - 1991
Chairman, Scientific Advisory Group, Equine Virology Research Foundation, UK, 1986 - 1999
Honours and awards
J.T. Edwards Memorial Medal, Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, London, 1965
R.B. Bennett Commonwealth Prize of the Royal Society of Arts, London, 1972
Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George by Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II, 1974
Fellow, Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, London, 1977
Bledisloe Trophy, Royal Agricultural Society of England, 1979
Fellow, Royal Society of London, 1981
King Baudouin Prize for International Development, 1984
Dalrymple-Champneys Award, British Veterinary Association, 1984
Fellow, Royal Veterinary College, London, 1987
Gold Medal, International Office of Epizootics, Paris, 1988
Outstanding Scientific Achievement Award, Animal Health Trust, UK, 1991
Gold Medal, European Society for Veterinary Virology, 1994
Theiler Memorial Trust Lecture and Award, South Africa, 1994
<section>6</section>
NEWCASTLE DISEASE
ELECTRONIC DISCUSSION ON NEWCASTLE DISEASE IN MIGRATORY BIRDS AND CRITERIA FOR NEWCASTLE DISEASE DIAGNOSIS
In August/September 1999 these issues were debated in the EMPRES-Livestock-L electronic mailing list.
The debate was raised by Dr Michael Van-Ham (Epidemiology Department, Beit Dagan, Israel) who asked whether a country could be classified as free from Newcastle disease (ND) if it is visited by migratory wild birds originating from countries with ND. Two responses from the OIE stated that a country could be regarded free of a domestic animal disease despite its possible presence in wildlife, provided the country could demonstrate that the risk of transfer of this disease to domestic population and the consumers was negligible. In practice this involves a clear separation between wild and domestic animals (compartmentalization) and evidence of its freedom in the domestic population through intensive surveillance.
Dr Dennis J. Alexander (FAO/EU Reference Laboratory for Newcastle disease and avian influenza) replied that reports of ND transfer from wild to domesticated birds were rare, but that there is a need to address how ND in different avian species should be controlled, given a new OIE definition of ND. Professor Peter Spradbrow (Virus Laboratory, University of Queensland, Australia) elaborated on these definitions, pointing out that the official ND diagnosis was now linked to the presence of ND virus with certain characteristics rather than to the presence of clinical disease. Many countries lack the capabilities for such advanced diagnostics and he warned that this might lead to serious underreporting of the disease. Alexander indicated that the new OIE criteria included virus-excreting birds without clinical symptoms, which occur quite often in immunized birds. In support of Spradbrow's warning from a developing country field worker's point of view, Dr Nick Honhold of the
EC/HMGN SVSLDC Project in Nepal suggested that the clinical signs combined with positive antibody results should be maintained in the OIE diagnostic criteria for unvaccinated birds.
EMPRES had received no conclusions to the issue on diagnostic criteria but learned that this would be addressed at the OIE Wildlife Disease Group Meeting, held in Paris in mid-October.
We regard this debate as continuing and contributions to the debate may still be sent to: EMPRES-Livestock-L@mailserv.fao.org.
The full discussion can be obtained under "Electronic Discussion Group" at our Web site: www.fao.org/empres.
Other issues regarding transboundary livestock diseases are also welcome. This mailing list is moderated, implying that we reserve the right to filter submitted contributions.
New subscribers are very welcome to enter the list: send an e-mail to mailserv@mailserv.fao.org leaving the subject blank and entering the one-line message as follows: subscribe EMPRES-Livestock-L.
<section>7</section>
TADINFO
TADinfo is a GIS-based database package with an easy-to-understand user interface and a query interface designed to produce simple analyses (tables and maps) as an aid to disease management. It is able to store disease outbreak (passive surveillance) data, disease survey data, abattoir, vaccination and livestock census data.
TADinfo WORKSHOP IN ACCRA
As part of the regional Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) project aimed at containing, managing and, where possible, eradicating African swine fever (ASF) in West Africa (TCP/RAF/7822), a one-week workshop was held recently for epidemiologists in the region to give guidance on disease surveillance and to introduce FAO's new TADinfo software. The workshop was held in Accra, Ghana from 3 to 8 August 1999. Representatives from eight countries attended. The delegates compared notes about surveillance in their own countries, and issues relating to surveillance management and innovations in surveillance were discussed.
TADinfo was introduced to the national epidemiologists from the region who had the opportunity to gain "hands-on" experience in using the software. The response to TADinfo as it has been developed so far was very favourable. Even participants with little computer experience were soon able to use the software effectively.
TADinfo is a GIS-based database package with an easy-to-understand user interface and a query interface designed to produce simple analyses (tables and maps) as an aid to disease management. It is able to store disease outbreak (passive surveillance) data, disease survey data and abattoir, vaccination and livestock census data. It is currently based in MS Access 97, with mapping supported by ArcView; it is hoped that by the end of 2000 a standalone version with its own map viewer will be available.
TADinfo USERS ONTHE INCREASE
TADinfo is already deployed in six countries in Africa, with formal requests received from the Chief Veterinary Officers (CVOs) of a further five. Twenty-two of the 29 RADISCON countries (North Africa and the Near East) have committed themselves to using TADinfo, and the Pan African Programme for the Control of Epizootics (PACE) is moving in the same direction. TADinfo demonstration versions are in place (for evaluation purposes) in seven more epidemiology units across Africa and Asia, and inquiries about it have been received from Asia, South America, the Balkan countries and Central Europe.
The French research/development organization, the International Cooperation Centre on Agrarian Research for Development (CIRAD) has agreed to translate TADinfo into French and provide support for the deployment of the French version of TADinfo. The Pan-American Foot-and-Mouth Disease Center, PANAFTOSA, will be cooperating with FAO to produce a specialized software package in Spanish (based on the Web/GIS template being developed for regional TADinfo) to meet the needs of vesicular disease management and eradication in South America.
HOW DO I GET TADinfo?
TADinfo, being GIS-based, has to be customized with country geographic data before it can be put into use. This customizing is done at FAO, but requires at least the correct names of the first and second levels of administrative divisions within the country (e.g. provinces and districts) and the corresponding ArcView shape files for these administrative divisions (these are polygon files used to create maps for TADinfo's mapping component, and have the file extensions *.shp, *.shx and *.dbf). FAO has these data for some countries, but they are mostly outdated. These files are usually generated by ministries of transport or university departments of geography - and would be essential in order to prepare a country-customized version of TADinfo.
An official request, addressed to the Director of FAO's Animal Protection and Health Division (AGA) in Rome from the country's CVO, should be accompanied by the shape files and their correctly spelled names in electronic format.
A demonstration version of TADinfo (without mapping capabilities) is available on request from Dr Roger Paskin at FAO (AGAH) or by e-mail: empres-tadinfo@fao.org
WHAT DOES TADinfo DO?
Currently, TADinfo is developed with six submodules. The module active in the current version is intended for input of disease outbreak reports, and details of each outbreak (date, place, species, number affected, clinical signs, post-mortem lesions, tentative diagnosis, laboratory samples, final diagnosis, action taken) can be entered. Although the underlying database structure cannot be changed, details such as place names, clinical signs, species and diseases can all be customized in-country to suit the needs of the national system.
An easy-to-use query interface enables the generation of tables, smart printed reports and maps.
Other modules which are under development and partially active are for the input of disease surveys (e.g. serosurveillance, blood smear campaigns, etc.), abattoir reports (lesions seen and diagnoses made at abattoirs or slaughter slabs), vaccination campaigns and livestock census. The sixth module is the configuration module which allows for in-country customizing (animal species, diseases, etc.). TADinfo is delivered with the ability to store data for all OIE list A diseases in most domestic livestock species - but other diseases and species can be added via the customizing/configuration interface.
USER COMMENTS ON TADinfo
A number of veterinarians have been exposed to TADinfo either through workshops held in recent months, or as "full-time" users. Some comments received are:
"What I like most in TADinfo is ... it is all-in-one ... at last, it is possible to access all raw data, analysed information, reports and mapped events. It does not demand editing spelling mistakes, for example, names of places, because such information is corrected and stored permanently. Very little writing is required while entering new information/data." (Tanzania)
"The Director and staff were very happy with TADinfo." (Cape Verde)
"Can you help me by telling me the steps I have to follow to install TADinfo? I would like to train myself and my colleagues too." (Senegal)
TADinfo is beginning to make its mark as an aid to epidemiological decision-making. Users are invited to get involved in the development of the programme by reporting bugs and suggesting improvements. Remember, this is your software! Contact us by e-mail at: empres-tadinfo@fao.org.
<section>8</section>
CONTRIBUTIONS FROM FAO REFERENCE LABORATORIES AND COLLABORATING CENTRES
FAO/OIE WORLD REFERENCE LABORATORY FOR FMD AND RINDERPEST,
PIRBRIGHT, UK.
FMD REPORT FOR JULY TO SEPTEMBER 1999
Samples received from Iran indicate outbreaks caused by serotypes Asia 1, O and A. Routine vaccination in Iran is against serotypes O and A and the Asia 1 outbreaks required immediate control by the veterinary authorities to keep them contained. It is thought likely that the virus was imported illegally with live animals from an eastern neighbour, where Asia 1 is endemic. There is concern that further illegal traffic in live animals could allow the virus to spread into Turkey or the Caucasus. A genetically new strain of serotype A is also present in Iran, different again from the Iran '96 strain. The new strain is also antigenically different from Iran '96 and will require the use of a homologous vaccine if it continues to cause outbreaks. Results are awaited from recent type A isolates received from Turkey, to show whether they are similar to Iran '96 or have been replaced by the new A strain from Iran.
There have been further outbreaks of SAT 1 and 2 in Burundi, reflecting much larger outbreaks of FMD in East Africa. Reports from Kenya indicate that there have been economically serious outbreaks of FMD, but no samples have been submitted to the World Reference Laboratory.
RINDERPEST AND PPR REPORT FOR JULY TO SEPTEMBER 1999
Country
Species
Disease
Diagnosis technique
Result
Yemen
Cattle
Rinderpest
PCR
-ve
Mozambique
Suni antelopes
Rinderpest/PPR
C-ELISA
-ve
Chad
Wildlife
Rinderpest/PPR
C-ELISA
-ve
Burkina Faso
Wildlife
Rinderpest/PPR
C-ELISA
1/13 PPR +ve
Central African Republic
Wildlife
Rinderpest/PPR
C-ELISA
2/122 PPR +ve
Bangladesh
Sheep/goats
PPR
PCR
+ve
Iran
Goats
PPR (vaccine)
Molecular characterization
Under way
TRAINING COURSES AT THE INSTITUTE OF ANIMAL HEALTH, PIRBRIGHT, EPIDEMIOLOGY DIVISION
The courses are aimed mainly at overseas scientists who wish to improve their knowledge of exotic virus diseases and thus extend their national diagnostic capabilities. They provide training in the principles and applications of more modern biotechnology. The lectures also form part of the post-graduate training programme. The following courses will be run at IAH on an annual basis.
Course Title:
Laboratory diagnosis of rinderpest, peste des petits ruminants (PPR) and bluetongue diseases
Date: February 2000
Scope of the Course:
The aim of the 4 week course is to provide training in laboratory techniques for the diagnosis of rinderpest, peste des petits ruminants (PPR) and bluetongue diseases. The course will provide specific training in:
Rinderpest and PPR:
- Clinical signs and epidemiology
- Collection and transport of samples
- Antigen detection by immunocapture ELISA
- Antibody detection by competitive ELISA
- Lectures on eradication strategy and current status
Bluetongue and epizootic haemorrhagic disease (EHD):
- Clinical signs and epidemiology
- Collection and transport of samples
- Virus isolation in eggs and tissue culture
- Antigen detection by immunocapture ELISA
- Antibody detection by competitive ELISA
Course Title:
ELISA techniques and cell cultures for foot and mouth disease, swine vesicular disease and vesicular stomatitis viruses
Date: May 2000
Scope of the Course:
The aim of the 4 week course is to provide training in ELISA and cell culture techniques for the diagnosis of foot and mouth disease (FMD), swine vesicular disease (SVD) and vesicular stomatitis (VS). The course will provide specific training in:
- ELISA principles and test optimisation
- Preparation of samples for both virus isolation and ELISA
- Tissue culture and virus isolation
- Sandwich ELISA for the detection of FMDV, SVDV and VSV antigens
- Competitive ELISA for detection of antibodies to SVDV
- Liquid-phase blocking ELISA for detection of antibodies to FMDV
- Discussions on the epidemiology and control of FMD
Course Title:
Application of RT-PCR for the diagnosis of foot and mouth disease (FMD) and rinderpest
Date: November 2000
Scope of the Course:
The aim of the 4 week course is to provide training in polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the diagnosis of foot and mouth disease (FMD) and rinderpest. The course will provide specific training in:
- Principles of DNA replication
- Principles of PCR
- Preparation of samples for PCR
- Optimisation of PCR
- Confirmation of identity of PCR product
- PCR ELISA
- Discussions on the epidemiology and control of FMD and rinderpest
MODULAR TRAINING FOR INDUSTRY PROGRAMME
Title of Programme:
Principles and applications of ELISA for disease diagnosis
Date: September/October 2000
Aims and objectives:
There are three main aims for this module:
1. Provide an in-depth understanding of the principles and applications of ELISA.
2. Provide a detailed insight into the development, validation and standardization of diagnostic assays. This will allow critical evaluation of commercially produced kits and greater ability to "troubleshoot" when and if problems arise.
3. Provide a full understanding of the relative merits of various assay systems which should assist in the development of appropriate immunoassays for both research and commercial applications.
Content, Structure and Delivery of Module:
The Module will run for 4 weeks and will be composed of a mixture of the following lectures, demonstrations and practical exercises. Individual lectures will be interspersed between the various stages of the practical exercises. The module will be run once in 1999 but subject to demand may be increased to twice in later years. Complimentary modules on molecular techniques such as PCR and nucleotide sequencing may be developed in the near future.
LECTURES ON BASIC PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES
Basic Immunology:
- The Immune response
- Antigens
- Antibodies
- Adaptive Immunity and clonal selection
- Polyclonal antibodies
- Monoclonal antibodies
Basic Principles of ELISA:
- Terminology
- Direct ELISA
- Indirect ELISA
- Sandwich ELISA
- Competitive ELISA
- Choice of assay system
Stages of ELISA:
- Solid-phase
- Washing
- Addition of reagents
- Incubation
- Blocking non-specific reactions
- Enzyme conjugates
- Substrate/chromogen
- Colour development and stopping reaction
- Plate reading
- Practical problems
Practical aspects:
- Developing an ELISA
- Choice of antigens and control antisera
- Validating an ELISA
- Standardisation and quality control
- Internal Quality control
- External quality assurance
- Units of measurement, dilutions and pipettinG
PRACTICAL EXERCICES
Introduction to equipment:
- Calibration and use of pipettes
- ELISA reader and soft-ware programme
Direct ELISA:
- Titration of antigen and conjugate
- Cross-reactivity of anti-species conjugates
- Interpretation of results
Indirect ELISA:
- Titration of antigen
- Titration of positive and negative sera
- Selection of test serum dilution
- Frequency distribution of negative population
- Selection of cut-off value
- Testing field sera
- Interpretation of results
Sandwich ELISA:
- Titration of trapping antibody
- Titration of capture antibody
- Detection of antigens
- Interpretation of results
Competitive ELISA:
- Titration of antigen
- Titration of detecting antibody
- Cross-reaction of anti-species conjugates
- Antigen competition
- Antibody competition
- Selection of test serum dilution
- Frequency distribution of negative population
- Selection of cut-off value
- Testing field sera
- Interpretation of results
Trouble-shooting:
- Problem solving in all assays
Immunochemical techniques:
- Purification of immunoglobulins
- Coupling antibodies to enzyme
There will be a written, practical and oral assessment at the end of the course.
<section>9</section>
News@RADISCON
SHEEP POX SITUATION IN THE MAGHREB
The number of reported outbreaks may not reflect the reality of the disease situation in the Maghreb, since the disease seems underreported. For example, a questionnaire distributed in 1994 in the Oriental region of Morocco showed that livestock owners had observed clinical signs related with sheep pox and had not officially notified them to the veterinary authorities.
Sheep pox control measures
Official figures for the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya are not available but an estimation of the vaccination coverage in this country may be calculated roughly using the number of imported doses of vaccines (2 to 3 million each year) and the estimated ovine population (4 to 5 million). In 1999, Tunisia changed its vaccination season to the spring. Because of the FMD epizootic in the Maghreb and the mobilization of all the resources to vaccinate the animals against this disease, only 614 993 head of ovine were vaccinated during the spring season, which represents only 29 percent of ovine animals normally vaccinated against the disease. This represents approximately 10 percent of the total ovine population.
In Morocco, Tunisia and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya the sheep pox vaccine in use is the attenuated live vaccine. Algeria is using a sensitized vaccine, which will be changed to an attenuated live vaccine as soon as production starts in the veterinary laboratory of Draa Ben Khedda. Morocco and Algeria are vaccinating during the spring season while Tunisia and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya until recently were vaccinating during the autumn season.
Sheep pox surveillance
Sheep pox is a notifiable disease in the four Maghreb countries. The countries are generating data of a quantitative nature, mainly originating from passive surveillance of the disease. Because of its endemic nature and the decentralization of veterinary services in countries such as Tunisia, the efficiency of notification may be lower than it should be. In other cases, the number of reported outbreaks might be overestimated by misdiagnosing the disease and confusing it with such diseases as contagious pustular dermatitis. In Algeria, for each suspected sheep pox case samples should be submitted to the laboratory for confirmation. In Tunisia and Morocco, diagnosis is based on clinical signs of the disease.
Through the RADISCON project, a coordinated effort is being made to define the distribution of sheep pox in the Maghreb countries and to identify primary endemic areas where high vaccination coverage should be targeted.
FMD SITUATION IN THE MAGHREB
FMD situation during the epizootic of 1999
The other FMD serotypes, namely SAT1, SAT2, SAT3 and Asia1, have never been reported in the Mediterranean Maghreb. Serotype A was first introduced into the region in Morocco in 1977, with the importation of frozen meat from South America. This serotype spread to Algeria the same year and to Tunisia in 1979. Serotype A was also introduced from Spain into Morocco in 1983, probably through subclinically affected sheep.
Before 1999, the latest reported outbreaks in North Africa were chronologically as follows: Egypt, in March 1997; Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, in January 1994 (two outbreaks in Ejbadia region, in the western part of the country); and Tunisia, in August 1994.
FMD situation during the epizootic of 1999
FMD is a notifiable disease in all North African countries. An epidemic of FMD was first declared in February 1999 in Algeria. The disease appeared simultaneously in the wilaya of Souk Ahras (20 km from the Tunisian border) and in Algiers. Up to June 1999, the number of declared outbreaks in the country was 165.
Unlike the 1989-1992 epidemic, the virus involved in the 1999 epidemic did not exhibit specific tropism for small ruminants.
The disease mainly affected the bovine population. In Algeria, only two outbreaks were reported in ovine flocks, although a total of 40 outbreaks were recorded on premises which had mixed cattle and small ruminants. In Tunisia, the two reported outbreaks were observed in mixed bovine and ovine animals. In Morocco, the disease was not observed in small ruminants and only bovines were affected.
The World Reference Laboratory at Pirbright demonstrated that the isolated serotype in Algeria was similar to the strain isolated in Côte d'Ivoire in 1999 (O/CIV/8/99) (less than 2 percent difference in D nucleotide sequence).
Vaccination
All the Maghreb countries have or have had FMD vaccination programmes. In Tunisia, vaccination has been carried out annually in bovine and small ruminants since 1989. The last vaccination campaign took place between September 1998 and January 1999. In Algeria, the latest vaccination campaign was carried out eight months before the start of the epidemic in February 1999 in the eastern part of the country, while vaccination stopped 18 months before that epidemic in the rest of the country. In Morocco, the last generalized vaccination (ovine and bovine) against FMD was carried out in November/December 1997. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has been vaccinating bovines twice a year since 1996. In 1997, the number of vaccinated bovines was 70 000 head, representing a vaccination coverage estimated at 50 percent (the bovine population is estimated to be 150 000 head).
During the epidemic of 1999, Algeria practised ring vaccination around the foci, before starting mass vaccination of all the bovine population and the vaccination of small ruminants along the eastern border of the country. On 22 June 1999, 1 216 960 bovines were vaccinated and 430 221 received a second injection of the vaccine; and 829 350 ovine and 48 561 caprine animals were vaccinated along the eastern border.
In Tunisia, the bovine and small ruminant population that had been vaccinated three months before the appearance of the disease were vaccinated again. In Morocco, the bovine vaccination campaign started along the border with Algeria (in the provinces of Oujda, Berkane, Figuig, Jerrada, Errachidia and Ouarzazate). Vaccination was extended to the buffer zone consisting of the provinces of Taza, Taounate, Fès, Al Hoceima, Boulemane and Nador. Following the appearance of three outbreaks in Khouribga and Beni Mellal, the vaccination was extended to include all of the bovine population. Vaccination was reinforced in the buffer zone and in the northern provinces.
<title>Empres Transboundary Animal Diseases Bulletin No. 11</title>
EMPRES ADDRESS LIST
Communication with
FAO-EMPRES, Rome
fax: +39 06 57053023
e-mail: empres-livestock@fao.org
Mark Rweyemamu
Senior Officer, Infectious Diseases/EMPRES
tel.: +39 06 57056772
e-mail: mark.rweyemamu@fao.org
Peter Roeder
Animal Health Officer (Infectious Disease Emergencies)
tel.: +39 06 57054637
e-mail: peter.roeder@fao.org
Kris Wojciechowski
Animal Health Officer (Virology)
tel.: +39 06 57054180
e-mail: kris.wojciechowski@fao.org
Abdelali Benkirane
Animal Health Officer (Bacteriology)
tel.: +39 06 57052681
e-mail: abdelali.benkirane@fao.org
Roger Paskin
Animal Health Officer (Epidemiology)
tel. : +39 06 57054747
e-mail: roger.paskin@fao.org
Karim Ben Jebara
Radiscon Technical Support Officer
tel.: +39 06 57053135
e-mail: karim.benjebara@fao.org
Anita von Krogh
Associate Professional Officer (Norway)
tel.: +39 06 57053762
e-mail: anita.vonkrogh@fao.org
Vincent Martin
Associate Professional Officer (France)
tel.: +39 06 57055428
e-mail: vincent.martin@fao.org
Preben Boysen
Associate Professional Officer (Norway)
tel.: +39 06 57053712
e-mail: preben.boysen@fao.org
Ledi Pite
Associate Professional Officer (Albania)
tel.: +39 06 57054848
e-mail: ledi.pite@fao.org
Bernadette Abela
Short-term Officer
tel.: +39 06 57054521
e-mail: bernadette.abela@fao.org
FAO REGIONAL OFFICERS
Denis Hoffmann
Senior APH Officer, Asia & the Pacific - Bangkok, Thailand
tel.: +66 2 281 7844 Ext. 308
e-mail: denis.hoffmann@fao.org
Talib Ali
Senior APH Officer, Near East - Cairo, Egypt
tel.: +202 3610000
e-mail: talib.ali@field.fao.org
C. Arellano Sota
Senior APH Officer, Latin America & Caribbean - Santiago, Chile
tel.: +56 2 3372221
e-mail: carlos.arellanosota@fao.org
Moises Vargas
Regional EMPRES Epidemiologist
tel.: +56 2 337 2222
e-mail: moises.vargasteran@fao.org
Julio de Castro
APH Officer, Southern & East Africa - Harare, Zimbabwe
e-mail: julio.decastro@field.fao.org
David Nyakahuma
Regional EMPRES Associate Professional Officer, Accra
e-mail: david.nyakahuma@fao.org
Paul Rossiter
Regional Epidemiologist (PARC)
fax: +254 2 332046
e-mail: parcepid@africaonline.co.ke
Roland Geiger
Technical Officer, Africa
tel.: +254 2 332046; e-mail: parcepid@africaonline.co.ke
Joint FAO/IAEA Division
PO Box 100, Vienna, Austria
fax: +43 1 20607
Martyn Jeggo
Head, Animal Production and Health Section
tel.: +43 1 2060 26053; e-mail: m.h.jeggo@iaea.org
John Crowther
Technical Officer, Near East
tel.: +43 1 2060 26054; e-mail: j.crowther@iaea.org
Andrea Gervelmeyer
Associate Professional Officer
tel.: +43 1 2600 21606; e-mail: a.gervelmeyer@iaea.org
<title>Empres Transboundary Animal Diseases Bulletin No. 11</title>
<section>1</section>
RADISCON ADDRESS LIST
RADISCON Coordinating Unit (RCU)
FAO Headquarters
Abdelali Benkirane, RADISCON Coordinator
e-mail: abdelali.benkirane@fao.org
Karim Ben Jebara, RADISCON Support Officer
e-mail: karim.benjebara@fao.org
IFAD
Ahmed Sidahmed, Technical Adviser
e-mail: a.sidahmed@ifad.org
FAO Regional Office for the Near East
Pal Hajas, Senior Country Project Officer
e-mail: pal.hajas@field.fao.org
Ali Talib, Animal Production and Health Officer
e-mail: talib.ali@field.fao.org
RADISCON E-mail
connected National Liaison Officers (NLOs)
Algeria: Abdelmalek Bouhbal
e-mail: dsval@mail.wissal.dz
Bahrain: Fareeda Razaq Mohd
e-mail: vete@batelco.com
Chad: Angaya Maho
e-mail: cnaruser@sdntcd.undp.org
Egypt: Shoukry Guirguis
e-mail: shourky@dns.claes.sci.eg
Eritrea: Ghebremicael Aradom
e-mail: vet@eol.com.er
Ethiopia: Wondwosen Asfaw
e-mail: vet.addis@telecom.net.et
Iran: Nader Afshar Mazandaran
e-mail: irvet157@iran.com
Israel: Michael Van Ham
e-mail: vsahvan@netvision.net.il
Jordan: Fuad Aldomy
e-mail: vetjo@index.com.jo
Kuwait: Wario Godana
e-mail: animhlth@qualitynet.net
Lebanon: Mustapha Mestom
e-mail: minagric@inco.com.lb
Mali: Mamadou Kané
e-mail: radiscon.bamako@malinet.ml
Mauritania: Lemrabott Ould Mekhalla
e-mail: drap_sa@toptechnology.mr
Morocco: Kamal Laghzaoui
e-mail: demamv@mtds.com
Niger: Salifou Sama
e-mail: radiscon@intnet.ne
Oman: Sultan Al-Ismaily
e-mail: mafvet@gto.net.om
Palest. N.A.: Ayman Shuaibi
e-mail: brvce@planet.edu
Qatar: Abdul Hakeem Al-Khaldi
e-mail: aaf952@qatar.net.qa
Saudi Arabia: Mohamed Al-Ogeely
tel.: +966 1 404 4265; fax: 966 1 404 4555
Somalia: Mohamed Ahmed Sheikh Ali
tel.: +2521 216064; fax: +2521 215040
Sudan: Ahmed Mustafa Hassan
e-mail: parcsud@sudanet.net
Tunisia: Mohamed Bahirini
e-mail: bo.agr@email.ati.tn
Turkey: Necdet Akkoca
e-mail: necdeta@ahis.gov.tr
Yemen: Najib Al-Hammadi
e-mail: dgna.res.str.unt@y.net.ye
