<title>Forest Energy Forum No 5. Forest Energy Forum Newsletter</title>
<section>1</section>
Logo EDITORIAL
Many important events have occurred during this semester, as you will see when reading the different articles presented in this issue. Some of them are very positive, interesting and encouraging for those of us involved in bioenergy themes and aspects; others, however, are not so good.
I regret to report that among these was the death of David Hall on 22 August at the age of 63. David was a professor of biology at King's College London, from where he contributed to many issues. In particular, he made an outstanding contribution to our Wood Energy Programme in its work on bioenergy, and bioenergy and its interrelation with global climate change, energy and environmental policies.
It is really hard for me to describe my Latin feelings about David's outstanding ability to see, write and describe the bioenergy situation and contribution, and the connections and interrelations between different disciplines, technologies and policies. With his work and assistance David helped us, our partners and me in particular, to develop bioenergy to its present status as an environmentally friendly source of energy and as an option for the mobilization of investment for rural development.
However, it was in the early 1990s, when few people trusted wood energy as a modern source of energy, that David helped me and proved to be so useful. At that time, David used all his efforts and talent to support and promote bioenergy activities. Many thanks David. I, in the bioenergy community, will never be able to forget your dedication and great support for the inspiration of a new energy order. [See under Special Features for a tribute to Professor David Hall.]
During these past months we have seen the establishment of new bioenergy programmes, some of which will lead future bioenergy activities. For instance, the new plan established by President Clinton deserves special attention since it is quite clear that it will not only influence bioenergy activities in the industrialized world but also those in developing countries. [See under United States in our Country Compass section for more information.]
On the other hand, negotiations on climate change mitigation measures within the UNFCCC are proceeding very slowly and the COP-5 meeting in Bonn ended without any real important decision for us. One thing is becoming clear, however: the process is not going back and the use of environmentally friendly energy sources has encouraging perspectives.
In our specific area of work, I am pleased to announce that we have now finalized the third in our regional Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow (WETT) studies "The role of wood energy in Africa", which presents woodfuel information and data for 55 African countries. According to the best current wood energy estimates, African woodfuel consumption reached 623 million m3 in 1994. The figures show that Africa has the highest per caput woodfuel consumption (0.89 m3/year) compared with other continents (e.g. Asia: 0.3 m3/caput/year) and that the woodfuel share ranges from 61 to 86 percent of primary energy consumption, with a major part (74 to 97 percent) consumed by households. Unfortunately, despite its important interactions with development, environment and social welfare, there have only been a few attempts in Africa to include woodfuels as a basic sector in the planning processes of forestry and energy agencies.
We are now preparing the fourth regional WETT study, covering the Latin American and Caribbean countries. More details will be given in our next issue.
Let's hope that forest energy continues to develop successfully in the new millennium!
Miguel A. Trossero
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>2</section>
Logo SPECIAL FEATURES
Professor David Hall
14 November 1935 - 22 August 1999
David Hall was Professor of Biology at King's College London, where he undertook research on biomass energy policy, environmental aspects, external costs, bioenergy in developing countries and the effects of climate change. He was internationally acclaimed for his expertise and experience in biomass. He was an adviser for the European Union and the United Nations, and travelled extensively in promoting the development of biomass technologies.
He was a leading contributor to two working groups of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and was Treasurer of the Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment and Director of the International Solar Energy Society.
As humanity grapples with one of the biggest transitions in its history, away from fossil fuels and towards clean and renewable energy, biomass will surely come to take its place as a prominent source of energy, especially in the tropics. Hall's work will always be acknowledged as a pioneering endeavour with major import for all our energy futures. He has left us at the height of his professional powers but, fortunately, with a bequest that should eventually enhance the lives of communities far and wide.
David was a good friend of FAO. He helped us develop our notions and programmes on bioenergy and always had the time and interest to discuss new ideas. His sense of humour, his unparalleled unselfishness and his love of life will always be remembered by those who felt and feel great pride at having known and worked with David, in the UN and in FAO.
David's friends in FAO
Unified Wood Energy Terminology (UWET)
The approach being used by FAO's Wood Energy Programme for the classification and differentiation of the various types of woodfuel, as well as its users and supply sources, was explained in the last issue of Forest Energy Forum. In this issue, definitions of the most important terms used in our proposed Unified Wood Energy Terminology (UWET) are described.
[See also the graph on page 3 of Forest Energy Forum No. 3, reproduced below.]
The basic idea behind UWET is to create an adequate framework to identify the amount and type of wood energy flowing from different supply sources to the final users. The fuel or product used to transport energy, therefore, is the basic parameter to be accounted and properly classified. Either by commercial or non-commercial ways, these fuels should always be considered as goods or commodities, worthy and able to solve any effective demand. UWET intends to make it easier to exchange the information and statistical data now available from different organizations, at both national and international levels, involved in the collection, collation and presentation of wood energy figures.
It is important to bear in mind that these definitions have been elaborated taking into consideration all the relevant definitions used, for biofuels in general and woodfuels in particular, and already agreed upon and discussed by different international organizations over the past 20 years.
Basic definitions
In a broad sense, energy is the capacity to promote changes and action (heating, motion, etc.) and biomass is all kinds of material coming directly or indirectly from contemporary photosynthesis reactions, such as all vegetal matter and derivatives: woodfuel, charcoal, paper, dung and a great portion of urban refuse. Bioenergy is the word used for energy associated with biomass, and biofuel is the bioenergy carrier, transporting solar energy stored as chemical energy. Biofuel should be considered as a renewable source of energy as long as there is sustainable biomass production.
The following are the main definitions to be used in UWET:
Woodfuels include all types of biofuels derived directly and indirectly from trees and shrubs grown in forests and non-forest lands. In the past, in FAOSTAT, fuelwood and charcoal included only what was derived from forest lands. WETT is trying to solve this problem using UWET. The definition of "forest" used in the FAO Forest Resource Assessment 1990 (FAO Forestry Paper No. 124, p. 7) is rather broad and includes lands with a minimum crown cover of 20 percent in developed countries and 10 percent in developing countries. Woodfuels also include biomass derived from silvicultural activities (thinning, pruning, etc.) and harvesting and logging (tops, roots, branches, etc.), as well as industrial by-products derived from primary and secondary forest industries which are used as fuel. They also include woodfuels derived from ad hoc forest energy plantations.
Woodfuel sources. Woodfuels can be divided into three groups according to their origin: direct woodfuels , indirect woodfuels and recovered woodfuels, defined as follows:
Direct woodfuels consist of wood directly removed from: forests (natural forests and plantations; land with tree crown cover of more than 10 percent and area of more than 0.5 ha); other wooded lands (land either with a tree crown cover of 5 to 10 percent of trees able to reach a height of at least 5 m at maturity in situ; or crown cover of more than 10 percent of trees not able to reach a height of 5 m at maturity in situ, and shrub or bush cover); and other lands to supply energy demands and including both inventoried (recorded in official statistics) and non-inventoried woodfuels.
Indirect woodfuels usually consist of industrial by-products, derived from primary (sawmills, particle boards, pulp and paper mills) and secondary (joinery, carpentry) wood industries, such as: sawmill rejects, slabs, edgings and trimmings, sawdust, shavings and chips, bark, black liquor, etc.
Recovered woodfuels refer to woody biomass derived from all economic and social activities outside the forest sector, usually wastes from construction sites, demolition of buildings, pallets, wooden containers and boxes, etc.
Direct woodfuels, indirect woodfuels and recovered woodfuels can be directly burnt or converted into another fuel, such as charcoal, pyrolysis gases, pellets, ethanol and methanol.
Woodfuel types. As regards the commodities to be considered for wood energy accounting, woodfuels can be presented in four types of product, fuelwood, charcoal, black liquor and other, defined as follows:
Fuelwood (or firewood) includes "wood in the rough" in small pieces (fuelwood), chips, pellets and/or powder derived from forests and isolated trees, as well as wood by-products from the wood products industry and from recovered woody products. It essentially preserves the original structure of wood and can be used either directly or after some conversion to another woodfuel, as charcoal. When needed, fuelwood can be prepared (without major physicochemical transformations) into more convenient products such as chips and pellets.
Chips are wood that has been deliberately reduced to small pieces from wood in the rough, or residues suitable for energy purposes.
Wood pellets can be considered as a fuel derived from the auto-agglomeration of woody material as a result of the combined application of heat and high pressure in an extrusion machine.
Charcoal refers to a solid residue derived from the carbonization, distillation, pyrolysis and torrefaction of wood (from the trunks and branches of trees) and wood by-products, using continuous or batch systems (pit, brick and metal kilns). It also includes charcoal briquettes, made from wood-based charcoal which, after crushing and drying, is moulded (often under high pressure), generally with the admixture of binders, to form artefacts of even shapes.
Black liquor is the alkaline-spent liquor obtained from the digesters in the production of sulphate or soda pulp during the process of paper production, in which the energy content is mainly derived from the content of lignin removed from the wood in the pulping process.
Other woodfuels include a broad range of liquid and gaseous fuels derived from fuelwood and charcoal basically by pyrolitic or enzymatic processes, such as pyrolisis gases, ethanol, methanol, products which are of growing interest but so far not very important as energy commodities.
Woodfuel users. Traditionally woodfuels were assumed to be used mainly by households. However, in some geographical areas, the use of woodfuels by the industrial and commercial sectors is also very important. Therefore, wood energy systems are not completely understood if the consumption side is not properly disaggregated by main users and/or consumption sectors.
Moreover, with the growing demand for woodfuel by new users of industrial wood energy, particularly for industrial power and heat, it is important to understand who is using woodfuels, how much they are using and where. This information is vital for analysing and planning sustainable and cost-effective wood energy systems.
For this reason, in our Wood Energy Information System (WEIS) woodfuel consumption data are categorized within the following main areas:
* residential sector (sometimes divided into rural and urban households);
* commercial;
* industrial; and
* power heat generation.
For more information, please contact Miguel Trossero.
[Information on units and conversion factors will be given in future issues of Forest Energy Forum.]
Bioenergy - encouraging perspectives
The multifunctional character of agriculture and land: bioenergy
Agriculture is intrinsically multifunctional in character. Furthermore, all agricultural activity and related land use lead directly to other non-agricultural functions ranging over social, environmental, economic and cultural goods and services, which can result in significant benefits or costs. However, there is abundant evidence that, beyond food security, the multifunctional character of agriculture makes significant contributions to achieving rural development, energy and environmental sustainability at the local, national, regional and global levels. An improved and more systematic understanding of this "multifunctional character" can lead directly to even greater benefits. Its significance constitutes a major issue for contemporary policy-makers and practitioners alike. This document is an attempt to assess the energy function of agriculture.
The role of agriculture as an energy consumer related to the energy needs for irrigation, fertilization, transport, processing and conservation is quite well documented, even if it is still necessary to view the energy/food nexus more systematically.
The role of agriculture as a major energy producer is neither recognized nor mobilized. Recent considerations regarding global climate change and the realization of the potential of biomass energy as a motor for rural development have triggered new attention. This study draws from these new concerns and understanding.
Bioenergy production and use is an important agricultural activity, particularly in many rural areas of developing countries.
Currently biomass energy provides about 55 EJ (equivalent to 25 million barrels per day of oil, and providing 14 percent of total global energy while being number one [34 percent] in developing countries as a whole), both in its traditional and modern forms. It can represent more than 90 percent of total energy use in many developing countries, and as much as 20 percent in some industrial countries. Much of this energy originates from various types of agricultural and forestry residues, although in the future various types of energy crops and plantations are expected to provide the main source.
Biomass was the main source of energy until the early twentieth century. It was only during the past few decades, the so-called "oil era", that biomass energy was less recognized and largely ignored by policy-makers and energy planners alike. Current trends indicate that the amount of bioenergy used remains stable (or even growing), with an increased use in industrial countries, such as European Union members and the United States, mainly for environmental rather than purely energy reasons. Since the early 1990s, the increasing interest in biomass for energy has been manifested in most energy scenarios showing biomass as a potential major source of energy in the twenty-first century, ranging from 59 to 145 EJ by 2025. This expected increase in biomass energy could have a significant impact on agricultural development.
Despite the high energy intensity of agriculture in industrial countries, in global terms the agricultural sector consumes little energy in comparison with other industrial sectors. In fact, in many developing countries these inputs are very low. This means that: first, by adopting western patterns for modernization of agriculture higher amounts of energy would result; and, second, the potential of carbon mitigation in agriculture from decreased energy use is much smaller than in other sectors. The combined potential of agricultural systems for mitigating CO^2 has been estimated at between 0.94 and 2.53 PgC/year compared with present global emissions of 7.0 PgC/year.
In the short to medium term, residues will continue to be major sources of bioenergy and thus would have less direct implications for agriculture than would be the case if large-scale energy crops and plantations were established on agricultural land. Thus, guidelines for residues use are urgently needed to determine what is and what is not renewable to ensure maximum environmental advantages, as has been done with energy forestry/crops/plantations. The large-scale use of animal manure for energy is questionable because the non-energy uses may have greater value, except in specific circumstances where surplus manure poses environmental problems for agriculture, such as in Denmark, where surplus manure is treated to produce biogas and also fertilizer as a by-product.
Energy technology has been improved over the past two centuries to meet certain economic and also environmental criteria but not for sequestering carbon. Large-scale use of bioenergy, when it reaches market maturity, offers the most effective alternative to carbon sequestration. The conventional view that use of biofuels was often a cause of land degradation, deforestation and health hazards is not supported by evidence. For example, health hazards of biofuels are a more direct consequence of cultural practices, underdevelopment and poverty than to the nature of biofuels themselves. Most of these negative impacts could be eliminated by improved socio-economic conditions (such as better housing) and improved technology (such as improved cooking stoves).
Agricultural development has been very unequal around the world, which is to be expected given the differing level of development, resource endowment, climatic conditions, policies, etc. In many developing countries a major reason has been the lack of political support to farmers for infrastructure, markets, R&D and extension, for example, despite the fact that agriculture is often the main source of livelihood for the majority of the population. Some of these shortcomings are now being addressed through more consultation with the farming community, greater recognition that traditional farming knowledge has a role to play, that modernization of agriculture needs good technical skills, and of the role of women in food production, etc. There is also greater recognition of the potential role of bioenergy in socio-economic development and in food production. Bioenergy can be a large (if normally secondary) source of employment and income for many farmers in remote rural areas.
The potential implications of large-scale production and use of bioenergy for the rural economy are significant and thus should not be overlooked.
Climate change and the potential implications for agriculture poses many questions for which there are still very few answers. Simply not enough is known to make any meaningful predictions. Much more long-term research is needed before any unequivocal recommendations can be made. The intricacies of land availability, food and fuel competition are being addressed more seriously, and it is now more widely accepted that land availability is not at the core of the problem but agricultural mismanagement, waste, land tenure, policy interference, etc. are more crucial problems. The potential role of bioenergy has been addressed more seriously since the early 1990s when global concerns about sustainability and environmental impacts of development were put high on the political agenda and privatization of the energy sector started to be a major issue.
Farmers have demonstrated their capacity for change and innovation if they see clear opportunities. With proper support (extension services, infrastructure, financial services, etc.), farmers will be able to produce far more food and energy, provided that the necessary changes are put in place. It is important to remember that production of food and energy in agriculture are mutually interrelated and complementary. Bioenergy programmes which couple with agroforestry and integrated farming can improve food production by making energy and income available, where it is needed, in a more environmentally and sustainable manner.
However, bioenergy production is a complex issue that depends on many and varying factors. Bioenergy should not be regarded as the panacea for solving agricultural and energy problems in the rural areas, but as an activity which can play a significant role in improving agricultural productivity, energy supply, the environment and sustainability. Its final contribution will depend on a combination of social, economic, environmental, energy and technological factors. The multifunctional character of agriculture and its potential role in bioenergy production should receive greater recognition, together with the need for positive political encouragement, and socio-cultural adaptations.
Policy recommendations
Policies and institutions should
* bring the vast potential of bioenergy for CO^2-mitigation, energy efficiency and rural development on the political agenda - particularly that of national and international agricultural authorities;
* stress the large potential role of bioenergy technologies in the transition process to a cleaner and more sustainable energy scenario using carbon substitution (substituting biofuels for fossil fuels) and the opportunities this represents for the agricultural sector;
* stimulate the integration of the energy aspect into the agricultural sector and the potential of bioenergy for the energy sector. International organizations such as the World Bank, FAO and other United Nations agencies should take the lead in this by allocating resources and personnel to the field of bioenergy and agriculture. Their example would help support similar actions by national governments, non-governmental organizations, etc.;
* support those countries with relatively limited capacity in the bioenergy field for assessing their bioenergy and agriculture potential and for negotiating investments. They might also be in need of support to acquire technologies, skills and investments (e.g. under the Clean Development Mechanism) to develop their potential fully in line with their country's needs. International organizations are in the ideal position to act as "honest brokers" and support them in this capacity-building process, for instance through the provision of information and technical assistance;
* use the existing trends of privatization and decentralization in the energy sector for stimulating research and investment in the production and use of bioenergy and agriculture;
* promote and formulate clear policies to promote bioenergy on an equal footing with conventional sources by internalizing the external costs of conventional energy, that is, ensuring that the polluter pays the full costs.
Research, development and extension should
* assess in greater detail the interrelationships between energy and agriculture for different agricultural systems, plants and management systems - especially in relation to climate change;
* study and promote the integrated management of energy and other inputs such as water and fertilizers to gain a better understanding of the synergies regarding natural resource management and to develop sound management practices and tools;
* develop tools for the rapid field assessment of bioenergy potential in agricultural production areas and transfer these tools to agricultural authorities and farmers;
* promote R&D of promising technologies for the production and use of biomass energy and conversion technologies and efficient energy flows.
Projects and financing should
* stimulate the implementation of existing commercially viable bioenergy technologies, such as cogeneration with agroresidues, sustainable charcoal making, etc. by making available capital, credit and tax incentives. These projects should be used to demonstrate to the world at large the potential and viability of bioenergy and agriculture;
* tap into existing mechanisms such as the Clean Development Mechanism and the Global Environment Facility to finance demonstration and research projects; and attract international finance for sustainable agroforestry projects in remote and underdeveloped areas that have the potential of producing energy and water for more developed areas.
(Extracted from: the executive summary of Bioenergy, a paper prepared by David Hall and Frank Rosillo-Calle of King's College London and finalized under the supervision of Gustavo Best, FAO's Senior Energy Coordinator. This paper represents one of the background documents of the FAO/Netherlands Conference on the Multifunctional Character of Agriculture and Land [MFCAL], held in Maastricht, the Netherlands, 12-17 September 1999. The full paper is available for downloading at: www.fao.org/mfcal/pdf/bp_2_bio.pdf )
[See under Events for more information on the conference .]
Bioenergy is a means to achieve all of these objectives - to heat our homes, to fuel our vehicles and to power our factories while producing virtually no greenhouse gas pollution. To make the most of these opportunities, government and industry must work together, as partners. In "industry" I include agriculture and small and big business, government and everyone in the private sector who is involved in this. (Extracted from: President Clinton's speech at the Bioenergy Climate Change Event, United States Department of Agriculture, 12 August 1999.)
FAO, IEA and bioenergy
A draft Memorandum of Understanding between FAO's Forestry Department and the International Energy Agency (IEA) covering a programme of research, development and demonstration on bioenergy is under preparation.
A meeting with Mr J. Tustin, Secretary, IEA Bioenergy, was held at FAO in September 1999 when details were discussed about possible areas of cooperation to be established in the coming months. We expect that closer collaboration with IEA, and IEA Bioenergy in particular, will play a catalytic role in increasing the visibility of the use of biomass as an environmentally friendly source of energy.
For more information, please contact:Miguel Trossero.
[More information will be given in the next issue of Forest Energy Forum.]
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>3</section>
Logo
FORESTS BRANCH OFF...
into carbon sequestration and substitution
FAO task force on the role of forestry in carbon sequestration
Mr Wulf Killmann, Director of the Forest Products Division, has taken over as Chairman of the FAO Task Force on the Role of Forestry in Carbon Sequestration. Mr Miguel Trossero will continue as Technical Secretary. Mr Killmann has kindly accepted our invitation to give us his views.
Carbon sequestration and substitution contribute considerably towards the mitigation of global warming and, thus, climate change. Forestry and forest activities play important roles in the process of carbon sequestration and substitution. There are a number of forestry practices helping to slow the accumulation of CO^2 in the atmosphere, and the Kyoto Protocol, with its three flexible mechanisms proposed in article 12, offers possibilities of funding them.
Although many of the details required to put the flexible mechanisms into practice (such as clear definitions, guidelines and carbon accounting schemes) are still to be defined and the Kyoto Protocol has not yet been ratified by the signatory nations, investment in forestry projects in developing countries with the purpose of carbon sequestration and substitution has already started. In fact, some joint implementation projects, such as those funded through the Dutch foundation, Forest Absorbing CO^2 Emissions (FACE), started in the early 1980s.
At present, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is preparing a special report to clarify some of these details. Members of the Ad Hoc Group on Climate in Relation to Agriculture and Food Security and the Task Force on the Role of Forestry in Carbon Sequestration were involved in the technical review of this report.
With its worldwide mandate, FAO can assist its member countries in making use of the opportunities opening up under the Clean Development Mechanism defined in the Kyoto Protocol. The function of the Task Force on the Role of Forestry in Carbon Sequestration will be to advise the respective forestry sector of the member country. In particular, it will:
* collect, compile and analyse information on the subject;
* prepare technical and position papers;
* make the information available to member countries, the public and the private sector and to non-governmental organizations (NGOs);
* facilitate the exchange of information and experiences between member countries; and
* liaise and network with other agencies, NGOs and the private sector.
We are looking forward to cooperating actively with all of you.
[See also Forest Energy Forum No. 3 for more information on this Task Force.]
Advisory committee on paper and wood products (ACPWP)
During the recent meeting of the Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products (ACPWP) in Brazil
(27-28 April 1999), the committee recommended that FAO should give more attention and resource allocation to activities on carbon sequestration and substitution, carbon accounting and a general follow-up of forestry issues in connection with the Kyoto Protocol. This will be followed up in the next session of the committee which is scheduled to take place in May 2000 in New Zealand.
As a consequence, FAO's Forest Products Division will employ a short-term expert to advise on the areas within this context where the FAO Forestry Department might contribute, taking into consideration the involvement of others within and outside FAO.
For more information, please contact: Mr Jacques Lahaussois, Technical Secretary, Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products, Forest Products Division, Forestry Department FAO.
Boreal forests and forestry in the global carbon budget
The role of forests and forestry in the global carbon budget has become an important research issue. It is also of increasing international policy interest, as indicated by the inclusion of some forestry practices in the Kyoto Protocol. Nevertheless, there remains a diversity of scientific opinion regarding sinks and sources of greenhouse gases associated with forests and forestry practices, particularly in northern latitudes.
Forests in the boreal zone are an important part of the cultural and economic wealth of northern countries. Among the world's few remaining natural forests, boreal forests are known to be very large stores of carbon and play an important role in the annual exchange of greenhouse gases with the atmosphere. There is global concern about the increasing effect of greenhouse gases on our climate and continuing scientific debate about the role of circumpolar boreal forests as a sink or source of atmospheric CO^2, one of the prime greenhouse gases. A number of important scientific and forest management issues are attached to questions of climate change and the role of natural disturbances in the global carbon budget. How can these forests be sustainably managed as renewable sources of fibre and wood products while preserving their carbon storage abilities? Recalling the 1995 finding of the IPCC that boreal forests were perhaps the most vulnerable of the earth's forests, what
changes can be expected in the forest's carbon balance associated with climate change itself?
The Canadian Forest Service and the International Boreal Forest Research Association are organizing an international science conference on The Role of Boreal Forests and Forestry in the Global Carbon Budget, in Edmonton, Canada in May 2000. Discussions will focus on the current scientific understanding of forest carbon dynamics in the circumpolar boreal region, as well as the unique ecological, economic and social conditions that influence management decisions regarding carbon sequestration, climate change impacts and adaptation to climate change in the boreal region. It is intended to bring a circumpolar perspective to research initiatives as well as fostering cooperation and an exchange of ideas among countries in the circumpolar boreal forest.
For more information, please contact: Carbon Conference Coordinator, 5320-122 Street, Edmonton, Alberta T6H 3S, Canada.
Fax: +1 780 453 7356;
e-mail: carbon@nofc.forestry.ca
www.nofc.forestry.ca/carbon
Biomass energy
Biomass currently supplies about a third of the energy in developing countries. Precise levels vary from about 90 percent in countries such as Nepal, Rwanda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda, to 45 percent in India and 28 percent in China and Brazil. Levels are lower in industrial countries: 14 percent in Austria, for example, 20 percent in Finland and18 percent in Sweden.
On a global basis, biomass contributes about 14 percent of the world's energy (55 EJ or 25 million barrels of oil equivalent, offsetting 1.1 PgC of net CO^2 emissions annually).
(Source: Bioenergy, prepared by David Hall and Frank Rosillo-Calle of King's College London.)
[Editor's note: This is an important issue which shows how forest energy contributes to climate change mitigation.]
Canada's pulp and paper industry and its role in reducing CO^2 emissions
The pulp and paper industry is Canada's largest consumer of industrial energy, but it also leads the country in reducing emissions from the use of fossil fuels. Canada made an international commitment to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide (the most significant greenhouse gas) by 6 percent below 1990 levels. The pulp and paper industry is one of the few industries in the country to have achieved that target; it has cut CO^2 emissions by 19 percent since 1990, despite a 21 percent increase in production.
The industry has achieved this reduction through a combination of factors:
* The use of fuel oil as an energy source has been cut by half since 1989, replaced either by cleaner-burning natural gas or by CO^2-neutral wood wastes.
* Co-generation projects involve the production of heat and electric power in partnership with energy companies. Excess power is sold to the public power grids. This provides efficiencies and further reduces CO^2 emissions per unit of production.
* More than 56 percent of the fuel used to generate energy for pulp and paper production comes from biomass, or wood waste, derived from sustainable operations. Such biomass is considered CO^2-neutral because young forests absorb a great deal more CO^2 from the atmosphere than mature or degrading forests, thereby balancing the production and absorption of CO^2.
(Source: Harvest and Harmony, Canadian Pulp and Paper Association; originally published June 1995, updated 1999.)
International protocol for measuring and reporting business greenhouse gases
An international group of business, governmental and environmental organizations has formed a partnership to develop an international protocol for measuring and reporting greenhouse gas emissions from business activities. The protocol will help businesses simplify reporting and will improve the credibility, comparability and usefulness of information. Standardized measurement and reporting is an important first step towards reducing emissions and responding to global climate change.
The collaboration was announced at a meeting which was recently convened jointly by the World Resources Institute (WRI) based in Washington, DC, and the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) based in Geneva, Switzerland.
The group's initiative will build on the significant progress that has already been made by other climate-related measurement efforts. It breaks new ground in the following ways:
The group will be collaborative, will not simply focus on one country, type of industry or company and will involve an open multistakeholder process. The results will be linked with broader corporate sustainability reporting practices, such as the Global Reporting Initiative.
The group aims to reach agreement on unresolved reporting issues, such as how a reporting entity is defined, which reporting formats, units and conversion factors to use, how to define measurement and reporting boundaries, and how to relate to national reporting and emissions inventory schemes.
WRI and WBCSD
The World Resources Institute is a Washington, DC-based centre for policy research and technical assistance on global environmental and development issues.
The World Business Council for Sustainable Development is a coalition of 120 international companies united by a shared commitment to the environment and to the principles of economic growth and sustainable development. Its members are drawn from 30 countries and more than 20 major industrial sectors.
The group's work will provide a foundation for businesses and others to identify greenhouse gas reduction opportunities, set reduction goals, initiate self-assessment or independent auditing, assess progress and provide data that enable flexible, market-oriented climate policies.
"A credible and usable standard for measuring and reporting greenhouse gas emissions will help advance climate actions globally," said WRI's president Jonathan Lash and WBCSD's president Björn Stigson in a joint statement. "The ultimate success of the initiative is developing a robust and practical tool that is widely used by companies and others to measure and manage their greenhouse gas emissions. It is dependent on securing input, synergy and support from a range of key international actors." To this end, the group welcomes additional partners to join the effort. (Source: World Resources Institute News Release, Washington, DC, 11 June 1999.)
La contribución forestal para la mitigación del cambio climático
La FAO, en colaboración con la Comisión Centroamericana de Ambiente y Desarrollo (CCAD) y el auspicio de la Secretaría de Estado en Honduras, organizó una reunión Regional sobre la contribución del sector forestal a la mitigación del cambio climático. Dicha reunión se llevó a cabo en Tegucigalpa del 4 al 6 de octubre de 1999.
El evento tuvo como principal objetivo discutir los detalles de un proyecto centroamericano que permita establecer estrategias nacionales y regionales para mitigar el cambio climático mediante el manejo de los recursos forestales y sus actividades vinculadas, como así también reforzar las capacidades nacionales para la implementación de dichas estrategias. En vista de ello y considerando la importancia que tienen los recursos forestales para el desarrollo de los países de la región fueron invitados a los Sres. Ministros de la CCAD, los Directores Forestales nacionales, miembros de la oficina de Implementación Conjunta (IC), donantes, representantes del sector privado y demás autoridades pertinentes. Se contó además con la participación y contribución de expertos internacionales.
Role of wood-based products in absorbing atmospheric carbon
The contribution of wood-based products in absorbing atmospheric carbon will be estimated as part of the ongoing EU-funded project, Long-term regional effects of climate change on European forests: impact assessment and consequences for carbon budgets (LTEEF-II). Based on past wood use, carbon stocks in wood products for 1990 will be estimated. In addition to the estimation of the initial carbon stock in wood products, scenarios of the future development of the carbon stock in wood products will be made. This is based on future growth of forest resources - both under current climatic conditions and under changing climatic conditions - as well as future harvesting levels.
Mr Thies Eggers (Faculty of Forest Science and Forest Ecology, Georg-August University, Göttingen, Germany) has been working on the data collection and data analysis for those European countries that are included in the LTEEF-II project. The main data source on removals and commodities is the FAOSTAT forestry products database. Additional data are supplied by EUROSTAT forestry statistics and commodity producer information. (Source: EFI News, June 1999.)
For more information, please visit: www.ibn.dlo.nl/LTEEF-II/
Special report on land use, land use change and forestry
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was established by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in 1988 to assess the scientific, technical, and socio-economic information relevant for the understanding of the risk of human-induced climate change. It bases its assessments mainly on published and peer-reviewed scientific technical literature.
The role of land use change and forestry and forestry activities for the mitigation of climate change is not clearly described in the Kyoto Protocol. For this reason, the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) requested IPCC to examine the scientific, technical, economic and social implications of using carbon sequestration strategies in land use and forestry activities to reduce atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases. IPCC has completed the first draft of a Special Report on Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry. This report will be completed in May 2000.
For more information, please visit their Web site or contact: IPCC Working Group II TSU, Special Report on Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry Expert Review, 400 Virginia Avenue, SW, Suite 750, Washington, DC 20024, USA.
Fax: +1 202 488 8678;
e-mail: srlucf@usgcrp.gov ;
www.usgcrp.gov/ipcc/html/SRLUCF.html
Unfccc launches new web site
The secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) has been on the Internet since 1995. Its Web site receives more than one million hits each month. This new "third generation" site updates and consolidates information from the previous sites and adds several new features and resources.
The site provides parties, representatives of observer organizations and others interested in the UNFCCC process with a one-stop source of news, data, information and documents.
The section on Resources includes the "Greenhouse Gas Inventory Data", which will be the first of a series of interactive databases to be made available. The data are presented in two forms: a series of summary tables provide an overall analysis for Annex 1 and non-Annex 1 countries; in addition, a database with search capabilities permits specialized searches of data by country, gas and time period. An introductory note explains how the data have been collected and presented. In addition to the above, users will still find the texts of the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol in all available languages as well as the latest list of ratifications. Background information on the national communications process and a complete list of communications are also available electronically. A climate change information kit, developed by the UNEP Information Unit on Conventions, provides for "Frequently Asked Questions" about climate change.
For more information, please visit the Web site or contact: Mr Kevin Grose, Information Support Subprogramme, UNFCCC, POB 260 124, D-53153 Bonn, Germany.
Fax. +49 228 815 1999;
e-mail: kgrose@unfccc.de;
www.unfccc.de
Wood energy, climate and health
Impacts on health and the environment of emissions from wood stoves are increasingly being recognized in Asia and elsewhere. Smoke and other emissions add to indoor pollution as well as greenhouse gases. Evidence for both effects is fairly substantial. What we can agree upon is that reducing the emissions will mitigate the two adverse effects at the same time. However, different views exist on how best to improve the situation.
Some experts argue that wood stoves, even the improved ones, are not good enough from the health point of view, and we should get away from such fuels. Others argue that stoves can be improved still further to achieve better combustion, and thus wood would be as clean as any other household fuel. As yet no one has made reliable cost estimates on a life cycle basis in order to compare the options.
For the short term, such expert arguments may seem academic. The facts are that for many people in Asia wood is the only available or accessible energy source, and this situation will not change in the foreseeable future. However, in view of recent research in China and India, the issue is not academic at all. It has already been convincingly analysed and documented that for the sake of improving public health alone, the costs of not reducing emissions are higher than the costs of taking adequate measures. An extra bonus from the health-oriented measures arises for the benefit of the global environment.
A similar argument can be also built on the climate aspect. Saving greenhouse gas emissions by introducing improved household stoves can be achieved at a cost of less than US$4/tonne of CO^2 avoided (which is quite attractive under current conditions). Health improvement would then be the additional bonus. Whether health or climate benefits are the prime driving forces, an important observation can be made: socially and environmentally, emission characteristics of household stoves are far more impacting than any other characteristic. Hence, the main criteria for stove design must shift from thermal efficiency to combustion efficiency.
RWEDP convened an Expert Consultation on this subject, in Phuket, Thailand, from 7 to 9 October 1999. Experts came from member countries, the United States, Sweden and the Netherlands, as well as from international agencies. A report with the conclusions and recommendations will be available in due course. (Contributed by: W.S. Hulscher, RWEDP, Bangkok, Thailand.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Wim Hulscher, Chief Technical Adviser, RWEDP-GCP/RAS/154/NET, c/o RAP, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: +66 2 280 0760;
e-mail: rwedp@fao.org;
www.rwedp.org
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>4</section>
Logo NEWS AND NOTES
Carbonizing by partial combustion
Among the various charcoal manufacturing processes, a French company, CML, has developed a complete semi-industrial carbonizing system by partial combustion. The main advantages of this system during the production phase are: an outlet with an energy recovery system for wood pre-drying (increase of yield and quality of the end product); a high carbonization yield; and mproved working conditions. The system also has environmental advantages, in that it eliminates pollution; destroys smoke by incineration; and eliminates pyroligneous juices and tars.
For more information, please contact: CML, Route de Port Galland, F-01360 Loyettes, France.
Fax: +33 472939617.
El fogón a leña modelo «doña justa»
En una comunidad de Honduras, Proleña, situada en las cercanías de Tegucigalpa, se está promoviendo el fogón a leña modelo «Doña Justa». Este fogón me pareció revolucionario, ya que consiste en una cámara de combustión hecha de un codo de cerámica, inmerso en una gruesa camada de cenizas que sirve de aislante térmico, protegido por ladrillos laterales y cubierto arriba por una plancha de hierro de 3,175 mm de aproximadamente 50 cm por 50 cm. Al fondo de la cámara de combustión está la chimenea hecha de lámina metálica de 10,16 cm de ancho y de 2 a 3 metros de altura.
Este fogón es la combinación del fogón tipo «plancha» que promovía Proleña/Honduras con el fogón tipo «rocket» que promovía el Instituto APROVECHO de Oregón en Estados Unidos. La plancha permitía un nivel de emisiones muy bajo mientras el rocket permitía una combustión más eficiente por el efecto «turbo» que genera (un pequeño tiro de aire caliente exactamente arriba de la cámara de combustión).
El fogón Doña Justa fue desarrollado en Honduras en año de 1998 por el Instituto APROVECHO, Proleña y con el apoyo de la ONG Estadounidense Forest, Water and People.
Las ventajas de este fogón son:
* Con el codo de cerámica y la ceniza aislante se genera una buena eficiencia de por lo menos 16 por ciento (según pruebas iniciales). Según el testimonio de tres familias visitadas, se observa un significativo ahorro de leña con relación a los fogones tradicionales semi-abiertos.
* Se utilizan pequeños trozos de madera, ya que la apertura del codo no permite leña gruesa.
* Los niveles de emisiones de humo son insignificantes, por la mejor combustión de la madera, por el efecto de la chimenea y por la vedación total de la plancha de cocción.
* La plancha metálica presenta una cierta pérdida por radiación y la falta de contacto directo de la olla con el fuego, sin embargo no ensucia las ollas, reduciendo el esfuerzo de las mujeres para la limpieza de las mismas. El fogón permite también cocinar directamente en la plancha tortillas, carne asada, panqueques, mantener el café y la comida caliente, e inclusive si por la noche se cierra la chimenea y la entrada del codo, manteniendo el calor interno, y se colocan trozos de leña sobre la plancha durante toda la noche por la mañana la leña está seca y lista para utilizarla.
* La apariencia del fogón es muy bonita y valoriza el ambiente de la cocina y el de la familia.
En base a mis entrevistas en tres casas, fue notorio la satisfacción de la gente, incluyendo hombres y mujeres con el fogón tipo Doña Justa. Este fogón básicamente responde a las expectativas de los usuarios de leña que son por orden de prioridad:
1. Salud: elimina o minimiza la contaminación del hogar y sus efectos directos en las infecciones respiratorias agudas, las irritaciones de los ojos, el bajo crecimiento intrauterino, las quemaduras de los niños y el riesgo de cáncer a los pulmones.
2. Situación: mejora la calidad de vida del hogar, facilitar la limpieza de la cocina, lo práctico de los fogones mejorados y su mejor apariencia y presentación.
3. Ahorro: reduce los gastos diarios de compra de leña y se ahorra tiempo en la recolección.
4. Medio ambiente: reduce la demanda de leña y sus efectos directos en la reducción de la deforestación y degradación de los bosques naturales, y una mayor garantía de sostenibilidad ecológica.
Según Saul Guzmán, Director Ejecutivo de Proleña/Honduras el costo de este fogón es de aproximadamente 40 a 50 dólares EE.UU. (Fuente: Rogerio Miranda, Red Internet en Bioenergía.)
Para más información, dirigirse a: Sr. Guzmán, Director Ejecutivo, Proleña Honduras, Apdo. Postal 3870, Tegucigalpa, Honduras.
Correo electrónico: prolena@prolena.sdnhon.org.hn
[Quien desea información adicional sobre el uso de los combustibles forestales en Honduras puede contactar nuestro sitio Web .]
Enecon - wood utilization for carbon products, eucalyptus oil and energy
Enecon Pty Ltd (Enecon), founded in 1998, is an Australian company involved in engineering consulting and technology development. Enecon's focus over the past 12 months has been on two main areas:
* energy consulting, with emphasis on renewable energy from wood; and
* commercialization of CSIRO technology for simultaneous production of energy and carbon products from wood. Enecon holds the worldwide managing licence for this technology and is investigating potential uses in Australia and other countries.
Current and recent assignments include:
Wood to energy studies
* Review of technical options for utilization of large quantities of residual wood for energy (thermal and electrical) and value added products in Western Australia (WA).
* Review of wood gasification technology worldwide for use in innovative process heating application at a proposed pulp and paper mill.
* Major study covering quantification of residues from forestry and saw milling in New South Wales (NSW) plus technology review of existing and emerging processes for recovery of thermal and electrical energy and preliminary case studies of selected sites. Studies include greenhouse gas calculations for potential projects.
Activated carbon and energy from mallee eucalypts
Enecon is leading a major, multidisciplined study of integrated processing of mallee eucalypts in WA. The goal of the study is to obtain technical and commercial data to verify the commercial benefits of processing plantation mallee eucalypts in centralized plants to recover renewable electricity, activated carbon and eucalyptus oil. The mallee trees are being grown as a land care crop to reduce the effects of salinity in the WA wheat belt. Commercial use of the trees will greatly enhance their planting rates. The study is jointly funded by RIRDC and Western Power Corporation. Technology being used includes the CSIRO carbon and energy process and Curtin University continuous distillation process. Results to date show that activated carbon made from these eucalypts performs very well in water treatment and gold recovery applications. Estimates for factory gate prices for whole tree feed and plant capital and operating costs have been analysed. They indicate a commercially
viable industry.
The concept is well regarded by all involved and in June 1999 Enecon and its partners won an environmental award for work to date from the Institute of Chemical Engineers, United Kingdom. The integrated tree processing opportunity has also been considered favourably for financial support by the Australian Greenhouse Office in the first round of the Renewable Energy Commercialisation Program (RECP). Funding is almost completed for a multimillion dollar demonstration facility in WA to follow the study work. It is intended that this demonstration plant will be designed and built during 1999/2000, ready for operation early in 2001. The plant will accept 20 000 tonnes per year of chipped, whole tree feed from mallee plantations and comprises the following sections:
* separation of leaves from wood;
* continuous distillation of leaves to extract oil;
* spent leaf dewatering and combustion for energy recovery;
* carbonization of wood to charcoal;
* intermediate processing of charcoal;
* steam activation of charcoal to activated carbon;
* energy recovery system to generate electricity for export via the state grid;
* all necessary infrastructure for plant operation.
Charcoal and energy from wood
A study is being carried out on large-scale charcoal manufacture (30 000 tonnes/year) in NSW for use in silicon smelting or as a cooking fuel. The use of CSIRO carbonizing technology allows focus on significant energy recovery in parallel with charcoal manufacture as well as improved utilization of wood resources. The study includes the trial preparation and optimization of briquettes, plant sizing and costing, product yield calculations and project cash flow analysis.
Biomass gasification
Ongoing consulting assistance on feasibility of Waterwide close-coupled gasification/combustion systems running on wood and other biomass sources is available at several locations around Australia.
Activated carbon from wood - New Zealand
A screening study provides a preliminary review of activated carbon from soft wood residues.
For more information, please contact: Mr Colin Stucley, Managing Director, Enecon Pty Ltd, 210 Canterbury Road, (PO Box 417), Canterbury, Victoria 3126, Australia.
Fax: +61 3 9888 6744;
e-mail: enecon@ozemail.com.au
Prizewinning process promises benefits in the West
A novel process that produces energy and high-value activated carbon from wood has been recognized in this year's awards for "excellence in safety and environment" presented by the international journal The Chemical Engineer.
Dr Paul Fung, leader of the CSIRO Forestry and Forest Products team that devised the process, and Colin Stucley, Managing Director of Enecon, the company licensed to develop applications, received the award in June 1999. The citation described the process, the basis of an ambitious project now under way in Western Australia's wheat belt, as an elegant chemical engineering solution to a number of environmental problems being faced in Australia and elsewhere. (Source: Onwood, No. 26, Spring 1999.)
European Association for Solar Energy (EUROSOLAR)
Dr Hermann Scheer, President of the European Association for Solar Energy (EUROSOLAR) and one of the world's leading promoters of solar energy, was named as one of four recipients of the 1999 Right Livelihood Award, also known as the Alternative Nobel Prize.
EUROSOLAR, which Scheer founded in 1988, now has more than 20 000 members and offices in 12 of the member states of the European Union. He and EUROSOLAR have prompted the European Commission to adopt many of their policy proposals. Scheer himself said, "We need a stronger commitment of the ecological community to overcome the massive obstruction of the established energy economy and of the directly connected political institutions and politicians." (Source: EUROSOLAR: www.eurosolar.org/home.html )
Institutional and legal aspects regulating wood energy activities in european countries
The growing interest for woodfuels as an environmentally friendly source of energy is leading to an increased number of initiatives and projects in this field. In fact, by 2010, European Union countries expect to reduce their CO^2 emissions by 15 percent compared with 1990 levels. One important contribution to this reduction is expected to come from woodfuel utilization. This implies that production, trade and use of woodfuels will increase considerably in the years to come. New institutional arrangements for the promotion and monitoring of these initiatives, as well as adequate legal aspects for the regulation and control of production, trade and use of woody fuels, will be needed.
FAO's Wood Energy Programme, together with the Italian Biomass Association (ITABIA), is now carrying out a study to review the institutional and legal aspects and issues regulating the implementation of wood energy activities and projects. As a first step, relevant documentation and information is being collected on: institutional aspects, identifying the main institutions responsible for the regulation, promotion and control of existing and new wood energy systems, including the financial mechanisms and tools adopted for the promotion of wood energy initiatives; and legal issues, identifying the laws, rules and standards normally used for the regulation of wood energy systems.
For more information, please contact Miguel Trossero.
[The results of this study will be reported in the next issue of Forest Energy Forum.]
MESAP planning system
The Modular Energy System Analysis and Planning Environment (MESAP) is a tool for integrated energy and environmental planning. It was developed at the Institute for Energy Economics and the Rational Use of Energy (IER), University of Stuttgart, Germany. It is used, for example, in the GTZ-supported project Combustibles Domestiques in Senegal. MESAP integrates different modular energy planning models through a central database system, NetWork. Figure 1 below shows the diagram of the MESAP architecture. MESAP is being developed for PCs with a Windows-based graphical user interface.
The MESAP system was designed to support every phase of integrated energy planning and thus assists the decision-making process in a pragmatic way, from the problem definition phase to finding the right decisions. (Edited from: Boiling Point, No. 42, Spring 1999.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Christoph Schlenzig, Institute for Energy Economics and the Rational Use of Energy (IER), University of Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 31, D-70550 Stuttgart, Germany.
Fax: +49 721 685 7567;
e-mail: CS@ier.uni-stuttgart.de
Solar photovoltaics - a complementary renewable energy
Energy from the forest or biomass is just one of the renewable energies available. Others include wind energy, solar hot water systems, hydro power (usually restricted to small micro plants) and solar photovoltaics. The latter process uses the phenomenon discovered by Becquerel in 1839 and is most known to readers by its mass usage in solar-powered calculators around the world. Here a two-layer device of different semiconductors creates electricity from light photons hitting one layer and causing transfer of electrons between the two areas which can be collected as electricity. The result is a fuel-free, reliable power source which can be used for a variety of applications. Of particular interest to readers is that one of the biggest threats to forests is fire. It can often take many days before such fires are even reported and can be tackled. One way of getting information from very remote locations to the authorities is by radio network. These remote radio stations,
therefore, need a reliable, fuel-free power source to ensure their effectiveness and solar photovoltaics is the ideal power source.
Such systems have been used by forestry departments around the world: in Indonesia, Kenya, Algeria and Turkey, to name but a few. It is a situation where one renewable energy source ensures the success of another.
For more information, please contact: Mr Mark Hammonds, BP Solar, PO Box 191,
Chertsey Road, Sunbury on Thames, Middlesex TW16 7XA, UK.
Fax: +44 1932 762686;
e-mail: Hammonm@bp.com;
www.bpsolar.com
Waste to fuel process wins award
Pacific Northwest researchers have developed a process that turns levulinic acid into products such as alternative automotive fuel ingredients. An innovative energy-saving project that could lead to low-cost alternative fuels has received the Environmental Protection Agency Presidential Green Chemistry Challenge Award.
The project, introduced by a small Massachusetts company, Biofine, has led to an economical method of turning paper mill waste into levulinic acid, an important, multipurpose chemical. Levulinic acid can be used to make a range of everyday products, including petrochemicals. Created through the Biofine process for as little as one tenth of the cost of current manufacturing processes, the acid can be made with virtually any biomass waste product.
The cost savings are key to using a second process that creates, from levulinic acid, an important component for use in alternative fuels. The Department of Energy Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, in partnership with Biofine, has developed the first ever multistep, catalytic process to convert levulinic acid to useful products, including an alternative fuel component, methyltetrahydrofuran, which can be used with ethanol and natural gas liquids to create a cleaner-burning fuel for cars and trucks that produces less air pollution than petroleum-based gasoline.
"Our system incorporates multiple chemical reaction steps into one process and creates higher yields than previously available," said Doug Elliott of Pacific Northwest's chemical process development group. The process produces about 110 gallons (416 litres) of alternative fuel component for every 100 gallons (378.5 litres) of levulinic acid.
"This is an exciting technology emerging from DOE's investments in biomass conversion, a field where we are literally just touching the surface of the potential for using low-value and waste biomass material for valuable products," said Dennis Stiles, manager of Agriculture and Food Processing Technology programmes at Pacific Northwest. "In the near future, the technology will be expanded to produce levulinic acid from other organic wastes, such as straw, as well as producing a variety of other chemical products, such as solvents, herbicides and plastics, in addition to [methyltetrahydrofuran]."
Researchers are optimistic about the success of the project because levulinic acid is economical - unlike most alternative feedstocks - and can be converted to a large number of other chemicals. Using low-cost and abundant waste feedstocks such as paper mill sludge, municipal solid waste, unrecyclable waste paper, waste wood and agricultural residues, the process also offers a welcome alternative to landfills. (Source: Environmental News Network.)
Wood energy and gender
Gender aspects are important for wood energy development in Asia since in most households men and women play distinct and different roles in virtually all issues relating to woodfuels. It is usually the women who have the knowledge about woodfuel species, growth and harvesting; many women also look after the supply, processing and trading of the fuels; and, last but not least, women tend the fires for cooking and other applications. The situation may be different with regard to non-household related woodfuel activities, which often have a commercial bias. Examples are tree growing in plantations, or other systems which produce woodfuel as a by-product; woodfuel wholesale; and woodfuel-based commercial activities, such as rural industries and food preparation by street vendors and the like. Whether household or non-household, it is usually the men who decide on the resources that matter to woodfuel, from land use to stove acquisitions and other areas where money is involved.
The implications of this state of affairs can be that women's interests and problems are not being adequately addressed and incorporated into decision-making on woodfuel matters (as well as many other matters). The adverse impacts can be quite dramatic. For instance, seedlings for woodlots may go astray; restrictions on woodfuel trading can deprive poor women of their small incomes; and, most important, adverse health impacts from poor kitchens and stoves affect the women disproportionately.
Gender problems of wood energy do not exist in isolation, but are part of broader socio-cultural realities which are still only partly understood and acknowledged. For instance, in development concepts it is too often assumed that a household exists as an economic unit. In statistics, "household income" is a common parameter, whereas in many societies such a concept has no ground whatsoever. Men and women do not share their incomes, and who belongs to the household can only be defined arbitrarily. It has also been amply documented that most rural women in Asia work several more hours a day than men do, whereas their work is often not even classified as "work".
Acknowledging that gender aspects play such important roles in wood energy, the Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia (RWEDP) has integrated the main issues in its technical assistance programme. However, this can only be implemented in close cooperation with local organizations which utilize site-specific knowledge of gender constraints and which are in a position to explore realistic ways for improvement. So far, three regional and four national workshops have been organized by RWEDP to study and address the gender and wood energy issues. Of equal importance, gender aspects have been integrated into virtually all RWEDP training activities, from woodfuel resource management to processing and utilization of woodfuels. It is observed that understanding and acknowledging the importance of gender aspects is gradually increasing. After all, gender roles are not governed by laws of nature, but are the result of the way people organize their societies. That means
these roles can be changed by people. (Contributed by: W.S. Hulscher, RWEDP, Bangkok, Thailand.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Wim Hulscher, Chief Technical Adviser, RWEDP-GCP/RAS/154/NET, c/o RAP, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: +66 2 280 0760;
e-mail: RWEDP@fao.org;
www.rwedp.org
And have you heard about ...
Biomass and Bioenergy ?
Biomass and Bioenergy is a monthly international journal which publishes original research papers and short communications, review articles and case studies on biological resources, chemical and biological processes and biomass products for new renewable sources of energy, food and materials.
Key areas covered by the journal are: biomass, biological residues, bioenergy processes, bioenergy utilization and biomass and the environment. The scope of the journal extends to the environmental, management and economic aspects of biomass and bioenergy.
One of the four editors of Biomass and Bioenergy, until his death in August 1999, was Professor D.O. Hall, King's College London.
For more information, please contact one of the two editors:
Prof. C.P. Mitchell, Forestry Department, Aberdeen University, 581 King Street, Aberdeen AB24 5UA, UK.
e-mail: c.p.mitchell@abdn.ac.uk ;
Dr R.P. Overend, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Alternate Fuels Division, 1617 Cole Boulevard, Golden, CO 80401-3393, USA.
e-mail: rpo2@worldnet.att.net ;
or
Biomass and Bioenergy, c/o Elsevier Science Regional Sales Officer, Customer Support Department, 655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010, USA.
Fax: +1 212 633 3680;
e-mail: usinfo-f@elsevier.com
[See under Special Features for a tribute to Professor Hall.]
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>5</section>
Logo FOCUS ON ... Austria
Wood energy utilization - a case study
In the past few years, considerable progress has been made in the development of small- and medium-scale wood-based energy plants in Austria. The demand for wood originating from thinning operations has been shrinking over the last decades owing to a steady decrease in the number of households using wood energy and also to low prices for this wood. This has encouraged research institutes, agencies and individuals to focus on improvement of technology in wood-based energy production. The focus has been on the development of small- and medium-scale energy plants, rather than on the smallest plants heating a single house, because of the high investment involved and in order to make the use of wood energy as cost-effective and reliable as that of fossil fuels such as oil and gas.
FAO, therefore, intends to carry out a case study in cooperation with a private enterprise in Austria in order to collect data and analyse the technical, economic, environmental and socio-economic aspects and issues of the whole process of fuelwood production, harvesting and utilization of a typical geographical area where wood is used as a source of energy; this could serve as an example for Eastern European and developing countries of the wise use of renewable energy sources. (Contributed by: Norbert Winkler, Consultant on Environmental Impact Assessment, Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch (FOPH), Forest Products Division, FAO.)
For more information please contact: Mr Rudolf Heinrich, Chief, Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch (FOPH), Forest Products Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: +39 06 5225 5618;
e-mail: Forest-Harvesting@fao.org
[More information on this case study will be given in the next issue of Forest Energy Forum.]
Domestic heating
Owing to the nature of its landscape, Austria has always been a land of forests, which still cover 40 percent of its area. This is the result of a foresighted policy which introduced legislation ensuring a sustainable use of Austrian forests at the turn of this century.
Since the mid-1970s, a remarkable revival of wood as an energy source has taken place. Within 15 years, its contribution rose to about 12 percent of national primary energy use. Together with the use of hydropower, Austria is able to derive a quarter of its energy demand from renewable resources.
The most significant contribution to renewable energy use in Austria comes from domestic heating with logwood. Since 1990, a marked decline in wood use for domestic heating can be observed as a result of the replacement of wood stoves and old wood boilers with central heating systems based on natural gas and oil.
The reversal of this trend towards the increasing use of modern wood boilers is the greatest challenge for Austria's renewable energy policies at present. It is particularly difficult as the switch to other energy carriers is partly due to the decline of traditional lifestyles that involved producing fuelwood privately in the forest. Thus the effects of lifestyle changes must be offset by new strategies and services that make heating with wood attractive to young people who give comfort a high priority in the choice of heating systems.
Financial incentives have been established in a number of provinces in order to stimulate the installation of modern wood boilers. Complementary actions will be necessary to enhance fuel supply services, distribution networks and maintenance services.
The most convenient option for domestic heating with wood is district heating. More than 350 small-scale biomass district heating plants have been established for this purpose, mostly in rural areas. (Source: Energy from Biomass - Research and Development in Austria, a brochure prepared by the Austrian Federal Ministry of Science and Transport.)
For more information, please contact: Dipl. Ing. Brigitte Weiss, Bundesministerium für Wissenschaft und Verkehr, Minoritenplatz 5, A1014 Vienna, Austria.
Fax: +43 531 20 6480;
e-mail: brigitte.weiss@bmwf.gv.at
Decentralized biomass combined heat and power plant technologies
Potential applications, technological and economic evaluation
Scientific studies and the successful implementation of electricity generation projects in the low power range realized during the past years, as well as changing economic conditions for decentralized combined heat and power plants using biomass, have greatly improved the situation of electricity generation from biomass.
Decentralized thermal use of biomass is of great importance in Austria. In addition to small- and large-scale plants in the paper making and cellulose industries, as well as in wood processing plants, biomass district heating installations with a rated output of 0.5 to 10 MWth constitute an important factor in the supply of energy. During the past ten years, the biomass district heating systems' sector experienced annual increases of more than 10 percent. By the end of 1997, 359 plants were already in operation.
However, at present, electricity from biomass is generated at only about ten locations in Austria in major plants operated by the paper making and cellulose industries (with bark and waste lye as fuel) and in about ten small and medium-sized plants of the wood processing industry.
Biomass district heating plants currently only produce heat. On account of the abundance of forest in Austria and a highly decentralized demography, energy supply concepts based on decentralized biomass combined heat and power (CHP) plants seem to be particularly advantageous.
Some of the reasons for the slow implementation of such concepts are:
* the lack of technologies for an economical electricity generation in the low power range and in plants with a low annual portion of full load operation;
* the lack of economic incentives for decentralized electricity generation in biomass CHP plants and, partly, supply tariffs to the public grid below the cost price of the thermal energy involved; and
* information deficits as to the state-of-the-art technology of decentralized CHP plants using biomass.
Over the past few years, there has been an emphasis on the development and further improvement of technologies for electricity generation in the 2 MWel power range, which seems to be promising for the use of biomass in CHP plants. Plants of this type should be operated predominantly on a thermal basis in order to achieve a high total rate of efficiency. As potential operators of such plants usually have only limited financial and personnel resources, these projects should fulfil the requirements of robustness, flawless operation, and controllability or automation, respectively.
The study, Decentralized Biomass CHP Technologies, which was commissioned by the Austrian Federal Ministry of Science and Transport and carried out by Ingenieurbüro BIOS Obernberger & Narodoslawsky OEG, Graz, in cooperation with the Energieverwertungsagentur Wien, evaluated and compared such concepts from a technological point of view (operation, control technology, maintenance, ecological aspects, state of development). In addition, a detailed economic evaluation of technologies, which are either already standard practice or will soon be marketable, has been conducted.
At present, there are two marketable technologies for electricity generation from solid biomass: the steam turbine and the steam piston process. Three other technologies, i.e. the steam screw engine, the Stirling engine process and the ORC-process, have already reached a high state of development and are on the verge of marketability. Solid-bed and fluidized-bed combustion with gas engine or gas turbine can also reach this state of development as soon as the problem of process gas purification is solved efficiently on the basis of practicable concepts. In addition, two other innovative technologies are being developed: the direct (inverse) gas turbine process and the indirect gas turbine process (hot air turbine process).
All the technologies that have been evaluated still show a great potential for economic and technological development. Therefore, the concepts involved also incorporate a certain potential as to the increase in efficiency and a reduction of costs. (Source: Home Page of Forschungsforum, Energy Environment Transport, Division of Energy and Environmental Technologies, Austria; www.bmwf.gv.at/6extern/forschungsforum/titel_e.htm)
Solar energy and biomass - a good combination
Much research has been dedicated to the possibility of storing solar energy in the summer for use for residential heating in the winter. In a way, biomass is also a seasonal store of solar energy; however, its heat storage density is about 50 times higher than that of water storage. Thus solar energy and biomass are a good combination as they offer the most economical way to realize 100 percent of renewable energy supply for domestic heating and hot water.
The most economical and effective system to achieve a full solar heating system for single family houses at present is the combination of a logwood boiler, a water tank (2-3 m3) and thermal solar collectors. In the summer, the solar system provides hot water and stores it in the tank; in the autumn and spring, the solar system can also provide heating (depending on its size), whereas in the winter the biomass boiler uses the heat store, which allows full power operation of the boiler and continuous heat retrieval at any required load.
The most advanced project of low-energy, full solar housing is the Sundays project in Gleisdorf. This combines a number of innovative achievements at a total construction cost of about ECU 1 300/m2 of living area. Owing to high installation standards and passive solar energy features, the total energy consumption in one year is 32 kW/m2 (a typical value for a new single family house is 100 kW/m2). This energy is provided by a combined solar energy and biomass system. The Sundays project is constructed of innovative solid wood panels and even the insulation is made of a new, wood-derived product. Thus the household does not produce any net CO^2 for heating and acts as a carbon sink. It will be available on the market as a standard prefabricated house at a competitive price. (Source: Energy from Biomass - Research and Development in Austria, a brochure prepared by the Austrian Federal Ministry of Science and Transport.)
For more information, please contact: Arge Erneuerbare Energie, Feldgasse 19, A-8200 Gleisdorf, Austria.
Fax: +43 3112 5886 0;
e-mail: office@aee.at
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>6</section>
Logo COUNTRY COMPASS
Brazil
IDB approves grant for Brazilian renewable energy project
The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) has approved a US$898 950 grant to support a Brazilian programme promoting decentralized energy services based on renewable sources in isolated communities. The resources from the Japan Special Fund, which is administered by IDB, will help the Brazilian Government to improve the management and the effectiveness of its programme, known as PRODEEM (Programa de Desenvolvimento Energético de Estados e Municípios), for developing renewable energy services in rural municipalities.
The project will create a framework designed to attract investment in renewable energy systems and renewable energy-based services that can improve the quality of life and raise productivity in isolated populations that lack access to modern and clean sources of energy. Under the programme, PRODEEM would step up the transfer of project execution to decentralized market agents and the private sector. It would also provide training to the agents and assist small and medium-sized enterprises in using renewable energy to boost their productive capacity.
The project also seeks to reduce deforestation due to the use of wood and charcoal as energy sources, as well as to decrease emissions from poorly maintained diesel generators. (Source: IDB press release, 1 September 1999.)
El Consejo termina con los subsidios a la producción de alcohol
El Consejo Interministerial del azúcar y del alcohol (CIMA) decidió terminar con los subsidios al alcohol y crear un grupo de estudio para el mismo sector. La secretaría ejecutiva del Ministerio de Agricultura y Comercio garantiza que no realizará ningún aumento del precio del alcohol como combustible. A partir del 1 de noviembre, el gobierno va a suspender el subsidio otorgado a las distribuidoras del alcohol hidratado de todo el país, de manera tal de compensar el precio del producto en el mercado. El diferencial de competitividad correspondió $R 0,045 por litro de alcohol hidratado.
También será suspendido, el subsidio concedido a las distribuidoras de alcohol anhidro que está siendo mezclado con gasolina. Las principales distribuidoras del producto, pertenecientes a las regiones de Paraná, Río de Janeiro, Minas Gerais, Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso del sur del Pará, recibían $R 0,037 por litro vendido.
«No tendrá ningún efecto en el mercado, puesto que las distribuidoras no estaban usando este subsidio», afirmó Fortes.
El consejo creó un grupo de trabajo para obtener datos del sector alcoholero. Una de las modificaciones que el grupo estudiará será la actualización del programa de Ecualización.
En el noreste, el programa beneficia a los productores con R$ 5,07 por tonelada de caña de azúcar vendida. Pero los usuarios de la región piden que el subsidio sea de R$ 9,40.
«Nosotros vamos a estudiar la situación, analizar los costos, los gastos, en general, y vamos a ver si vale la pena», enfatizó el secretario-ejecutivo. Para las demás regiones del país, Márcio Fortes dijo que se deberá modificar el modo de pago del beneficio.
Actualmente, en las regiones del norte, centro-oeste, sur y sudeste, el subsidio se paga a las distribuidoras. «La idea es hacer que todos estos estados tengan la misma forma de pago que se hace en el nordeste, directamente al productor», explicó Fortes. (Extraído de: CNN en portugués, agencia del Brasil, 15 de octubre de 1999; http://cnnemportugues.com/economia/1999/10/15/brasil.alcool/index.html )
China
Bioenergy systems in a South Chinese context
The present development in Asia will greatly affect the future global environment, owing to its high growth rate and the high population in the area. The production and use of energy is a key factor in this development. China is a major symbol for the growth and development in Asia. In order to elucidate the possibilities and problems involved in bioenergy production and use in China today and in the future, the Department of Forest Management and Products held a course on Bioenergy Systems in a South Chinese Context at the Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences (SLU) and Central South Forestry University (CSFU), Hunan Province, China. This multidisciplinary course, which took place from 11 October to 12 November 1999, aimed to increase the knowledge of bioenergy, in general, and of bioenergy use in a Chinese context, in particular.
The students were given:
* basic knowledge of the case for using biomass for energy;
* basic knowledge of the factors that determine the competitiveness of bioenergy;
* the ability to carry out basic evaluations of different bioenergy systems; and
* applications.
The course gave an overview of present and future feasible bioenergy applications in Central South China. The Chinese overview was complemented with experiences and research results from Sweden. The two perspectives provided increased understanding of the potential for bioenergy in China and Asia. (Contributed by: Dr Bengt Hillring, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Sweden.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Johan Vinterbäck, Department of Forest Management and Products, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Box 7060, 750 07 Uppsala, Sweden.
Fax: +46 18 673522;
e-mail: Johan.Vinterback@sh.slu.se
Honduras
Proyecto FAO TCP/HON/6713 Apoyo al subsector dendroenergético de Honduras -algunos resultados en relación al balance de carbono de Honduras
El TCP realizó una nueva estimación del consumo de madera para energía en el país, basada en un estudio del consumo domiciliar en el Distrito Central, en la Localidad de San Lorenzo y en una zona rural del Sur de Lempira. También se realizó un estudio del consumo pequeño-industrial y artesanal en los ocho ramos más importantes. Los resultados (para el año 1998) se resumen en el cuadro A.
Doméstico rural
Doméstico urbano
Industrial
TOTAL
3 700 000 m^3/a
1 480 000 m^3/a
350 000 m^3/a
5 530 000 m^3
2 405 000 t LE /a
962 000 t LE/a
227 500 t LE/a
3 600 000 t LE/a
1 200 000 t C/a
480 000 t C/a
113 000 tC/a
1 800 000 t C/a
18% comercial
93% comercial
100% comercial
La tendencia del consumo de madera para energía parece ser estable en el sector doméstico y decreciente en el sector industrial. La leña está siendo substituída por gas de petróleo liquefactado (GPL) y electricidad en los domicilios urbanos, pero el aumento de la población urbana hace que el número de usuarios aumente. En la población rural, la nueva estimación es más baja que las anteriores debido a un menor consumo medio por hogar. En las pequeñas industrias, hay algo de substitución y menor nivel de actividad en muchos ramos.
En cuanto a las emisiones de carbono originadas en el uso de madera para energía, se encontró que:
* el sector doméstico rural se abastece mayormente por recolección de leña muerta, residuos del desmonte y podas, por lo cual no estaría produciendo emisiones netas de importancia;
* el sector doméstico urbano se abastece en parte de residuos de aserrado, en algunos casos de residuos del desmonte o de áreas agrícolas y en menor medida del corte de árboles vivos en tierras forestales, por lo cual sus emisiones netas corresponderían a menos del 50 por ciento de lo consumido;
* el sector pequeño industrial se abastece en su mayoría de residuos de aserrío y podas de cafetales, y genera pocas emisiones netas.
Queda en claro que el uso de leña no es una causa principal de la deforestación ni del cambio de uso del suelo, aunque en algunas áreas -donde los recursos forestales son muy escasos y la población rural es densa- el corte de árboles vivos para leña puede estar reduciendo la biomasa en pie. Las causas principales de la deforestación son la expansión de las fronteras agrícolas, la pecuarización de muchos sistemas productivos y los sistemas de agricultura migratoria no estabilizados.
Teniendo en cuenta el origen de la leña utilizada (podas, residuos de desmonte, madera muerta), la reducción de consumo de leña en el sector domestico rural no acarrearía reducción de las emisiones de carbono. Sólo en los casos en que la leña proviene del corte de árboles vivos (que representan no más del 50 por ciento del consumo urbano) se podría afirmar que su ahorro o substitución por otro combustible podría reducir las emisiones. Pero en estos casos las emisiones netas también pueden reducirse desarrollando sistemas de manejo sostenible para producción de leña.
El potencial para producir leña bajo manejo sostenido parece bastante grande, porque:
* el 40 por ciento del pino usado para aserrío queda como desperdicio en monte (1,2 m3/ha/año);
* los raleos prescriptos en bosques de pino (generalmente no realizados) pueden aportar hasta 1,5 m3/ha/año;
* los guamiles tienen incrementos interesantes (1,5 a 2 m3/ha/a), y hay áreas considerables;
* los robledales crecen a razón de 4 a 6 m3/ha/año, y pueden manejarse en forma simple.
Si se aprovecharan racionalmente los recursos forestales leñeros, sería posible producir en forma sostenible los siguientes volúmenes de leña (ver cuadro B).
Recursos
Disponibilidad
Productividad
(m^3/ha/año)
Utilización para leña
Volumen
(m^3/año)
Aprovech. pino
600 000 m^3/a
Aserrado pino
600 000 m^3/a
Sombra de café
210 000 ha
SUBTOTAL*
Guamiles
144 000 ha
Raleos en PMs
270 000 ha
Bosques robles
360 000 ha
TOTAL
* actualmente utilizado en su mayor parte
Este volumen sería suficiente para atender a toda la demanda industrial y comercial de leña de Honduras, que es del orden de 2 100 000 m3/año.
Por su alto costo (debido entre otras causas a relieve accidentado, tierras no mecanizables, incidencia de incendios) y los bajos índices de productividad prevalecientes (debidos a sitios de baja calidad, dificultades para el manejo, afectación por malezas y plagas), las plantaciones energéticas no son económicamente viables. El manejo de bosques secundarios (guamiles o tacotales), los sistemas agroforestales sucesionales, y el manejo de bosques de Quercus son alternativas mucho más seguras, de menor inversión y de mayor rentabilidad para la producción sostenible de leña y la fijación de carbono, que tienen además un componente importante de conservación de la biodiversidad.
Para más información, dirigirse a Sr. Miguel Trossero.
India
Fuelwood and displaced people: a case study from northwestern Bengal, India
FAO's Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia (RWEDP) sponsored a case study entitled, Forests and displaced people: woodfuel collection and trade as a first step survival strategy, which was recently undertaken by the Indian Institute of Forest Management (IIFM), Bhopal, an autonomous institute under the Ministry of Environment and Forests of the Government of India. The study aimed to understand the regional peculiarities of woodfuel flow in the narrow, chicken-neck belt of northwestern Bengal. This is a strategic location, being surrounded by a number of sister states and close to a few neighbouring countries, namely Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan. This area is prone to the influx of large numbers of people from outside the regioon who migrate under traumatic or distressed conditions, driven by the onslaught of natural and human-caused catastrophes. Fuelwood collection and trade acts as a safety net in the first-step survival strategy of these displaced people.
The main objective of the case study was to document the impact of unwanted outside pressure on the area's forests with special reference to the status of fuelwood production, collection and marketing, and other related issues.
The study used a combination of methods for information collection, which included surveys, interviews, focus group discussions and participatory rural appraisal (PRA). Eight different kinds of questionnaires and checklists were used in the primary data collection process. In order to make detailed observations and to fulfil the study objectives, five Forest Divisions spread over three districts of northwestern Bengal were selected. A total of 255 respondents in 55 villages of 18 forest ranges were selected for carrying out field surveys to generate data for the study.
The tea garden (TG) labour in Jalpaiguri imposes a heavy demand on fuelwood from the forest, especially since the regular TG fuelwood quota has been withdrawn by the Forest Department. Trees on non-forest areas, traditional woodlots and private plantations are largely missing in the Baikunthapur and Darjeeling Forest Divisions. However, in the forest-deficient Cooch Bihar Social Forestry Division, fuelwood is derived either from the traditionally managed home gardens or as a purchased item from the market. The non-monetized or free fuelwood supply in the former case is derived destructively from the area's forests in an unauthorized manner. The distance to be travelled and time taken for fuelwood collection have been increasing over the years as have the effort and patience needed to collect dry leaves and twigs from the forest floor. It is the rural women who have had to bear a major share of the brunt of this ecological ravage. Attracted by the ease of illegal fuelwood
removal from the State forests and the lucrative prospects of earning cash from the sale of this freely collected fuelwood, primary collectors use their hands, axes and sickles to bring down young and mature trees in a systematic and ingenious manner. An armed Forest Protection Force deployed by the Forest Department in the area has also been unsuccessful in protecting the forests from this destruction.
Of the more than 0.7 million rural people engaged in fuelwood trade in the study area, around 36 percent are migrants who depend on fuelwood collection and sale as the major source of household income. A large proportion (53 percent) of these migrants are people from Bangladesh who were attracted to the West Bengal region by the prospects of earning cash from fuelwood sale; and still, today, fuelwood trade remains the main occupation of this section of migrants. Around 100 000 Bangladeshis in the area contribute more than 15 percent of the illegally removed fuelwood to the market. The socio-economic impacts of these activities include: accelerated fuelwood supply to the flourishing illegal fuelwood market; social heterogeneity and the consequent demographic distortions; encroachment of public and community lands owing to the low land-person ratio; and irreversible damage to natural forests catering to the unsustainable demands for fuelwood.
Fuelwood emerged as the most important wood product in the area, with more than 70 percent being sourced from the State forests. The study revealed that more than 200 000 people enter 11 879 km2 of forests in North Bengal every day, collecting up to 120 kg fuelwood per week per household on a regular basis. Fuelwood business was found to be the main source of income for 10 percent of rural households in three districts of northwestern Bengal and it also accounts for about 45 percent of their cash earnings. Around 72 000 tonnes of fuelwood traded in the primary and secondary markets of northwestern Bengal every week represent the 45 percent monetized portion of the total fuelwood supply in the study area.
This case study emphasizes the need for green development through the introduction, dissemination and adoption of clean technologies. This has been found to be essential for weaning local people in the study area away from the lure of earning quick cash from the sale of forest-derived fuelwood, whose free and easy availability appears to be the strongest disincentive for switching over to cleaner and greener alternatives. The need to integrate forestry and energy sector programmes with those of other sectors to bring about a holistic development of the area has been emphasized. It has also been recommended that the existing Joint Forest Management institutions in the area should be stimulated and encouraged to channel their energy into tackling the fuelwood problem in the area. (Abstract by: Bharati Joshi, Indian Institute of Forest Management, Madhya Pradesh, India.)
For more information, please contact: Dr P. Bhattacharya, Indian Institute of Forest Management, Nehru Nagar, PO Box 357, Bhopal-462003, Madhya Pradesh, India.
Fax: +91 755 772878;
e-mail: prodyut@iifm.org
Kenya
Briquetting charcoal powders
In Nairobi, a company called Tamfeeds Ltd has been collecting the waste powder and chips (fines) that are discarded at urban lump-charcoal vendors' sites. Between 10 and 15 percent of all charcoal arriving in Nairobi is discarded as fines. Rough roads, increasing transport distances owing to diminishing wood resources and the prevalence of soft-wood charcoal are contributing factors to a high proportion of waste fines arriving in Nairobi. This scenario is probably repeated throughout Africa, and indeed the world, wherever lump charcoal is a major domestic fuel.
A brief survey of available charcoal powder was conducted by the author in June 1999. It is estimated that more than 150 000 tonnes of unutilized charcoal fines in and around Nairobi are distributed over 150 medium-to-large vendors' sites. This material is accumulating at the rate of 15 to 20 tonnes per day and is considered to be both a nuisance and an environmental hazard.
Waste charcoal powder is purchased from vendors' sites in urban Nairobi in 7 tonne lorry loads and delivered to the Tamfeeds premises where the material is protected from rain with plastic sheeting. Fines are sieved to sort the material into two size groups and to separate out foreign material. Charcoal particles not passing through the 5 mm sieve are milled in a 20 h.p. electrically driven hammer mill and then mixed back with the sieved particles. The ratio of milled to sieved charcoal is approximately 1:2.
Locally sourced bentonite clay is used as a binder at an inclusion of 10 percent. For a standard 50 kg batch, 5 kg of clay are thoroughly mixed into 10 litres of water. The water/clay solution is mixed into 45 kg of charcoal powder either by hand or with a drum-type cement mixer.
Extrusion is accomplished via locally made electrically driven 5 h.p. screw-type extruders. In practice, one machine's output is 750 kg per eight-hour shift. Briquettes are cylindrical, 3 cm in diameter and vary in length between 4 and 7 cm.
Damp briquettes are carried by hand on trays to outdoor drying trestles where they are sun- and air-dried. One square metre of mesh drying surface holds 10 kg of dried briquettes. Drying time is 1.5 days in full sun, or three days in dry overcast conditions. Briquettes on the trestles are covered with plastic sheets during wet weather.
The finished product is dense and hard, although slightly more difficult to light. Burning time is almost twice as long as for lump charcoal. The briquette is smokeless and does not spark, burning with a blue flame in excess air. Ash content averages 27 percent and energy is calculated at 22.5 mj/kg. Briquettes are sold at a price slightly below (US$0.072/kg) the cost per kg of lump charcoal. Acceptance has been good in the absence of any marketing initiatives. Production is currently 50 to 60 tonnes per month. (Contributed by: Mr E.L. Karstad, Kenya.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Elsen L. Karstad, Tamfeeds Ltd, PO Box 24371, Nairobi, Kenya.
e-mail: elk@net2000ke.com
Mali
Commercialization of the Sewa stove
Appropriate Technology International (ATI)/Mali trains local, private entrepreneurs in the production of the Sewa stove, a modified stove design based on the Kenyan Jiko, and the entrepreneurs then make and sell the stoves commercially. ATI/Mali provides support in the form of initial production research and tooling, training and quality control, and marketing campaigns. Through the latter, consumers are informed of the Sewa stove's existence and performance and are free to decide whether or not to contact a retailer or producer in order to purchase. If they purchase, they pay the true retail cost, without price subsidies. ATI/Mali does not fix prices, pay a salary to producers or pay consumers to purchase stoves.
The entrepreneurs trained by ATI/Mali use their own working capital and sell directly to retailers and consumers; if they wish, they may, at the same time, produce competing stove models. Successful entrepreneurs sell at a profit. The two principal reasons cited for choosing the Sewa stove are: since the price per stove is not set by ATI/Mali, the price they can charge depends on what the market will permit; and manufacturing the Sewa stove requires less physical effort and is more profitable.
ATI/Mali believes that in the end it is the Malian consumer the and environment that benefit from competition and a wider range of improved stove technologies on the commercial market. More than 8 200 Sewa stoves have been sold in Bamako since April 1997. (Edited from: Boiling Point, No. 42, Spring 1999.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Brian Dotson, Appropriate Technology International (ATI)/Mali, s/c USAID, BP 34, Bamako, Mali.
e-mail: brian@ati.malinet.ml
Nicaragua
Proyecto de emergencia de producción sostenible de carbón de leña en Posoltega, Nicaragua
El siguiente es el resumen ejecutivo del proyecto de emergencia de producción de carbón en una área afectada por el huracán Mitch en Nicaragua. Este proyecto tuvo duración de seis meses (enero-junio de 1999) y su objetivo fue crear fuentes de trabajo inmediata para los damnificados por el huracán, aprovechando la gran cantidad de madera caída para producir carbón. Este proyecto fue ejecutado por PROLEÑA con financiamiento del Programa de asistencia para la administración del sector de la energía (ESMAP) del Banco Mundial.
La zona más afectada por el huracán Mitch fue el municipio de Posoltega, donde se produjo un deslizamiento del volcán Casita, avalanchas, inundaciones provocados por la enorme cantidad de lluvias concentradas en períodos cortos, lo cual conlleva la pérdida de numerosas vidas humanas, destrucción de infraestructura y viviendas, irreparables pérdidas ecológicas (suelos, bosques, formación de grandes cárcavas, alteración de cauces, etc.). Contabilizando 1 741 hectáreas destruidas en cultivos agrícolas y otras perdidas pecuarias.
El proyecto de emergencia de producción sostenible de carbón de leña en Posoltega, Chinandega, nace con la visita de la misión de emergencia del ESMAP/Banco Mundial, el 20 de noviembre de 1998 en Nicaragua. La misión tiene el propósito de identificar con las agencias del gobierno y con la Asociación para el fomento dendroenergético de Nicaragua - PROLEÑA, las prioridades en el sector forestal a raíz de los daños causados por el huracán Mitch. El proyecto fue ejecutado en coordinación con el Ministerio de Agricultura y Forestal (MAGFOR), durante el período de enero a junio de 1999, en la zona del Tololar, Posoltega, ha sido ejecutado por PROLEÑA, con el financiamiento del ESMAP/Banco Mundial, bajo la asesoría de FRM y CIRAD. El objetivo del proyecto, es aprovechar la gran cantidad de madera caída y soterrada producto del huracán Mitch, para ser carbonizada, con el fin de generar empleos e ingresos en el aprovechamiento, producción y comercialización del Carbón con los
damnificados por el huracán. La producción de carbón se realizo a través de «parvas tradicionales», beneficiando a 46 productores de la zona.
Este proyecto se desarrolló en condiciones bastante inestable, debido a que se trabajó con personas refugiadas, sin ninguna capacidad de inversión, en vía de reinstalación, preocupaciones cotidianas (salud, comida, empleo), la producción de carbón no era una actividad conocida, el acceso de la madera no estaba claramente establecida, no existían nuevas fuentes de trabajo en la zona, en general es una población muy afectada por las trágicas consecuencias del huracán. La iniciativa de los productores en participar en el proyecto, es porque el negocio del carbón les genera empleos e ingresos significativos para subsistir en las condiciones precarias que están pasando los damnificados del huracán Mitch.
Las maderas a carbonizar proceden de las zonas de deslizamiento de la vertiente sur del volcán Casita que se produjeron bajo el efecto del huracán Mitch. Estas zonas están cubiertas por bosques naturales secos. Contienen una gran diversidad de especies, de arboles de pequeña o de gran dimensión (árboles de más de 1,5 m de diámetro y de 30 m de altura). Los depósitos de madera se formaron en las zonas bajas ocupadas por la agricultura, cubren varios miles de hectáreas en diferentes sitios. Las maderas se encuentran dispersas, semienterradas parcialmente y algunas totalmente (troncos de árboles o trozos de madera dispersas aquí o allí), sea a nivel de plazas de depósitos que se formaron más arriba de setos vivos, de repoblaciones forestales (las maderas están muy enredadas y son difíciles de extraer). Estas maderas a carbonizar presentan una fuerte heterogeneidad del recurso (madera de varia densidad, diámetros muy variables que oscilan de 5 cm hasta 1 m de diámetro, maderas
mal conformadas (curvas, rotas y desgarradas) y maderas parcialmente o totalmente enterradas (presencia de tierra, madera enredadas e inicio de degradación).
En resumen los logros del proyecto fueron los siguientes: El impacto social que tuvo el proyecto de la actividad de carbonización de la madera y leña arrasada por el huracán Mitch contribuyó a resolver problemas familiares de la población afectada, la cual fue una alternativa de trabajo directa e indirecta que contribuyó a la organización y unificación de los damnificados. Desde el punto de vista ambiental, los sitios de extracción de leña han sido limpiados para ser utilizados nuevamente en la actividad agrícola. Eliminando la leña y madera avalserada, se ha evitado el peligro de epidemias y obstaculización de las vías de acceso a las diferentes comarcas. Referente a lo técnico, los productores de carbón se apropiaron de las diferentes técnicas de producción de carbón y se elaboró una guía de técnicas de carbonización.
Desde el punto de vista económico, el proyecto generó empleo directo para 46 personas, además de unos 74 empleos adicionales, produciendo un total de 6 774 sacos de carbón, lo que generó un ingreso total de 24 454 dólares EE.UU., lo que equivale a un ingreso mensual por productor de 110 dólares EE.UU. por persona. Finalmente, en lo organizativo, se conforma la Asociación de Productores de carbón Mitch en Posoltega, para el acopio y comercialización del producto.
Podemos resumir que las lecciones aprendidas en este proyecto fueron las siguientes:
* Un pequeño proyecto puede impactar en la economía de una población, cuando se presenta de manera acertada como una alternativa a las necesidades inmediatas.
* Sin capacitación adecuada y oportuna no es posible introducir nuevas tecnologías productivas en las actividades económicas.
* La actividad de producción de carbón debe ir acompañada de una capacitación e investigación en comercialización y mercado del producto.
(Fuente: Red Internet en Bioenergía: bioenergia@sdnnic.org.ni )
Para más información, dirigirse a: Lic. Maria Engracia De Trinidad, Director Ejecutivo/PROLEÑA, Apartado Postal C-321, Managua, Nicaragua.
Fax: +505 2705448;
Correo electrónico: prolena@sdnnic.org.ni
Russian federation
Charcoal manufacture in Russia: past and future
Prior to the twentieth century, charcoal manufacture in Russia was considered only as a handicraft. The layers of wood covered by earth were a source of charcoal in wooded areas and provided fuel for rural forges and small factories. Much of the charcoal was made in this way, especially in the Urals, where it was fed into the famous Demidovs factories. These "handicraft" technologies damaged nature and the gases produced polluted the air and poisoned plants, in addition to having low productivity and being poorly controlled.
At the beginning of the eighteenth century, the first brick and metal kilns appeared. In the early part of the twentieth century, large industrial enterprises for charcoal production were created. They processed from 90 000 to 150 000 m3 of fuelwood per year using the wood from birch, oak and beech trees. The trunks were sawn into 20-25 cm lengths and then chopped into 15 cm thick pieces. Initially, all factories had American steel retorts with trolleys. These vertical retorts, similar to the "Lambiotte" system, were still used in two factories in the 1950s. The liquid products were recovered almost completely and the gases burnt to generate the heat required in the charcoal production process.
These large factories clearcut almost all the wood available in their neighbouring forest areas and after 30 to 40 years of operation they had exhausted the wood supply for charcoal production. Fuelwood had to be transported from distant areas and the rail tariffs became so high that charcoal production ceased to be a profitable activity. Nowadays, the majority of large factories are no longer making charcoal or are just producing small quantities. In 1991, the annual per caput consumption of charcoal in the United States was five times higher than it was in Russia. This has increased during the last decade.
Charcoal consumers in Russia have varied over the years. Ten years ago, industry consumed almost all the charcoal produced; recently, however, households have increased their demand.
The former economic system placed parameters on the volume of the development of production as the overall objective. In the planned economy, the profitability of manufacturers as a main parameter was not considered. But this parameter now defines their activities.
The timber industry concentrated principally on the manufacture of industrial wood. The wastes remained in the forest or were burnt. Such squandering is not permitted today.
The obligation to produce qualitative charcoal from wood wastes has arisen for the first time in the history of Russian wood technology.
Over the past decade, the charcoal kiln UVP-5 has been used by private enterprises. This kiln is very cheap, can be transported from one place to another and does not require electricity. However, emits gases into the air and its thermal efficiency does not exceed 10 percent. If the raw material and fuelwood are very cheap, and ecology is not a priority, then the use of such a charcoal kiln is a satisfactory solution. In normal situations, however, this technical solution can no longer be accepted.
For this reason, the Department of Forest Chemical Products of the St Petersburg Forest Technical Academy has developed its own apparatus which meets present Russian requirements. It has a small production output (processing 5 000 to 15 000 m3/year of fuelwood) and is designed to use residues from the wood and timber industry. The end product complies with the needs of the main users. An obligatory condition needs to be made - use of the superfluous heat generated during the carbonization processes.
Experimental work was carried out and a charcoal kiln was made which can produce 300 tonnes per year. Tests have shown that the kiln can work constantly using poor-quality wood wastes as raw material. About one half of the charcoal produced satisfies all consumer requirements. The rest (fine charcoal) can be used for the preparation of household charcoal briquettes. The results of these tests have permitted the transfer of expertise to the industrial manufacturers. The new charcoal kiln is under construction near St Petersburg. This technology started producing high-quality charcoal in April 1999; charcoal output will be 500 tonnes per year. Two new charcoal kilns are being built with an estimated productivity of 800 tonnes per year each.
The main features of this charcoal kiln will be the complete burning of the by-products formed at charcoaling and its maintenance. The process is ecologically clean. It consists of a heat exchanger, which permits the use of surplus heat to provide hot water to meet household needs. A general scheme of a charcoal kiln is shown below.
The tendency to create ecological and economical charcoaling processes with the power aspect in mind has recently become more and more widespread in Russia. It is hoped that such processes will predominate in charcoaling. (Contributed by: Yury Yudkevitch, Associate Professor; and Vladimir Jagodin, Professor, Head, Department of Technology of Chemical Forest Products, St Petersburg Forest Technical Academy.)
For more information, please contact: Prof. Yury Yudkevitch, Department of Technology of Chemical Forest Products, St Petersburg Forest Technical Academy, St Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Fax: +7 3133 73256;
e-mail: woodcoal@mailbox.alkor.ru
Sri lanka
Woodfuel is the primary energy source in rural Sri Lanka, but in the industrial sector woodfuel consumption is limited to 18.2 percent of total energy consumption. The ways in which woodfuel is distributed from production sources to end users are not well understood. Indeed, the national wood energy picture currently available reveals little about woodfuel flows, particularly about gender issues or about the flow mechanisms that have a direct bearing on the commercial trade in woodfuel. Our limited understanding impedes our ability to plplan and formulate strategies of local significance, to promote cash returns from woodfuel to both men and women equitably and efficiently and to contribute to improving the living standards of those who are engaged in the woodfuel distribution process without remuneration or with only marginal benefits.
A recent publication by FAO's Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia (RWEDP) presents the findings of a study conducted in Kandy district. From the perspective of studying the gender aspects of woodfuel flows, a wide range of situations was taken into consideration. In the process of commercial woodfuel flow, women's roles are marginal, so the benefits of trade are directly reaped by men. At the local, national and regional levels, the goals of empowering women and improving their socio-economic status must be integrated into the policies and programmes related to wood energy development. "Woodfuel trade" needs to be considered as a means to provide women with income earning opportunities. To achieve the broader goals of gender equality, a Regional Advocacy Network (RAN) is proposed under the umbrella of RWEDP. The RAN will take the initiative to help organize national networks. (Source: Gender aspects of woodfuel flows in Sri Lanka: a case study in Kandy
district, Field Document No. 55.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Wim Hulscher, Chief Technical Adviser, RWEDP, c/o RAP, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: +66 2 280 0760;
e-mail: RWEDP@fao.org
United states
Developing and promoting bio-based products and bioenergy
On 12 August 1999, President Clinton issued an Executive Order to further the development of a comprehensive national strategy that includes research, development and private sector incentives to stimulate the creation and early adoption of technologies needed to make bio-based products and bioenergy cost-competitive in national and international markets.
This included taking steps to address global warming by setting a goal to increase within ten years the use of technology in the United States that converts plants and trees into fuel, chemicals and electricity. The Executive Order established a council to coordinate the federal government's effort to develop a biomass research programme, and set a goal of tripling the use of bioenergy and bioproducts by 2010.
Biomass energy, generated mostly from wood and wood waste, is currently about 3 percent of the total United States energy supply. Biomass technology uses trees, crops and waste from agriculture or forestry to make energy that can then be used as fuel for cars or to power factories.
The ultimate goal of Clinton's order is to replace coal, oil, natural gas and uranium with cleaner, renewable biomass energy. White House officials have said that if the goal of tripling biomass use by 2010 is met, annual greenhouse gas emissions would drop by more than 100 million tonnes, the equivalent of taking 70 million automobiles off the nation's roads. They added that meeting the goal would also generate US$15 billion to 20 billion in income for farmers and rural areas.
President Clinton appealed to Congress to approve US$242 million in his fiscal 2000 budget proposal for research and tax credits to promote energy efficiency, bioenergy and other clean energies. The Executive Order directs the secretaries of agriculture and energy and the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency to prepare a report within 120 days on options for increasing biomass energy use. (Source: Various, including the Executive Order and an AP press release.)
It's hard to think of a greater gift we could give at the turn of the century or a new millennium than a clean energy future. (Extracted from: President Clinton's speech at the Bio-energy Climate Change Event, United States Department of Agriculture, 12 August 1999.)
Future use of biomass energy
Biomass is the second-largest of the renewable energy sectors (after conventional hydroelectric), with wood comprising the largest component of biomass energy. The greatest use of wood for energy occurs in the forest products industry. Congress is discussing several bills that would increase the quantity of renewables used to generate electricity. Three important factors should be considered by policy-makers as they see ways to increase the use of renewables in electricity generation:
· The largest proportion of current wood-based electricity generation occurs in the forest products industry (there are now only a handful of wood-fired utilities in the United States).
* Primary forest product industries are located in close proximity to timber resources. In contrast, utilities are generally located near population centres. This is of particular concern to generating plants needing to fire with wood-based products, because transporting wood-based energy products is much less economical than transporting coal.
* The supply of commercial forest resources is limited and distributed among competing uses. Forest product industries enjoy a well-established supply infrastructure and would be reluctant to force prices higher for pulp and other products owing to an increased demand for fibre in generating electricity.
Some scenarios for greatly increased biomass-energy use rely heavily on the assumption that fluidized-bed combustion (FBC) units and combined cycle generators will offset possibly higher biomass fuel costs through energy-efficient operation. This assumption is likely to be true for generation-only plants. FBC technology, however, generally does not have very good economic, energy or environmental characteristics in the short term when applied for pulp and paper manufacturing.
Biomass-oriented generating plants yet to be built could indeed have an energy-efficiency advantage over some of the conventional combustion systems now in use in the forest products industry. However, in the short term they are certain to face disadvantages. Biomass-generating plants must be located near fuel resources, especially because of their established fuel supply infrastructure. At the same time, these facilities need to be located near existing electricity transmission lines. In contrast, pulp and paper manufacturing plants are located near their fuel resources as well as the point of electricity demand.
These issues are only a few of the two-edged considerations associated with possible legislative mandates for higher renewable electricity generation. Another is the cost-effectiveness of locating generating facilities near population centres, where the cost of land is high or possibly prohibitive. Yet biomass energy has demonstrated favourable environmental, employment as well as energy security characteristics and is generally considered to be CO^2-neutral. The challenge of broader implementation of biomass for energy is to gain the wider involvement of those entities most able to participate, and to stimulate new industry.
Although certain sectors of the forest products industry would indeed resist diverting more biomass resources for energy, the fact is that the majority of timber grown in the United States is available to the winning bidder. Forest products industry members are generally not self-sufficient in supply, so they purchase the necessary biomass products from producers or other intermediaries. Generally, these resources are non-industrial private forest landowners not under long-term contract. Further, current forest removal (i.e. utilization) rates are such that a substantial supply of logging residue is available. Therefore, at a sufficient price, energy interests could obtain additional biomass resources. The above statements are generally more true in the eastern United States, where most wood is purchased directly from the producer.
Another factor operating in energy interests' favour is that a significant volume of wood is consumed as fuelwood for home heating. The value of forest removals for this purpose is generally less than that of timber removed for industrial products. Thus, energy interests could obtain additional fuelwood without having to compete with industrial interests.
Finally, forest products companies are seeking new ways to increase timber resource utilization. One possibility is to convert logging slash into a usable product. Members of the forest products industry, a very significant potential participant, have mixed views on the increased use of wood for electricity generation. Some, such as those in the pulp and paper subgroup, believe that increased demand on wood supply would drive up resource costs and place a greater strain on already tight profit margins. Others in the industry who are well situated with respect to resource ownership, or whose resource divisions are very profitable, may view biomass energy as a favourable opportunity. Regardless of resource position, biomass energy producers may increase their generation if they can operate profitably on woodfuel priced competitively with stumpage that might otherwise go for pulp and paper manufacturing.
Considering all viewpoints, however, two key questions relating to the area of governmental policy seem to be emerging:
* Will renewable energy mandates, if enacted, stimulate the birth of a new renewable-based generating industry, with survival qualities yet to be determined?
* Will the forest products industry overall be a formidable obstacle or a willing participant in additional biomass energy generation?
(Source: A view of the forest products industry from a wood energy perspective, EIA.)
For more information, please contact: National Energy Information Center, United States Department of Energy, 1000 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, DC 20585, USA.
e-mail: infoctr@eia.doe.gov;
www.eia.doe.gov/
Yugoslavia
FAO's Special Relief Operations Service, in close collaboration with its Forest Products Division and Investment Centre Division, is fielding a mission to the Kosovo Province of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. One of the main issues to be addressed by the consultant forestry specialist is fuelwood; in particular, the setting up of a fuelwood project before the winter, including:
* identification of safe, accessible areas for fuelwood collection (with regard to anti-personnel mines), without excessive damage to forest resources;
* formulation of simple management plans;
* organization of harvesting activities through local contractors, family permits or other sustainable mechanisms; and
* verification of available fuelwood market structures.
In addition, the consultant will take into consideration the following factors:
* the need for the population of Kosovo to have large quantities of forestry products, mainly sawn timber and fuelwood, for the reconstruction of their houses and the coming winter;
* numerous families, not reached by such programmes, will probably search locally for fuelwood in the absence of alternative heating sources;
* overcutting of accessible forests will be unavoidable and it is essential that forest harvesting activities should be managed in order to limit the damage to vegetative cover and hence future soil erosion; and
* the importance of rehabilitating already degraded forests to restore timber production.
For more information, please contact: Mr Miguel Trossero.
[The results of the consultant's mission will be given in the next issue of Forest Energy Forum.]
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>7</section>
Logo EVENTS OF INTEREST
The fao/netherlands conference on the multifunctional character of agriculture and land
12-17 September 1999
Maastricht, the Netherlands
Participants from more than 100 countries and around 50 intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations met in order to discuss the multifunctional character of agriculture and land (MFCAL).
The overall objective of the Maastricht Conference was to identify the new practices and the necessary enabling environments that would lead to increased agricultural sustainability. Particular emphasis was on raising international, national and local awareness of the range, diversity and positive potential of the multiple contributions that agriculture and related land use can make to improving both food security and sustainability in the broad sense.
The principle tasks of the conference were to:
* review progress, in the context of agriculture and related land use, towards the principles contained in the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development and Agenda 21: Programme of Action for Sustainable Development;
* identify the main issues to be addressed, taking into consideration the continually evolving nature of agriculture and related land use; and
* propose strategies and approaches for the "way forward".
For more information, please contact: Mr Gustavo Best, Senior Energy Coordinator, Environment and Natural Resources Service, Research, Extension and Training Division, Sustainable Development Department, FAO.
e-mail: mailto:gustavo.best@fao.org
www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/sustdev/welcome_.htm
[Please see under Special Features - Bioenergy for more information.]
Energy sector monitoring and verification of greenhouse gas emissions
13 September - 1 October 1999
Berkeley, California, USA
The course provided professionals from emerging economies with the in-depth training and hands-on experience they need to monitor, verify and report on greenhouse gas emissions from the energy sector.
For more information, please contact: Mr Mark Murray, Team Leader and CTO or Ms Nohemi Zerbi, Deputy Team Leader, Energy & Environment Training Program, USAID G/ENV/EET, Washington, DC 20523-3800, USA.
Fax: +1 202/216 3230;
e-mail: mmurray@usaid.gov
Renewable Energy Finance Forum
27-28 September 1999
London, UK
"Perhaps the greatest challenge - and opportunity - of the twenty-first century is to meet the world's ever increasing energy demands, by sustainable means. Those who recognize the opportunity and rise to the challenge will reap substantial rewards."
The European Commission's framework supporting the integration of renewable energy technologies has set an objective of 12 percent for the contribution by renewable sources of energy to the European Union's gross inland energy consumption by 2010. In order to double the present level of 6 percent market penetration, the Commission has recognized the necessity of implementing a radical framework of internal market measures in the regulatory and fiscal areas. It is estimated that 75 to 80 percent of the capital required to achieve this would have to come from private sources.
In recent years there has been an acceleration in the development of renewable energy technologies, in terms of both efficiency and economic viability. Many renewables are already competitive alternatives to conventional sources of energy. However, as with many other innovations, they suffer from an initial lack of confidence on the part of investors, governments and end users. For this reason, the principal objective of the Renewable Energy Finance Forum was to familiarize investors with the economic potential of this growth industry. The forum provided a panel of leading experts in energy finance, illustrating the innovative strategies required of renewable energy projects.
The global annual turnover of the renewable energy sector is estimated to be higher than ECU 5 billion, of which Europe has more than a one-third share. Investments will have to be made by both the private and public sectors. These will provide multiple dividends as Europe's industry and service companies demonstrate their technological leadership in a globally competitive market. At the same time, the increasingly liberalized and globalized energy markets present new opportunities.
For more information, please contact: Euromoney Energy Events, Euromoney Institutional Investor Plc, Nestor House, Playhouse Yard, London EC4V 5EX, UK.
Fax: +44 171 779 8946;e-mail:
energyevents@euromoneyplc.com;
www.euromoneyplc.com
Reunión regional sobre la contribución del sector forestal a la mitigación del cambio climático
4 al 6 de octubre de 1999
Tegucigalpa, Honduras
Para más información, dirigirse a Sr. Miguel Trossero.
[Véase también en la sección Forests branch off ....]
Expert consultation on `wood energy, climate and health'
7-9 October 1999
Phuket, Thailand
The consultation was organized by FAO's Regional Wood Energy Programme in Asia (RWEDP). About 20 experts from Asia, Europe and the United States analysed and discussed emission aspects of wood/biomass energy use in the context of global warming and health problems.
For more information, please contact: Mr Wim Hulscher, Chief Technical Adviser, RWEDP-GCP/RAS/154/NET, c/o RAP, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: +66 2 280 0760;
e-mail: RWEDP@fao.org;
www.rwedp.org
[Please see under Forests branch off ... for more information.]
Taller internacional sobre energía y caña de azúcar
19 al 21 de octubre de 1999
Dominica, República Dominicana
Se desarrolló un taller internacional "Caña de azúcar: una agenda multidimensional para el siglo XXI" en la República Dominicana, para analizar integralmente el sector cañero desde una perspectiva agronómica, tecnológica, ambiental y energética. Ponencias relacionadas a los aspectos energéticos se enfocaron en el futuro de los programas de la producción del alcohol, la bioenergía y el protocolo de Kyoto, y la cogeneración.
El taller fue organizado por el Grupo de Países Latinoamericanos y del Caribe Exportadores de Azúcar (Geplacea) y la FAO con la cooperación del Instituto Interamericano de Cooperación para la Agricultura (IICA) y del Gobierno de la República Dominicana.
El programa del evento está disponible en: www.fao.org/sd/egdirect, donde las presentaciones y las conclusiones del evento se publicarán luego.
Para publicaciones de la FAO sobre caña de azúcar, cogeneración y el protocolo de Kyoto también visite: www.fao.org/forestry/fop/fopw/energy/public-e.stm
Para más información, dirigirse a Sr. Gustavo Best, Coordinador Principal de Energía, Servicio del Medio Ambiente y los Recursos Naturales, Dirección de Investigación, Extensión y Capacitación, Departamento de Desarrollo Sostenible, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Roma, Italia.
Fax: +39 06 57053369;
Correo electrónico: Gustavo.Best@fao.org
Workshop on wood energy in industrialized countries
19-20 November 1999
Graz, Austria
Organized by Biosphere, Climate and Economy (BIOCLIMECO), Germany, the workshop discussed "wood energy in the industrialized world: present status and potential contribution to CO^2 mitigation - technology, economy and policy issues".
For more information, please contact: Mr M. Rohner, J.W. Goethe University, Department of Economics (Fach 62), D-60054 Frankfurt-am-Main, Germany.
Fax: +49 6109 762034;
e-mail: rohner@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de
Forum international sur la biomasse-energie pour le developpement et l'environnement: quelles perspectives pour l'afrique?
22-26 novembre 1999
Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: Mme. Francine Bolduc, Institut de l'Energie et de l'Environnement de la Francophonie (IEPF), 56 rue St. Pierre, 3e étage, Québec G1K 4Ai, Canada.
Télécopie: +1 418 692 6544 ;
mél: f.bolduc@iepf.org
Harmonization of international energy statistics
24 November 1999
Paris, France
Organized by the International Energy Agency, the main objectives of the meeting were to: examine similarities and differences in definitions and methodologies; examine ways and means to reduce the differences; examine possibilities of further harmonization of international questionnaires in order to reduce the burden for the member states; and facilitate data exchange and comparability between international organizations.
For more information, please contact: Mr Sohbet Karbuz, International Energy Agency, 9 rue de la Fédération, 75739 Paris cedex 15, France.
Fax: +33 1 40 57 66 49;
www.iea.org
Millennium international conference on renewable energy technologies
9-11 February 2000
Chennai, India
For more information, please contact: Dr C. Palaniappan, Organizing Secretary, Millennium International Conference on Renewable Energy Technologies, Planters Energy Network, 171/2, M.K. University Road, Rajambadi, Madurai 625 021, India.
Fax: +91 452 858607;
e-mail: pen@vsnl.com; or pen@md3.vsnl.net.in
The role of boreal forests and forestry in the global carbon budget
8-12 May 2000
Edmonton, Canada
This conference, which is sponsored by the Canadian Forest Service in conjunction with the International Boreal Forest Research Association, will focus on the current scientific understanding of forest carbon dynamics in the circumpolar boreal region.
For more information, please contact: Carbon Conference Coordinator, 5320-122 Street, Edmonton, Alberta T6H 3S, Canada. Fax: +1 780 453 7356;
e-mail: mailto:carbon@nofc.forestry.ca
www.nofc.forestry.ca/carbon
[Please see under Forests branch off ... for detailed information on this conference .]
First world conference and exhibition on biomass for energy and industry
5-9 June 2000
Seville, Spain
Jointly organized by EnergiaTA-Florence and WIP-Munich in collaboration with CIEMAT-Madrid, the First World Biomass is expected to become the largest and most outstanding event in the worldwide biomass sector. It will gather together for the first time the traditional European Conference on Biomass for Energy and Industry and the Biomass Conference of the Americas.
For more information, please contact: EnergiaTA-Florence, Piazza Savonarola 10, 50132 Florence, Italy.
Fax: +39 055 573425.
International symposium on alcoholic fuels
3-6 July 2000
Stockholm, Sweden
For more information, please contact: Mr Lars Vallander, Swedish National Energy Administration, Energimyndigheten, Box 310, SE-631 04 Eskilstuna, Sweden.
Fax: +46 16 544 2099;
e-mail: lars.vallander@stem.se
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>8</section>
Logo PUBLICATIONS
Three new Working Papers have been produced by our Wood Energy Programme
The role of wood energy in Africa
(Working Paper FOPW/99/3)
This Working Paper is the third in our Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow (WETT) series.
[Please see Forest Energy Forum No. 4, for more information.]
Electricidad a partir de eucalipto y bagazo en ingenios azucareros de Nicaragua
(Working Paper FOPW/99/2 (S) )
El estudio realiza un análisis tecnoeconómico de la generación de electricidad a partir de bagazo y de leña de eucalipto utilizados como combustibles en dos ingenios azucareros nicaragüenses.
El Protocolo de Kyoto y el mecanismo para un desarrollo limpio
(Working Paper FOPW/99/1 (S))
Las actividades de secuestro, almacenamiento o reducción de emisiones de carbono asociadas con los cambios de uso del suelo y las actividades forestales constituyen una de las opciones existentes para regular las emisiones antrópicas de gases con efecto invernadero, permitiendo por lo tanto mitigar los efectos potenciales del calentamiento global subsecuente.
El Protocolo de Kioto (PK), negociado en diciembre de 1997 durante la tercera Conferencia de las Partes de la Convención Marco de las Naciones Unidas sobre el Cambio Climático (CMCC), reconoce esta opción posibilitando que aquellos países que han aceptado reducir sus emisiones de gases con efecto invernadero puedan acreditar dicha reducción a partir de la ejecución doméstica de actividades forestales y de cambio en el uso del suelo que intensifiquen el secuestro y el almacenamiento de carbono en sumideros naturales o que lleven a la reducción de emisiones de dichos gases.
Adicionalmente, el PK prevé mecanismos de flexibilidad, mediante los cuales los mencionados países podrán desarrollar dichas actividades de secuestro o reducción de emisiones en colaboración con otros países, pudiendo "compensar" parcialmente los compromisos de reducción de emisiones de gases en sus propios países.
Estos elementos han desencadenado una gran expectativa, tanto en los países industrializados como en los países en desarrollo, con relación a las consecuencias que puedan tener sobre el desarrollo futuro.
Si bien aún existen muchos interrogantes sobre los aspectos políticos, técnicos y económicos de estas cuestiones y, principalmente, acerca de los mecanismos mediante los cuales se llevarán a cabo los nuevos acuerdos, al crecer el consenso general -tanto científico como político- sobre la acumulación en la atmósfera de gases con efecto invernadero que pueden tener efectos nefastos para el ambiente global, la naturaleza del debate político internacional ha cambiado sensiblemente: de argumentar si es necesario hacer algo, a preguntarse qué se puede hacer, cuándo se debe hacer, y a qué costo.
Con el convencimiento de que esta temática constituirá un importante dinamizador del desarrollo sostenible del sector forestal, se ha preparado el presente documento a fin de describir brevemente las oportunidades, riesgos e incertidumbres emergentes -focalizándolos sobre la región de América Latina y El Caribe- con el objetivo de difundir sus principales características e impulsar la realización de iniciativas forestales y bioenergética para la movilización de inversiones.
For copies of these publications, please contact Mr Miguel Trossero.
Volume/biomass special study: georeferenced forest volume data for Latin America
The assessment of environmental functions of forests is essential for FAO Forest Resources Assessment 2000 (FRA 2000). It relates directly to the role of forests in the carbon cycling and maintenance of biological diversity. This report (FRA Working Paper No. 4) deals with forest biomass estimate and specifically describes the progress made so far towards the establishment of a geographic information system and an electronic information system, containing integrated cartographic and tabular information for data analysis, modelling and the implementation of special studies on selected thematic elements.
For more information, please contact: Mr Robert Davis, FRA Programme Coordinator, Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
e-mail:robert.davis@fao.org
Wood pelletization sourcebook
Produced by the Great Lakes Regional Biomass Energy Program, this sourcebook describes the costs and processes for making pellets from sawdust and other wood waste products.
For more information, please contact: Mr Fred Kuzel, Director, Great Lakes Regional Biomass Energy Program, 35 E. Wacker Drive, Suite 1850, Chicago, IL 60601, USA.
Fax: +1 312 407 0038;
e-mail: fkuzel@cglg.org
The challenge of rural energy poverty in developing countries
This joint FAO/WEC publication, which was published in October 1999, draws attention to a problem that is often overshadowed by the more immediate problems of hunger and famine. Energy, however, is an essential element both for the fulfilment of basic needs (especially cooking and heating, but also hygiene, health, etc.) and for sustainable rural development, including energy for agriculture, food processing and education.
FAO's approach in the field of energy is aimed at assisting developing countries to meet their energy requirements in agriculture, forestry and fisheries, as a means of achieving sustainable rural development. A transition from the present energy supply of mainly fuelwood and animal and human power, to a more diversified base and a better use of commercial energy, is the key to improving the living conditions of rural populations. While the report advocates this gradual transition to more modern energy systems, it recognizes that the use of traditional fuels will remain a long-term reality in many rural areas. This calls for the development of ways to manage the use of traditional fuels in a sustainable way, while at the same time improving the lot of rural people. The report advocates an approach which is best summarized as decentralized, integrated and empowering: decentralized because biomass is essentially a local issue; integrated because biomass management needs to
take account of other measures in sectors such as agriculture and health; and empowering because those best equipped to manage their (energy) problems are those who know best - the rural people themselves.
It is hoped that this report, issued jointly by the World Energy Council (WEC) (www.worldenergy.org) and FAO, will raise the awareness of the impact energy poverty has on hunger, health and other aspects of rural development.
For more information, please contact: Mr Gustavo Best, Senior Energy Coordinator, Environment and Natural Resources Service, Research, Extension and Training Division, Sustainable Development Department, FAO.
Fax: +39 06 57053369;
e-mail: Gustavo.Best@fao.org;
www.fao.org/sd/egdirect
[Top of page][Contents]
Latest publications from FAOs Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia (RWEDP)
WOOD ENERGY DATA, PLANNING AND POLICIES
Wood energy planning: study tour in India (RM 44), 1999
WOOD ENERGY RESOURCES, PRODUCTION, DISTRIBUTION AND MARKETING
Production, Utilization and Marketing of Woodfuel in Lao PDR National Workshop (RM 45), 1999
Woodfuel trade in Nepal (RM 46), 1999
Woodfuel Production and Marketing in India National Training Course (RM 47), 1999
OTHERS
Wood Energy and Forestry Education Expert Consultation on the Integration of Wood Energy into the Training Curricula of Forestry Education, Cha-am, Thailand (FD 56), 1999
WOOD ENERGY AND GENDER
Gender aspects of woodfuel flows in Sri Lanka: a case study in Kandy district (FD 55), 1999
WOOD ENERGY NEWS
Small and medium enterprises , Vol. 14.1, 1999
Wood energy in India , Vol. 14.2, 1999
For more information, please contact: Mr Bert van der Plas, APO Information Systems, RWEDP, c/o RAP, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: +66 2 280 0760;
e-mail:RWEDP@fao.org
<section>9</section>
Logo WEB SITES
Database now available on the RWEDP site
The FAO Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia (RWEDP) has developed a wood energy database which contains data on various aspects related to wood energy for the 16 RWEDP member countries. Data are grouped in five main categories: resources, utilization, woodfuel flows, technology and socio-economic aspects. They have been compiled by RWEDP from various sources, such as national and international agencies, research work and miscellaneous publications.
Besides the database, the user can find nearly 50 publications and all issues of the RWEDP newsletter Wood Energy News, together with overviews of major issues in wood energy, and the wood energy situation for each country, programmes and institutions. RWEDP has also developed a CD-ROM of the site (without the database), which can be ordered by contacting the RWEDP secretariat.
For more information, please contact: Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia (RWEDP), FAO-RAPA, Maliwan Mansion, 39 Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: +66 2 2800760;
e-mail: rwedp@fao.org
www.rwedp.org
Canadian Association for Renewable Energies (CARE)
www.renewables.ca/
CARE is a federal not-for-profit association, incorporated to promote feasible applications of renewable energies. A weekly newsletter, Trends in Renewable Energies, is available by e-mail.
Environmental Overview
www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/cabs/contents.html
The Energy Information Agency (EIA) of the United States Government is now including an expanded overview of the environment towards the end of each individual Country Analysis Brief; in each case, it immediately follows the Energy Overview. In the expanded Environmental Overview, information can be found on sectoral energy use and carbon emissions, energy intensity, carbon intensity, fuel share of energy use and carbon emissions, as well as other key environmental statistics.
Home page of Grant Ballard-Tremeer
www.energy.demon.nl/
This site is an information resource for people concerned with energy, the environment and the developing world.
Household Energy Development Organisations' Network (HEDON)
www.energy.demon.nl/hedon
The Household Energy Development Organisations' Network (HEDON) is an informal consultative forum dedicated to improving social, economic, and environmental conditions through the promotion of local, national, regional and international initiatives in the household energy sector. It does this in two ways: by encouraging appreciation of, and support for, household energy programmes among decision-makers and the general public in developing and developed countries; and by enhancing the professional knowledge of individuals and organizational workers in the household energy sector.
Household Energy Programme
www.gtz.de/hep
Internet Newsbrief
www.epa.gov/natlibra/hqirc/inb.htm
Internet NewsBrief is a weekly service from the United States Environment Production Agency (EPA) Headquarters Information Resources Center that provides a sampling of new and/or useful Internet resources for EPA staff and other environmental professionals.
Intergovernmental Forum on Forests (IFF )
www.un.org/esa/sustdev/iff.htm
IFF produces an informal monthly circular letter.
Networks
Bioenergy Information Network
The Bioenergy Information Network is an integral part of the United States Department of Energy's Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy outreach activities. This network of programmes focuses on the domestic production, recovery and conversion of energy crops (fast-growing trees and grasses) and residues to economically priced, environmentally beneficial fuels and power generation.
Programmes connected to this site include the DOE National Biofuels Program, which researches and develops the use of biofuels for electricity and transportation, and the Regional Biomass Energy Program (RBEP), which carries out activities related to technology transfer, industry support and resource assessment, and matches local resources to conversion technologies.
www.esd.ornl.gov/bfdp/
[Top of page][Contents]
<title>Forest Energy Forum No 5. Forest Energy Forum Newsletter</title>
Logo POINTS OF VIEW
I was very pleased to see a change in emphasis from sequestration towards substitution in the third issue of Forest Energy Forum which I received recently. However, I wonder if this positive change of direction will find its way into the Special Report on Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry?
I am particularly interested in the term "sustainable" as used by Pierre Boileau in FEF3. Domestic policy in New Zealand has already settled on carbon sequestration because of our extensive plantation forestry (for wood products, not energy). Our fossil fuel use is expected to rise dramatically, compensated for by "carbon sequestration". It seems we are ahead of the rest of the world in turning the Kyoto Protocol into a politically viable least-cost solution that I believe will have no substantial positive impact on CO^2 emissions over time, only a commitment to expanding permanent forest reservoirs that is "seen" to be positive. We are very wasteful of wood because it is abundant, and often "clean up" harvest residues with large open fires. I see no reason for this to change under the Kyoto Protocol.
It seems to me that "deforestation" is "sustainable" if there is no change of land use. Regeneration will take place if the forest is not replanted. Of far more importance is capturing the energy component as fully as possible. We should be looking at prioritizing this capture ahead of all other strategies, because deforestation and forest harvesting will continue to take place, but is now understood to be a potential (but biodegradable) renewable energy resource.
Assuming that we have "no regrets" about previous deforestation and fossil fuel use, and therefore also the present atmospheric concentrations of CO^2, additional sources are surely to be avoided unless they are temporary. Deforestation can be "sustainable", while fossil reservoir exploitation can not.
We can also plant trees where previous deforestation has involved wastefully burning (or allowing to rot) the biomass resource. We can make sure wood products are burnt for energy at the end of their useful life. We can ensure biotic carbon reservoirs are restored by not changing land use after deforestation. Bioenergy and other renewable energy production can be accounted for within "fossil reduction inventories". Does this mean the Kyoto Protocol must be superseded by a well-informed concept/agreement based on an evolution of understanding?
Deforestation/fossil substitution emissions are sequestered again on the same land that the emissions were sourced from, whereas fossil emissions require more land committed on an ongoing basis to permanent forests for sequestration.
Forestry for sinks versus energy. Planting trees for the specific purpose of energy and wood products (energy later) is likely to be far more efficient in terms of volume produced over time, as opposed to forestry for carbon sequestration, which has the objective of maximizing the reservoir carbon capacity, so would require different management approaches. Yield per hectare per annum and growth rates are no longer relevant, but only mass. Nor is length of time to maturity; slow-growing species will have the same or greater reservoir potential as fast-growing species. (Dean Satchell, New Zealand)
FOREST ENERGY or WOOD ENERGY???
What do you think of the term FOREST energy?
Do you prefer the traditional term of WOOD energy?
What do you understand by the two terms? Is there a difference?
Please write and let us have your views: forest-energy-forum@fao.org
Tobacco and fuelwood in the Philippines - could energy plantations be a viable option?
Below is a short e-mail exchange on a recent stoves listing. We would welcome comments on this subject from our readers.
My present job entails finding ways to minimize if not eliminate the use of fuelwood in curing tobacco - through barn modification, fuel substitution, etc. At present about 10 to 15 percent of the farmers in the region are using coal briquettes for curing - the rest still use fuelwood. (Alvin Glova)
If one of your problems is "deforestation" related to the demand of fuelwood for tobacco curing, I have seen tobacco companies in Honduras working with the surrounding farmers to establish an energy plantation to sustain their fuelwood demand. In Brazil, also, there are good examples of associations for fuelwood replacement among consuming industries and surrounding farmers. (Rogerio Carneiro de Miranda)
(Source: Stoves network e-mail list,stoves@crest.org )
Another interesting point of view on the slogan "Need energy? Plug a tree" (please see FEF2, 3 and 4) has just been received from one of our readers in Brazil.
The idea of matching energy and a tree (forest) is quite interesting, but in my opinion the slogan should be: "Need energy? Look to a tree". In the sense that the forest must be understood as an energy source, with all its differences:
* it has been here for millions of years;
* not just to produce energy [Editor's note: "and timber"] but also to protect the soil;
* it is the easiest way to collect the small part of the sun's energy that reaches our planet;
* it grows day by day, storing more energy;
* if used appropriately, it can last for ever; and
* all fossil fuel, in one sense or another, comes from a forest origin (as does coal).
The point is that we have to start to see the forest as an energy solution, more than a source, as it:
* is common to all countries and cultures;
* can respond to all the differences that exist in the global climate by adapting itself;
* helps humankind to protect this small planet in which we live; and
* makes it possible for us all to survive.
We need to think over the energy ideas, start making long-lasting solutions - really long (the next 10 billion years) - or is humankind not planning to last so long? (Marcos Alexandre Teixeira, Brazil)
We have received the following contribution from Dr Grant Ballard-Tremeer from HEDON. Please see Miguel Trossero's very different point of view at the end of this article.
Raising the profile of household energy
Roughly half of the world's population uses wood or other biomass fuels in open fires or simple stoves for cooking and heating, and in Africa fuelwood accounts for more than 70 percent of the total energy used. Pollution levels in homes using open fires or wood-burning stoves are extremely high by current standards: both daily averages and instantaneous peaks of particulate matter and carbon monoxide reach many thousands of times the permitted limits in Western countries. In fact, studies in many parts of the world have shown that open fires and simple stoves, used in poorly ventilated homes, lead to some of the highest levels of air pollution in the world. One can therefore expect to find severe health problems - and this indeed appears to be the case, based on the small number of studies carried out in developing countries. Acute respiratory infection (ARI), for example, for which there is growing evidence that high exposure levels are an important risk factor, is the most
important cause of death for children under five years of age.
In spite of the large numbers of people using traditional biofuel fires or stoves, the attention that has been given to such issues as health is extremely limited. For example, there have been more than 10 000 studies establishing the link between tobacco smoking and health, but less than 40 examining biofuel emissions and health in developing countries.
Although, in recent years, energy has become the subject of international focus as a result of concerns about climate change, the shift to a more market-based approach and the reduction of donor aid means that fewer and fewer resources are available to tackle household energy issues. However, serious and urgent attention by the international community and local governments is required to address the issue. The Household Energy Development Organisations' Network aims to bring the problems associated with household energy back to the attention of decision-makers. This must be done through stressing the nature and scale of the problems, as well as finding viable alternatives.
Solutions are by no means easy to find and need to include more than just improved stoves. In fact, a number of studies have shown that some improved stoves, although perhaps using less fuel, have higher emissions than traditional stoves. Many renewable energy sources although appearing attractive, are costly and, as is the case for solar PV, meet only limited needs such as lighting. Solutions will also address more than just health, tackling poverty and income generation, local environment and well-being and will be found with people not for people. Feasible options will include combinations of alternative fuels, improved stoves or cooking devices, improved ventilation, reduced need for the fire and alternative cooking methods. (Contributed by: Dr Grant Ballard-Tremeer, Household Energy Development Organisations' Network (HEDON), the Netherlands.)
For more information, please contact: Dr Grant Ballard-Tremeer, BTG biomass technology group, c/o University of Twente, PO Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, the Netherlands.
e-mail: hedon@energy.demon.nl;
www.energy.demon.nl/hedon
We are pleased to publish this article prepared by one of my HEDON colleagues. I share with him many common feelings and perceptions about the role played by fuelwood and charcoal to meet the energy needs of the poorest of the poor.
I fully agree with him when he says that the use of these traditional sources of energy has received very limited attention by the national and international community, despite its importance.
I also agree with him that the use of these fuels in poorly ventilated homes in poor urban areas and in cold winter weather can lead to high levels of pollution and cause some (never severe) health problems. However, I do not agree that the use of woodfuels causes severe health problems. To use a personal example, I was born on a typical farm in Argentina. My mother used to cook our food using fuelwood, as did her mother. (My mother is now 80 years old and has some health problems, but none of them has been caused by the use of fuelwood; her mother died when she was 92 years old.) For this reason, I cannot agree with my HEDON colleague when he says that more attention needs to be given to these health aspects and that solutions need to address not only fuelwood shortages and prices, but also the health and education of the people involved.
I am convinced that our activities to generate new jobs and incomes (poverty alleviation), such as promoting more sustainable woodfuel systems, can help these people make their lives better, easier and healthier.
We welcome more (and different) points of view on this subject. A thank you to my colleague for his contribution. (Miguel Trossero)
[See also the article "Wood energy, climate and health" in the section Forests branch off ....]
[Top of page][Contents]
<title>Forest Energy Forum No 5. Forest Energy Forum Newsletter</title>
<section>1</section>
Logo READERS' FORUM
This section is for our readers to air their views and make their comments. So, please write to us with your ideas/views/comments and suggestions for items that you feel should be covered in future issues, at the address in the Editorial. To put your name on our mailing list, please send your full postal address to Forest-Energy-Forum@fao.org
In Spain there is renewed interest in the utilization of forest residues for energy applications. However, some sectors of forestry management and some ecologists are against the removal of residues from the forest floor as they are a source of nutrients and organic matter. For this debate, we need arguments to define the restrictions that must be taken into account to preserve soil fertility when residues are to be collected.
Do you know of any studies, publications or working groups dealing with environmental effects of the collection of forest residues, in general, and especially its influence on forest soil?
We would like to participate in any joint project to study this aspect of bioenergy. (Luis Esteban, Centro de Desarrollo de Energías Renovables (CIEMAT), Ctra N-111 km 206, 42290-Lubia, Soria, Spain; fax: +34 975 28 10 51; e-mail: esteban@CIEMAT.es )
This is an issue that is being debated by everybody everywhere and we welcome comments from our readers.
Different wood energy initiatives being undertaken in Finland, Sweden and Austria clearly show how to cope with this aspect. For more information, please contact Miguel Trossero.
I have visited your Web site on biomass fuel and wish to inform you about the Australian Biomass Thermal System which can readily combust any biomass fuel with a moisture content in the vicinity of 80 percent and attain temperatures in excess of 1 000oC in doing so. The combustion process is so efficient that no smoke is emitted from the stack. In addition to green wood, all household food scraps can be used as fuel.
In 1995, I was invited by the University of California to present a paper on our system at an international incineration conference which was held in Seattle, United States. I was recently invited by another international aid agency, the Bureau for the Development of Perennial Oil Crops (BUROTROP), to give a presentation on the biomasss thermal system to their executive committee at their annual conference in Manila. The Philippines Coconut Authority is very keen to introduce my technology in the Philippines and I understand that it will make an application for funding through BUROTROP at their next meeting in November, in France. In addition, I have been liaising with Tsinghua University in China who have expressed interest in introducing our technology in China; and Brazil has also shown interest.
I anticipate that I will need to sell equity in my company in order to finance and commercialize the Australian Biomass Thermal System. (Frank Scott, Managing Director, Dalite Holdings Pty Ltd, 3/9 Riverview Street, South Perth, Australia; e-mail: franks@q-net.net.au )
Ante todo, muchas gracias por el periódico envío de la revista Forest Energy Forum, que es realmente muy interesante.
En el número 4 aparece un artículo sobre la dendroenergía como una alternativa para el desarrollo energético sostenible en Cuba. Nosotros tenemos una amplia experiencia en utilización de biomasa y residuos celulósicos de procesos como combustible para generación de energía, tanto térmica como eléctrica. Yo creo que nuestros diseños tienen una tecnología sumamente adecuada para nuestros países, sin sofisticaciones, en tamaños pequeños y medianos y con rendimientos absolutamente comparables a las más modernas tecnologías como pueden ser lechos fluidizados y/o gasificaciones. Sería de mi interés el poder colaborar con la adopción de soluciones aptas para lo que Cuba necesita.
Sería interesante poder ponerme en contacto con interesados en el tema. Yo estoy a disposición. (Eduardo León, Ingeniería Agrest Srl, Belgrano 355 -P13, 1092 Buenos Aires, Argentina; correo electrónico: agrestin@internet.siscotel.com )
"No one is listening until you make a mistake."
Anon
[Top of page][Contents]
