<title>FAO - C 99/Report. Report of the Conference of FAO</title>
<section>1</section>
INTRODUCTION
TWENTY-FIRST MCDOUGALL MEMORIAL LECTURE^1
1. Mr.Boutros-Ghali, Secretary-General of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie, and a former United Nations Secretary-General, delivered the Twenty-first McDougall Memorial Lecture, in memory of Frank Lidgett McDougall, a founding father of the Organization.
PRESENTATION OF THE B.R. SEN AWARDS 1998 AND 1999^2
2. The annual B.R. Sen Award, in honour of the late Mr B.R. Sen, who was Director-General of FAO from 1956 to 1967, is bestowed on an FAO field officer who has made an outstanding contribution to the country or countries to which he or she was assigned.
3. The 1998 B.R. Sen Award was conferred on Mr Eduardo Seminario Martín, a national of Peru, in recognition of his major contribution in developing and utilizing participatory approaches to integrated watershed management and environmental policy and planning in Burundi. Mr Seminario Martin contributed to the protection and conservation of the environment, as well as to improving the living conditions of rural populations in the country.
4. The 1999 Award was conferred on Mr Abdelouahhab Zaid, a national of Morocco, for his outstanding achievements on the Date Production Support Programme in Namibia. This highly visible Programme contributed not only to promoting food security and the fight against desertification, but also to poverty alleviation and creation of employment.
PRESENTATION OF THE A.H. BOERMA AWARD 1998-99^3
5. The A.H. Boerma Award for 1998-99 was presented jointly to Mr Patrick Luganda, Senior Features Writer of "The New Vision" newspaper (Uganda), for his contribution in increasing public awareness of the importance of food security in his country, and to Mr Alain Zolty as Chief Editor of "Afrique Agriculture", a specialized monthly magazine that had greatly facilitated the comprehension of food and agricultural issues in the world, particularly in the Africa Region.
PRESENTATION OF THE EDOUARD SAOUMA AWARD^4
6. The Edouard Saouma Award for 1998-99 was shared between two national institutions for their outstanding contribution to the implementation of TCP funded projects. At the invitation of the Director-General, Mr Edouard Saouma attended the ceremony and personally bestowed the Award to representatives of the institutions.
7. The Award was presented to the "Dirección Forestal, Ministerio de la Agricultura" in Cuba, represented by Mr Linares Landa Elías. This institution formulated forestry legislation that offered an improved framework for sustainable forest and encouraged people's participation in forestry activities (TCP/CUB/5612).
8. The Award was also presented to the "General Department of Plant Protection" in Yemen, represented by Mr Mohamed Yahya Ali Al-Ghashim. It had developed and implemented a control technology that effectively curbed the outbreak of an insect pest in stone and pome fruit (TCP/YEM/4555).
PRESENTATION OF THE MARGARITA LIZÁRRAGA MEDAL^5
9. The Margarita Lizárraga Medal for 1998-99 was presented to the non-governmental organization, National Fisheries Solidarity (NAFSO) of Sri Lanka, for its outstanding and pragmatic initiative in taking practical steps to have the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries translated into the Sinhala language and distributed to fish workers in the country, as well as in organizing meetings to promote a better understanding of its various aspects among poor, small-scale fishing communities that would not otherwise have had access to the Code.
IN MEMORIAM^6
10. The Conference observed one minute of silence in memory of those staff members who had died in the service of the Organization since the Conference had last met. The names of the deceased staff members were read out and are contained in the Verbatim Records of the Conference.
11. The Conference paid tribute to the memory of Mr Hans W.O. Röbbel, Director, Field Operations Division and former Director, Conference, Council and Protocol Affairs Division, and Assistant Secretary-General of the Council and Conference, who had passed away on 13 October 1999.
INTRODUCTION AND REVIEW OF THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
ELECTION OF CHAIRPERSON AND VICE-CHAIRPERSONS^7
12. The Council nominated and the Conference elected Benalia Belhouadjeb (Algeria) as Chairperson of the Thirtieth Session of the Conference.
13. The Conference approved the appointment of the three Vice-Chairpersons of the Conference recommended by the Nominations Committee, as follows:
Juan Nuiry Sánchez (Cuba)
Saeed Nouri-Naeeni (Iran, Islamic Republic of)
Jan Berteling (Netherlands)
APPOINTMENT OF GENERAL COMMITTEE AND CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE^8
14. The Nominations Committee recommended and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Seven Members of the General Committee 
Burkina Faso Estonia Sweden
China Mexico United States of America
Egypt 
Nine Members of the Credentials Committee
Australia Germany Iraq
Belgium Haiti Japan
Canada Indonesia Tunisia
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE SESSION^9
15. The Conference adopted its Agenda as amended by the General Committee, and as given in Appendix A to this Report.
16. The Conference adopted the arrangements and timetable proposed by the Hundred and Sixteenth Session of the Council, as amended by the General Committee.
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairpersons, Vice-Chairpersons and Drafting Committees
17. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendations to establish two Commissions to consider and report upon Parts I and II of the Agenda.
18. In accordance with Rule VII-1 and Rule XXIV-5 (b) of the General Rules of the Organization (GRO), the Hundred and Seventeenth Session of the Council had nominated the following Chairpersons of the Commissions which the Conference approved:
Commission I Luigi M. Fontana-Giusti (Italy)
Commission II Bhaskar Barua (India)
19. Victor Manuel Rebolledo González (Chile) was elected as Chairperson of the Drafting Committee for Commission I with the following membership: Barbados, Belgium, Cameroon, Canada, Finland, Guinea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Japan, New Zealand, Syria and Thailand.
20. Renaud Collard (France) was elected as Chairperson of the Drafting Committee for Commission II with the following membership: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, China, France, Ghana, Iraq, Japan, Pakistan, Sweden, United States of America and Zimbabwe.
21. The Conference appointed the foregoing officers and, taking into consideration the proposals of the General Committee, in accordance with Rule XIII-2 GRO, also appointed the following Vice-Chairpersons:
Commission I Ms Victoria Guardia Alvarado (Costa Rica)
Bob Jalang'o (Kenya)
Commission II Bill Doering (Canada)
Ms Anneli Vourinen (Finland)
Resolutions Committee of the Conference
22. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the Hundred and Sixteenth Session of the Council to establish a Resolutions Committee of seven members, one from each region, and appointed the following:
Africa : Angola
Asia : Philippines
Europe : Finland
Latin America and the Caribbean : Nicaragua
Near East : Sudan
North America : Canada
Southwest Pacific : Australia
23. The Conference agreed to the recommendation of the General Committee that the Resolutions Committee be chaired by Ronald Rose (Canada).
24. The Conference approved the functions of the Resolutions Committee and the criteria for the formulation of resolutions, as given in Appendix C of document C 99/16.
Right of Reply
25. The Conference confirmed the decision taken at its 16 previous sessions to the effect that, when a Member wished to reply to criticisms of its Government's policy, it should preferably do so on the afternoon of the day on which such criticism had been voiced after all those wishing to participate in the discussion had had an opportunity to speak.
Verbatim Records
26. As provided for in Rule XVIII-1 GRO, Verbatim Records were kept of all Conference Plenary and Commission meetings. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the General Committee that statements could be inserted in the Verbatim Records when time did not permit them to be delivered, taking into consideration, however, the conditions laid down by the General Committee.
Verification of Credentials
27. The credentials of delegations of 162 Members were found valid. The remaining Members did not submit valid credentials.
28. The credentials of the representatives of the United Nations, its Specialized Agencies and related organizations were duly deposited as prescribed under Rule III-2 of the General Rules of the Organization.
Voting rights
29. The Conference noted that, in accordance with Article III-4 of the Constitution, at the beginning of the session 38 Member Nations had no right to vote in the Conference, since the amount of their arrears of contributions to the Organization exceeded the amount of the contribution due from them for the two preceding years. Nevertheless, the Conference decided that all Member Nations in attendance be authorized to vote on 12, 13 and 15 November 1999.
30. Subsequently, four of these Member Nations (Republic of Congo, Djibouti, Niger and Suriname) made payments sufficient to regain their voting rights.
31. The Conference also agreed that voting rights should be restored to 22 Member Nations (Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Georgia, Guinea-Bissau, Iraq, Lithuania, Moldova, Nicaragua, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tajikistan, Togo and Yemen). Some Members disagreed with this decision since it was their general principle that voting rights should be restored only to those Member Nations which had requested and agreed to an instalment plan for repayment of their arrears. Some Members objected to restoring voting rights to Iraq because it would be inconsistent with action taken at United Nations Headquarters, New York.
32. The following 12 Member Nations (Azerbaijan, Comoros, Cook Islands, Equatorial Guinea, Grenada, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liberia, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia, Turkmenistan and Yugoslavia) had no right to vote in the Conference because of arrears in contributions.
ADMISSION OF OBSERVERS^10
Applicants for Membership
33. The Director-General had provisionally invited the applicants for membership to be represented by observers until a decision had been taken on their applications. The Conference approved the Director-General's invitation in respect of Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Niue, Palau and San Marino.
Admission of Observers from Non-Member Nations
34. The Conference confirmed the invitations issued by the Director-General to the Governments of Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Russian Federation and Ukraine to attend the Session in an observer capacity.
Liberation Movement
35. The Conference confirmed the invitation issued by the Director-General, at the suggestion of the Hundred and Sixteenth Session of the Council, to the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Intergovernmental Organizations and International NGOs
36. The Conference reviewed the list of intergovernmental organizations and international non-governmental organizations to which the Director-General had extended a provisional invitation to the Session, and confirmed the said provisional invitations.
REVIEW OF THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE^11
37. One hundred and thirty-three Heads of Delegation intervened on this agenda item. Delegates commented on the overall economic, agricultural and food security situation, as described in the Secretariat documents, and reported on the food and agricultural situation and related issues in their respective countries.
38. The Conference also heard addresses by the President of Brazil, His Excellency Fernando Henrique Cardoso (18 November 1999) and the President of Finland, His Excellency Martti Ahtisaari (22 November 1999).
39. The Conference noted with concern the slow progress made so far towards meeting the World Food Summit (WFS) objective of reducing by half the number of undernourished people by 2015. Delegates also noted several unsatisfactory features and trends in the situation of food and agriculture: the persistence of a large number of countries affected by severe food shortages; the poor growth in agricultural production in the developing countries in 1998 and 1999; the decline in international commodity prices, reduction in the export earning capacity of many developing countries; inadequate investment flows and resources for agricultural and rural development; and declining levels of Official Development Assistance (ODA). References were made to the effects of the international financial crisis, which had slowed progress in meeting food security objectives in their countries.
40. As regards the role of FAO, the importance of its assistance to developing countries in participating to the forthcoming multilateral trade negotiations was emphasized, as well as the need for actively disseminating information on biotechnology/biosafety and on the benefits and risks involved in the adoption of new technologies. FAO should maintain balance and complementarity between its normative and operational activities. The importance of adequate budgetary resources for FAO to fulfil its mandate was recognized.
SUBSTANTIVE AND POLICY MATTERS
PROGRESS ON FOLLOW-UP TO THE WORLD FOOD SUMMIT^12
41. The Conference discussed the document Report on Follow-up to the World Food Summit Plan of Action^13 which covered two topics: (a) progress in implementation of the WFS Plan of Action and (b) specific actions taken by FAO.
42. Member Nations reaffirmed their commitment to achieving the objectives of the WFS Plan of Action. As such, they endorsed the measures taken by the Committee on World Food Security (CFS) in establishing reporting formats and a work plan on the implementation of the Plan of Action. To this end, the Conference urged all FAO Members and other countries that participated in the World Food Summit to submit their reports on implementation of relevant parts of the Plan of Action by the end of December 1999, in order to enable the CFS to fulfil the monitoring role which it had been assigned.
43. The Conference welcomed the active participation of other international organizations, within and outside the UN System, in supporting the implementation of Summit commitments and urged them to report on their activities to the CFS. The Conference endorsed the active collaboration among UN organizations at country level through existing mechanisms such as the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) and the ACC Thematic Groups of Food Security and Rural Development.
44. The Conference noted with satisfaction the number of countries in which civil society was taking an active role in Summit follow-up activities, and the active involvement of civil society organizations, in particular NGOs, in the work of the CFS and in undertaking practical action at international, regional and country level aimed at relieving food insecurity, and encouraged them to report to the CFS.
45. The Conference noted that, according to the Secretariat's latest estimates^14, the number of undernourished persons in developing countries had declined from 830 million to 790 million in the period between 1990-92 and 1995-97, representing a decrease of some 40 million persons or 8 million persons per year. The Conference noted that the level varied from region to region and from country to country, and that such limited progress as had been made was certainly not sufficient to meet the WFS target. Several Members expressed the view that due to a number of factors, the real number of undernourished was currently increasing. In addition to the need for greater efforts in poverty reduction and assigning higher priority to sustainable agricultural and rural development, many Members underlined that peace and conflict resolution were preconditions for successful implementation of the WFS Plan of Action, and hence the achievement of food security.
46. The Conference acknowledged the contribution of FAO programmes to the implementation of the WFS Plan of Action. It noted that the Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS) was being implemented in 50 countries and under formulation in 25 others. In this regard, several Members expressed satisfaction with the contributions of the SPFS to increasing sustainable food production and rural income growth in developing countries, and acknowledged the important role of the associated South-South Cooperation initiative. Several Members called for additional assistance from FAO and donors for implementation of the SPFS and South-South Cooperation. Several Members stressed the importance of an early evaluation of the Special Programme.
47. The Conference noted that regional food security strategies and programmes had been prepared in collaboration with the appropriate regional and subregional economic groupings. In this respect, many Members observed that the regional strategies and programmes could be useful in mobilizing synergies and cooperation at subregional and regional levels in support of national efforts towards food security. The Conference recommended that arrangements be explored to further enhance the capacity of the Regional Conferences to contribute to the monitoring of the implementation of the WFS Plan of Action by the CFS.
48. The Conference expressed satisfaction with the progress that had been made in setting up Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping Systems (FIVIMS) at national and international levels. The Conference urged all interested parties to provide resources to implement FIVIMS at country level and for the establishment of a global FIVIMS database.
49. The Conference strongly endorsed FAO's assistance to developing countries and countries in transition for the forthcoming multilateral trade negotiations in the area of food and agriculture, including capacity-building under the "Umbrella" Training Programme.
50. The Conference, noting with concern the slow progress towards meeting the WFS target, called upon Governments, donors and international financing institutions to accord greater priority to food security and sustainable agricultural and rural development, paying particular attention to the countries with the greater extent of undernourishment.
51. The Conference acknowledged the existing collaboration among the three Rome-based organizations, which was essential for effective coordinated action towards world food security. The Conference encouraged further progress towards this end. In this regard, the Conference debated a Draft Resolution on an "Alliance on Food Security", but concluded that additional study was needed by CFS to develop the concepts further with a view to the possible adoption of a Resolution on this subject.
GENDER MAINSTREAMING IN FAO^15
52. The Conference indicated agreement with the four basic substantive areas of action that characterized the FAO Plan of Action. These included the continued development and dissemination of methods and tools to train and assist development specialists in FAO and its Member Nations in gender mainstreaming, strengthening the capacities of rural women to reduce the burden of their labour and to increase their economic gains, supporting the development and implementation of gender-responsive agricultural and rural development policies, and increasing the availability and use of accurate quantitative and qualitative data and information on the gender dimension of agricultural and rural development.
53. The Conference noted that some commendable achievements had been made in the implementation of the Plan of Action. However, with reference to the Programme Committee's review of the Corporate Progress Review on Gender Mainstreaming, and the Report of the Council on this item, as well as its own review of the Sixth Progress Report, the Conference noted its concern with the uneven progress across the Technical Divisions in the implementation of the Plan of Action. It endorsed the call for adequate attention to this important cross-sectoral priority and stressed the importance of putting in place effective supportive mechanisms and monitoring arrangements throughout the Organization.
54. The Conference endorsed the Sixth Progress Report on the Implementation of the Plan of Action on Women in Development, and it recommended that the Seventh and final Progress Report on the Implementation of the Plan of Action be presented to the Conference at its Thirty-first Session to report on progress made during the 2000-2001 biennium.
55. The Conference noted the outcome of the High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information and stressed the need for more gender-disaggregated data. Several Members expressed concern that most of the gender activities had occurred through the use of extra-budgetary resources and asked the Secretariat to consider how such activities could be financed within the Regular Programme Budget.
56. The Conference supported the proposal made by the Secretariat to prepare a new FAO Plan of Action to be submitted for approval to the Thirty-first Session of the FAO Conference in 2001. It was recommended that the Secretariat seize the occasion of the new Plan to realign concepts, approaches and institutional mechanisms with the Gender and Development approach adopted widely in the UN System. Furthermore, the Conference recommended that the new Plan should not only incorporate lessons learned during the implementation of the current plan and the Beijing + 5 Review, but also take into account the results of the High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information. Finally, the Plan should reflect the observations made by the Programme Committee, the Council and the Conference on the subject of Gender Mainstreaming in FAO.
57. The Conference considered a Draft Resolution requesting the Director-General to continue actively to redress current gender imbalances in the Professional and Higher Categories of the staff structure, in line with existing procedures designed to allow him to appoint staff meeting the highest standards of efficiency and technical competence, while responding to geographical requirements. The Conference noted that in the last six years, the number of non-represented Member Nations among Professional staff had been reduced from 54 to 21 countries notwithstanding the increase in the membership of the Organization. The Conference was also informed that, over the past five-year period, the percentage of women staff in the Secretariat had increased from 18 to 20 percent.
58. The Conference noted with concern that progress achieved to date in correcting gender imbalances and working towards the United Nations goal of 50 percent of Professional and Higher Categories^16 was too slow. It therefore called upon the Director-General to establish a programme focused on redressing the current gender imbalance. In this connection, the Conference took note of some suggestions for increasing the number of Professional female staff in the Secretariat, such as a pro-active recruitment of competent women professionals in the areas of agriculture, forestry, fisheries and natural resources; utilization of strategies for retaining Professional female staff in the Secretariat; and encouragement to Governments to propose to the Organization more qualified female Professionals. The Conference stressed, however, that the paramount criterion for selection of staff to the Organization must continue to be efficiency and technical competence.
59. The Conference then adopted the following Resolution:
RESOLUTION 1/99
Correction of Geographical and Gender Imbalances in the Professional Staff Structure
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling
that, in accordance with Article VIII.3 of the FAO Constitution "in appointing the staff, the Director-General shall, subject to the paramount importance of securing the highest standards of efficiency and of technical competence, pay due regard to the importance of selecting personnel recruited on as wide a geographical basis as is possible",
Recalling
that Conference Resolution 50/55 requested the Director-General to take the proper measures to re-establish the necessary equilibrium within the Secretariat, bearing the principles set out in Article VIII.3 constantly in mind when filling vacancies that might occur in the various categories of Professional staff and any new posts that might be established,
Noting
that under the framework set out by the above provisions, the Council of FAO, at its Twenty-sixth and Twenty-seventh sessions, in June and November 1957, formulated criteria for the combined implementation of the requirements of "the paramount importance of securing the highest standards of competence" and of "selecting personnel recruited on as wide a geographical basis as is possible" and that, in line with these criteria, the Organization developed selection procedures for the combined application of those requirements,
Recalling
that the FAO Conference had, on various occasions, stressed the need to redress gender imbalances within the Secretariat in order to attain the targets set by the United Nations for women in the Professional category,
Recalling
in particular that, at its Twenty-fifth and Twenty-sixth sessions, in November 1989 and November 1991, when considering the Plan of Action for the Integration of Women into Agricultural and Rural Development, the Conference asked the Organization to increase the access of women, especially those from developing and underrepresented Member Nations, to Professional posts in FAO, with a view to making progress towards reaching the United Nations target for female staff by 1995,
Recalling
also that, at its Twenty-eighth session, in November 1995, the Conference adopted the revised FAO Plan of Action for Women in Development (1996-2001) providing that the Organization would increase its efforts in order to reach the United Nations target for women in Professional posts in the Secretariat,
Noting
with appreciation that the Director-General had been carrying out actively a substantial effort to redress existing imbalances in equitable geographical distribution within the Secretariat and that, since his appointment, notwithstanding the increase in the membership of the Organization, the number of non-represented Member Nations among the Professional staff had been reduced from 54 to 21 countries,
Noting
further with satisfaction that the Director-General was seeking actively to redress existing gender imbalances in the staff structure of the Organization in order to reach the target set by the United Nations,
Considering
that, in line with long-standing practice of the Organization, current selection procedures, whereby the Director-General appointed Professional staff on the basis of recommendations of the Professional Staff Selection Committee, were designed to allow the Director-General to appoint staff meeting the highest standards of efficiency and of technical competence, while responding to geographical and gender distribution requirements,
Considering
further that in the exercise of his full powers of appointment of staff the Director-General was under an obligation to give effect to the requirement of geographical distribution of staff set out in Article VIII.3 of the FAO Constitution and to relevant decisions by the Conference on gender distribution,
1. Confirms that, in the selection and appointment of Professional staff, the Director-General, while maintaining the paramount importance of securing the highest standards of efficiency and technical competence, should continue to give effect to criteria of equitable geographical and gender distribution, through a combined application of all these requirements;
2. Requests the Director-General to continue actively to redress geographical and gender imbalances in the Professional and Higher Categories staff structure, with a view to fulfilling the constitutional requirement of equitable geographical distribution and the United Nations target for gender distribution;
3. Requests the Director-General to ensure that the selection and appointment procedures and the relevant Staff Rules and Manual provisions adequately reflect the wishes of the Conference, with particular reference to the need to give combined effect to the requirements of paramount importance of securing the highest standards of efficiency and technical competence and equitable geographical and gender distribution.
(Adopted on 23 November 1999)
INTERNATIONAL UNDERTAKING ON PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES FOR FOOD AND AGRICULTURE^17
60. The Conference considered that the successful completion of the negotiations for the revision of the International Undertaking, as an international instrument for the conservation and sustainable utilization of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture, and for access to these resources, was essential in ensuring global food security and sustainable agriculture for present and future generations.
61. The Conference considered that the Undertaking was at the meeting point between agriculture, the environment and commerce, and agreed that there should be consistency and synergy in the agreements being developed in these different sectors. It felt that early success in these negotiations should allow the agricultural sector to shape solutions that took its specific needs into account.
62. The Conference expressed satisfaction with the progress made in the negotiations by the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture and its Contact Group during 1999, particularly in regard to the consensus reached on the text on Farmers' Rights. It considered, however, that much work was still needed in order to finalize the negotiations in the year 2000. It expressed its appreciation for the untiring efforts of its Chairman, Ambassador Fernando Gerbasi, and its desire that he carry the process through to completion. It agreed that the Chairman's Elements developed in Montreux, Switzerland, in January 1999 should continue to provide the framework in which to seek further consensus on the text of the revised Undertaking. It appealed for the Negotiating Parties to show flexibility and a spirit of constructive compromise in this regard.
63. The Conference agreed that a cornerstone of the revised Undertaking should be the Multilateral System for Access and Benefit-Sharing.
64. The Conference also confirmed that the negotiations on the revision of the International Undertaking would proceed on the basis that the Undertaking would take the form of a legally-binding instrument, closely linked to FAO and the Convention on Biological Diversity. It recognized that the full implementation of the Global Plan of Action for the Conservation and Sustainable Utilization of Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture would be greatly facilitated by the funding strategy of the International Undertaking.
65. The Conference expressed its gratitude to the Governments of Germany, Japan, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States of America for their generous contributions to the process in 1999.
66. The Conference requested that the text of the revised International Undertaking be finalized, as planned, for submission to the Hundred and Nineteenth Session of the FAO Council in November 2000. It appealed to all countries to facilitate this process. In this spirit, Members stressed the importance for countries that are developing relevant legislation to do so in such a way that would enable them to take into account and allow for the elements of this new international agreement.
67. The Conference recognized that progress was subject to the provision of extra-budgetary funds for further negotiating meetings of the Chairman's Contact Group and the Commission. It therefore appealed to countries to provide the funds necessary to prepare and run the meetings, and to facilitate the participation of developing countries. It expressed appreciation for Japan's announcement of a further contribution towards the costs of the next negotiating session of the Contact Group.
UNITED NATIONS/FAO WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME^18
68. Members were unanimous in the expression of their condolences to the family members, friends and colleagues of those who died aboard the WFP plane which crashed in Kosovo on Friday, 12 November 1999.
69. The security of humanitarian aid workers, as outlined in a United Nations General Assembly Resolution currently being finalized, had become an issue of the utmost importance, requiring assertive action by the international community at large.
70. The Conference congratulated the World Food Programme for the excellent work accomplished during 1998. Members also recalled the value of multilateral food aid as implemented by WFP and the importance of working towards a balance between emergency and development activities.
OUTCOME OF THE FAO/NETHERLANDS CONFERENCE ON THE MULTIFUNCTIONAL CHARACTER OF AGRICULTURE AND LAND
(MAASTRICHT, NETHERLANDS, SEPTEMBER 1999)^19
71. The Conference took note of the Report of the Hundred and Seventeenth Session of the Council on the FAO/Netherlands Conference on the Multifunctional Character of Agriculture and Land, and the Summary Report of the Maastricht Conference, which had been submitted to it as an information document.
OUTCOME OF THE CONFERENCE OF PLENIPOTENTIARIES ON THE ROTTERDAM CONVENTION ON PRIOR INFORMED CONSENT^20
72. The Conference expressed its satisfaction at the successful conclusion of the negotiations for the Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in International Trade, and its adoption in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, in September 1998. It favourably viewed the cooperation of FAO and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), both in the negotiation of the Convention and the joint provision of the Interim Secretariat. The Conference supported the primary role of FAO and UNEP in the Interim Secretariat and the Convention Secretariat.
73. The Conference noted that, as agreed by the Rotterdam Conference, the Interim Secretariat was provided by FAO and UNEP and that "the Secretariat functions for the Convention shall be performed jointly by the Executive Director of UNEP and the Director-General of FAO, subject to such arrangements as shall be agreed between them and approved by the Conference of Parties". It also noted the request of the Rotterdam Conference that the Director-General and the Executive Director consider the offer received from Germany and the combined offer of Italy and Switzerland, as well as any other offers, for the physical location of the Convention Secretariat, and to provide a comparative analysis of these offers to be prepared in consultation with the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (INC) for consideration by the Conference of Parties at its first meeting.
74. A number of Member Nations favoured the retention of the existing Headquarters arrangements for the future Convention Secretariat to avoid weakening the synergy between FAO and UNEP's programmes and the Convention Secretariat and to minimize expenditure, both for countries and for appropriate UN bodies.
75. The Conference noted the necessity of providing technical assistance to developing countries to implement the Convention. Several Member Nations re-emphasized the need to consider the issues of dispute settlement, illicit trafficking, and responsibility and liability. The Conference expressed its appreciation for the outcome of the Sixth Session of the INC in July 1999, including the establishment of an Interim Chemicals Review Committee.
76. The Conference expressed its appreciation that a number of countries had made resources available for the implementation of the Convention. The Conference noted with concern that resources remained insufficient, and it requested that further resources should be made available to the Secretariat through additional Regular Programme funding, which could imply corresponding savings in other areas.
PROGRAMME AND BUDGETARY MATTERS
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION REPORT 1996-97^21
77. The Conference noted that this Programme Implementation Report (PIR), covering the years 1996-97, was based upon the actual results for the entire biennium, reflecting the arrangements and timing it had approved. It welcomed the improved format with extensive use of tables and charts, focusing on quantitative information and the main achievements and events of the biennium. The Conference observed that this more concise version had been made possible in particular by placing detailed information on the implementation of planned outputs in the Programme of Work and Budget (PWB) on the FAO Internet Website. It encouraged further recourse to this method, in order to continue to strike a satisfactory balance between the expectations of a compact document and the availability of more detailed information on achievements for interested Members. It also proposed that the Programme and Finance Committees examine the possibility of the inclusion of an annual performance report in
future versions of the Programme Implementation Report.
78. The Conference stressed the importance of feedback from the membership, when addressing key accountability reports such as the PIR and its companion report, the Programme Evaluation Report (PER). It recalled in this connection the expected benefits from the enhanced programme-budget process, including the introduction of the Strategic Framework and the new programming model, and the likely impact on relevant documentation. The Conference felt, therefore, that the format and content of future accountability reports could be usefully kept under review, in particular by the Programme Committee and through the latter, by the Council.
79. In endorsing the contents of the document, the Conference observed in particular the reported decline in resources, especially under extra-budgetary funding for operational activities excluding emergency activities. It looked forward to a reversal of this trend. The Conference stressed the need to use local consultants where available, instead of international ones, especially in field project implementation.
80. The Conference welcomed current efforts to reduce the actual cost of supporting the Field Programme, therefore contributing to bridging the shortfall in reimbursements from funding sources. While endorsing further progress in this direction, the Conference underlined that it was useful that donors continue to support Regular Programme normative activities through Trust Funds. It appreciated that the issue of support costs was under constant scrutiny, particularly under the aegis of the Finance Committee.
81. In considering the synthesis of field project evaluations contained in the document, the Conference welcomed the trend in improved project formulation reported, and urged that due attention continue to be placed on ensuring overall success of the projects entrusted to FAO and the long-term sustainability of their impact.
PROGRAMME EVALUATION REPORT 1998-99^22
82. The Conference welcomed the Programme Evaluation Report 1998-99 as informative and useful. It appreciated in particular several improvements in this version, including enhanced reporting on the interaction between the evaluation teams, programme managers and senior management, as well as the use of external expertise. At the same time, the Conference endorsed the observations of the Programme Committee and the Council regarding areas for further improvement. For example, the individual programme reviews and evaluations should be more concise and less descriptive with more systematic assessment of results and impact. The Conference also called for further efforts to enhance the analytical quality of the Report. These could include more systematic use of results measurement and assessment criteria, greater attention to the Organization's thematic priorities, such as gender and environmental aspects, and to a considerably greater extent, recourse to external expertise in
evaluation.
83. The Conference reiterated the importance of evaluation in improving the relevance and cost-effectiveness of the Organization's programmes and operations. It stressed, in particular, the need for integration of evaluation with programme-budget formulation and implementation, to ensure effective feedback to decision-making.
84. In this context, the Conference stressed that the introduction of the Strategic Framework and the new programming approach provided a good opportunity for more systematic use of evaluation as a management tool. It noted that the Programme Committee had begun a dialogue with the Secretariat, starting with a review at its September 1999 session, of proposals for an enhanced evaluation regime in FAO. It encouraged the Secretariat to continue undertaking joint evaluations with partner organizations. Some Members stressed that evaluation should be linked closely to the Strategic Framework and the Medium-Term Plan, facilitating management decisions on the future of programmes, based on performance assessments and defined criteria.
85. The Conference appreciated the performance in the implementation of the programmes covered in the Report. It concurred with the comments of the Programme Committee and the Council on the main conclusions and recommendations for the individual programmes.
86. The Conference adopted the Programme Evaluation Report 1998-99 on this basis.
PROGRAMME OF WORK AND BUDGET 2000-2001^23
General Considerations
87. The Conference considered the Programme of Work and Budget proposals for the 2000-2001 biennium, welcoming the concise format of the document made possible by placing detailed information on the FAO Internet Website.
88. The Conference recognized that this Programme of Work and Budget embodied the first attempt to apply the new programming model to technical and economic programmes. It appreciated the resulting enhanced presentation of planned activities, and invited further attention to improving the focus of FAO programmes.
89. The Conference also recognized that the proposals had been developed in terms of three scenarios, covering a Real Growth (RG) option, Zero-Real Growth (ZRG) and Zero-Nominal Growth (ZNG).
90. The Conference noted that the cost increase estimate of US$ 14.9 million given in the document was based on an exchange rate of Lira 1,800 to US$ 1, the budget having been calculated on this basis. It was satisfied that the above amount and related assumptions had been endorsed by the Finance Committee.
91. The Conference observed, however, that subsequent developments were leading to a significantly different impact of the exchange rate factor. As the rate had moved to the 1,860-1,880 range, this implied a much reduced cost increase estimate and attendant lower budget levels under both the RG and ZRG options. The Conference also noted the substantial narrowing of the difference between ZRG and ZNG, which would permit the release of additional resources for priority programmes under the latter option. It noted that irrespective of the scenario adopted, some adjustments to the distribution of resources by Chapter might be required, which would be duly reported to the Council through the Finance Committee.
92. The Conference took note that adjustments to organizational structures in the administrative and operational areas, and related anticipated savings, had been incorporated in the proposals. It requested the protection of the technical programmes of the Organization. In this regard, it shared the regret expressed by the Finance Committee concerning the transfer made from substantive work in Chapter 2 to administrative activities in Chapters 5 and 6 during this biennium. The Conference was informed that further restructuring requirements were being contemplated, which could not be identified at the time of processing of the document, and for which the envisaged solutions would not have an impact on total resources. These involved in particular the strengthening of the Finance Division (AFF) and would also be duly reported to the Finance Committee.
93. The Conference underlined that the search for possible efficiency savings should remain an on-going concern of management, provided it was well considered and planned. It encouraged further efforts towards the reduction in the effective cost of support to the field programmes and compression of administrative expenditures whenever feasible. Some Members stressed that a review of the FAO Country Office structure was warranted in this context. Other Members stressed the essential role of FAO Country Offices, and gave illustration of the benefits for the countries of accreditation.
94. The Conference reaffirmed the imperative of ensuring parity and balance in the use of all FAO languages and the need for supervision of the quality of translation and interpretation. It endorsed the proposed measures towards a more balanced use of languages, including a special provision to meet specific and urgent requirements, as reflected under all scenarios included in the Programme of Work and Budget. In this respect, many Members emphasized the need for countries hosting meetings held outside Headquarters in collaboration with or under the aegis of FAO to contribute to the costs in accordance with the rules of the Organization governing the use of languages. In looking forward to further improvements in the future, the Conference agreed to the need for Members to monitor progress closely through periodic follow-up and evaluation.
95. The Conference emphasized the need for assured Regular Programme resourcing for a healthy Organization. Many Members moreover, emphasized the need for extra-budgetary support to complement limited Regular Programme resources, and invited further generous contributions from donors. At the same time, the Conference warned against excessive dependency on extra-budgetary funding, particularly for the core activities of the Organization. The Conference also reiterated the need to continue to ensure an appropriate balance between FAO's normative and operational work and, where applicable, synergy between the two.
Preferences for the Scenarios
96. During their interventions, Members expressed their preference in relation to the three scenarios.
97. Many Members stressed the context of persistent problems of hunger and malnutrition, while Official Development Assistance to agriculture was stagnant, following a period of substantial decline. They also recalled the commitments made by the Member Nations at the World Food Summit to which FAO must respond, to the greatest extent possible. Therefore, they called for adequate resources to fulfill the mandate of FAO, thereby ending the four-year period of budgetary restraint. These Members indicated that they preferred the adoption of the RG scenario, but they were prepared to endorse the ZRG scenario as a strict minimum, with the expectation that any additional resources available during the biennium could be used to adequately support high priority areas.
98. Other Members supported ZNG, recalling that this was a general policy pursued by their Governments throughout the UN System, and reflecting among other things the stringent approach to public expenditures in their countries. Some mentioned in this regard the decisions reached in other Specialized Agencies, including the ILO and WHO.
Substantive Priorities
99. The Conference endorsed the protection offered to a number of high-priority areas under all three scenarios, while noting that they had been consistently supported by the membership. These included FAO's work on Fisheries and Forestry, Genetic Resources, work on Integrated Pest Management (IPM), Codex Alimentarius, the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC), Gender Mainstreaming, the Global Information and Early Warning Systems (GIEWS), the Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping System (FIVIMS), the World Agricultural Information Centre (WAICENT) and agricultural statistics development, assistance to Members in the context of the aspects of Multilateral Trade Negotiations falling under FAO's mandate, the TCP and SPFS. Many Members expressed the wish to see increased resources being channelled to these high-priority areas. Many Members also recalled the desirability of achieving in the future an increased share for TCP in the total budget.
100. During their interventions, Members stressed other substantive areas to which they attached particular importance, such as monitoring and conservation of natural resources, including plant genetic resources, animal production and health, the Soil Fertility initiative, Prior Informed Consent (PIC), Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases (EMPRES), research promotion, the review of socio-economic and institutional strengthening aspects of rural development, assistance in case of emergencies from early warning to the rehabilitation phase, technology transfer and capacity-building in countries, Gender Mainstreaming, conservation of water resources, peri-urban agriculture, legal assistance in the application of international conventions and instruments, organic agriculture, aquaculture within the overall priority on fisheries, and active science-based contributions of FAO to current debates on biotechnology and genetically-modified
organisms.
101. Many Members expressed regret that the requests of the Ministerial Meetings for Fisheries and Forestry, in particular the four Plans of Action endorsed by the former, had not been accommodated. They also regretted that requests for a different resource allocation pattern within Chapter 2, favouring the fisheries and forestry sectors, had not materialized. Other Members did not wish to transfer resources away from Agriculture.
102. The Conference endorsed the call from the concerned Members of the Near East Region to reinstate the post of Secretary of the Desert Locust Control Commission for the Central Region, and urged the Director-General to give high priority to identifying resources from the Regular Budget or extra-budgetary resources for this purpose as soon as possible.
Arrears
103. The Conference reiterated the importance of prompt settlement of arrears due to the Organization. In this connection, it welcomed the positive information which gave it reason to hope for a significant payment of arrears by the main contributor in the next biennium.
104. In this light, the Conference addressed a Draft Resolution which had been prepared by the Secretariat to authorize the use of a portion of expected arrears payments for specific items. It received clarifications on the constitutional aspects of the Resolution.
105. The Conference considered other possible ideas as to the use of arrears payments, including for high priority technical activities which could not be funded under the normal Appropriations Resolution. It underlined the desirability of prior examination of proposed priorities by the Programme and Finance Committees and subsequent approval by the Council.
Budgetary Appropriations and the Use of Arrears
106. The Conference then adopted the following Resolutions:
RESOLUTION 2/99
Budgetary Appropriations 2000-01
THE CONFERENCE
Having considered the Director-General's Programme of Work and Budget:
Approves a total net appropriation of US$ 650 000 000 for the financial period 2000-01;
(a)
Appropriations^24 are voted for the following purposes:
US$
Chapter 1 - General Policy and Direction
Chapter 2 - Technical and Economic Programmes
Chapter 3 - Cooperation and Partnerships
Chapter 4 - Technical Cooperation Programme
Chapter 5 - Support Services
Chapter 6 - Common Services
Chapter 7 - Contingencies
Total Appropriation (Net)
Chapter 8 - Transfer to Tax Equalization Fund
Total Appropriations (Gross)
(b)
The appropriations (gross) voted in paragraph (a) above shall be financed by assessments on Member Nations, after deduction of Miscellaneous Income in the amount of US$ 6 900 000, thus resulting in assessments against Member Nations of US$ 735 680 000.
(c) In establishing the actual amounts of contributions to be paid by individual Member Nations, the Assessment of each Member Nation shall be reduced by any amount standing to its credit in the Tax Equalization Fund provided that the credit of a Member Nation that levies taxes on the salaries, emoluments and indemnities received from FAO by staff members shall be reduced by the estimated amounts of such taxes to be reimbursed to the staff member by FAO. An estimate of US$ 4 000 000 has been withheld for this purpose.
(d) The contributions due from Member Nations in 2000 and 2001 shall be paid in accordance with the Scale adopted by the Conference at its Thirtieth Session, which contributions, after the deduction of amounts standing to the credit of Member Nations in the Tax Equalization Fund, result in net amounts payable totaling US$ 647 100 000.
(Adopted on 19 November 1999)
RESOLUTION 3/99
Use of Arrears and of Advances from the Working Capital Fund
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting the continued pressure to constrain public expenditure and the consequences for the Organization's assessed contributions,
Recognizing
that the demands placed upon the Organization in respect of its programmes exceed the level of the effective working budget as defined in its Programme of Work,
Noting
that the Director-General has, as a consequence, been unable to accommodate a number of important capital and other one-time expenditures under the budget as approved by the Conference,
Noting
that additional funds may become available to the Organization during the biennium 2000-2001 in the form of payments of arrears of contributions, in particular by the major contributor,
Notwithstanding
the continuing generous support of Trust Fund donors to the work of the Organization and recognizing that some of the purposes mentioned below may benefit from voluntary contributions,
1. Requires that the Director-General apply such arrears as may be paid by the major contributor to a proportional reduction in the accumulated deficit as shown in the accounts of the Organization as at 31 December 1999 equal to the proportion of payments made by the major contributor of its total arrears in assessed contributions resulting in the replenishment of the General Fund and the Working Capital Fund as necessary,
2. Reaffirms the principle of Financial Regulation 6.1 that any cash surplus in the General Fund at the close of any financial period shall be allocated among Member Nations,
3. Urges Member Nations to pay their assessments in full, on time and without conditions and to immediately pay all arrears,
4. Authorizes the advance of funds from the Working Capital Fund up to an amount of US$ 9 million to cover redeployment and separation costs as may be necessary, as a one-time expenditure, to complete restructuring pending the eventual receipt of assessed contributions in arrears from the major contributor,
5. Further authorizes the Director-General, notwithstanding Financial Regulation 6.1, to use part or the whole of the balance of such payments of arrears for the following purposes, after providing for the implementation in full of the Programme of Work and Budget for the 2000-2001 biennium under Resolution 2/99, and to carry forward such funds to the following biennium if necessary, subject to the receipt of such arrears and prior review of priorities by the Programme and Finance Committees and subsequent approval of those priorities by the Council:
a. One-time activities of high priority and of the technical programmes of the Organization; and/or
b. One-time expenditures of a capital nature for improvement to the Organization's infrastructure including its communication capacity with Members,
6. Establishes Chapter 9 of the Programme of Work and Budget, "One-time Expenditures funded from Arrears", to manage such expenditures.
(Adopted on 19 November 1999)
FAO Representations
107. The Conference was reminded that despite the increase in membership in recent years the number of FAO Representations remained at the number decided by the Conference in 1987.
108. The Conference took note of the requests expressed by several Members to have an appropriate presence of the Organization in their countries. It requested the Director-General to review this matter and to submit proposals for decision to the Council and its relevant Committees on how best to respond to these requests.
STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK 2000-2015^25
General
109. The Conference addressed Version 4.0 of the Strategic Framework together with the Report of the Hundred and Seventeenth Session of the Council, including its consideration of the observations of the Programme and Finance Committees. It noted that, as recommended by the Council at its Hundred and Sixteenth Session, supporting analytical material prepared by the Secretariat was contained in a supplement, which had been provided for information and not for approval. It further noted that another supplement was planned, covering Regional Perspectives, but had not been issued as the comments called for by the Council had not been received from all Groups.
110. The Conference recalled that the Council, in its Hundred and Seventeenth Session during the preceding week, had expressed generally positive views on the Strategic Framework. However, several delegations proposed substantive changes.
111. The Conference recognized that Version 4.0 was the result of a comprehensive process of analysis and discussions among Members, in line with Resolution 6/97. It appreciated the participatory nature of this process, including the progressive refinement of several versions. The Conference welcomed the fact that Members had been given ample opportunity to express their views through the review of the document by a large number of inter-governmental bodies.
112. The Conference also noted that the comments received from FAO partners had been taken into account.
113. The Conference recalled that the Strategic Framework was part of the enhanced programme planning process that it had endorsed. It underlined that, by providing general orientations for the work of the Organization over the coming fifteen years, the document was expected to greatly facilitate the formulation of the complementary Medium-Term Plans and Programmes of Work and Budget in future biennia.
114. The Conference agreed that both experience in implementation of the Strategic Framework and significant changes in the external environment would warrant its revision at appropriate times.
115. The Conference also agreed that a summary version of the Strategic Framework should be prepared promptly, in order to facilitate the dissemination of its key messages to broader audiences.
Discussion of Textual Changes
116. Following extensive discussions, the Conference approved specific amendments to paragraphs 30, 31, 39 and 154 of document C 99/12, as follows:
* Paragraph 30: redraft:
"FAO's Regular Programme is the basis and starting point for formulation of the Strategic Framework. The strategies to address Members' needs are rooted in normative work, complemented by operational activities requested by Member Countries, maintaining an appropriate balance between the two."
* Paragraph 31, first sentence:
delete the words "certain critical"
* Paragraph 154: add at the end of the first bullet:
"keeping in view the need to maintain a balance between normative and operational activities."
* Paragraph 39, redraft the end of the bullet as follows:
"...(e.g. through the TCP and the SPFS);".
117. Beyond these, considerable debate took place about the phrase "considering the multifunctional character of agriculture" in paragraph 76, echoing similar divergences in views expressed during the Hundred and Seventeenth Session of the Council, and at the last Joint Meeting of the Programme and Finance Committees.
118. A number of options were considered, and it was agreed to add the following sentence at the end of paragraph 76:
"However, as FAO's Members have noted that there is currently no consensus on the meaning of the concept of the multifunctional character of agriculture nor on a role for FAO with respect to work on it, they agree that the Organization should pursue and further develop its work on sustainable agricultural and rural development."
Conclusion
119. The Conference adopted the Strategic Framework on that basis. It stressed the importance of approval by the membership of a policy document of such depth and nature at this juncture. The Conference underlined that it would contribute to forging renewed unity of purpose and commitment by the membership to the mandate and goals of the Organization.
1. C 99/INF/9; C 99/PV/1; C 99/PV/15
2. C 99/INF/6; C 99/PV/2; C 99/PV/15
3. C 99/INF/7; C 99/PV/2; C 99/PV/15
4. C 99/INF/8; C 99/PV/2; C 99/PV/15
5. C 99/INF/10; C 99/PV/2; C 99/PV/15
6. C 99/PV/14; C 99/PV/15
7. C 99/LIM/1; C 99/LIM/2; C 99/PV/1; C 99/PV/15
8. C 99/LIM/2; C 99/PV/1; C 99/PV/15
9. C 99/1; C 99/16; C 99/INF/16; C 99/LIM/14; C 99/LIM/25; C 99/LIM/27; C 99/PV/2; C 99/PV/11; C 99/PV/15
10. C 99/13; C 99/13-Sup.1; C 99/PV/2; C 99/PV/15
11. C 99/2; C 99/PV/4; C 99/PV/5; C 99/PV/6; C 99/PV/7; C 99/PV/8; C 99/PV/9; C 99/PV/10; C 99/PV/11; C 99/PV/14; C 99/PV15
12. C 99/6; C 99/INF/25; C 99/I/PV/1; C 99/I/PV/2; C 99/I/PV/7; C 99/PV/15
13. C 99/6
14. FAO, The State of Food Insecurity in the World, 1999 (October, 1999)
15.C 99/INF/21; C 99/I/PV/2; C 99/I/PV/7; C 99/PV/15
16. UNGA Resolution 53/221
17. C 99/9; C 99/LIM/21; C 99/I/PV/4; C 99/I/PV/7; C 99/PV/15
18. C 99/LIM/3; C 99/I/PV/4; C 99/I/PV/7; C 99/PV/15
19. CL 117/REP/6; C 99/INF/20-Rev.1; CL 116/REP; CL 116/PV; CL 117/PV/3; C 99/I/PV/3; C 99/I/PV/7; C 99/PV/15
20. C 99/14; C 99/14-Sup.1; C 99/I/PV/4; C 99/I/PV/7; C 99/PV/15
21. C 99/8; C 99/8-Corr.1; C 99/LIM/4; C 99/II/PV/1; C 99/II/PV/7; C 99/PV/15
22. C 99/4; C 99/LIM/5; C 99/II/PV/1; C 99/II/PV/7; C 99/PV/15
23. C 99/3; C 99/3-Corr.1; C 99/3-Corr.2 (Chinese and English only); C 99/LIM/6; CL 117/LIM/3; C 99/II/PV/2; C 99/II/PV/3; C 99/II/PV/8; C 99/PV/13; C 99/PV/15
24. Calculated at Lira 1,875 = US$ 1 (Euro 0.9684=US$ 1)
25. C 99/12; C 99/II/PV/4; C 99/II/PV/5; C 99/II/PV/6; C 99/II/PV/8; C 99/II/PV/10; C 99/PV/15
Table of contents
<section>2</section>
LEGAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
AMENDMENTS TO THE BASIC TEXTS OF THE ORGANIZATION
General Rules of the Organization^26
120. The Conference noted that, at its Hundred and Fourteenth Session in November 1997, the Council had mandated the Joint Meeting of the Programme and Finance Committees to review the procedures and methods of work for Conference Sessions, including voting and relevant rules of the General Rules of the Organization. The Joint Meetings of the Programme and Finance Committees in May and September 1998 and the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM), at its Sixty-eighth Session in September 1998, had considered the matter in great detail.
121. The Conference also noted that, at its Hundred and Fifteenth Session (November 1998), the Council had reviewed the procedures and methods of work for Conference Sessions, in the light of the proposals of the Joint Meetings of the Programme and Finance Committees and the report of the CCLM, and provided further guidance to the CCLM on the matter. In particular, the Council had requested the CCLM to submit to its Hundred and Sixteenth Session ( June 1999) draft amendments to the General Rules of the Organization to permit the abolition of the Nominations Committee and the transfer of its functions to the Council, including designation of the Credentials Committee by the June Session of the Council, subject to formal election by the Conference; the introduction of an electronic voting system; the election of Council Members by clear general consent whenever the number of candidates was equal to the number of vacancies; and the elimination of references to Conference
Technical Committees.
122. The Conference noted that the CCLM had examined, at its Sixty-ninth Session, the draft amendments to the General Rules and a Draft Resolution for the Conference, which were endorsed subsequently by the Council at its Hundred and Sixteenth Session.
123. Consequently, the Conference adopted the following Resolution:
RESOLUTION 4/99
Amendments to the General Rules of the Organization
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling
that the Council, at its Hundred and Fourteenth Session in November 1997, requested the Joint Meeting of the Programme and Finance Committees to review the procedures and methods of work for Conference Sessions, including voting and relevant General Rules of the Organization, in order to ensure that those procedures are efficient and time effective whilst protecting the rights of individual Members,
Recalling
further that the Council, at its Hundred and Fifteenth Session in November 1998, in reviewing the procedures and methods of work for Conference Sessions in the light of the proposals of the Joint Meeting of the Programme and Finance Committees and the comments of the CCLM, requested the CCLM to continue its examination of the Basic Texts and to submit to the June 1999 Council draft amendments to the General Rules of the Organization to permit:
a. The abolition of the Nominations Committee and the transfer of its functions to the Council, including designation of the Credentials Committee by the June Session of the Council subject to formal election by the Conference,
b. The introduction of an electronic voting system,
c. The election of Council Members by clear general consent whenever the number of candidates was equal to the number of vacancies, and
d. The elimination of references to Conference Technical Committees.
Noting
the recommendation of the Council, at its Hundred and Sixteenth Session in June 1999, that the General Rules of the Organization should be amended as proposed by the CCLM, at its Sixty-ninth Session in April 1999,
Adopts
the following amendments to the General Rules of the Organization:
Rule VII
Nominations
The Chairman of the Conference, the Chairmen of the Commissions of the Conference, the three Vice-Chairmen of the Conference, the members of the Credentials Committee and the elected members of the General Committee, provided for by Rule X, Paragraph 1 shall be nominated by the Council.
Rule VIII
Election of Chairman and Vice-Chairmen of the Conference and of the members of the Credentials and General Committees
The Conference shall, after consideration of the Report of the Council, elect:
a. from the delegations, a Chairman and three Vice-Chairmen;
b. from the Member Nations:
i. the Credentials Committee, as provided in Rule III, Paragraph 3;
ii. the seven members of the General Committee to be elected as provided in Rule X, Paragraph 1.
Rule XII
Quorum and voting arrangements at meetings of Conference and Council
c. Abstentions shall be recorded:
i. in a vote by show of hands, only for those delegates or representatives who raise their hands in response to the Chairman's request for abstentions;
ii. in a roll call vote, only for those delegates or representatives who reply "Abstention";
iii. in a secret ballot, only for such ballot papers deposited in the ballot box as are either blank or marked "Abstention".
(iii bis) in a vote by electronic means, only for those delegates or representatives who indicate "Abstention".
6. Voting shall be by show of hands, roll call or secret ballot.
7. (a) Subject to the provisions of paragraph 9 of this Rule, a vote by roll call shall be taken either upon request of a delegate or representative, or if a majority of two thirds is required by the Constitution or these Rules. Voting by roll call shall be conducted by calling in English alphabetical order the names of all Member Nations entitled to vote. The name of the first nation to be called shall be designated by lot drawn by the Chairman. The delegate or representative of each Member Nation shall reply "Yes", "No", or "Abstention". At the conclusion of any roll call, the name of any Member Nation whose delegate or representative failed to answer shall be called again. The vote of each Member Nation participating in any vote by roll call shall be inserted in the record of the meeting.
(b) The count and recording of votes by show of hands or by roll call shall be conducted by or under the supervision of the Conference or Council Elections Officer, appointed by the Director-General in accordance with the terms of paragraph 16 below.
(c) If for two successive ballots by roll call the name of the same Member Nation is drawn, the name of another Member Nation shall be designed by lot or lots drawn by the Chairman.
7bis. When the Conference or Council votes by electronic means, a vote without recording names shall replace a vote by show of hands and a nominal vote shall replace a roll-call. In the case of a nominal vote, the procedure of calling out the names of the Members shall not be applicable unless the Conference or Council otherwise decides. The vote of each Member participating in a nominal vote shall be inserted in the record.
9. (a) The appointment of the Chairman of the Council and of the Director-General, and the admission of additional Member Nations and Associate Members shall be decided by secret ballot. Other elections shall likewise be decided by secret ballot, except that in the case of an election in which there are not more candidates than vacancies the Chairman may submit to the Conference or Council that the appointment be decided by clear general consent.
(b) Any other matter shall be decided by secret ballot if the Conference or Council so determines.
Rule XV
Other Committees of the Conference
1. The Conference may appoint, or authorize the appointment of, any temporary or special committee which it deems necessary. Delegates of Associate Members shall have the right to participate in the deliberations of any such committee, but shall not hold office nor have the right to vote.
2. The chairman of any committee set up under this Rule shall be elected by such committee. He shall have, in relation to meetings of the committee, the same power and duties as the Chairman of the Conference has in relation to meetings of the Conference. A majority of the Members of the committee shall constitute a quorum. Decisions in the committee shall be taken by a majority of the votes cast. No Member shall have more than one vote. A Member of the committee who is unable to be present at any meeting may be represented by another Member of his delegation. Meetings of the committee shall be held in private, unless otherwise determined by the Conference.
Rule XXIV
Functions of the Council
5. General
The Council shall:
b. propose candidates for the office of Chairman of the Conference, the Chairmen of the Commissions of the Conference, the three Vice-Chairmen of the Conference, the Members of the Credentials Committee and the elected Members of the General Committee;
Rule XLII
Arrangements for the Conference
2. Member Organizations shall not participate in the Credentials Committee or the General Committee or any other body of the Conference dealing with the internal working of the Conference as the Conference may decide.
(Adopted on 23 November 1999)
Financial Regulations^27
124. The Conference considered three sets of amendments to the Financial Regulations of the Organization, in order to change the format of the External Audit Opinion, to change the entity responsible for oversight functions with respect to the investments of the FAO Reserve Fund and to provide for the establishment of a Revolving Fund for FAO Products and Related Services (other than Information Products).
125. The Conference concurred with the amendment to the Annex to the Financial Regulations, dealing with the format for the External Auditor Opinion, which had been proposed by the Finance Committee at its Eighty-ninth Session in May 1998, reviewed by the CCLM at its Sixty-eighth Session in September 1998, and endorsed by the Council at its Hundred and Fifteenth Session in November 1998. The amendment had been proposed upon suggestion by the United Nations Panel of External Auditors in order to ensure that the audit opinion of the External Auditors reflected current best practice, and to maintain consistency throughout the United Nations System.
126. The Conference also agreed with the proposal that the FAO Internal Investment Committee and the FAO Advisory Committee on Investment should replace the oversight function performed by the United Nations Investment Committee (UNIC) over the investments of the FAO Reserve Fund, which involved an amendment to Financial Regulation 9.1. The Conference noted that the proposal had been considered by the Finance Committee at its Eighty-ninth and Ninetieth Sessions, was reviewed by the CCLM at its Sixty-eighth Session in September 1998, and endorsed by the Council at its Hundred and Fifteenth Session in November 1998. The Conference noted also that the reason for the amendment was that the UNIC had communicated to FAO that, as a consequence of an increase of their responsibilities with regard to funds under the authority of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, including the funds of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, they could not continue to exercise
responsibilities with regard to FAO funds.
127. Finally, the Conference agreed with the establishment of a Revolving Fund for FAO Products and Related Services (Other than Information Products). The amendment had been prepared in response to a request by the Finance Committee at its Ninety-third Session in September 1999, was reviewed by the CCLM at its Seventieth Session in September 1999, and endorsed by the Council at its Hundred and Seventeenth Session in November 1999. The Conference noted that there was a need for the establishment of a new Revolving Fund for FAO Products and Related Services, under Financial Regulation 6.9, along the same lines as the existing Information Products Revolving Fund, allowing FAO to reinvest income derived from such products into their maintenance, dissemination and further development. The amendments also allowed funds to be used to pay for the direct costs of the production, sale and marketing of such products, and protection of intellectual property rights in those products.
Examples of such products, developed by FAO within the framework of its approved programmes, were the Microbanker software and the new Coconut Water Processing Technology. When approving the amendments, the Conference underlined that the products so developed should be related to the institutional objectives of FAO, that FAO should not be tempted to duplicate the role of the private sector and that arrangements for the exploitation of such products should be in line with the objectives of the Organization, such as ensuring that such products are made widely available to developing countries or sectors at accessible prices.
128. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
RESOLUTION 5/99
Amendment of Financial Regulations 6.9, 7.1, 9.1 and Paragraph 5 of the Annex to the Financial Regulations
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling
that the Council, at its Hundred and Seventeen Session in November 1999, on the recommendation of the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters at its Seventieth Session in September 1999, approved amendments to Financial Regulation 6.9 and 7.1 to provide for the establishment of a Revolving Fund for FAO Products and Related Services (Other than Information Products), as set out in the Report of the Hundred and Seventeenth Session of the Council^28,
Taking into account
that, regarding the establishment of a Revolving Fund for FAO Products and Related Services (Other than Information Products), the Finance Committee, at its Ninety-third Session in September 1999^29, noted that the development of such FAO innovated products should continue to be related to the achievement of the institutional objectives of the Organization, that the Organization should not be tempted to duplicate the role of the private commercial sector and that arrangements for the exploitation of such products should be in line with the aims of the Organization, such as ensuring that such products were made widely available to developing countries or sectors at accessible prices,
Taking also into account
the wish expressed by the Finance Committee to monitor the implementation of the new Revolving Fund and to receive periodical reports to that effect, and the desirability of avoiding the proliferation of separate Funds,
Considering
, in this context, that the experience in the implementation of the proposed new Fund might demonstrate the eventual need to streamline the provisions of Financial Regulation 6.9 relating to Revolving Funds,
Recalling
further that the Council, at its Hundred and Fifteenth Session in November 1998 , on the recommendation of the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters at its Sixty-eighth Session in September 1998^30, approved amendments to Financial Regulation 9.1 regarding arrangements for review of investments of the FAO Reserve Fund, as well as amendments of paragraph 5 of the Annex to the Financial Regulations to change the format of the External Audit opinion, as set out in the Report of the Hundred and Fifteenth Session of the Council^31,
Adopts
the following amendments to the Financial Regulations:
Regulation VI - Funds
6.9 There shall be established
(a) an Information Products Revolving Fund to which shall be credited the proceeds of sales of information products and the revenue from advertising in and sponsorship of such products, except that where extra-budgetary funds are used to finance those information products, the proceeds of sales may be credited to such funds. The Fund shall be used only for the following purposes:
i. to meet the direct costs of reproducing those information products for the sale of which there is a demand or reproducing new information products;
ii. to pay, from within the resources available to the Fund, the direct costs, including costs of human resources and equipment, not covered by the Programme of Work and Budget, required for the sale and marketing of all such information products; and
iii. to credit the originating divisions with such proportion of the proceeds credited to the Fund, up to 20 percent thereof, as may be determined by the Director- General, to be utilized within the biennium in which it is credited.
Any balance at the end of each financial period in excess of such sums as may be approved by the Finance Committee to cover commitments in respect of expenditures proposed by the Director-General for the following biennium shall be transferred to Miscellaneous Income.
(b) a Revolving Fund for FAO Products and Related Services other than Information Products to which shall be credited the proceeds of sales of such products as well as proceeds derived from licensing and other arrangements for their use, except that where extra-budgetary funds are used to finance the development of such products, such proceeds may be credited to such funds. The Fund shall be used only for the following purposes:
i. to meet the direct costs of maintaining and further developing such products and making them widely available, and for developing new products;
ii. to pay for direct costs of the production, sale and marketing of all such products, and protection of the property rights of these products.
Any balance at the end of each financial period in excess of such sums as may be approved by the Finance Committee to cover commitments in respect of expenditures proposed by the Director-General for the following biennium shall be transferred to Miscellaneous Income.
Regulation VII - Other income
7.1 Contributions from Associate Members and all receipts other than:
a. contributions from Member Nations to the budget,
b. direct refunds of expenditures made during the financial period,
c. advances by Member Nations to the Working Capital Fund or deposits to Trust and Special Funds and other receipts directly related to those funds, and
d. proceeds of sales of information products and the revenue from advertising in and sponsorship of such products, and proceeds of sales of FAO products and related services, other than information products, developed by FAO, and proceeds derived from licensing and other arrangements for their use,
shall be classified as Miscellaneous Income, for credit to the General Fund. Interest or other income derived from any Trust or Special Fund accepted by the Organization shall be credited to the fund to which it relates, unless provided for otherwise by the terms of the applicable Trust or Special Fund agreement.
Regulation IX - Investment of funds
9.1 The Director-General may invest moneys not needed for immediate requirements seeking, wherever practicable, the advice of an Advisory Committee on Investments composed of not less than three and not more than five members appointed by the Director-General from persons outside the Organization having substantial experience in the financial sector. The investment of moneys standing to the credit of any Trust Fund, Reserve or Special Account shall be subject to any directives of the appropriate authority.
Paragraph 5 of the Annex to the Financial Regulation
5. The External Auditor shall express and sign an opinion on the financial statements. The opinion shall include the following basic elements:
a. the identification of the financial statements audited;
b. a reference to the responsibility of the entity's management and the responsibility of the auditor;
c. a reference to the audit standards followed;
d. a description of the work performed;
e. an expression of opinion on the financial statements as to whether:
- the financial statements present fairly the financial position as at the end of the period and the results of the operations for the period;
- the financial statements were prepared in accordance with the stated accounting policies; and
- the accounting policies were applied on a basis consistent with that of the preceding financial period;
f. an expression of opinion on the compliance of transactions with the financial regulations and legislative authority;
g. the date of the opinion;
h. the external auditor's name and position; and
i. should it be necessary, a reference to the report of the External Auditor on the financial statements.
(Adopted on 23 November 1999)
AMENDMENTS TO THE GENERAL REGULATIONS AND RULES OF WFP^32
129. The Conference noted that the WFP Executive Board had established a Formal Working Group in May 1998 to review WFP Resource and Long-Term Financial Policies, to recommend any necessary changes to improve their effectiveness and to enhance its ability to attract contributions of Members. The implementation of the proposals of the Working Group involved a few changes to the Financial Regulations, the General Rules and, in particular, to Article XIII, Paragraph 2 of the General Regulations of WFP. This amendment allowed for more flexibility in accepting contributions from developing countries, countries with economies in transition and other non-traditional donors, under conditions laid down in the General Rules of the Programme. The amendment was approved by the WFP Executive Board and endorsed by the FAO Council, at its Hundred and Sixteenth Session in June 1999. A parallel amendment was also endorsed by ECOSOC by Resolution 1999/220 of 23 July 1999 and approved by the
United Nations General Assembly.
130. The Conference amended Article XIII, Paragraph 2 of the General Regulations of WFP to read as follows:
ARTICLE XIII, PARAGRAPH 2 of the General Regulations of WFP
Article XIII, Paragraph 2:
Donors may contribute appropriate commodities, cash and acceptable services in accordance with the general rules made pursuant to these General Regulations. Except as otherwise provided in such general rules in respect of developing countries, countries with economies in transition and other non-traditional donors, or in respect of other exceptional situations, each donor shall provide cash contributions sufficient to cover the full operational and support costs of its contributions.
131. The Conference also noted that, by parallel resolutions, the United Nations General Assembly and the FAO Conference in 1995 had decided that the distribution of seats of the Executive Board of WFP should be reviewed within two years after its establishment, that the review should be conducted in parallel by the General Assembly and the FAO Conference, taking into account relevant inputs from ECOSOC and the Council of FAO, and that the new proposals should enter into force on 1 January 2000. Parallel working groups, based in New York and in Rome, reached a consensus position which was reflected in a parallel Draft Resolution for the UNGA and the FAO Conference.
132. The Draft Resolution was endorsed by ECOSOC on 26 March 1999 and approved as Resolution 53/223 by the United Nations General Assembly on 7 April 1999. The Draft Resolution for the Conference was endorsed by the FAO Council at its Hundred and Sixteenth Session in June 1999.
133. The Conference then adopted the following Resolution:
RESOLUTION 6/99
Amendment to Appendix B of the WFP General Regulations
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling
its Resolution 9/95 of 1 November 1995, concerning the revision of the General Regulations of the World Food Programme,
Noting
Resolution 53/223 adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 7 April 1999, on the revision of the General Regulations of the World Food Programme,
1. Decides, subject to the concurrence of the General Assembly of the United Nations, that the Members of the Executive Board of the World Food Programme shall be elected on an interim basis for a term of three years from among the States included in the Lists set out in the Basic Texts of the World Food Programme, in accordance with the following distribution of seats, it being understood that this allocation of seats creates no precedent for the composition of other United Nations bodies of limited membership:
a. Eight Members from the States included in List A, four Members to be elected by the Economic and Social Council and four by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
b. Seven Members from the States included in List B, four Members to be elected by the Economic and Social Council and three by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
c. Five Members from the States included in List C, two Members to be elected by the Economic and Social Council and three by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
d. Twelve Members from the States included in List D, six Members to be elected by the Economic and Social Council and six by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
e. Three Members from the States included in List E, two Members to be elected by the Economic and Social Council and one by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
f. One additional Member rotating among the States included in Lists A, B, and C to be elected by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; the pattern of rotation shall be as follows:
i. A State from List A is to be elected to occupy the additional seat every other term out of four, starting from 1 January 2000;
ii. A State from List B is to be elected to occupy the additional seat the second term out of four, starting from 1 January 2003;
iii. A State from List C is to be elected to occupy the additional seat the fourth term out of four, starting from 1 January 2009;
2. Decides that the above-mentioned distribution of seats shall be reviewed two years before the end of one full rotation scheme of four terms, as referred to in paragraph 1(f) of the present Resolution. Such a review shall be in accordance with relevant provisions of General Assembly Resolutions 48/162 and 50/8, taking into account the relevant inputs of the Economic and Social Council and the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; the result of the review shall enter into force on 1 January 2012;
3. Decides further that, subject to concurrence of the General Assembly of the United Nations, the revised General Regulations shall enter into force on 1 January 2000.
(Adopted on 13 November 1999)
OTHER CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL MATTERS
Cooperation Agreement between FAO and the Intergovernmental Organization for Marketing Information and Cooperation Services for Fishery Products in Africa (INFOPÊCHE)^33
134. The Conference expressed satisfaction with the strengthening of the cooperation between the Intergovernmental Organization for Marketing Information and Cooperation Services for Fishery Products in Africa (INFOPÊCHE) and FAO.
135. The Conference noted that the Council, at its Hundred and Seventeenth Session in November 1999, had endorsed the proposed Agreement. The Conference confirmed the Cooperation Agreement as set out in Appendix D to this Report.
Cooperation Agreement between FAO and the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organization (LVFO)^34
136. The Conference expressed satisfaction with the strengthening of the cooperation between the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organization (LVFO) and FAO.
137. The Conference noted that the Council, at its Hundred and Seventeenth Session in November 1999, had endorsed the proposed Agreement. The Conference confirmed the Cooperation Agreement as set out in Appendix E to this Report.
Cooperation Agreement between FAO and the Centre for Marketing Information and Advisory Services for Fishery Products in Latin America and the Caribbean (INFOPESCA)^35
138. The Conference expressed its satisfaction with the strengthening of the cooperation between the Centre for Marketing Information and Advisory Services for Fishery Products in Latin America and the Caribbean (INFOPESCA) and FAO.
139. The Conference noted that the Council, at its Hundred and Seventeenth Session in November 1999, had endorsed the proposed Agreement. The Conference confirmed the Cooperation Agreement as set out in Appendix F to this Report.
Use of Gender Neutral Language in the Basic Texts^36
140. The Conference considered the question of the use of gender neutral language in the Basic Texts of FAO on the basis of the Report of the Hundred and Seventeenth Session of the Council in November 1999.
141. The Conference noted that the fact that the English language version of the Basic Texts contained many examples of language referring to one gender only should not cause any substantive legal problems, inasmuch it would be assumed, in accordance with generally accepted rules of interpretation, that the use of the masculine gender includes the feminine gender when referring to office-holders. The Conference agreed with the proposal made by the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters (CCLM), at its Seventeenth Session in September 1999, endorsed by the Council at its Hundred and Seventeenth Session in November 1999, that a Resolution be adopted by the Conference clarifying that the use of one gender should be considered as including a reference to the other, unless the context otherwise requires.
142. Consequently, the Conference adopted the following Resolution:
RESOLUTION 7/99
Use of Gender-Neutral Language in the Basic Texts
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting
the importance of gender-neutral language in the constitutive documents of the Organization,
Noting
, however, the technical impact and the expenses that would be incurred by amending the entire Basic Texts,
Noting
the views and recommendations of the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters as expressed at its Seventieth Session in September 1999,
Resolves
that in the Basic Texts, in accordance with the generally accepted rules of interpretation, the use of one gender shall be considered as including a reference to the other unless the context otherwise requires.
(Adopted on 18 November 1999)
FAO AUDITED ACCOUNTS 1996-97^37
143. The Conference took note of the Audited Accounts 1996-97 and the Report of the External Auditor, as reviewed by the Finance Committee at its Ninetieth Session and by the Council at its Hundred and Fifteenth Session and adopted the following Resolution:
RESOLUTION 8/99
FAO Audited Accounts 1996-97
THE CONFERENCE,
Having considered
the report of the Hundred and Fifteenth Session of the Council,
Having examined
the 1996-97 FAO Audited Accounts and the External Auditor's Report thereon,
Adopts
the Audited Accounts.
(Adopted on 23 November 1999)
SCALE OF CONTRIBUTIONS 2000-2001^38
144. The Conference recalled that it had been the normal practice of the Organization to derive the Scale of Contributions for the next biennium directly from the United Nations Scale of Assessments in force during the calendar year of the Conference Session. In 1997, however, the Conference had adopted for the biennium 1998-1999 a Scale of Contributions derived from the United Nations Scale of Assessments in force during 1997, but had requested the Director-General to prepare a modified Scale of Contributions for 1999 should the United Nations General Assembly adopt, before 31 December 1998, a new Scale of Assessments for the triennium 1998-2000.
145. The Conference noted that the UN General Assembly was expected to reach agreement during year 2000 on the United Nations Scale of Assessments to be applied for the years 2001-2003, and that the largest contributor had declared its intention to negotiate a reduction in its maximum ceiling rate.
146. The Conference further noted that the Scale recommended by the Council had been duly modified to include the new Members (Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Niue, Palau and San Marino) admitted at the Thirtieth Session of the Conference (See operative paragraph 1 of Resolution 9/99)
147. One Member Nation expressed reservations on the proposed Draft Resolution, and believed that it was incompatible with the Financial Regulations of the Basic Texts of FAO and its traditional practices, in particular with regard to its admissibility from a legal point of view. Another Member Nation expressed its strong concern at the possible increase of assessed contributions of many Member Nations, in particular Asian nations, and about the need to modify the FAO Scale of Contributions to reflect the new UN Scale of Assessments before the next session of the Conference.
148. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
RESOLUTION 9/99
Scale of Contributions 2000-2001
THE CONFERENCE,
Having noted the recommendations of the Hundred and Sixteenth and Hundred and Seventeenth Sessions of the Council,
Confirming
that, as in the past, FAO should follow the United Nations Scale of Assessments subject to the adaptation for the different membership of FAO,
Noting
that the United Nations General Assembly is expected next year to reach agreement on the United Nations Scale of Assessments to be applied for the years 2001-2003,
Further noting
that the 1997 FAO Conference adopted Resolution 15/97 directing the Director-General to prepare a modified Scale of Contributions for the second year of the 1998-99 biennium, based on the expectation of the adoption by the United Nations of a new Scale of Assessments after the completion of the 1997 Conference:
1. Adopts for use in 2000 and 2001 the Scale as set out in Appendix G of this Report, derived directly from the United Nations Scale of Assessments in force for 2000;
2. Decides that if the United Nations General Assembly adopts a new United Nations Scale of Assessments for the years 2001 to 2003 before 31 December 2000, the Director-General shall prepare a modified Scale of Contributions for the year 2001 to reflect the Scale of Assessments for that year fixed by the United Nations General Assembly, applying established principles for adjusting the FAO Scale of Assessment to take into account differences in membership between the United Nations and FAO.
(Adopted on 19 November 1999)
PAYMENT BY THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY TO COVER EXPENSES ARISING OUT OF ITS MEMBERSHIP IN THE ORGANIZATION^39
149. Article XVIII.6 of the Constitution provides that:
"A Member Organization shall not be required to contribute to the budget as specified in paragraph 2 of this Article, but shall pay to the Organization a sum to be determined by the Conference to cover administrative and other expenses arising out of its membership in the Organization .."
At its Twenty-sixth Session in 1991, the Conference had fixed the sum to be paid by the European Community for the 1992-1993 biennium at US$ 500 000. At its Twenty-seventh Session in 1993, the Conference had again set the amount of the payment due by the EC for the 1994-1995 biennium at US$ 500 000: this sum was arrived at by taking the lump-sum payment set by the Conference in 1991, increasing it in line with the standard cost increase coefficient adopted for the 1994/1995 budget, and adjusting it in line with the comparative movements of the US and Italian currencies. The Conference had further decided that the sums paid by the EC in respect of administrative and other expenses should be paid into a Trust or Special Fund to be established by the Director-General under Regulation 6.7 of the Financial Regulations.
150. At the request of the Conference, the Finance Committee, at its Seventy-eighth Session in April 1994, had considered further the methodology for the calculation of the sum to be paid by Member Organizations to cover administrative and other expenses arising out of their membership in the Organization. The Committee
"recommended that, in future, the Conference should continue to set the payment due for administrative and other expenses arising out of membership in the Organization at a lump-sum, calculated on the basis of the lump-sum set for the preceding biennium, adjusted to take into account cost increases in line with the rest of the budget, and the setting of the US Dollar/Italian Lire 'budget rate'. This would of course be without prejudice to the reimbursement of expenses incurred in respect of services not normally granted to FAO Members without special payment."
This recommendation was supported by the Council at its Hundred and Seventh Session in November 1994. On the basis of the methodology recommended by the Finance Committee and supported by the Council, the Twenty-eighth Session of the Conference in 1995 had set the payment due for the 1996-1997 biennium at US$ 525 000.
151. On the basis of the same methodology, the Twenty-ninth Session of the Conference in 1997 had set the payment due for the 1998-1999 biennium at US$ 545 500. Using the same methodology and taking the cost increases at their average of 2.3 percent as used in the budget proposed by the Director-General in document C 99/3 after adjustment of the rate of exchange to reflect the expected rate of Lit. 1800 = US$ 1.00, the lump sum payment due by the EC to cover administrative and other expenses arising out of its membership in the Organization would be US$ 558 000 for the 2000-2001 biennium.
152. In view of the above, the Conference agreed to set the lump-sum payment due by the EC to cover administrative and other expenses arising out of its membership in the Organization at US$ 558 000 for the 2000-2001 biennium.
153. As for previous biennia, it was proposed that the sums paid by the EC in respect of administrative and other expenses should be paid into a Trust or Special Fund to be established by the Director-General under Regulation 6.7 of the Financial Regulations.
AFTER SERVICE MEDICAL COVERAGE^40
154. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
RESOLUTION 10/99
After Service Medical Coverage
THE CONFERENCE,
Having considered
the report of the Hundred and Fifteenth Session of the Council,
Having noted
the unfunded liability for past services,
Having noted
that the Separation Payments Scheme and the Staff Compensation Plan have achieved fully funded status and that the Audited Accounts at 31 December 1997 show that the book value of related investments exceeds the liabilities,
Approves
the following plan of action:
1. Any income generated from the investments held in respect of the Separation Payments Scheme and Staff Compensation Plan be applied as originally foreseen to ensure the adequacy of those funds to extinguish the respective liabilities.
2. Should there be an excess in the investment income of the Separation Payments Scheme and Staff Compensation Plan over the requirements for these funds then this should in principle be earmarked for the After Service Medical Coverage liability for past services.
3. Following the past practice to establish separate funds for after service benefits, the investments in the Separation Payments Scheme and the Staff Compensation Plan exceeding the liabilities be earmarked for an After Service Medical Coverage Fund.
(Adopted on 23 November 1999)
ADDRESS BY A STAFF REPRESENTATIVE^41
155. The General Secretary of the Union of General Service Staff (UGSS) spoke on behalf of the three Staff Representative Bodies highlighting the concerns of the staff about downsizing and career prospects as a result of the financial constraints of the Organization and indicating their willingness to participate in providing input into human resources management plans. In addition, the General Secretary also expressed concern about the security of UN staff.
APPOINTMENTS AND ELECTIONS
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP IN THE ORGANIZATION^42
156. The Conference had before it applications for membership from the following countries:
- Republic of Kiribati;
- Republic of the Marshall Islands;
- Niue;
- Republic of Palau;
- Republic of San Marino.
These applications were supplemented by the formal instrument required under Article II of the Constitution, and were thus found to be in order.
157. The applications from the Republic of the Marshall Islands, Niue, the Republic of Palau and the Republic of San Marino had been submitted within the time limit prescribed by Rule XIX GRO. The application from the Republic of Kiribati had arrived after the aforementioned time limit, but the Conference decided to waive the time limit, in accordance with Rule XLVIII.1 GRO.
158. The Conference proceeded to a secret ballot on the applications from the Republic of the Marshall Islands, Niue, the Republic of Palau and the Republic of San Marino at its second plenary meeting on Friday 12 November 1999, in accordance with Article II-2 of the Constitution and Rule XII-9 GRO. The application from the Republic of Kiribati was voted on, by secret ballot, at its sixth plenary meeting on Monday 15 November 1999. The results were as follows:
Admission of Niue
1. Number of ballots deposited 135
2. Defective ballots 0
3. Abstentions 9
4. Number of votes cast 126
5. Majority required 84
6. Votes for 126
7. Votes against 0
Admission of the Marshall Islands
1. Number of ballots deposited 135
2. Defective ballots 0
3. Abstentions 9
4. Number of votes cast 132
5. Majority required 89
6. Votes for 132
7. Votes against 0
Admission of the Republic of Palau
1. Number of ballots deposited 135
2. Defective ballots 1
3. Abstentions 10
4. Number of votes cast 124
5. Majority required 83
6. Votes for 123
7. Votes against 1
Admission of the Republic of San Marino
1. Number of ballots deposited 135
2. Defective ballots 0
3. Abstentions 12
4. Number of votes cast 123
5. Majority required 82
6. Votes for 123
7. Votes against 0
Admission of the Republic of Kiribati
1. Number of ballots deposited 122
2. Defective ballots 0
3. Abstentions 3
4. Number of votes cast 119
5. Majority required 80
6. Votes for 119
7. Votes against 0
159. The Conference accordingly admitted the aforementioned applicant countries to membership of the Organization.
160. The Conference decided that, according to established principles and customs, the contribution due for the last quarter of 1999 and the advance to be made to the Working Capital Fund by each country was as follows:
Contribution - Last quarter
(US$)
Working Capital Fund Advance
(US$)
Kiribati, Republic of 
Marshall Islands, Republic of the
Niue 
Palau, Republic of 
San Marino, Republic of 
APPOINTMENT OF THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL^43
161. The Conference had before it two nominations for the Office of Director-General. After a secret ballot, the Conference appointed Mr Jacques Diouf (Senegal) to the Office of Director-General for a period of six years, from 1 January 2000 to 31 December 2005.
162. Pursuant to Rule XXXVI-1(c) GRO, on the recommendation of the General Committee, the Conference adopted the following Resolution:
RESOLUTION 11/99
Appointment of the Director-General
THE CONFERENCE,
Acting
in accordance with Article VII of the Constitution,
Having
proceeded to a secret ballot as laid down in Rule XII of the General Rules of the Organization,
1. Declares that Jacques Diouf is appointed to the office of Director-General, for a period of six years, from 1 January 2000, the term of office expiring on 31 December 2005; and
Having considered
the recommendations regarding the conditions of appointment of the Director-General submitted by the General Committee in accordance with Rules X-2(j) and XXXVI-1(c) of the General Rules of the Organization,
2. Resolves that the Director-General shall receive a gross annual salary of US$ 186 094 corresponding to a net base annual salary of US$ 126 494 at the dependency rate, or US$ 112 488 at the single rate and an annual post adjustment corresponding to US$ 1 264.94 for each multiplier point at the dependency rate, or US$ 1 124.88 at the single rate, payable in accordance with the provisions of the Organization governing the salary to staff members; that he shall receive a representation allowance at the rate of US$ 50 000 net per annum; that in addition the Organization will directly rent appropriate housing accommodation to be assigned as the official residence of the Director-General and pay related expenses, in lieu of a rental subsidy; and that he shall be entitled to all other allowances and benefits accruing to staff members of the Organization in the Professional and Higher Categories;
3. Further resolves that the Director-General shall not be a participant in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and that, in lieu thereof, he shall be entitled to receive, in monthly instalments, the equivalent of the Organization's contribution to the Fund that would have been payable had he been a participant, as a supplement to his monthly remuneration; and
4. Further resolves that the terms and conditions of appointment of the Director-General shall be governed by the relevant provisions of the Staff Regulations subject, however, to the provisions of the contract to be signed by the Chairman of the Conference on behalf of the Organization and by the Director-General elect, in accordance with Rule XXXVI-1(c).
(Adopted on 17 November 1999)
ELECTION OF MEMBERS AND INDEPENDENT CHAIRMAN OF THE COUNCIL^44
Election of Council Members^45
163. The Conference elected Burkina Faso to the Council seat for the Africa Region for the outstanding period November 1999 to November 2001.
164. The Conference then elected the following Member Nations as Members of the Council:
Period November 1999 to 31 December 2002
REGION (SEATS) 
MEMBERS
Africa (4)
Ethiopia
Lesotho
Mauritania
Senegal
Asia (3)
India
Malaysia
Pakistan
Europe (4)
France
Iceland
Italy
United Kingdom
Latin America and the Caribbean (1)
Guatemala
Near East (3)
Egypt
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of
Syria
North America 
None
South West Pacific (1) 
Australia
Period 1 January 2001 to November 2003
REGION (SEATS) 
MEMBERS
Africa (3)
Cameroon
Kenya
Zimbabwe
Asia (6)
China
Japan
Korea, Republic of
Philippines
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Europe (3)
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Germany
Latin America and the Caribbean (3)
Argentina
Chile
Peru
Near East (1) 
Iran, Islamic Republic of
North America 
None
South West Pacific 
None
Appointment of Independent Chairman of the Council^46
165. The Conference had before it one nomination for the office of Independent Chairman of the Council.
166. The Conference, after a secret ballot, appointed Sjarifudin Baharsjah to the office of Independent Chairman of the Council and adopted the following Resolution:
RESOLUTION 12/99
Appointment of the Independent Chairman of the Council
THE CONFERENCE,
Having proceeded
to a secret ballot, in accordance with the provisions of Rule XII of the General Rules of the Organization:
1. Declares that Sjarifudin BAHARSJAH is appointed Independent Chairman of the Council for a period of two years, that is, until the end of the regular session of the Conference to be held in 2001;
2. Decides that the conditions of appointment, including the allowances attached to the office of the Independent Chairman of the Council, shall be as follows:
a. An annual allowance of the equivalent of US$ 22 000 to cover the representation expenses and secretarial assistance in the Chairman's home station, on the understanding that the Director-General will provide secretarial assistance when the Chairman attends sessions of the Council or Conference; one-half of the allowance shall be payable in US dollars, the balance being payable, in whole or in part, in the currency of the home station of the Chairman, or in Italian lire, according to his desires;
b. a per diem allowance at a rate equivalent to that for the Deputy Director-General, while the Chairman is absent from his home station on Council business;
c. Travel expenses, including the above per diem allowance, shall be defrayed by the Organization, in conformity with its regulations and existing practice, when the Chairman attends sessions of the Council, of the Programme and Finance Committees, of the Conference, or when he is invited by the Council or by the Director-General to travel for other purposes.
(Adopted on 22 November 1999)
APPOINTMENT OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE FAO CONFERENCE TO THE STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE^47
167. In accordance with Article 6(c) of the Regulations of the UN Joint Staff Pension Fund, the Conference appointed two members and two alternate members to the Staff Pension Committee for the periods specified as follows:
For the period 1 January 2000 - 31 December 2002
Member Ms Korntip Ratanakomut
Deputy Permanent Representative of Thailand to FAO
Alternate Member Mr Gaspard Kabura
First Counsellor
Embassy of the Republic of Burundi
For the period 1 January 2001 - 31 December 2003
Member Mr Don Juan Borg Gil
Minister Counsellor
Embassy of the Dominican Republic
Alternate Member His Excellency Souhaib Deen Bangoura
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Guinea to FAO
OTHER MATTERS
DATE AND PLACE OF THE THIRTY-FIRST CONFERENCE SESSION^48
168. The Conference decided that its Thirty-first Session should be held in Rome from 2 to 13 November 2001.
FAO COMPLIANCE AGREEMENT AND REVISED TEXT OF THE INTERNATIONAL PLANT PROTECTION CONVENTION^49
169. In considering the Statutory Report to the Conference on "Multilateral Treaties deposited with the Director-General", the Conference emphasized the importance of an early entry into force of the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels in the High Seas, approved by the Conference at its Twenty-seventh Session, in November 1993, and the Revised Text of the International Plant Protection Convention, approved by the Conference, at its Twenty-ninth Session in November 1997.
170. Consequently, the Conference adopted the following Resolution:
RESOLUTION 13/99
FAO Compliance Agreement and Revised Text of the International Plant Protection Convention
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling that under the terms of Article XIV.1 of the FAO Constitution the Conference or the Council may approve and submit to Member Nations conventions and agreements concerning questions relating to food and agriculture,
Recalling, in particular, its approval of the International Plant Protection Convention under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution at its Sixth Session in 1951, which Convention came into force on 3 April 1952, and the adoption of a set of amendments to that Convention at its Twenty-ninth Session in 1997,
Recalling
that, in accordance with Article XIII.4 of the Convention, the amendments will enter into force as from the thirtieth day after their acceptance by two-thirds of the Contracting Parties and that, to date, only eight countries have accepted the Revised Text of the Convention,
Recalling
also its approval of the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas, at its Twenty-seventh Session in 1993,
Noting
that, in accordance with its Article XI.1, the Agreement will enter into force as from the date of receipt by the Director-General of the twenty-fifth instrument of acceptance and that, notwithstanding its importance, to date only fifteen countries have accepted the Agreement:
1. Requests FAO Members and eligible Non-Members of FAO that have not yet done so, to consider the International Plant Protection Convention, with a view to depositing an instrument of adherence thereto;
2. Requests the Contracting Parties of the International Plant Protection Convention to consider the amendments to the Convention, adopted by Conference Resolution 12/97 of 17 November 1997, with a view to accepting them, and thereby bringing the Revised Text of the Convention into force as soon as possible;
3. Requests FAO Members and eligible Non-Members of FAO to consider the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas with a view to accepting it, and thereby bringing the Agreement into force as soon as possible.
(Adopted on 23 November 1999)
26. C 99/LIM/8; C 99/PV/12; C 99/PV/15
27. C 99/LIM/13; C 99/PV/12; C 99/PV/15
28. CL 117/REP, para 61
29. CL 117/4, paras 40-42
30. CL 115/5
31. CL 115/REP, paras 88- 89
32. C 99/LIM/9; CL 116/REP; C 99/PV/3; C 99/PV/15
33.C 99/LIM/17; C 99/PV/11; C 99/PV/15
34. C 99/LIM/18; C 99/PV/11; C 99/PV/15
35. C 99/LIM/19; C 99/PV/11; C 99/PV/15
36. C 99/LIM/20; C 99/PV/11; C 99/PV/15
37. C 99/5; C 99/LIM/10; C 99/PV/14; C 99/PV/15
38. C 99/LIM/11; C 99/LIM/11-Corr.1; C 99/LIM/26; C 99/PV/13; C 99/PV/15
39. C 99/LIM/24; C 99/PV/15
40. C 99/LIM/12; C 99/PV/14; C 99/PV/15
41. C 99/PV/14; C 99/PV/15
42. C 99/10; C 99/10-Sup.1; C 99/10-Sup.2; C 99/PV/2; C 99/PV/6; C 99/PV/15
43. C 99/18; C 99/LIM/24; C 99/PV/3; C 99/PV/15
44. C 99/11; C 99/19; C 99/19-Corr.1; C 99/19-Corr.2; C 99/LIM/15; C 99/LIM/23; C 99/PV/12; C/99/PV15
45. C 99/11; C 99/LIM/23; C 99/PV/12; C 99/PV/15
46. C 99/19; C 99/19-Corr.1; C 99/19-Corr.2; C 99/LIM/15; C 99/LIM/28; C 99/PV/12; C 99/PV/15
47. C 99/17; C 99/PV/14; C 99/PV/15
48. C 99/PV/14; C 99/PV/15
49. C 99/LIM/29; C 99/PV/14; C 99/PV/15
APPENDIX A
AGENDA FOR THE THIRTIEH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE
INTRODUCTION AND REVIEW OF THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
1. Election of Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersons
2. Appointment of General Committee and Credentials Committee
3. Adoption of the Agenda and Arrangements for the Session
4. Admission of Observers
5. Review of the State of Food and Agriculture
PART I - SUBSTANTIVE AND POLICY MATTERS
6. Progress on Follow-up to the World Food Summit
7. Gender Mainstreaming in FAO
8. International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture
9. United Nations/FAO World Food Programme
10. Outcome of the FAO/Netherlands Conference on the Multi-Functional Character of Agriculture and Land (Maastricht, Netherlands, September 1999)
11. Outcome of the Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Rotterdam Convention on Prior Informed Consent (PIC)
PART II - PROGRAMME AND BUDGETARY MATTERS
12. Programme Implementation Report 1996-97
13. Programme Evaluation Report 1998-99
14. Programme of Work and Budget 2000-2001
15. Strategic Framework 2000-2015
PART III - LEGAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
16. Amendments to the Basic Texts of the Organization
16.1 General Rules of the Organization
16.2 Financial Regulations
17. Amendments to the General Regulations and Rules of WFP
18. Other Constitutional and Legal Matters
18.1 Cooperation Agreement between FAO and the Intergovernmental Organization for Marketing Information and Cooperation Services for Fishery Products in Africa (INFOPÊCHE)
18.2 Cooperation Agreement between FAO and the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organization (LVFO)
18.3 Cooperation Agreement between FAO and the Centre for Marketing Information and Advisory Services for Fishery Products in Latin America and the Caribbean (INFOPESCA)
18.4 Use of Gender Neutral Language in the Basic Texts
19. FAO Audited Accounts 1996-97
20. Scale of Contributions 2000-2001
21. Payment by the European Community to Cover Expenses Arising out of its Membership in the Organization
22. Other Administrative and Financial Matters
22.1 After Service Medical Coverage
PART IV - APPOINTMENTS AND ELECTIONS
23. Applications for Membership in the Organization
24. Appointment of the Director-General
25. Election of Council Members and Independent Chairman
26. Appointment of Representatives of the FAO Conference to the Staff Pension Committee
PART V - OTHER MATTERS
27. Date and Place of the Thirty-first Conference Session
28. Any Other Matters
28.1 McDougall Memorial Lecture
28.2 Presentation of B.R. Sen Awards
28.3 Presentation of A.H. Boerma Award
28.4 Presentation of Edouard Saouma Award
28.5 Margarita Lizárraga Medal
28.6 In Memoriam
Table of contents
<section>3</section>
APPENDIX B
LIST OF DELEGATES AND OBSERVERS
LISTE DES DÉLÉGUÉS ET OBSERVATEURS
LISTA DE DELEGADOS Y OBSERVADORES
Chairperson
Président
Presidente
Benalia BELHOUADJEB (Algeria)
Vice-Chairpersons
Vice-président(e)s
Vice Presidentes Juan NUIRY SÁNCHEZ (Cuba)
Saeed NOURI-NAEENI (Iran, Islamic Republic of)
Jan BERTELING (Netherlands)
MEMBER NATIONS
ÉTATS MEMBRES
ESTADOS MIEMBROS
AFGHANISTAN - AFGANISTÁN 
Delegate 
Naik Muhammad GARDIZI
Minister for Agriculture
Kabul 
Alternate 
Hamiddullah Nasser ZIA
Minister Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
ALBANIA - ALBANIE 
Delegate 
Lufter XHUVELI
Minister for Agriculture and Food
Tirana 
Alternates 
Leontiev ÇUÇI
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Leonidha KOSTA
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Sali METANI
Director
Foreign Relations Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Tirana 
ALGERIA - ALGÉRIE - ARGELIA 
Délégué 
Benalia BELHOUADJEB
Ministre de l'agriculture et de la pêche
Alger 
Suppléants 
Hocine MEGHAR
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Rachid BENAISSA
Chef de Cabinet
Ministère de l'agriculture et de la pêche
Alger
Abdallah GHEBALOU
Directeur général des forêts
Ministère de l'agriculture et de la pêche
Alger Yacine BAKAIL
Directeur d'études
Ministère de l'agriculture et de la pêche
Alger
Med Salah SMATI
Directeur général des pêches
Ministère de l'agriculture et de la pêche
Alger Bousekrine BOUDAA
Chargé d'études et de synthèse
Chargé des relations internationales
Alger
Med Nadji BENCHEIKH-LEHOCINE
Chargé d'études et de synthèse
Chargé du dossier suivi Sommet Mondial de l'Alimentation
Ministère de l'agriculture et de la pêche
Alger Aomar AIT AMEUR MEZIANÉ
Directeur des productions agricoles
Ministère de l'agriculture et de la pêche
Alger
Hamid Abdelaziz ACHOUR
Directeur général
Institut national de médecine vétérinaire
Ministère de l'agriculture et de la pêche
Alger Sid Ahmed FERROUKHI
Directeur général adjoint
Institut national de la recherche agricole
Ministère de l'agriculture et de la pêche
Alger
Mme Hariba YAHIA-CHERIF
Conseillère
Représentante permanente adjointe auprès de la FAO
Rome Nasreddine RIMOUCHE
Chef de Bureau
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Alger
Ahmed HACHEMI
Conseiller
Ambassade d'Algérie
Rome 
ANGOLA 
Délégué 
Gilberto Buta LUTUCUTA
Ministre de l'agriculture et du développement rural
Luanda 
Suppléants 
Antero Alberto EVERDOSA ABREU
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Kiala Kia MATEVA
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
Alberto Carlos AMARAL
Conseiller
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome Jacinto JOÃO
Directeur du cabinet du Ministre de l'agriculture
Ministère de l'agriculture et du développement rural
Luanda
Pedro Agostinho KANGA
Chef du département de la coopération et des relations internationales
Ministère de l'agriculture et du développement rural
Luanda Kimawu UKINU DANIEL
Technicien supérieur
Département de la coopération et des relations internationales
Ministère de l'agriculture et du développement rural
Luanda
Mme Adelaide Luis FONTES PEREIRA
Assistante du Ministre
Ministère de l'agriculture et du développement rural
Luanda 
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
ANTIGUA-ET BARBUDA
ANTIGUA Y BARBUDA
Delegate 
Vere Cornwall BIRD Jr
Minister for Agriculture, Lands and Fisheries
St John's 
ARGENTINA - ARGENTINE 
Delegado 
Enrique A. PAREJA
Embajador de la República Argentina en Zimbabwe
Harare 
Suplentes 
Sra. Ileana DI GIOVAN BATTISTA
Ministro Plenipotenciario
Subsecretaría de Negociaciones Económicas Internacionales
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, Comercio Internacional y Culto
Buenos Aires Sra. Hilda Graciela GABARDINI
Consejero
Encargado de Negocios a.i.
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Mario BOSSI de EZCURRA
Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma Ariel FERNÁNDEZ
Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Asesores 
Juan Carlos Roland VIGNAUD
Embajador de la República Argentina ante el Reino de Suecia
Estocolmo Sra. Marcela MOLINARI-BELTRÁN
Agregado Administrativo
Representante Permanente Agregado ante la FAO
Roma
Sra. Andrea FORBES
Representación Permanente de la República Argentina ante la FAO
Roma Sra. María Inés JAIME BURMEISTER
Representación Permanente de la República Argentina ante la FAO
Roma
ARMENIA - ARMÉNIE 
Delegate 
Gagik SHAHBAZIAN
Minister for Agriculture
Erevan 
Alternate 
Gaghik BAGHDASSARYAN
Ambassador
Embassy of Armenia
Rome 
AUSTRALIA - AUSTRALIE 
Delegate 
Warren TRUSS
Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Canberra 
Alternates 
Paul HICKEY
Executive Director
Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service
Canberra Dennis GEBBIE
Assistant Secretary
Internal Branch
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Canberra
Roger SMITH
Secretary
Northern Territory
Department of Primary Industry and Fisheries
Darwin Ms Sue WHITE
Senior Adviser
Office of the Minister
Canberra
Paul ROSS
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Brett HUGHES
Director
FAO and Americas Section
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Canberra
Andrew Craig COONEY
Policy Officer
FAO and Americas Section
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Canberra 
AUSTRIA - AUSTRICHE 
Delegate 
Wilhelm MOLTERER
Federal Minister for Agriculture and Forestry
Vienna 
Alternates 
Mrs Hedwig WÖGERBAUER
Head of Division
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Vienna Mrs Elke ATZLER
Head of Division
Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Vienna
Cristian MANDL
Federal Ministry for Foreign Affairs
Vienna Mrs Natalie FEISTRITZER
Attaché (Agricultural Affairs)
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Reinhard SCHWENDTBAUER
Member of the Cabinet of the Minister of Agriculture
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Vienna Mrs Karin LAURITSCH
Austrian Embassy
Rome
AZERBAIJAN - AZERBAÏDJAN - AZERBAIYÁN
BAHAMAS 
Delegate 
Earl DEVEAUX
Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries
Nassau 
Alternates 
Carl Francis SMITH
Director of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Nassau Michael T. BRAYNEN
Director of Fisheries
Technical Advisor
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Nassau
BAHRAIN - BAHREÏN - BAHREIN 
Delegate 
Ali Ibrahim AL-MAHROOS
Minister for Works and Agriculture
Manama 
Alternates 
Siddiq AL-ALAWI
Assistant Under-Secretary
Ministry of Works and Agriculture
Manama Jamal BUSHAGER
General Coordinator and Manager
Ministry of Works and Agriculture
Manama
Saeed Abdulla AL AYOUBI
Superintendent
Land Reclamation and International Relations Section
Ministry of Works and Agriculture
Manama Hussein Jawad AL LAITH
Head
Projects Engineering
Ministry of Works and Agriculture
Manama
BANGLADESH 
Delegate 
A.M.M. SHAWKAT ALI
Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Dhaka 
Alternates 
Muhammad ZAMIR
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mohammad MEJBAHUDDIN
Counsellor (Econ.)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
BARBADOS - BARBADE 
Delegate 
Anthony WOOD
Minister for Agriculture and Rural Development
Bridgetown 
Alternate 
Lyall W. SMALL
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Bridgetown 
BELGIUM - BELGIQUE - BÉLGICA
Délégué 
Jaak GABRIELS
Ministre de l'agriculture et des classes moyennes
Bruxelles 
Suppléants 
Jacques de MONTJOYE
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Xavier DE CUYPER
Chef de cabinet du Ministre
Ministère de l'agriculture et des classes moyennes
Bruxelles
Johnny DEMAITER
Conseiller général
Département de la politique agricole internationale et de la pêche
Ministère de l'agriculture et des classes moyennes
Bruxelles Wilfred GEENS
Directeur du service des Nations Unies
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Bruxelles
René POISMANS
Ingénieur
Service des relations internationales
Ministère de l'agriculture et des classes moyennes
Bruxelles Christian PANNEELS
Conseiller
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome
Mme Yolande SNOY
Conseillère Adjointe
Service des Institutions spécialisées
Département des affaires étrangères
Bruxelles Charles BOIS d'ENGHIEN
Conseiller Adjoint
Direction des relations économiques multilatérales
Bruxelles
Mme Justine GENTILE-PEREBOOMS
Secrétaire
Représentante permanente suppléante auprès de la FAO
Rome Jean-Christophe JACOBS
Attaché à la division des relations internationales de la Région Wallonne
Bruxelles
BELIZE - BELICE 
Delegate 
Horace GRANT
Assistant Secretary
Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Cooperatives
Belmopan 
BENIN - BÉNIN 
Délégué 
Théophile NATA
Ministre du développement rural
Cotonou 
Suppléant 
Imorou ADAM
Directeur de l'agriculture
Ministère du développement rural
Cotonou 
BHUTAN - BHOUTAN - BHUTÁN
Delegate 
Lyonpo KINZANG DORJI
Minister for Agriculture
Thimphu 
Alternates 
Choni DHENDUP
Head of Marketing Unit
Ministry of Agriculture
Thimphu Ms Chime P. WANGDI
Programme Co-ordinator
Ministry of Agriculture
Thimphu
BOLIVIA - BOLIVIE 
Delegado 
Oswaldo ANTEZANA VACA DIEZ
Ministro de Agricultura, Ganadería y Desarrollo Rural
La Paz 
Suplentes 
Javier ZUAZO CHÁVEZ
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Juan I. SILES DEL VALLE
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Sra. María Soledad PAREJA DELOS
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma 
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
BOSNIE AND HERZÉGOVINE
BOSNIA Y HERZEGOVINA
Delegate 
Miroslav PALAMETA
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
BOTSWANA 
Delegate 
Pelokgale SELOMA
Assistant Minister for Agriculture
Gaborone 
Alternates 
Thomas Madubeng TAUKOBONG
Deputy Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Gaborone Gaorelathe NAMETSEGANG MABUA
Deputy Director
Crop Production and Forestry
Ministry of Agriculture
Gaborone
Atamelang Anthony MOKGARE
Principal Agricultural Economist
Ministry of Agriculture
Gaborone 
BRAZIL - BRÉSIL - BRASIL 
Delegates 
Marcos Vinicius PRATINI DE MORAES
Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Supply
Brasilia Raul BELENS JUNGMANN PINTO
Minister Extraordinary for Land Policy
Brasilia
Alternates 
Júlio C. GOMES dos SANTOS
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Carlos Antônio da ROCHA PARANHOS
Career Ambassador
International Advisor of the Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Supply
Brasilia
Ms Irene PESSOA DE LIMA CÂMARA
Minister Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ms Mitzi GURGEL VALENTE da COSTA
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
João Maurício CABRAL de MELLO
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Daniel FALCON LINS
Third Secretary
Division of Social Themes
Ministry of External Relations
Brasilia
BULGARIA - BULGARIE 
Delegate 
Gueorgui KARKAMOV
Deputy Minister for Agriculture, Forestry and Agrarian Reform
Sofia 
Alternates 
Krassimir KOSTOV
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ilia KRASTELNIKOV
Minister Plenipotentiary
International Organizations and Human Rights Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Sofia
Ms Rossitsa GUEORGOVA
Senior Expert
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Agrarian Reform
Sofia 
BURKINA FASO 
Délégué 
Issa Martin BIKIENGA
Ministre de l'agriculture
Ouagadougou 
Suppléants 
Mme Béatrice DAMIBA
Ambassadeur
Représentante permanente auprès de la FAO
Rome Laya SAWADOGO
Secrétaire Général
Ministère des enseignements secondaire, supérieur et de la recherche scientifique
Ouagadougou
André Anatole YAMEOGO
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome Ousmane TONTOTOGOBO
Conseiller
Ministère de l'agriculture
Ouagadougou
Maxime OUEDRAOGO
Ministère des ressources animales
Ouagadougou 
BURUNDI 
Délégué 
Salvator NTHIABOSE
Ministre de l'agriculture
Bujumbura 
Suppléant 
Gaspard KABURA
Premier Conseiller
Chargé d'affaires
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome 
CAMBODIA - CAMBODGE- CAMBOYA
CAMEROON - CAMEROUN - CAMERÚN
Délégué 
Zacharie PEREVET
Ministre de l'agriculture
Yaoundé 
Suppléants 
Michael TABONG KIMA
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Simon Pierre ESSOMBA ABANDA
Chargé de mission à la présidence de la République
Yaoundé
Marc SAMATANA
Directeur
Ministère de l'agriculture
Yaoundé Philip MOUMIE
Secrétaire permanent
Comité de gestion de l'assistance FAO/PAM
Yaoundé
Dr DAWA
Inspecteur général
Ministère de l'élevage, des pêches et des industries animales
Yaoundé Roger Martin FOTEU KAMENI
Conseiller technique
Ministère de l'environnement et des forêts
Yaoundé
Celestin MODESTE BOMBA
Chef de service des institutions specialisées de l'ONU à caractère
économique et technique
Ministère des relations extérieures
Yaoundé Thomas NDIVE MOKAKE
Deuxième Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
Jeannot ENGOLA OYEP
Secrétaire permanent CP/PNRVA
Ministère de la recherche scientifique et technique
Yaoundé 
CANADA - CANADÁ 
Delegate 
Lyle VANCLIEF
Minister for Agriculture and Agri-Food
Ottawa 
Alternates 
Jeremy K.B. KINSMAN
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ms. Denise BOUDRIAS
Assistant Deputy Minister
Market and Industry Services Branch
Agriculture and Agri-Food
Ottawa
Ronald ROSE
Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Bill DOERING
Executive Director
Programs and Multilateral Affairs Division
International Markets
Agriculture and Agri-Food
Ottawa
Ms Barbara DOAN
Special Assistant to the Minister
Agriculture and Agri-Food
Ottawa Paul DELANEY
Director for Europe
International Market Bureau
Agriculture and Agri-Food
Ottawa
Ms Eileen DURAND
Assistant Deputy Director for Europe
International Market Bureau
Agriculture and Agri-Food
Ottawa Iain MAC GILLIVRAY
Senior Specialist in Agriculture
Canadian International Development Agency
Ottawa
Dave LUCK
Senior Economist
Economic Analysis Division
Department of Fisheries and Oceans
Ottawa Ms Janice VANSICKLE
Acting Director General
Communications Branch
Agriculture and Agri-Food
Ottawa
Ms Thi Lan HOANG
Adviser
UN Specialized Agencies and Economic Issues
Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade
Ottawa 
CAPE VERDE - CAP-VERT - CABO VERDE
Délégué 
José António PINTO MONTEIRO
Ministre de l'agriculture, de l'alimentation et de l'environnement
Praia 
Suppléants 
Élvio G. Napoleão FERNANDES
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Mme Adelaide RIBEIRO
Directrice de la coopération
Ministère de l'agriculture, de l'alimentation et de l'environnement
Praia
Mme Maria Ferananda TAVARES FERNANDES
Secrétaire
Représentante permanente adjointe auprès de la FAO
Rome Mme Elísia MONTEIRO
Technicienne
Direction des services de la coopération
Ministère de l'agriculture, de l'alimentation et de l'environnement
Praia
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
RÉPUBLIQUE CENTRAFRICAINE
REPÚBLICA CENTROAFRICANA
Délégué 
Mme Marie Madeleine NZELA
Cadre des finances
Ministère de l'économie, des finances, du plan et de la coopération internationale
Bangui 
CHAD - TCHAD 
Délégué 
Mme Bintou MALLOUM
Ambassadeur
Représentante permanente auprès de la FAO
Rome 
CHILE - CHILI 
Delegado 
Ángel SARTORI ARELLANO
Ministro de Agricultura
Santiago 
Suplentes 
Víctor Manuel REBOLLEDO GONZÁLEZ
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Carlos FURCHE
Director
Oficina de Estudios y Políticas Agrícolas
(ODEPA)
Ministerio de Agricultura
Santiago
Jaime CONTRERAS
Consejero
Dirección de Política Multilateral
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores
Santiago Humberto MOLINA REYES
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Sra. Francisca PRATICO
Representación Permanente de Chile ante la FAO
Roma 
CHINA - CHINE 
Delegate 
CHEN YAOBANG
Minister for Agriculture
Beijing 
Alternates 
TANG ZHENGPING
Director-General
Department of International Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
Beijing LIANG QU
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
XU HAIJIANG
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome YU YONGWEI
Director-General
Office of General Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture
Beijing
DUAN WUDE
Deputy Director-General
Department of Science and Education
Ministry of Agriculture
Beijing ZHANG ZHONGQIU
Deputy Director-General
Department of Animal Production and Husbandry
Ministry of Agriculture
Beijing
Mrs JIANG YONGHUA
Director-General
Department of Foreign Finance
Ministry of Finance
Beijing JIN WENCHENG
Division Director
Office of General Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture
Beijing
XU NANSHAN
Division Director
Department of Foreign Finance
Ministry of Finance
Beijing NI HONGXING
Deputy Division Director
Department of International Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
Beijing
WANG JINBIAO
Programme Officer
Department of International Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
Beijing Ms WANG XINXIA
Deputy Division Director
Department of International Organization
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Beijing
TANG SHENGYAO
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome WANG ZHANLU
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
COLOMBIA - COLOMBIE 
Delegado 
Carlos Eduardo MARTÍNEZ SIMAHAN
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma 
Suplentes 
Bernardo GUTIÉRREZ ZULUAGA BOTERO
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma José Ignacio MEJÍA VELÁSQUEZ
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Alfredo ALDANA MIRANDA
Consejero
Embajada de Colombia
Roma 
COMOROS - COMORES - COMORAS
CONGO, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF
CONGO, RÉPUBLIQUE DÉMOCRATIQUE DU
CONGO, REPÚBLICA DEMOCRÁTICA DEL
Délégué 
Innocent MANDENDE MOKOSA
Secrétaire général de l'agriculture
Kinshasa 
Suppléants 
Mme Justine SANGO YA TAMBWE
Directrice et experte nationale au secrétariat général à l'agriculture
Kinshasa Mpuza KAPUNDU
Directeur de Cabinet Adjoint
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Kinshasa
Bokisila NDASHAO
Directeur de la cellule nationale d'information sur la sécurité
alimentaire et la nutrition
Secrétariat général à l'agriculture
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Kinshasa Munwaku MALEFELE
Premier Secrétaire
Ambassade de la République Démocratique du Congo
Rome
Phoba DINKA
Secrétaire administratif
Ambassade de la République Démocratique du Congo
Rome 
CONGO, REPUBLIC OF
CONGO, RÉPUBLIQUE DU
CONGO, REPÚBLICA DEL
Délégué 
Auguste-Célestin GONGARAD-NKOUA
Ministre de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Brazzaville 
Suppléants 
Jean-Claude ELOMBILA
Directeur général
Brazzaville Gilbert OKOMBA
Conseiller à l'agriculture
Brazzaville
ELENGA-MPILA
Attaché à la coopération
Brazzaville Rufin Gabriel AMBERO
Ministre Conseiller
Chargé d'affaires a.i.
Rome
Georges GUITO
Premier Conseiller
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome Grégoire NKEOUA
Centre liaison Congo sur les ressources phytogénétiques
Ministère de l'économie forestière chargé de la pêche et des
ressources halieutiques
Brazzaville
Jacques KANWE
Conseiller aux forêts
Ministère de l'économie forestière chargé de la pêche et des ressources halieutiques
Brazzaville 
COOK ISLANDS - ÎLES COOK - ISLAS COOK
COSTA RICA 
Delegado 
Esteban R. BRENES
Ministro de Agricultura y Ganadería
San José 
Suplentes 
Sra. Victoria GUARDIA ALVARADO de HERNÁNDEZ
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Sergio SALAS
Gerente de SENARA
San José
Sra. Yolanda GAGO de SINIGAGLIA
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma Sra. Marcela SUÑOL PREGO
Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
CÔTE D'IVOIRE 
Délégué 
Amadou OUATTARA
Ministre Délégué auprès du
Ministre de l'agriculture et des ressources animales
Chargé des jeunes exploitants agricoles
Abidjan 
Suppléants 
Emmanuel Kouassi NOUAMA
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Aboubakar BAKAYOKO
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
Lassina COULIBALY
Secrétaire du Comité National pour l'alimentation
Abidjan 
CROATIA - CROATIE - CROACIA 
Delegate 
Ivan DURKI C
Minister for Agriculture and Forestry
Zagreb 
Alternates 
Davorin RUDOLF
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Vlado BI C ANI
Assistant Minister
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Zagreb
Ms Du&#154;ka PARAVI C
Minister Plenipotentiary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ms Lidija MRKOCI
Head of Department for International Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Zagreb
Branimir C E C UK
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
CUBA 
Delegado 
Alejandro ROCA IGLESIAS
Ministro de la Industria Alimenticia
La Habana 
Suplentes 
Juan NUIRY SÁNCHEZ
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Sra. Ana María NAVARRO ARRÚE
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma
Ricardo GONZÁLEZ
Director
Gabinete del Ministro de la Industria Alimenticia
La Habana Armando CASADO
Especialista
Ministerio para la Inversión Extranjera y la Colaboración Económica
La Habana
CYPRUS - CHYPRE - CHIPRE 
Delegate 
Costas THEMISTOCLEOUS
Minister for Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment
Nicosia 
Alternates 
Symeon MATSIS
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment
Nicosia George F. POULIDES
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Andreas ROUSHIAS
Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Harris ZANNETIS
Agricultural Officer
Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment
Nicosia
CZECH REPUBLIC
RÉPUBLIQUE TCHÈQUE
REPÚBLICA CHECA
Delegate 
Jan FENCL
Minister for Agriculture
Prague 
Alternates 
Tomá&#154; ZIDEK
Deputy Minister for Agriculture
Prague Miroslav FIEDLER
Deputy Minister for Finance
Prague
Ji ri NOVÁK
Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Pavel &#138;KODA
United Nations Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Prague
Vojtech HAVRÁNEK
Secretary
Czech Committee for Cooperation with FAO
International Trade Cooperation Department
Ministry of Agriculture
Prague Ms Zuzana DOUBKOVÁ
Department of Environmental Hazards
Ministry of the Environment
Prague
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
RÉPUBLIQUE POPULAIRE DÉMOCRATIQUE DE CORÉE
REPÚBLICA POPULAR DEMOCRÁTICA DE COREA
Delegate 
Mrs Kin YONG SUK
Vice-Minister
Ministry of Agriculture
Pyongyang 
Alternates 
Kim HUNG RIM
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome YUN SU CHANG
Ambassador
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Kim YONG
Secretary General
FAO National Committee
Pyongyang Han TAE SONG
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Ri HYONG CHOL
Senior Officer
FAO National Committee
Pyongyang Ri KWANG HYOK
Third Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
DENMARK - DANEMARK - DINAMARCA
Delegate 
Henrik Dam KRISTENSEN
Minister for Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
Copenhagen 
Alternates 
Gunnar RIBERHOLDT
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Poul OTTOSEN
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
Copenhagen
Børge SCHOU PEDERSEN
Head of Department
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
Copenhagen Ms Birgitte MØLLER CHRISTENSEN
Minister Counsellor (Agriculture)
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Jørgen MÆRSK PEDERSEN
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Anders ASMIND
Personal Assistant to the Minister
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
Copenhagen
Ms Ulla HEIDEN
Head of Section
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
Copenhagen Lars BREDAL
Head of Section
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Copenhagen
DJIBOUTI 
Délégué 
Ali Mohamed DAOUD
Ministre de l'agriculture, de l'élevage et de la mer
Djibouti 
Suppléants 
Djama Mahamoud DOUALEH
Chef de Bureau de programmation et de suivi
Ministère de l'agriculture, de l'élevage et de la mer
Djibouti Aboulkader KAMIL
Directeur
Office national des eaux
Ministère de l'agriculture, de l'élevage et de la mer
Djibouti
DOMINICA - DOMINIQUE 
Delegate 
Peter CARBON
Minister for Agriculture and the Environment
Roseau 
Alternate 
Mrs Hannelore A.H. BENJAMIN
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
RÉPUBLIQUE DOMINICAINE
REPÚBLICA DOMINICANA
Delegado 
Rafael CALVENTI
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma 
Suplente 
Juan BORG GIL
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma 
ECUADOR - ÉQUATEUR 
Delegado 
José PARRA GIL
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma 
Suplentes 
Marco SAMANIEGO SALAZAR
Ministro
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma Carlos LARREA DÁVILA
Segundo Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
EGYPT - ÉGYPTE - EGIPTO 
Delegate 
Nehad Ibrahim ABDEL-LATIF
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Mohamed Abd El Hamid KHALIFA
Agricultural Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representtaive to FAO
Rome Raafat Salah El-Din ZAKI
Senior Specialist
International Organizations and Conferences Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation
Cairo
Reda Habib I. ZAKI
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
EL SALVADOR 
Delegado 
Sra. María Eulalia JIMÉNEZ DE MOCHI ONORI
Ministro Consejero
Encargado de Negocios a.i.
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma 
Suplente 
Eduardo VIDES LARÍN
Ministro Consejero
Embajada de El Salvador ante la Santa Sede
Rome 
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
GUINÉE ÉQUATORIAL
GUINEA ECUATORIAL
ERITREA - ÉRYTHRÉE 
Delegate 
Arefaine BERHE
Minister for Agriculture
Asmara 
Alternates 
Fessahazion PIETROS
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Yohannes TENSUE
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
ESTONIA - ESTONIE 
Delegate 
Ivari PADAR
Minister for Agriculture
Tallinn 
Alternates 
Toomas KEVVAI
Vice Chancellor
Ministry of Agriculture
Tallinn Ruve &#138;ANK
Vice Chancellor
Tallinn
Mrs Ene LEPP
Head of the Bureau of Foreign Relations
Ministry of Agriculture
Tallinn Mrs Maija TASA-AUN
Attaché
External Economic Policy Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Tallinn
Mrs Elena SUETT-ASKERSTAM
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
ETHIOPIA - ÉTHIOPIE - ETIOPÍA 
Delegate 
Mengistu HULUKA
Minister for Agriculture
Addis Ababa 
Alternates 
Ms Halima MOHAMMED
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Gebrehiwot REDAI
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY - MENBER ORGANIZATION
COMMUNAUTÉ EUROPÉENNE - ORGANISATION MEMBRE
COMUNIDAD EUROPEA - ORGANIZACIÓN MIEMBRO
Délégué 
Alexandre TILGENKAMP
Directeur des affaires internationales
concernant l'agriculture
Bruxelles 
Suppléants 
Mme Vilma DU MARTEAU
Ambassadeur
Représentante permanente auprès de la FAO
Rome Hugo-Maria SCHALLY
Chef de l'Unité "Politique de développement et
questions multilatérales"
Direction générale "Développement"
Bruxelles
Gerasimos APOSTOLATOS
Administrateur principal
Direction générale "Santé et protection des consommateurs"
Bruxelles Andrew BYRNE
Premier Secrétaire
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome
Mme Frances Anne HUNTER
Attachée
Représentante permanente suppléante auprès de la FAO
Rome 
FIJI - FIDJI 
Delegate 
Niumaia TABUNAKAWAI
Permanent Secretary for Agriculture,
Fisheries and Forests
Suva 
Alternate 
Kaliopate TAVOLA
Acting Chairman
Sugar Commission of Fiji
Suva 
FINLAND - FINLANDE - FINLANDIA 
Delegate 
Kalevi HEMILÄ
Minister for Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki 
Alternates 
Glen LINDHOLM
Director General
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Helsinki Jarmo RATIA
Secretary General
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki
Veli-Pekka TALVELA
Director General
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki Raimo ANTTOLA
Deputy Director General
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Helsinki
Ms Ulla-Maija FINSKAS
Minister Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Jan HEINO
Director General
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki
Ms Anne HUHTAMÄKI
Counsellor
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Helsinki Ms Aulikki KAUPPILA
Counsellor
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki
Ms Pirkko-Liisa KYÖSTILÄ
First Secretary
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Helsinki Ms Lea LASTIKKA
Deputy Director General
Finnish Food and Drink Industries Federation
Helsinki
Jouko NIEMINEN
Trade Policy Adviser
Central Union of Agricultural Producers and
Forest Owners (MTK)
Helsinki Juhani ROUHIAINEN
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Ms Anna SANTALA
Senior Adviser
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki Ms Mirja SUURNÄKKI
Counsellor
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki
Ms Seija TORO
Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ms Anneli VUORINEN
Director
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Helsinki
Veikko MARTTILA
Director
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki Ms Leena HÖMMÖ
Assistant
Embassy of Finland
Rome
Ms Eeva SUHONEN
Assistant
Embassy of Finland
Rome Ms Alda SILVEIRA-REIS
Principal Administrator
European Union Council Secretariat
Brussels
Hans HOLSTEIN
Administrator
European Union Council Secretariat
Brussels Ms Elisa CHIANALE
Official
European Union Council Secretariat
Brussels
Ms Annie PATIES
Official
European Union Council Secretariat
Brussels 
FRANCE - FRANCIA 
Délégué 
Louis DOMINICI
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome 
Suppléants 
Alain PIERRET
Président du Comité interministériel
pour l'alimentation et l'agriculture
Paris Patrick PRUVOT
Secrétaire général du Comité interministériel pour
l'alimentation et l'agriculture
Paris
Marc GIACOMINI
Sous-Directeur des Affaires économiques
Direction des Nations Unies et des
organisations internationales
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Paris Mme Catherine GESLAIN-LANEELLE
Sous-Directrice des échanges internationaux
Direction de la production et des échanges
Ministère de l'agriculture et de la pêche
Paris
Daniel BERTHERY
Conseiller scientifique
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome Paul LUU
Chef du Bureau Afrique Méditerranée et
organisations internationales
Direction des politiques économiques et internationales
Ministère de l'agriculture et de la pêche
Paris
Hervé GALLÈPE
Conseiller
Représentation permanente de la France auprès
de l'Union européenne
Bruxelles Renaud COLLARD
Chargé de mission
Direction des Nations Unies et des organisations internationales
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Paris
Mme Marie-France TEILLARD D'EYRY
Chargée de mission
Direction générale de la coopération internationale et du
développement
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Paris Jean-Louis MULTON
Direction des relations internationales
Institut national de la recherche agronomique
Paris
GABON - GABÓN 
Délégué 
Gaston No el MBOUMBOU-NGOMA
Ministre de l'agriculture, de l'élevage et du
développement rural
Libreville 
Suppléants 
Hilaire MATHAS NGOUBA
Haut Commissaire
Ministère de l'agriculture, de l'élevage et du développement rural
Libreville Marcel IBINGA-MAGWANGU
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome
Mme Ivone Alves DIAS DA GRAÇA
Première Conseillère
Représentante permanente adjointe auprès de la FAO
Rome Pierre NYAR OLLAME
Conseiller technique du Ministre des eaux et forêts
Ministère des eaux et forêts et de la pêche
Libreville
Robert ONDOH-MVE
Directeur des pêches artisanales
Libreville Honoré NGOMA
Ministère de l'agriculture, de l'élevage et du développement rural
Libreville
GAMBIA - GAMBIE 
Delegate 
Fasainey DUMBUYA
Secretary of State for Agriculture
Banjul 
Alternates 
Mamadi CEESAY
Deputy Permanent Secretary
Department of State for Agriculture
Banjul Yaya SARR
Director
Department of Agricultural Services
Banjul
GEORGIA - GÉORGIE 
Delegate 
Bakur GULUA
Minister for Agriculture and Food
Tbilisi 
Alternate 
Mrs Rusudan LORTKIPANIDZE
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
GERMANY - ALLEMAGNE - ALEMANIA
Delegate 
Karl-Heinz FUNKE
Federal Minister for Food, Agriculture and Forestry
Bonn 
Alternates 
Dietrich LINCKE
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Jürgen DETKEN
Director General
International Agriculture and Fisheries Policy
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry
Bonn
Theodor SEEGERS
Director
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry
Bonn Klaus GARCKE
Head of Division
International Food and Agriculture Organizations
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry
Bonn
Roland MAUCH
Head of Division
United Nations Economic and Development Affairs
Federal Foreign Office
Berlin Carl-Josef WEIERS
First Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Gerhard DILG
First Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Jörn BEIßERT
Desk Officer
Division for United Nations Economic and Development Affairs
Federal Foreign Office
Berlin
Sigrun NEUWERTH
Head of Press Department
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry
Bonn Ms Karola FABER
Assistant to the Minister
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry
Bonn
Ms Petra HECKER
Assistant
International Food and Agriculture Organizations Division
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry
Bonn Harald BAJORAT
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
GHANA 
Delegate 
J.H. OWUSU ACHEAMPONG
Minister for Food and Agriculture
Accra 
Alternates 
Mrs Aanaa N. ENIN
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mallam Issah SEIDU
Minister Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Kwaku NICOL
Acting Managing Director
Ghana Food Distribution Cooperation
Ministry of Food and Agriculture
Accra Ms Azara Ali MAMSHIE
Senior Agricultural Economist
Ministry of Food and Agriculture
Accra
GREECE - GRÈCE - GRECIA 
Delegate 
Georges ANOMERITIS
Minister for Agriculture
Athens 
Alternates 
E. TSEKOURAS
Secretary-General
Agricultural Policy and International Relations
Ministry of Agriculture
Athens Antonios VLAVIANOS
Minister Counsellor
Embassy of Greece
Rome
Giorgios PAPADOPOULOS
Counsellor
International Economic Organizations Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Athens Vassilis BORNOVAS
Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Dimitrios DADIOTIS
Consultant
International Economic Organizations Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Athens P. TSOTROS
Director
Agricultural Policy and Verification Directorate
Ministry of Agriculture
Athens
Mrs Georgia BAZOTI
Head of Section
Agricultural Policy and Verification Directorate
Ministry of Agriculture
Athens 
GRENADA - GRENADE - GRANADA
GUATEMALA 
Delegado 
Sra. Josefina MORALES FIGUEROA
Embajadora en Italia
Roma 
Suplentes 
Sra. Rita CLAVERIE DE SCIOLLI
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Héctor I. ESPINOZA FARFÁN
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
GUINEA - GUINÉE 
Délégué 
Jean Paul SARR
Ministre de l'agriculture, et de l'élevage
Conakry 
Suppléants 
Souhaib Deen BANGURA
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Abdul Karim CAMARA
Directeur National de l'agriculture
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Conakry
Arafan Kabiné KABA
Chef de Division
Organisations et conférences internationales
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Conakry Ce GAMY
Chef de section ONU pour le
Développement rural
Ministère du plan et de la coopération
Conakry
GUINEA-BISSAU - GUINÉE-BISSAU
Délégué 
Manuel BATISTA
Directeur général de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Ministre de l'agriculture, des pêches et des ressources naturelles
Bissau 
Suppléant 
CARLOS Mateus de AMARANTE
Directeur du Cabinet de planification agricole
Ministère de l'agriculture, des pêches et des ressources naturelles
Bissau 
GUYANA 
HAITI - HAÏTI - HAITÍ 
Délégué 
François SEVERIN
Ministre de l'agriculture, des ressources naturelles et du développement rural
Port-au-Prince 
Suppléants 
Edouard DEMETRIUS
Chef de cabinet
Port-au-Prince Mme Suze PERCY
Conseillère
Représentante permanente adjointe auprès de la FAO
Rome
Patrick SAINT-HILAIRE
Premier secrétaire
Ambassade de la République d'Haiti
Rome 
HONDURAS 
Delegado 
José Rafael FERRARI SAGASTUME
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma 
Suplentes 
Srta. Cristian MENJIVAR RODRÍGUEZ
Agregado
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma Manuel Hernando REYES PINEDA
Consejero
Embajada de Honduras
Roma
HUNGARY - HONGRIE - HUNGRÍA
Delegate 
Karóly TAMÁS
State Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Regional Development
Budapest 
Alternates 
Ferene SULYOK
Head of Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Regional Development
Budapest Tamás KORSÓS
Chargé d'Affaires
Embassy of the Republic of Hungary
Rome
Ms Mariann KOVÁCS
Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Péter SZÖKE
Counsellor
Embassy of the Republic of Hungary
Rome
Ms Dóra EGRI
Assistant
Permanent Representation of Hungary to FAO
Rome 
ICELAND - ISLANDE - ISLANDIA 
Delegate 
Gu dni ÁGÚSTSSON
Minister of Agriculture
Reykjavik 
Alternates 
Björn SIGURBJÖRNSSON
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Reykjavik Mrs Sigri dur Á. SN ÆVARR
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Paris
Gu dni BRAGASON
Minister Counsellor
Member of th e Icelandic National FAO Committee
Reykjavik Gu dmundur B. HELGASON
Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Paris
þorsteinn GEIRSSON
Ministry of Fisheries
Reykjavik Jón ERLING JÓNASSON
Counsellor
Representative to FAO
Rome
Thorgeir LAWRENCE
Advisor
Ministry of Agriculture
Reyjkjavik 
INDIA - INDE 
Delegate 
S.B.P.B.K. SATYANARAYANA RAO
Minister of State for Agriculture
New Delhi 
Alternates 
Bhaskar BARUA
Secretary
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
New Delhi M.D. ASTHANA
Secretary
Department of Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution
Ministry of Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution
New Delhi
Kalarickal P. FABIAN
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome P.D. SUDHAKAR
Joint Secretary
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
New Delhi
Govindan NAIR
Joint Secretary
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
New Delhi Ms Neela GANGADHARAN
Minister (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Ms Malvika PAWAR
Director
Prime Minister's Office
New Delhi J. KRISHNA KISHORE
Private Secretary to the Minister of State of Agriculture
New Delhi
INDONESIA - INDONÉSIE 
Delegate 
Syarifuddin KARAMA
Secretary General
Ministry of Agriculture
Jakarta 
Alternates 
Soendaroe RACHMAD
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Alim FAUZI
Senior Advisor to the Head of
Agency for Logistic Affairs
Jakarta
Suharyo HUSEN
Director
Bureau for International Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
Jakarta Tadjoeddin ABDULAH
Minister Counsellor
Embassy of Indonesia
Rome
I Nyoman ARDHA
Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Sumpeno POETRO
Agricultural Attaché
Permanent Representation of Indonesia to the European Community
Brussels
Erman AZIS
Head of Sector for Cooperation
Research and Development Centre
Agency of National Food Logistics
Jakarta Ms Adek Triana YUDHASWARI
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
IRAN, RÉPUBLIQUE ISLAMIQUE D'
IRÁN, REPÚBLICA ISLÁMICA DEL
Delegate 
Issa KALANTARI
Minister for Agriculture
Teheran 
Alternates 
Abdul Ali SABBAGH
Deputy Minister
Ministry for Economic and Finance
Teheran Mohammad Saeed NOURI-NAEENI
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Mehdi HAJIKAZEMI
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mostafa JAFARI
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Ahmad ALAVI
Advisor to the Minister
Head of the International Relations Department
Ministry of Agriculture
Teheran Shamshoun MAGHSOUDPOUR
Member of Parliament
Teheran
Mahmoud BARIMANI
Deputy Director
International Specialized Agencies Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Teheran 
IRAQ 
Delegate 
Basil K. DALALI
Under-Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Baghdad 
Alternates 
Bader J. ALLAWI
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Koutaiba M. HASSAN
Executive Director
National Programme for the Optimum Use of Water Resources of the Euphrates Basin
Ministry of Agriculture
Baghdad
Mohammed A. MAHAL
Director
Relations Department
Baghdad Rafid HUSSAIN
General Director
Ministry of Agriculture
Baghdad
IRELAND - IRLANDE - IRLANDA 
Delegate 
Ned O'KEEFE
Minister of State
Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Development
Dublin 
Alternates 
John MALONE
Secretary General
Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Development
Dublin Joseph SMALL
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Tony DEVLIN
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Dermot FLOOD
Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Development
Dublin
Ms Breda ROCHE
Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Development
Dublin Ms Maire DEMPSEY
Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Development
Dublin
ISRAEL - ISRAËL 
Delegate 
Chaim ORON
Minister for Agriculture and Rural Development
Tel Aviv 
Alternates 
Yoram LEVI
Director
Consumer Products Administration
Food, Textiles and Light Industries
Ministry of Industry and Trade
Tel Aviv Arieh SZESKIN
Director
Foreign Relations Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Tel Aviv
Zvi HERMAN
Director
Centre for International Agricultural Development Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Tel Aviv Raphael MORAV
Counsellor
Department for Economic Affairs
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Tel Aviv
Roy PELED
Assistant to the Minister
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Tel Aviv Elazar COHEN
First Secretary (Economic Affairs)
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
ITALY - ITALIE - ITALIA 
Délégué 
Paolo DE CASTRO
Ministre pour les politiques agricoles
Rome 
Suppléants 
Luigi M. FONTANA-GIUSTI
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Mme Rosa Anna CONIGLIO PAPALIA
Première Conseillère
Représentante permanente adjointe auprès de la FAO
Rome
Adolfo TREGGIARI
Conseiller
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome Cosimo LACIRIGNOLA
Ministère des politiques agricoles
Rome
Franco COZZA
Ministère des politiques agricoles
Rome Ruggero FIORAVANTI
Ministère du trésor
Rome
Giovanni PREVITI
Ministère du trésor
Rome Mme Laura DI BELLO
Ministère du trésor
Rome
Paolo VICENTINI
Ministère des politiques agricoles
Rome Roberto LAUDATO
Ministère des politiques agricoles
Rome
Gennaro PISCOPO
Ministère des politiques agricoles
Rome Mme Stefania TEDESCHI
Ministère des politiques agricoles
Rome
Mario MARINO
Ministère des politiques agricoles
Rome Marcello GORGONI
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Rome
Giovanni ARRU
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Rome Lorenzo RAFFI
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Rome
Filippo ALESSI
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Rome Mme Vincenza RUSSO
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Rome
Mme Patrizia ROMANO
Ministère des politiques agricoles
Rome Danilo CECCARELLI
Ministère des politiques agricoles
Rome
Mme Valeria BOCCIA
Stagiaire
Universita Bocconi
Milano Guido BULLIGAN
Stagiaire
Universita Bocconi
Milano
JAMAICA - JAMAÏQUE 
Delegate 
Roger CLARKE
Minister for Agriculture
Kingston 
Alternate 
Aaron PARKE
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Kingston 
JAPAN - JAPON - JAPÓN 
Delegates 
Tokuichiro TAMAZAWA
Minister for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo Hiromoto SEKI
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to Italy
Rome
Alternates 
Hideaki KUMAZAWA
Vice-Minister for International Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo Masato ITO
Minister
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Takafumi TAHARA
Director
International Cooperation Planning Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo Kazuo TANAKA
Senior Assistant for Trade and Development Issues
Developing Economics Division
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo
Hisao HARIHARA
Director
International Economic Affairs Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo Motoi KADAIRA
Director
Office of International Liaison
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo
Masakatsu MIZUTA
Secretary to the Minister for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo Hirofumi KUGITA
Director
International Agricultural Organizations
International Cooperation Planning Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo
Kazumasa SHIOYA
Deputy Director
International Cooperation Planning Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo Takanori OHASHI
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Hideya YAMADA
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Hiroshi KODAMA
Assistant Director
International Cooperation Planning Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo
Toshio UNO
Assistant Director
Developing Economies Division
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Tokyo Yasufumi UEDA
Section Chief
International Cooperation Planning Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo
Kazuhiro SHIMANE
Section Chief
International Policy Planning Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo Nenemu OSHIDA
Section Chief
International Economic Affairs Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo
JORDAN - JORNANIE - JORDANIA
Delegate 
Hashem SHBUL
Minister for Agriculture
Amman 
Alternates 
Mazen KHASAWNEH
Secretary General
Ministry of Agriculture
Amman Salem AL AKOUR
Director of Project Management
Ministry of Agriculture
Amman
Ibrahim Abu UTEILAH
Director
Planning and Development
Ministry of Agriculture
Amman Samir MASARWEH
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
KAZAKHSTAN - KAZAJSTÁN 
Delegate 
Olzhas SULEIMENOV
Ambassador
Astana 
Alternates 
Amanbek MUHASHEV
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Astana Valery TOLMACHEV
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Astana
Barlybay SADYKOV
Second Secretary
Embassy of Kazakhstan
Rome 
KENYA 
Delegate 
Chris Mogere OBURE
Minister for Agriculture and Rural Development
Nairobi 
Alternates 
Bob Francis JALANG'O
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Wilfred MWANGI
Deputy Permanent Secretary
Director of Agriculture and Livestock
Production
Nairobi
G.K. NZUVA
Senior Deputy Director of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Nairobi Paul Kipsigei CHEPKWONY
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Joseph Kipchirchir BOINNET
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
KIRIBATI 
Delegate 
Tukabu TEROROKO
Deputy Secretary
Natural Resources Development
Tarawa 
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
CORÉE, RÉPUBLIQUE DE
COREA, REPÚBLICA DE
Delegate 
KIM Sung-Hoon
Minister for Agriculture and Forestry
Seoul 
Alternates 
CHUNG Tae-Ik
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome CHOI Yong-Kyu
Director General
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Seoul
RHO Kyeong-sang
Agricultural Attaché
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome YOON Kiho
Deputy Director
Multilateral Cooperation Divison
International Agriculture Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Seoul
CHO Il-Ho
Deputy Director
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Seoul CHOI Il-Hyoung
Secretary to the Minister for Agriculture and Forestry
Seoul
CHO Chae-moon
Deputy Manager
Department of International Cooperation
Korea FAO Association
Seoul HONG Kyoung Soo
Manager
Department of International Cooperation
National Agriculture Cooperative Federation
Seoul
KUWAIT - KOWEÏT 
Delegate 
Mohamed Al Said Abdul Mohssen AL-RIFAI
Chairman of Board of Directors
Director General of the Public Authority for Agriculture and Fish Resources
Kuwait 
Alternates 
Ahmad S. AL-OQAB
Deputy Director General for Financial and Administrative Affairs
Kuwait Jassem M. H. AL-BADR
Deputy Director General for Services and Agricultural Areas
Kuwait
Miss Fatimah HASAN J. HAYAT
Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Nasser Ahmad F. Al-AMIR
Director of the P.A.A.F
President's Cabinet
Kuwait
KYRGYZSTAN - KIRGHIZISTAN - KIRGUISTÁN
LAOS - LAO 
Delegate 
Siene SAPHANGTHONG
Minister for Agriculture and Forestry
Vientiane 
Alternates 
Viravanh PHANNOURATH
Director General
Department of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Vientiane Phouangparisack PRAVONGVIENGKHAM
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Vientiane
Singkham PHONVIXAY
Director General
Department of Livestock and Fisheries
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Vientiane Langsy XAYVISITH
Director General
Department of Irrigation
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Vientiane
LATVIA - LETTONIE - LETONIA 
LEBANON - LIBAN - LÍBANO 
Délégué 
Suleiman FRANGIE
Ministre de l'agriculture
Beyrouth 
Suppléants 
Samir EL-KHOURY
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Georges MANSOUR
Directeur des études et de la coordination
Ministère de l'agriculture
Beyrouth
Samir ABOU JAOUDEH
Président du Comité administratif du Plan Vert
Beyrouth Tony EL-SISSA
Conseiller du Ministre
Ministère de l'agriculture
Beyrouth
Fadi HAJJ ALI
Secrétaire
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome 
LESOTHO 
DelegateVova B. BULANE
Minister for Agriculture, Cooperatives and Land Reclamation
Maseru 
Alternates 
Mrs R.R.NTSINYI
Ambassador (designate)
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Maxwell Tieiso KHALEMA
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Mrs M. MOLUMELI
Director
Economics and Marketing
Maseru Mrs Ines Maphutheho RANOOE
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
LIBERIA - LIBÉRIA 
LIBYA - LIBYE - LIBIA 
Delegate 
Ali Yousef JUMMA
Secretary of the General People's Committee for Agriculture
Tripoli 
Alternates 
Nouri Ibrahim HASSAN
Ambassador
Permanent Representation of the Socialist People's Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to FAO
Rome Taher SADDAK AZABI
Secretariat, General People's Committee for Agriculture
Tripoli
Mohamed Ahmad AL TASHANI
Deputy Secretary of Agriculture
Benghazi Aiad Abdelkarim HAZIM
Deputy Secretary of Agriculture
Kafra
Issam Mahjoub ZAWIA
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Amer Abou AÏCHA ALI
Secretariat, General People's Committee for Livestock
Tripoli
Abdussalam Mohamed ZBIDA
Secretariat, General People's Committee for Marine Wealth
Tripoli Ali El Amin EL-TARHONI
Secretariat, General People's Committee for Agriculture
Tripoli
Mustapha Ali KRIR
Secretariat, General People's Committee for Foreign Liaison and
International Cooperation
Tripoli Fauzi A. TAHER
Director General
Agriculture Research Centre
Secretariat, General People's Committee for Agriculture
Tripoli
LITHUANIA - LITUANIE - LITUANIA
Delegate 
Vytautas GRU&#138;AUSKAS
Vice-Minister
Ministry of Agriculture
Vilnius 
Alternates 
Antanas MAZILIAUSKAS
Director
Department of Agricultural Development and Food
Ministry of Agriculture
Vilnius Ms Filomena ZUKAUSKAITE
Chargé d'Affaires
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
LUXEMBOURG - LUXEMBURGO 
Délégué 
Paul FABER
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome 
Table of contents
<section>4</section>
(APPENDIX B/...2)
MADAGASCAR 
Délégué 
Georges RUPHIN
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome 
Suppléant 
Monsieur MONJA
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome 
MALAWI 
Delegate 
Mrs Lyana Lexa TAMBALA
Deputy Minister for Agriculture and Irrigation Development
Lilongwe 
Alternates 
Charles J. MATABWA
Director
Agricultural Research and Technical Services
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation Development
Lilongwe Daniel David KAMPUTA
Director
Agricultural Extension Services
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation Development
Lilongwe
MALAYSIA - MALAISIE - MALASIA 
Delegate 
Dato'ANNUAR MA'ARUF
Secretary General
Ministry of Agriculture
Kuala Lumpur 
Alternates 
Dato'R. VENGADESAN
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Saharan HAJI ANANG
Deputy Director General
Ministry of Agriculture
Kuala Lumpur
Khairuddin Md TAHIR
Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome ROSELY Dato'Haji KHALID
Assistant Director
Planning Division
Department of Agriculture
Kuala Lumpur
Mohd ZULKIFLI MOHAMMED
Principal Assistant Secretary
International Unit
Ministry of Agriculture
Kuala Lumpur Syed BAKRI SYED ABD. RAHMAN
First Secretary
Alternate Representative to FAO
Rome
MALDIVES - MALDIVAS 
Delegate 
Abdul Rasheed HUSSAIN
Minister for Fisheries and Agriculture
Malé 
Alternate 
Mohamed ZUHAIR
Director
Agricultural Services
Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture
Malé 
MALI - MALÍ 
Délégué 
Modibo TRAORE
Ministre du développement rural et de l'eau
Bamako 
Suppléants 
Ibrahim Bocar DAGA
Ambassadeur
Rome Zana SANOGO
Conseiller technique
Ministère du développement rural et de l'eau
Bamako
Amadou KONE
Directeur de la
Cellule de planification et de la statistique
Ministère du développement rural et de l'eau
Bamako Foune SYLLA
Premier Conseiller
Ambassade du Mali
Rome
MALTA - MALTE 
Delegate 
Ninu ZAMMIT
Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries
Valletta 
Alternates 
Francis MONTANARO MIFSUD
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Anthony MIFSUD
Assistant Private Secretary to the Minister
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Valletta
MARSHALL ISLANDS
ÎLES MARSHALL
ISLAS MARSHALL 
MAURITANIA - MAURITANIE 
Délégué 
Mohamed OULD SID'AHMED LEKHAL
Ministre du développement rural et de l'environnement
Nouakchott 
Suppléants 
Melainine OULD MOCTAR NECHE
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Dindou OULD TAJIDINE
Chargé de mission
Cabinet du Ministre
Ministère du développement rural et de l'environnement
Nouakchott
Mohamed OULD EL GHOUTH
Directeur
Développement des ressources agro-pastorales
Ministère du développement rural et de l'environnement
Nouakchott El Houssein OULD SIDI ABDALLAH
Premier conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
MAURITIUS - MAURICE - MAURICIO
Delegate 
Arvin BOOLELL
Minister for Agriculture, Food Technology and Natural Resources
Port Louis 
Alternates 
Suresh Chundre SEEBALLUCK
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Food Technology and Natural Resources
Port Louis Denis CANGY
Consul
Consulate of Mauritius
Rome
MEXICO - MEXIQUE - MÉXICO
Delegado 
Andrés CASCO FLORES
Subsecretario de Planeación
Secretaría de Agricultura, Ganadería y Desarrollo Rural
México D.F. 
Suplentes 
Mario MOYA PALENCIA
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma José ROBLES-AGUILAR
Consejero
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma
María de los Ángeles ARRIOLA AGUIRRE
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma Elías REYES BRAVO
Subdirector para Naciones Unidas y Asuntos Bilaterales
Dirección General de Asuntos Internacionales
Secretaría de Agricultura, Ganadería y Desarrollo Rural
México D.F.
Sra. Claudia GONZÁLEZ EGUÍA
Representación de la Secretaría de Medio Ambiente, Recursos Naturales y Pesca
Representación Permanente de México ante la FAO
Roma 
MOLDOVA 
Delegate 
Valentin CIUMAC
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternate 
Mrs Stela STINGACI
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
MONGOLIA - MONGOLIE 
Delegate 
B. SANJMYATAV
First Secretary
Permanent Mission of Mongolia to the Office of the United Nations
Geneva 
MOROCCO - MAROC - MARRUECOS
Délégué 
Said CHBAATTOU
Ministre délegué
Chargé des eaux et forêts
Rabat 
Suppléants 
Aziz MEKOUAR
Ambassadeur du Royaume du Maroc
Rome Ahmed AFAILAL
Ministre Plénipotentiaire
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
Larbi ZAGDOUNI
Directeur de l'enseignement, de la recherche et du développement
Ministère de l'agriculture, du développement rural et des pêches maritimes
Rabat Hassan BELHADFA
Directeur des ressources humaines
Ministère de l'agriculture, du développement rural et de la pêche
Rabat
Abdeljalil NADIF
Directeur du centre des travaux agricoles de AMZMIZ
Rabat Rachid LAKHDAR
Directeur de la protection des végétaux, des contrôles
techniques et de la répression des fraudes
Ministère de l'agriculture, du développement rural et de la pêche
Rabat
Mohamed ELAICHOUNI
Chargé de mission
Ministère chargé des eaux et forêts
Rabat M'Hamed BEN EL KADI
Conseiller au Ministère délégué chargé de la pêche
Rabat
Mohamed SBITRI
Chef de la division de la coopération
Ministère de l'agriculture, du développement rural et des pêches maritimes
Rabat Mohamed MILOUGHMANE
Chef de la division de la réforme des structures foncières
Ministère de l'agriculture, du développement rural et des pêches maritimes
Rabat
Zidane ALAOUI SOULIMANI
Chef du service du suivi-evaluation
Direction de la production végétale
Ministère de l'agriculture, du développement rural et des pêches maritimes
Rabat Driss BENAMARA
Conseiller
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome
Mlle Aïcha RHRIB
Chargée du dossier de la coopération avec la FAO
Ministère de l'agriculture, du développement rural et des pêches maritimes
Rabat Mlle Jamila ALAOUI
Secrétaire des affaires étrangères
Ambassade du Royaume du Maroc
Rome
Khalid SEBTI
Secrétaire des affaires étrangères à la Direction de la coopération multilatérale
Ministère des affaires étrangères et de la coopération
Rabat Moha MARGHI
Directeur de l'ORMVA du SOUSS - MASSA
Agadir
MOZAMBIQUE 
Delegate 
Carlos Agostinho DO ROSÁRIO
Minister for Agriculture and Fishing
Maputo 
Alternate 
Ananias Benjamin SIGAUQUE
Second Secretary
Chargé d'Affaires a.i.
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
MYANMAR 
Delegate 
Major-General NYUNT TIN
Minister for Agriculture and Irrigation
Yangon 
Alternates 
U PHONE MYIINT
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome U WIN KYI
Managing Director
Myanmar Agricultural Development Bank
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Yangon
U TIN HTUT OO
Director
Department of Agricultural Planning
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Yangon Ms YIN YIN MYINT
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
U KJI WIN
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome U SAW SHWE
Attaché
Embassy of the Union of Myanmar
Rome
NAMIBIA - NAMIBIE 
Delegate 
Stan WEBSTER
Deputy Minister
Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development
Windhoek 
Alternates 
Percy W. MISIKA
Under-Secretary
Department of Agriculture and Rural Development
Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development
Windhoek J.N. de KLERK
Director
Agricultural Research and Training
Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development
Windhoek
Ms Beatha NAMBUNDUNGA
Chief Agricultural Economist
Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development
Windhoek 
NEPAL - NÉPAL 
Delegate 
Chakra Prasad BASTOLA
Minister for Agriculture
Kathmandu 
Alternates 
Ms Leela PATHAK
Joint Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Kathmandu Madhab K. KARKEE
Economist
Ministry of Agriculture
Kathmandu
NETHERLANDS - PAYS-BAS - PAÍSES BAJOS
Delegate 
L.J. BRINKHORST
Minister for Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries
The Hague 
Alternates 
J.F. de LEEUW
Director General
Ministry of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries
The Hague Jan BERTELING
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
J.P. HOOGEVEEN
Director
Minister's Office
Ministry of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries
The Hague G.G. J. THISSEN
Deputy Director
Department of International Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries
The Hague
J.J. NEETESON
Policy Coordinator
Department of International Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries
The Hague Ewald J.N. BROUWERS
Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Y.S.A. RUIJTERS
Policy Advisor
United Nations Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
The Hague Jacco BOS
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
H.B.R. LETSCHERT
Agriculture and Horticulture Organization
Netherlands 
NEW ZEALAND - NOUVELLE-ZÉLANDE - NUEVA ZELANDIA
Delegate 
Bruce ROSS
Director General
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Wellington 
Alternates 
Peter R. BENNETT
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Neil FRASER
Manager, International Liaison
International Policy
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Wellington
Peter A. FERGUSON
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Godfrey R.B. PAYNE
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
NICARAGUA 
Delegado 
Horacio Jarquín DELGADO
Viceministro Agropecuario y Forestal
Managua 
Suplente 
Alejandro MEJÍA FERRETTI
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma 
NIGER - NÍGER 
Délégué 
Aminou TASSIOU
Ministre de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Niamey 
Suppléants 
Diop AMADOU
Directeur de l'agriculture
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Niamey Bagoudou MAIDAGI
Directeur de la production animale
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Niamey
Adam Maiga ZAKARIAOU
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome Mme Seydou ZIKA AMINANTU
Responsable de la Division agriculture
Ministère du plan
Niamey
Cheferou MAHATAN
Directeur PV/Niger
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Niamey 
NIGERIA - NIGÉRIA 
Delegate 
Alhaji Sani Zango DAURA
Minister for Agriculture
Abuja 
Alternates 
Ango ABDULLAHI
Special Adviser to the President
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Abuja Alhaji Mai M. JIR
Director
Department of Planning, Research and Statistics
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Abuja
O.A. EDACHE
Director
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Abuja Alhaji Sani ABDULLAH
Director
Agricultural Cooperatives
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Abuja
Ms E.O. OKEKE
Director
Rural Development
Federal Ministry of Agriculture, and Rural Development
Abuja T.O. ABEGUNDE
Acting Director
Federal Department of Livestock and Pest Control Services
Abuja
Alhaji ZAYYAD IBRAHIM
Personal Assistant to the Minister
Federal Ministry of Agriculture, and Rural Development
Abuja Onyeabo E. ONWUKEME
First Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Professor LOMBIN
Embassy of Nigeria
Rome 
NIUE - NIOUÉ 
Delegate 
Dion TAUFITU
Minister for Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Alofi 
Alternates 
Mrs Grace Sisilia TALAGI
Office of the Prime Minister
Alofi Sauni TONGATULE
Director of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Alofi
NORWAY - NORVÈGE - NORUEGA
Delegate 
Kåre GJØNNES
Minister for Agriculture
Oslo 
Alternates 
Olav KJØRVEN
Political Adviser of Development and Human Rights
Royal Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Oslo Per Harald GRUE
Secretary General
Royal Ministry of Agriculture
Oslo
Geir GRUNG
Ambassador
Royal Norwegian Embassy
Rome Dag BRISEID
Minister Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Ms Elin KLEVEN
Political Adviser
Royal Ministry of Agriculture
Oslo Mrs Inge NORDANG
Deputy Director General
Royal Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Oslo
Ms Merethe LUIS
Adviser
Royal Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Oslo Ms Maren Elise BACHKE
Executive Officer
Royal Ministry of Agriculture
Oslo
Arne VINJE
The Norwegian Farmers and Smallholders Union
Oslo Ms Bodil BLAKER
Adviser
National Council on Nutrition and Physical Activity
Oslo
OMAN - OMÁN 
Delegate 
KHALFAN bin SALAH AL-NABI
Undersecretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Muscat 
Alternates 
Said Khalifa AL-BUSAIDY
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Hilal bin Saoud AMBUSAIDI
Director
International Relations and Training
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Muscat
Yusuf Abdulla Nasser AL-AFIFY
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
PAKISTAN - PAKISTÁN 
Delegate 
Arif AYUB
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Adnan BASHIR KHAN
Agricultural Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Athar MAHMOOD
Minister
Embassy of Pakistan
Rome
PALAU 
Delegate 
Hersey KYOTA
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to the United States
Washington, D.C.
PANAMA - PANAMÁ 
Delegado 
Rafael E. FLORES
Viceministro de Desarrollo Agropecuario
Panamá 
Suplentes 
Sra. Mayra IVANKOVICH
Directora
Dipartamento de Naciones Unidas
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores
Panamá Horacio MALTEZ
Ministro Consejero
Encargado de Negocios a.i.
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
PAPOUASIE-NOUVELLE-GUINÉE
PAPUA NUEVA GUINEA
Delegate 
Ted SITAPAI
Deputy Secretary
Department of Agriculture and Livestock
Port Moresby 
Alternates 
Matthew KANUA
Director
Research and Technical Services Division
Department of Agriculture and Livestock
Port Moresby Kephas KAYO
FAO Desk Officer
Department of Foreign Affairs
Port Moresby
PARAGUAY 
Delegado 
Ronaldo DIETZE
Viceministro de Agricultura
Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería
Asunción 
Suplentes 
Raúl Reginaldo INCHAUSTI VALDEZ
Consejero
Encargado de Negocios a.i.
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma Oscar CABELLO SARUBBI
Embajador
Roma
Roberto BENÍTEZ FERNÁNDEZ
Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma Sra. Sonia BIEDERMANN
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Osvaldo BITTAR
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma Sra. Mabel Teresa MEDINA ZORILLA
Segundo Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
PERU - PÉROU - PERÚ 
Delegado 
Carlos LUNA CONROY
Vice Ministro de Agricultura
Lima 
Suplentes 
Sra. Ana María DEUSTUA
Embajadora
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Sra. Marcela LÓPEZ BRAVO de RUIZ
Ministra
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma
Carlos Manuel ROMÁN
Consejero
Embajada del Perú
Roma Miguel BARRETO
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Eliot GAVIRIA
Tercer Secretario
Embajada del Perú
Roma 
PHILIPPINES - FILIPINAS 
Delegate 
Edgardo J. ANGARA
Secretary for Agriculture
Metro Manila 
Alternates 
Philippe J. LHUILLIER
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Bal FOMACIER
Special Assistant to the Secretary for Agriculture
Department of Agriculture
Metro Manila
Ms Maria Celia FERNANDEZ
Assistant Secretary for Agriculture
Department of Agriculture
Metro Manila Noel D. De LUNA
Agricultural Attaché
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Ms Maria Luisa GAVINO
Assistant Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
POLAND - POLOGNE - POLONIA
Delegate 
Ryszard BRZEZIK
Under-Secretary of State
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Economy
Warsaw 
Alternates 
Wojciech PONIKIEWSKI
Director
Department for UN Economic and Social Affairs
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Warsaw Marek GRELA
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Tadeusz HUNEK
Institute of Agriculture and Rural Development
Polish Academy of Sciences
Warsaw Ms Malgorzata PIOTROWSKA
Head of Division
Department of International Cooperation
Secretary of the National Committee on FAO
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Economy
Warsaw
PORTUGAL 
Delegate 
José PAULOURO DAS NEVES
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Pedro PINTO DA SILVA
Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Carlos FONTES
Assistant to the Department of Agriculture and Food Planning
Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development and Fisheries
Lisbon
Francisco CHORÃO DA COSTA
Chief
Division of Cooperation for Development
Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development and Fisheries
Lisbon 
QATAR 
Delegate 
Ahmed Ali AL-ANSARI
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Abdulla A. FAKHROO
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Fahad Ibrahim AL-MANA
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Akeel HATOOR
Embassy of the State of Qatar
Rome 
ROMANIA - ROUMANIE - RUMANIA 
Délégué 
Ioan Avram MURESAN
Ministre de l'agriculture et de l'alimentation
Bucarest 
Suppléants 
Romicà TOMESCU
Ministre des eaux, des forêts et de la protection de l'environnement
Bucarest Serban STATI
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome
Petru DUMITRIU
Directeur
Ministère des Affaires Étrangères
Bucarest Ioan PAVEL
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
RWANDA 
Délégué 
Laurien NGIRABANZI
Secrétaire d'État de l'agriculture, de l'élevage et des forêts
Kigali 
Suppléant 
Laurent KAYITARE
Directeur de l'agriculture
Ministère d'agriculture, de l'élevage et des forêts
Kigali 
SAINT-KITTS AND NEVIS
SAINT-KITTS-ET-NEVIS
SAN KITTS Y NEVIS
Delegate 
Keith ARCHIBALD
Agricultural Development Advisor
Ministry of Agriculture, Lands and Housing
Basseterre 
SAINT LUCIA - SAINTE-LUCIE - SANTA LUCÍA
Delegate 
James FLETCHER
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment
Castries 
SAINT VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
SAINT-VINCENT-ET-LES GRENADINE
SAN VICENTE Y LAS GRANADINAS
Delegate 
Jeremiah C. SCOTT
Minister for Agriculture and Labour
Kingstown 
Alternate 
Philmore ISAACS
Chief Agricultural Officer
Ministry of Agriculture and Labour
Kingstown 
SAMOA 
Delegate 
Mafasolia PAPU VAI
Minister for Agriculture, Forests, Fisheries and Meteorology
Apia 
Alternates 
Tuisugaletaua A. SOFALA AVEAU
Director
Ministry of Agriculture, Forests, Fisheries and Meteorology
Apia Mrs Gaualofa VAAI
Ministry of Agriculture, Forests, Fisheries and Meteorology
Apia
SAN MARINO - SAINT-MARIN 
Delegates 
Gabriele GATTI
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
San Marino 
Alternates 
Mrs Barbara PARA
Ambassador of the Republic of San Marino
Rome Lucio DANIELE
Coordinator
Department of Foreign Affairs
Secretariat of State for Foreign Affairs
San Marino
Mrs Maria Alessandra ALBERTINI
Directorate for Political Affairs
Secretariat of State for Foreign Affairs
San Marino Mrs Daniela ROTONDARO
Embassy of the Republic of San Marino
Rome
SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
SAO TOMÉ-ET-PRINCIPE
SANTO TOMÉ Y PRÍNCIPE
Délégué 
Armindo BROTI FERNANDES
Chargé d'affaires
Ambassade du Sao Tomé et Principe
Bruxelles 
SAUDI ARABIA, (KINGDOM OF)
ARABIE SAOUDITE (ROYAUME D')
ARABIA SAUDITA (REINO DE)
Delegate 
Abdallah Ben Abdel Aziz Ben Fahd Bin M'AMMAR
Minister for Agriculture and Water
Riyadh 
Alternates 
Salah Ben Mohamed AL SOLIMAN
Director General
Grain Silos and Mills
Riyadh Hameed Ben Mohamed ABDOU GEBAL
Director General
Ministry of Agriculture and Water
Riyadh
Waleed Ben Abdel Kareem EL KHOOUREIGHI
Director General of Agriculture and Water in the Mecca Region
Riyadh Ahmed Suleiman AL-AQUIL
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Mohamed Ben Ahmed Ben MAHFOUZ
National Coordinator for International Agreements
Riyadh Saad Ben Abdallah KHALIL
Economic Researcher
Ministry of Agriculture and Water
Riyadh
Abdel Rahman Ben HAMAD AL GANAM
Director General
Economic Studies Service
Riyadh Bandar AL-SHALHOOB
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Mohamed DJERBI
FAO Programme Coordinator
Ministry of Agriculture and Water
Riyadh 
SENEGAL - SÉNÉGAL 
Délégué 
Robert SAGNA
Ministre d'État
Ministre de l'agriculture
Dakar 
Suppléants 
Jacques BAUDIN
Ministre des affaires étrangères et des Sénégalais de l'extérieur
Dakar Mame Balla SY
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome
Ibra Deguene KA
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent du Sénégal auprès des Nations Unies
New York Keba Birane CISSE
Ambassadeur
Ambassade du Sénégal
Paris
Mme Absa Claude DIALLO
Ambassadeur
Représentante permanente du Sénégal auprès de l'office des Nations Unies
Genève Papa Louis FALL
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent du Sénégal auprès de l'Organisation de l'Unité Africaine
Addis Ababa
Papa Abdou CISSE
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent du Sénégal auprès de l'Organisation de la Conférence Islamique
Riyadh Henri Antoine TURPIN
Ambassadeur du Sénégal auprès du
Saint-Siège
Amadou DIOP
Ambassadeur
Conseiller diplomatique de M. le Président
Dakar Paul BADJI
Ambassadeur
Conseiller diplomatique de M. le Premier Ministre
Dakar
Moussa Bocar LY
Ministre Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome Abdoukarim DIOUF
Deuxième Conseiller
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome
Oumar Lèye NGOM
Conseiller
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome Abdoulaye DIALLO
Premier secrétaire
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome
SEYCHELLES 
Delegate 
Callixte F.Z. d'OFFAY
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
SIERRA LEONE - SIERRA LEONA 
Delegate 
Umaru B. WURIE
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Bonn 
Alternate 
Elio PACIFICO
Honorary Consul General
Rome 
SLOVAKIA - SLOVAQUIE - ESLOVAQUIA
Delegate 
Pavel KONCOS
Minister for Agriculture
Bratislava 
Alternates 
Rudolf ZELENAY
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Embassy of the Slovak Republic
Rome Lubomir MICEK
Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Ms Ingrid JÉNEZOVÁ
Director
Department of Foreign Relations
Ministry of Agriculture
Bratislava Milan KOVÁ C
National Secretary for Follow-up Activities of World Food Programme
Bratislava
Ms Barbara HELLEBRANDTOVA
National Secretary for Cooperation between the Slovak Republic and FAO
Bratislava Milan HUBCEJ
Department of the United Nations and International Organizations
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Bratislava
SLOVENIA - SLOVÉNIE - ESLOVENIA
Delegate 
Ciril SMRKOLJ
Minister for Agriculture, Forestry and Food
Ljubljana 
Alternates 
Peter Andrej BEKE&#138;
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Republic of Slovenia
Rome Danilo BELOGLAVEC
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Matja &#158; LONGAR
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ms Irena MEGU&#138;AR
Counsellor to the Minister
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food
Ljubljana
Mrs Dragica MATIJEVI C
Assistant to the Minister
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food
Ljubljana 
SOLOMON ISLANDS - ÎLES SALOMON - ISLAS SALOMÓN
Delegate 
Steve AUMANU
Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries
Honiara 
Alternates 
Ezekiel WALAODO
Acting Permanent Secretary
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Honiara Tione BUGOTU
Assistant Secretary
United Nations Branch
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade Relations
Honiara
SOUTH AFRICA - AFRIQUE DU SUD - SUDÁFRICA
Delegate 
Mrs Thoko Angela DIDIZA
Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs
Pretoria 
Alternates 
Ms Bongiwe NOMANDI NJOBE
Director General
National Department of Agriculture
Pretoria Anthony Le CLERK KGADU MONGALO
Department of Foreign Affairs
Pretoria
Mahlomola JOHNSON KHASU
Member of the Executive Committee
Agriculture Conservation and Environment
North West Province
Pretoria Ms Margaret NONTOKAZI RAMABENYANE
Assistant Director
National Department of Agriculture
Pretoria
Ms Mmapusetso Maria BAKANE
Deputy Director General
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Environment
North West Province
Pretoria Julian Alexis THOMAS
Agricultural Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Edward Xolisa MAKAYA
Third Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mishack BUCHANKGE MOLOPE
Chief Director
Sustainable Resource Use and Management
National Department of Agriculture
Pretoria
Jacobus Ignatius Tertius BESTER
Assistant Director
International Relations
National Department of Agriculture
Pretoria 
SPAIN - ESPAGNE - ESPAÑA
Delegado 
Jesús María POSADA MORENO
Ministro de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid 
Suplentes 
Juan PRAT Y COLL
Embajador de España en Italia
Roma Fernando RIQUELME LIDÓN
Embajador en Misión Especial
Madrid
Ramón BLEIN SÁNCHEZ DE LEÓN
Director de Gabinete del Ministro de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación
Ministerio de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid Manuel GONZALO GONZÁLEZ
Secretario General Técnico
Ministerio de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid
Francisco José Simón VILA
Presidente
Istituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria
Madrid Arturo SPIEGELBERG DE ORTUETA
Subdirector General de Organismos Internacionales Técnicos
Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores
Madrid
Ricardo LÓPEZ DE HARO
Subdirector General de Relaciones Agrarias Internacionales
Ministerio de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid José Ignacio TRUEBA JAINAGA
Consejero
Represenatante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma
Rafael PONZ ASCASO
Subdirector General de Prospectiva y Coordinación de
Programas del I.N.I.A.
Madrid Sra. Isabel GARCÍA TEJERINA
Asesora del Ministro de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación
Ministerio de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid
Javier PIERNAVEJA NIEMBRO
Agregado
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma Sra. Maria Victoria SCOLA PLIEGO
Secretaria
Embajada de España en Italia
Roma
Juan Ignacio De la VEGA
Consejero Técnico
Agencia Española de Cooperación Internacional
Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores
Madrid Sra. Eva BLANCO MEDIO
Jefe de Área
Relaciones Multilaterales
Ministerio de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid
José Miguel BOLÍVAR SALCEDO
Jefe de Área de Prospectiva del I.N.I.A.
Madrid José Luis MILAS CLIMENT
Jefe de Área de Relaciones Científicas Internacionales del I.N.I.A.
Madrid
Sra. Magdalena TRUYOL WINTRICH
Jefe de Servicio de Organismos para la Agricultura, la Alimentación y el Medio Ambiente
Dirección General de Asuntos Políticos y para las Naciones Unidas
Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores
Madrid Sra. Pilar VILLALBA CORTIJO
Jefe de Servicio de Coordinación Técnica y Relaciones con la U.E.
Ministerio de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid
Miguel de SANTIAGO-JUÁREZ
Consejero de Información
Embajada de España
Roma Antonio IMICOZ
Asesor de Comunicación
Jefe de Prensa
Ministerio de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid
SRI LANKA 
Delegate 
T.H.WOUTERSZ
Ambassador
Embassy of Sri Lanka
Rome 
Alternates 
N.F.C. RANAWEERA
Assistant Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Lands
Colombo Ranamukalage Deeptha KULATILLEKE
Counsellor (Commercial)
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
SUDAN - SOUDAN - SUDÁN 
Delegate 
Osman Elhadi IBRAHIM
Minister for Agriculture and Forestry
Khartoum 
Alternates 
Adam BALOUH MOHAMED
State Minister for Animal Resources
Khartoum Abdel Razig ELBESHIR
Under-Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Khartoum
Ahmed ADAM
Under-Secretary
Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources
Khartoum Andrew MAKUR
Ambassador
Embassy of the Republic of the Sudan
Rome
Mrs Laila OMAR BESHIR
Ministry of Finance and the National Economy
Khartoum Mohamed Said Mohamed Ali HARBI
Counsellor (Agricultural Affairs)
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
SURINAME 
Delegate 
Saimin REDJOSENTONO
Minister for Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries
Paramaribo 
Alternate 
Jaswant SAHTOE
Director of Agricultural Research
Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries
Paramaribo 
SWAZILAND - SWAZILANDIA 
Delegate 
Roy FANOURAKIS
Minister for Agriculture and Cooperatives
Mbabane 
Alternates 
Patrick LUKHELE
Director of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Mbabane R.S. NXUMALO
Senior Veterinary Officer
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Mbabane
Sam DLAMINI
Senior Economist
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Mbabane G. MBULI
Private Secretary to the Minister
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Mbabane
SWEDEN - SUÈDE - SUECIA 
Delegate 
Ms Margareta WINBERG
Minister for Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
Stockholm 
Alternates 
Ms Pernilla IVARSSON
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
Stockholm Ms Cecilia NORDIN VAN GANSBERGHE
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
Stockholm
Rolf ÅKESSON
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
Stockholm Michael ODEVALL
Minister
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Ms Margareta ARNESSON-CIOTTI
Embassy of Sweden
Rome Lennart ACKZELL
National Board of Forestry
Stockholm
Ms Astrid BERGQUIST
Ministry of Industry and Trade
Stockholm Ms Amalia GARCIA-THÄRN
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Stockholm
Mrs Inge GERREMO
Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency
Stockholm Ms Ingbritt IRHAMMAR
Swedish Board of Agriculture
Stockholm
Ms Lena KLEVENÅS
Stockholm Ms Ylva MATTSSON
Swedish Board of Agriculture
Stockholm
Jonas RINGQVIST
Member of Parliament
Stockholm Ms Karin WALLENSTEEN
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
Stockholm
SWITZERLAND - SUISSE - SUIZA 
Délégué 
Michel PELLAUX
Directeur suppléant de l'Office fédéral de l'agriculture
Berne 
Suppléants 
Anton KOHLER
Chef du secrétariat suisse de la FAO
Office fédéral de l'agriculture
Berne Rudolf HORBER
Conseiller
Président du comité national suisse de la FAO
Direction du développement et de la coopération
Berne
Lothar CAVIEZEL
Conseiller scientifique principal
Section des affaires multilatérales
Direction du développement et de la coopération
Berne Juerg BURRI
Collaborateur diplomatique
Section ONU/OI
Direction politique
Berne
Rolf GERBER
Ministre
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Pedro ZWAHLEN
Stagiaire diplomatique
Ambassade de la Suisse
Rome
SYRIA - SYRIE - SIRIA 
Delegate 
Assa'd MUSTAFA
Minister for Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Damascus 
Alternates 
Ourfan ALLOUSH
Deputy Minister for Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Damascus Mohamad Najdi ALJAZZAR
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Nahi SHIBANI
Director
Statistics and Planning Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Damascus Mohamad Sleiman KARBOUJ
Deputy Director
Public Relations Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Damascus
TAJIKISTAN - TADJIKISTAN - TAYIKISTÁN
Delegate 
Shody KHABIROV
Minister for Agriculture
Dushanbe 
Alternate 
Mrs Svetlana BALKHOVA
Manager
Republican Centre for the Farm Privatization Support Project
Dushanbe 
TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF
TANZANIE, RÉPUBLIQUE-UNIE DE
TANZANÍA, LA REPUBLICA UNIDA DE
Delegate 
Adam C. MWAKANJULI
Minister for Agriculture, Livestock and Natural Resources
Dar-es Salaam 
Alternates 
Ismail MGENI
Deputy Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Natural Resources
Zanzibar Jeremiah HAKI
Director
Research and Development
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Dar-es-Salaam
Joseph Pious KIMATI
Head of Sectoral Planning (Livestock)
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Dar-es-Salaam Jonas MALEWAS
Acting Director
Livestock Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Dar-es-Salaam
George P. MBONDE
Assistant Director
Forestry Department
Ministry of National Resources and Tourism
Dar-es-Salaam Raphael P. MAPUNDA
Assistant Director
Fisheries Department
Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism
Dar-es-Salaam
Asmani ALBANO
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mrs Perpetua M. Simon HINGI
Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
THAILAND - THAÏLANDE - TAILANDIA 
Delegate 
Pongol ADIREKSARN
Minister for Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok 
Alternates 
Petipong Punghun Na AYUDHYA
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok Suthiporn CHIRAPANDA
Deputy Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok
Yongyos ADIREKSARN
Advisor to the Minister
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok Ampon KITTIAMPON
Assistant Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok
Chao TIANTONG
Minister (Agriculture)
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Vijai NOPAMORNBODI
Deputy Director General
Department of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok
Vitaya KHUNPLOME
Secretary to the Minister
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok Mrs Kajonwan ITHARATANA
Senior Policy and Plan Analyst
Office of Agricultural Economics
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok
Mrs Suchada TAOMAHAWONG
Senior Economist
Office of Agricultural Economics
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok Ms Ratana THANOMSAKYUTH
Chief
International Organization Sub-Division
Foreign Agricultural Relations Division
Office of Permanent Secretary
Bangkok
Mrs Sawanit PHONGPRAPAI
Policy and Plan Analyst
Foreign Agricultural Relations Division
Office of Permanent Secretary
Bangkok Korntip RATANAKOMUT
Counsellor
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
L'EX RÉPUBLIQUE YOUGOSLAVE DE MACÉDOINE
LA EX REPÚBLICA YUGOSLAVA DE MACEDONIA
Delegate 
Marjan GORCEV
Minister for Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management
Skopje 
Alternates 
Viktor GABER
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Aleksander LEPAVCEV
Director
Water Management Office
Skopje
Miomir RISTOVSKI
Minister Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mrs Ljubica TRENCESVSKA
Counsellor
Skopje
Mrs Dragica ZAFIROVSKA
Director of Directorate
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Skopje 
TOGO 
Délégué 
Komikipme BAMNANTE
Ministre de l'agriculture, de l'élevage et de la pêche
Lomé 
Suppléant 
Mme Akossiwa ALAGBO-DUYIBOE
Conseillère technique du Ministre
Secrétaire nationale du Sommet mondial de l'alimentation
Lomé 
TONGA 
Delegate 
S. LANGI KAVALIKU
Deputy Prime Minister
Minister for Education and Civil Aviation
Nuku'alofa 
Alternates 
Haniteli FA'ANUNU
Director of Agriculture and Forestry
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Nuku'alofa `AKAU'OLA
Secretary for Fisheries
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Nuku'alofa
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
TRINITÉ-ET-TOBAGO
TRINIDAD Y TABAGO
Delegate 
Ms Lauren BOODHOO
Chargé d'Affaires a.i.
Permanent Mission of Trinidad and Tobago to the United Nations Office
Geneva 
TUNISIA - TUNISIE - TÚNEZ 
Délégué 
Azouz ENNIFAR
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome 
Alternates 
Abderrazak DAALOUL
Directeur général
Production agricole
Ministère de l'agriculture
Tunis Khaled ZEGHIDI
Ingénieur général
Direction générale de la planification
Ministère de l'agriculture
Tunis
Ahmed BOUGUACHA
Ingénieur principal
Sous-Direction de la coopération internationale
Ministère de l'agriculture
Tunis Mahjoub LAMTI
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
Naceur BOUALI
Conseiller
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome 
TURKEY - TURQUIE - TURQUÍA 
Delegate 
Hüsnü Yusuf GÖKALP
Minister for Agriculture and Rural Affairs
Ankara 
Alternates 
Necati UTKAN
Ambassador
Embassy of the Republic of Turkey
Rome Vedat UZUNLU
Deputy Undersecretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
Ankara
Hüseyin SUNGUR
Director General
General Directorate of Protection and Control
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
Ankara Ahmet ALPMAN
Head of Department
Department of Multilateral Economic Affairs
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ankara
Sinan VAROL
Head of Department
Department of External Relations and EU Coordination
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
Ankara Ömer GÜCÜK
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Ahmet SAYLAM
Agricultural Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Cemal SANGU
Administrative Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
TURKMENISTAN - TURKMÉNISTAN - TURKMENISTÁN
UGANDA - OUGANDA 
Delegate 
KISAMBA-MUGERWA
Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
Entebbe 
Alternates 
Vincent KIRABOKYAMARIA
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Joshua MUTABAZI
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Mrs Ruth OKWELE
FAO Desk Officer
Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
Entebbe Martin KASIRYE
Second Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
ÉMIRATS ARABES UNIS
EMIRATOS ÁRABES UNIDOS
Delegate 
Saeed bin Mohammed AL RAQABANI
Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries
Dubai 
Alternates 
Mohammed Fahad ALDUHAIM
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Hamad Saif Ali AL MAZROUE
Acting Director
Agricultural Services Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Dubai
Abdallah Hussain Nasser ALABUDI
Acting Director
Research and Agricultural Production Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Dubai Aki Salem AL MUTAWA
Head of Agricultural Extension Section
Dubai
UNITED KINGDOM - ROYAUME-UNI - REINO UNIDO
Delegate 
George FOULKES MP
Parliamentary Undersecretary of State
Department for International Development
London 
Alternates 
Andrew BENNETT
Director
Rural Livelihoods and Environment Division
Department for International Development
London Anthony BEATTIE
Minister
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
James HOWIE
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Thomas J. KELLY
Second Secretary
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Sanjib BAISYA
Assistant Private Secretary to Mr Foulkes
Department for International Development
London Mrs Nicolette CIORBA
Permanent Representation to FAO
Rome
Mrs Fiona PRYCE
Permanent Representation to FAO
Rome 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
ÉTATS-UNIS D'AMÉRIQUE
ESTADOS UNIDOS DE AMÉRICA
Delegate 
Daniel R. GLICKMAN
Secretary of Agriculture
Washington D.C. 
Alternates 
James W. SCHROEDER
Deputy Under-Secretary
Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services
Department of Agriculture
Washington D.C. George S. McGOVERN
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
E. Michael SOUTHWICK
Deputy Assistant Secretary
Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Department of State
Washington D.C. George ABRAHAMS
Deputy Director
Office of U.N. Systems Administration
Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Department of State
Washington D.C.
James ALLEN
Deputy Director
Agricultural Development Division
Office of International Development Assistance
Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Department of State
Washington D.C. Ms Adela BACKIEL
Director
Sustainable Development and Small Farms
Department of Agriculture
Washington D.C.
Ms Carol KRAMER LEBLANC
Director
Research and Exchanges Division
International Cooperation and Development
Foreign Agricultural Service
Department of Agriculture
Washington D.C. Mrs Laurie J. TRACY
Minister Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Mrs Vonda Kimble DELAWIE
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome E. Wayne DENNEY
Director
International Organization Affairs Division
Foreign Agricultural Service
Department of Agriculture
Washington D.C.
Richard J. HUGHES
International Relations Advisor
International Organization Affairs Division
International Cooperation and Development
Foreign Agricultural Service
Department of Agriculture
Washington D.C. David LAMBERT
Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Isi SIDDIQUI
Special Assistant to the Secretary for Trade
Office of the Secretary
Department of Commerce
Washington D.C. Ms Meg EVANS
Office of Communications
Department of Agriculture
Washington D.C.
Andy SOLOMON
Director of Communications
Press Secretary
Department of Agriculture
Washington D.C. Mrs Rhoda GLICKMAN
Department of Agriculture
Washington D.C.
URUGUAY 
Delegado 
Juan E. NOTARO
Subsecretario de Ganadería, Agricultura y Pesca
Montevideo 
Suplentes 
Felipe H. PAOLILLO
Embajador
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma Felipe LUZARDO MARTÍNEZ
Director General
Ministerio de Ganadería, Agricultura y Pesca
Montevideo
Joaquín PÍRIZ JORGE
Ministro
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma Sra Laura GALARZA
Agregado
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
VANUATU 
Delegate 
Abel NAKO
Director General
Ministry of Agriculture, Quaranteen, Fisheries and Forestry
Port Vila 
VENEZUELA 
Delegado 
Amadeo VOLPE
Ministro Consejero
Encargado de Negocios a.i.
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma 
Suplentes 
Sra. Maritza CAMPO ALFONZO
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Adjunto ante la FAO
Roma Eduardo P. SPADARO ÁLVAREZ
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
VIET NAM 
Delegate 
TA QUANG NGOC
Minister for Fisheries
Hanoi 
Alternates 
TRAN MINH QUOC
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome VU VUAN TRIEU
Deputy Director
International Cooperation Department
Ministry of Fisheries
Hanoi
DOAN THE UONG
Deputy Director
International Cooperation Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Hanoi NGUYEN CHI THANH
Expert
International Organizations Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Hanoi
NGUYEN THI XUAN HUONG
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
YEMEN - YÉMEN 
Delegate 
Ahmed Salem AL-GABALI
Minister for Agriculture and Irrigation
Sana'a 
Alternates 
Ahmed Ali HUMMED AL-HAWRI
Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Abdul Malik KASIM AL-THOUR
Director General
Planning and Monitoring
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Sana'a
Mansour Abdullah AL-AHGARI
Directeur de Cabinet
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Sana'a 
ZAMBIA - ZAMBIE 
Delegate 
Y.J. NGULUBE
Deputy Minister
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
Lusaka 
Alternates 
M.R. MULELE
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
Lusaka J.P. LUNGU
Deputy Director
Extension
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
Lusaka
Obote SHAKACHITE
Chief Extension Officer
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
Lusaka 
ZIMBABWE 
Delegate 
Kumbirai Manyika KANGAI
Minister for Lands and Agriculture
Harare 
Alternates 
T. TAKAVARASHA
Secretary for Lands and Agriculture
Ministry for Lands and Agriculture
Harare B. SANDAMU
Acting Deputy Secretary
Agricultural Policy and Planning Division
Harare
Ms Rudo Grace MANYARA
Counsellor
Chargé d'Affaires a.i.
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ms Sophia NYAMUDEZA
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
APPLICANT FOR MEMBERSHIP
ÉTAT AYANT PRESENTÉ UNE DEMANDE D'ADMISSION À LA QUALITÉ DE
MEMBRE DE L'ORGANISATION
ESTADO QUE HA PRESENTADO SOLICITUD DE INGRESO COMO MIEMBROS DE LA ORGANIZACIÓN
MICRONESIA - MICRONÉSIE
Eliuel PRETRICK
Minister of the Department of Health, Education and Social Affairs
Pohnpei
OBSERVERS FROM UNITED NATIONS MEMBER STATES
OBSERVATEURS D'ÉTATS MEMBRES DES NATIONS UNIES
OBSERVADORES DE LOS ESTADOS MIEMBROS DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
FÉDERATION DE RUSSIE
FEDERACIÓN DE RUSIA
Igor V. SHAPOVALOV
Minister Plenipotentiary
Embassy of the Russian Federation
Rome Igor Z. SINELNIKOV
Embassy of the Russian Federation
Rome
HOLY SEE - SAINT-SIÈGE - SANTA SEDE
H.E. Monsignor
Agostino MARCHETTO
Apostolic Nuncio
Titular Archbishop of Astigi
Permanent Observer to FAO
Vatican City Vincenzo BUONOMO
Alternate Observer to FAO
Vatican City
Saverio PETRILLO
Adviser
Vatican City Guido SODANO
Adviser
Vatican City
Giovanni TEDESCO
Adviser
Vatican City
SOVEREIGN ORDER OF MALTA
ORDRE SOUVERAIN DE MALTE
SOBERANA ORDEN DE MALTA
Giuseppe BONANNO PRINCE di LINGUAGLOSSA
Observateur auprès de la FAO
Rome
LIBERATION MOVEMENT
MOUVEMENT DE LIBÉRATION
MOVIMIENTO DE LIBERACIÓN
PALESTINE - PALESTINA
Hikmat ZAID
Minister for Agriculture
Ramallah Walid Abed RABBOH
Advisor to the Minister
Ministry of Agriculture
Ramallah
Hussein AL AFLAK
Palestinian Embassy
Rome 
REPRESENTATIVES OF UNITED NATIONS AND SPECIALIZED AGENCIES
REPRÉSENTANTS DES NATIONS UNIES ET INSTITUTIONS SPÉCIALISÉES
REPRESENTANTES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS Y ORGANISMOS ESPECIALIZADOS
UNITED NATIONS
NATIONS UNIES
NACIONES UNIDAS
Ms Anne ROGERS
Chief
Oceans and Land Unit
Division for Sustainable Development
Department of Economic and Social Affairs
New York Ms Katia MIRANDA-SALEME
United Nations Information Centre
Rome
UNITED NATIONS ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMISSION FOR WESTERN ASIA
COMMISSION ÉCONOMIQUE ET SOCIALE POUR L'ASIE OCCIDENTALE
COMISIÓN ECONÓMICA Y SOCIAL PARA ASIA OCCIDENTAL
Mohamed GABR
Chief of the Agriculture Section
Beirut 
UNITED NATIONS POPULATION FUND
FONDS DES NATIONS UNIES POUR LA POPULATION
FONDO DE POBLACIÓN DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Erik PALSTRA
External Relations Office
Geneva 
JOINT UNITED NATIONS PROGRAMME ON HIV/AIDS
PROGRAMME COMMUN DES NATIONS UNIES SUR LE VIH/SIDA
PROGRAMA CONJUNTO DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS SOBRE EL VIH/SIDA
Ms Renu CHAHIL-GRAF
Manager
Governance and UN System
Geneva 
WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME
PROGRAMME ALIMENTAIRE MONDIAL
PROGRAMA MUNDIAL DE ALIMENTOS
Ms Catherine BERTINI
Executive Director
Rome Namanga NGONGI
Deputy Executive Director
Rome
Jean-Jacques GRAISSE
Assistant Executive Director
Rome Tun MYAT
Director
Resources and External Relations Division
Rome
Mohamed ZEJJARI
Regional Director
Africa Region
Operations Department
Rome Ms Judy CHENG-HOPKINS
Regional Director
Asia and Pacific Region
Operations Department
Rome
Bernd KAESS
Director
Office of the Executive Director
Rome Michael USNICK
Director
Office of Executive Director
Budget
Rome
Ms Dianne SPEARMAN
Acting Director
Strategy and Policy Division
Rome Trevor ROWE
Chief
Public Affairs Service
Resources and External Relations Division
Rome
Ms Valerie SEQUEIRA
Secretary to the Executive Board
Chief, Interagency Affairs Service
Resources and External Relations Division
Rome Ms Judith WORKS
Chief
Staff Relations and Benefits Branch
Human Resources Division
Rome
Ms Susana RICO
Assistant Secretary to the Executive Board
Resources and External Relations
Rome Eric WHITING
Deputy Director
FSF
Rome
Ms Peggy NELSON
Senior Programme Coordinator
Office of the Assistant Executive Director
Rome John BAILEY
Strategic Planning Officer
Strategy and Policy Division
Rome
Imran RIZA
Chief
Interagency Affairs Branch
Resources and External Relations Division
Rome Brian FITZPATRICK
Budget Officer
Office of the Executive Director,
Budget
Rome
Neil GALLAGHER
Senior Liaison and Communication Officer
Office of the Executive director
Rome Francis MWANZA
Public Affairs Officer
Public Affairs Service
Resources and External Relations Branch
Rome
Scott GREEN
Interagency Affairs Officer
Interagency Affairs Branch
Resources and External Relations Division
Rome Ms Claudia Von ROEHL
Senior Resource Officer
Resources Mobilization Service
Resources and External Relations Division
Rome
Yasuhiro TSUMURA
Interagency Affairs Officer
Interagency Affairs Branch
Resources and External Relations Division
Rome Ms Leslie ELLIOTT
Reports Officer
Africa Region
Operations Department
Rome
Pieter DIJKHUIZEN
Senior Programme Adviser for Nutrition
Technical Support Service
Rome Anthony TYREL
Internal Auditor
OEDA
Rome
Ms Robin JACKSON
Policy Analyst
Policy Service
Strategy and Policy Division
Rome Ms Sarah LONGFORD
Policy Analyst
Policy Service
Strategy and Policy Division
Rome
Ms Susanne LUNDGREN
Programme Officer
Technical Support Service
Operations Department
Rome Ms Birgitta BAUER
Consultant
Resources Mobilization Service
Rome
OFFICE OF THE UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES
HAUT COMMISSARIAT DES NATIONS UNIES POUR LES RÉFUGIÉS
OFICINA DEL ALTO COMISIONADO DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS PARA LOS REFUGIADOS
Ms Ana LIRIA-FRANCH
Representative
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE
BUREAU INTERNATIONAL DU TRAVAIL
OFICINA INTERNACIONAL DEL TRABAJO
Maurizio SACCONI
Director
Rome 
UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION
ORGANISATION DES NATIONS UNIES POUR LE DÉVELOPPEMENT INDUSTRIEL
ORGANIZACIÓN DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS PARA EL DESARROLLO INDUSTRIAL
Robert HALLETT
Senior Industrial Development Officer
Vienna Robert CASSANI
Resource Strategist
Rome
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
FONDS INTERNATIONAL DE DÉVELOPPEMENT AGRICOLE
FONDO INTERNACIONAL DE DESARROLLO AGRÍCOLA
Fawzi H. AL-SULTAN
President
Rome John WESTLEY
Vice President
Rome
Takao SHIBATA
Assistant President
Economic Policy and Resource Strategy Department
Rome Phrang ROY
Director
Asia Division
Rome
Richard TRENCHARD
Programme Manager
Popular Coalition to Eradicate Hunger and Poverty
Economic Policy and Resource Strategy Department
Rome Jean-Louis LAWSON
Assistant President
Rome
Hermi TRUPKE
Country Portfolio Manager
Rome Perin SAINT PERIN
Country Portfolio Manager
Rome
Ibrahim T. AYOUB
Chief
Administrative and Protocol Services
Rome Bruce MOORE
Coordinator
Popular Coalition to Eradicate Hunger and Poverty
Rome
Fawzi RIHANE
Coordinator, Multilateral and Inter-Agency Affairs
Economic Policy and Resources Strategy Department
Rome Ms Maria Claudia FONTANA
Protocol and Liaison Officer
Rome
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
AGENCE INTERNATIONALE DE L'ENERGIE ATOMIQUE
ORGANISMO INTERNACIONAL DE ENERGÍA ATÓMICA
James DARGIE
Director
Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture
Vienna 
OBSERVERS FROM INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
OBSERVATEURS DES ORGANISATIONS INTERGOUVERNEMENTALES
OBSERVADORES DE LAS ORGANIZACIONES INTERGUBERNAMENTALES
AFRO-ASIAN RURAL RECONSTRUCTION ORGANIZATION
ORGANISATION AFRO-ASIATIQUE POUR LA RECONSTRUCTION RURALE
ORGANIZACIÓN AFROASIÁTICA PARA LA RECONSTRUCCIÓN RURAL
Bahar MUNIP
Secretary General
New Delhi 
ARAB AUTHORITY FOR AGRICULTURAL INVESTMENT AND DEVELOPMENT
AUTORITÉ ARABE POUR LES INVESTISSEMENTS ET LE DÉVELOPPEMENT AGRICOLES
ORGANISMO ÁRABE DE INVERSIONES Y DESARROLLO AGRÍCOLAS
Nawfel Hameed RASHEED
Adviser
Dubai Al Arabi HAMDI
Acting Director
Dubai
ARAB ORGANIZATION FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
ORGANIZATION ARABE POUR LE DÉVELOPPEMENT AGRICOLE
ORGANIZACIÓN ÁRABE PARA EL DESARROLLO AGRÍCOLA
Yahia BAKOUR
Director General
Khartoum El Tag FADLALLAH A/RAHIM
Deputy Director General
Khartoum
Abbas ABOU AUF
Technical Adviser
Khartoum 
ARAB CENTRE FOR THE STUDIES OF ARID ZONES AND DRY LANDS
CENTRE ARABE POUR L'ETUDE DES ZONES ARIDES ET NON IRRIGUÉES
CENTRO ÁRABE PARA EL ESTUDIO DE LAS ZONAS ÁRIDAS Y LAS TIERRAS DE SECANO
Nabil Ibrahim HASSAN
Deputy Director of Animal Wealth Studies Department
Damascus 
CARIBBEAN COMMUNITY AND COMMON MARKET
SECRÉTARIAT DE LA COMMUNAUTÉ DES CARAÏBES
SECRETARÍA DE LA COMUNIDAD DEL CARIBE
Ronald M. GORDON
Deputy Programme Manager
Agricultural Development
Georgetown 
COMMUNITY OF PORTUGUESE-SPEAKING COUNTRIES
COMMUNAUTÉ DES PAYS DE LANGUE PORTUGAISE
COMUNIDAD DE PAÍSES DE LENGUA PORTUGUESA
Antero Alberto EVERDOSA ABREU
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome Kiala Kia MATEVA
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
Alberto Carlos AMARAL
Conseiller
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS
COMITÉ INTERNATIONAL DE LA CROIX-ROUGE
COMITE INTERNACIONAL DE LA CRUZ ROJA
Meinrad STUDER
Chef de Secteur
Division des Organisations Internationales
Genève 
LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES
LIGUE DES ÉTATS ARABES
LIGA DE LOS ESTADOS ÁRABES
Mohamad ALI MOHAMAD
Head of the Mission of the Arab League
Rome Khaldoun ROUEIHA
Counsellor
Mission of the Arab League
Rome
ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY
ORGANISATION DE L'UNITÉ AFRICAINE
ORGANIZACIÓN DE LA UNIDAD AFRICANA
Salim A. SALIM
Secretary General
Addis Ababa Vijay S. MAKHAN
Assistant Secretary General
Addis Ababa
John MDOE
Attaché de Cabinet
Addis Ababa Frederick ALIPUI
Head of Trade, Money and Finance Division
Addis Ababa
ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
ORGANISATION DE COOPÉRATION ET DE DÉVELOPPEMENT ÉCONOMIQUES
ORGANIZACIÓN DE COOPERACIÓN Y DESARROLLO ECONÓMICOS
Gerard VIATTE
Director Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
Paris Giuseppe VASTA
Consultant
Rome
PERMANENT INTERSTATE COMMITTEE FOR DROUGHT CONTROL IN THE SAHEL
COMITÉ PERMANENT INTER-ÉTATS DE LUTTE CONTRE LA SÉCHERESSE DANS LE SAHEL
COMITÉ PERMANENTE INTERESTATAL PARA LA LUCHA CONTRA LA SEQUÍA EN EL SAHEL
Mme Mariam CISSE
Secrétaire exécutif
Ouagadougou 
REGIONAL CENTRE ON AGRARIAN REFORM AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT FOR THE NEAR EAST
CENTRE RÉGIONAL SUR LA RÉFORME AGRAIRE ET LE DÉVELOPPEMENT RURAL POUR LE PROCHE-ORIENT
CENTRO REGIONAL DE REFORMA AGRARIA Y DESARROLLO RURAL PARA EL CERCANO ORIENTE
Khaldoun SBAIHI
Director General
Jordan 
REGIONAL INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR PLANT PROTECTION AND ANIMAL HEALTH
ORGANISME INTERNATIONAL RÉGIONAL CONTRE LES MALADIES DES PLANTES ET DES ANIMAUX
ORGANISMO INTERNACIONAL REGIONAL DE SANIDAD AGROPECUARIA
Celio Humberto BARRETO
Director Ejecutivo
San Salvador
WEST AFRICA ECONOMIC AND MONETARY UNION
UNION ÉCONOMIQUE ET MONÉTAIRE OUEST AFRICAINE
UNIÓN ECONÓMICA Y MONETARIA DEL ÁFRICA OCCIDENTAL
Bertin BORNA
Commissaire
Département développement rural et environnement
Burkina Faso Marc L. ATOUGA
Directeur de l'agriculture
Burkina Faso
OBSERVERS FROM NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
OBSERVATEURS DES ORGANISATIONS NON GOUVERNEMENTALES
OBSERVADORES DE LAS ORGANIZACIONES NO GUBERNAMENTALES
ASIAN NGO COALITION FOR AGRARIAN REFORM AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
COALITION ASIATIQUE DES ONG POUR LA RÉFORME AGRAIRE ET LE DÉVELOPPEMENT RURAL
COALICIÓN ASIÁTICA DE ORGANIZACIONES NO GUBERNAMENTALES PARA LA REFORMA AGRARIA Y EL DESARROLLO RURAL
Ms Cristina LIAMZON
Rome 
ASSOCIATED COUNTRY WOMEN OF THE WORLD
UNION MONDIALE DES FEMMES RURALES
UNIÓN MUNDIAL DE MUJERES RURALES
Ms Carmela BASILI MASTROPASQUA
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ms Joanna KOCH
UN Representative
Switzerland
CARITAS INTERNATIONALIS 
Ms Patricia WOHLRAB
International Delegate
Vatican City Ermond HARTMANS
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
EUROPEAN ASSOCIATION FOR AGRICULTURAL ECONOMISTS
ASSOCIATION EUROPÉENNE D'ÉCONOMISTES AGRICOLES
ASOCIACIÓN EUROPEA DE ECONOMISTAS AGRÍCOLAS
Ms Ornella M. Vittoria ARIMONDO
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
EUROPEAN ASSOCIATION FOR ANIMAL PRODUCTION
FÉDÉRATION EUROPÉENNE DE ZOOTECHNIE
FEDERACIÓN EUROPEA DE ZOOTECNIA
Jean RENAUD
Représentant
Rome 
GLOBAL CROP PROTECTION FEDERATION
Mrs A. DOLLACKER
Crop Protection Business group
International Information and Communication
Public Affairs and Market Research
Germany Jacob BRASSEL
Observer
Belgium
INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE OF WOMEN
ALLIANCE INTERNATIONALE DES FEMMES
ALIANZA INTERNACIONAL DE MUJERES
Mrs Bettina CORKE
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR AGRICULTURAL ECONOMISTS
ASSOCIATION INTERNATIONALE DES ÉCONOMISTES AGRONOMIQUES
ASOCIACIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE ECONOMISTAS AGRÍCOLAS
Mrs Margaret LOSEBY
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mrs Elena LODI FE
Observer
Rome
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR CEREAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
ASSOCIATION INTERNATIONALE DES SCIENCES ET TECHNOLOGIES CÉRÉALIÈRES
ASOCIACIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE CIENCIA Y TECNOLOGÍA CEREALERAS
Dr Enrica QUATTRUCCI
Vienna 
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR WATER LAW
ASSOCIATION INTERNATIONALE DU DROIT DES EAUX
ASOCIACIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE DERECHO DE AGUAS
Dante CAPONERA
Chairman of the Executive Council
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FAMILY MOVEMENTS OF RURAL TRAINING
ASSOCIATION INTERNATIONALE DES MOUVEMENTS FAMILIAUX DE FORMATION RURALE
ASOCIACIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE LOS MOVIMIENTOS FAMILIARES DE FORMACIÓN RURAL
Aimé CAEKELBERGH
Vice-Président
Paris 
INTERNATIONAL CATHOLIC RURAL ASSOCIATION
ASSOCIATION INTERNATIONALE RURALE CATHOLIQUE
ASOCIACIÓN INTERNACIONAL RURAL CATÓLICA
Vincenzo CONSO
Secretary General
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mons. Biagio NOTARANGELO
Assistant
Rome
Marco FOSCHINI
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Diego FILIPPIN
Coordinator
Rome
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON IRRIGATION DRAINAGE
COMMISSION INTERNATIONALE DE L'IRRIGATION ET DU DRAINAGE
COMISIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE RIEGO Y SANEAMIENTO
Mrs Maria Elisa VENEZIAN SCARASCIA
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR ANIMAL RECORDING
COMITÉ INTERNATIONAL POUR LE CONTRÔLE DES PERFORMANCES EN ÉLEVAGE
Andrea ROSATI
Member of ICAR Board
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL CONFEDERATION OF FREE TRADE UNIONS
CONFÉDERATION INTERNATIONALE DES SYNDICATS LIBRES
CONFEDERACIÓN DE ORGANIZACIONES SINDICALES LIBRES
Ms Maria Theresa GUICCIARDI
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATIVE ALLIANCE
ALLIANCE COOPÉRATIVE INTERNATIONALE
ALIANZA COOPERATIVA INTERNACIONAL
Roberto RODRIGUES
President
Rome Lino VISANI
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Ms Gianna PERRA
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ms Stefania MARCONE
Board Member and Director International Department LEGACOOP
Rome
Ms María Elena CHÁVEZ P.
Geneva 
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN
CONSEIL INTERNATIONAL DES FEMMES
CONSEJO INTERNACIONAL DE MUJERES
Mrs Lydie ROSSINI van HISSENHOVEN
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mrs Yvonne MELCHIORRI
Representative
Rome
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCERS
FÉDÉRATION INTERNATIONALE DES PRODUCTEURS AGRICOLES
FEDERACIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE PRODUCTORES AGRÍCOLAS
Gerard DOORNBOS
President
Rome Rashid PERTEV
Assistant Secretary General
Rome
Francesco CARACCIOLO
Director
Rome Mrs Paola ORTENSI
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL WOMEN
Ms Annarosa COLANGELO
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF HOME ECONOMICS
FÉDÉRATION INTERNATIONALE POUR L'ÉCONOMIE FAMILIALE
FEDERACIÓN INTERNACIONAL PARA LA ECONOMÍA FAMILIAR
Mrs Francesca RONCHI PROJA
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF RED CROSS AND RED CRESCENT SOCIETIES
FÉDERATION INTERNATIONALE DES SOCIETÉS DE LA CROIX-ROUGE ET DU CROISSANT-ROUGE
FEDERACIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE SOCIEDADES DE LA CRUZ ROJA Y DE LA MEDIA LUNA ROJA
Ghebremedhin GHEBREIGZABIHER
Assistant Vice-President
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF WOMEN IN LEGAL CAREERS
FÉDERATION INTERNATIONALE DES FEMMES DES CARRIERES JURIDIQUES
FEDERACIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE MUJERES QUE EJERCEN CARRERAS JURÍDICAS
Mrs Teresa ASSENSIO BRUGIATELLI
Honorary President
Rome Mrs Antonietta CESCUT
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
INTERNATIONAL FERTILIZER INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION
ASSOCIATION INTERNATIONALE DE L'INDUSTRIE DES ENGRAIS
ASOCIACIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE LA INDUSTRIA DE LOS FERTILIZANTES
N. SALVO
Director
Assofertilizanti
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL RAIFFEISEN UNION
UNION INTERNATIONALE RAIFFEISEN
UNIÓN INTERNACIONAL REIFFEISEN
Juan LÓPEZ
Responsible for Economic Research
FEDERCASSE
Rome 
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANIZATIONS
UNION INTERNATIONALE DES ORGANISMES FAMILIAUX
UNIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE ORGANISMOS FAMILIARES
Sandro VOTA
Rome Ms Anna CASTELLANI TARABINI
Member of the General Council
Paris
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FORESTRY RESEARCH ORGANIZATIONS
UNION INTERNATIONALE DES INSTITUTS DE RECHERCHES FORESTIÈRES
UNIÓN INTERNACIONAL DE ORGANIZACIONES DE INVESTIGACIÓN FORESTAL
Riccardo MORANDINI
Professor
Istituto Sperimentale per la Selvicoltura
Arezzo, Italy 
ROTARY INTERNATIONAL
Aldo FERRETTI
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Marco Claudio RANDONE
Rome
SOCIETY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
SOCIÉTE INTERNATIONALE POUR LE DÉVELOPPEMENT
SOCIEDAD INTERNACIONAL PARA EL DESARROLLO
Stefano PRATO
Rome 
WOMEN'S INTERNATIONAL LEAGUE FOR PEACE AND FREEDOM
LIGUE INTERNATIONALE DES FEMMES POUR LA PAIX ET LA LIBERTÉ
LIGA INTERNACIONAL DE MUJERES POR LA PAZ Y LA LIBERTAD
Mrs Bruna MAGNANI LOMAZZI
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
WORLD ASSOCIATION FOR ANIMAL PRODUCTION
ASSOCIATION MONDIALE DE ZOOTECHNIE
ASOCIACIÓN MUNDIAL PARA LA PRODUCCIÓN ANIMAL
A. NARDONE
Council Member of WAAP
University of Viterbo
WORLD ASSOCIATION OF GIRL GUIDES AND GIRL SCOUTS
ASSOCIATION MONDIALE DES GUIDES ET DES ÉCLAIREUSES
ASOCIACIÓN MUNDIAL DE LAS GUÍAS SCOUTS
Ms Margie CLAY
Team Coordinator
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Ms Alessandra SILVI
Trainee Representative to the United Nations
Rome
WORLD CONFEDERATION OF LABOUR
CONFÉDERATION MONDIALE DU TRAVAIL
CONFEDERACIÓN MUNDIAL DEL TRABAJO
Pio FRASGHINI
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome 
WORLD FEDERATION OF TRADE UNIONS
FÉDÉRATION SYNDICALE MONDIALE
FEDERACIÓN SINDICAL MUNDIAL
Mme Anna Laura CASADEI
Représentante permanente auprès de la FAO
Rome 
WORLD UNION OF CATHOLIC WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS
UNION MONDIALE DES ORGANISATIONS FÉMININES CATHOLIQUES
UNIÓN MUNDIAL DE LAS ORGANIZACIONES FEMENINAS CATÓLICAS
Mrs Carla ROMERSI
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome Mrs Maria Giovanna RUGGIERI
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
WORLD VETERANS FEDERATION
FÉDÉRATION MONDIALE DES ANCIENS COMBATTANTS
FEDERACIÓN MUNDIAL DE VETERANOS DE GUERRA
Remigio CASSANO
ANMIG
Rome 
Table of contents
<section>5</section>
APPENDIX C
LIST OF DOCUMENTS
C 99/1 Provisional Agenda
C 99/2 The State of Food and Agriculture
C 99/3 Programme of Work and Budget 2000-2001
C 99/3-Corr.1 Corrigendum to C 99/3
C 99/3-Corr.2 (Chinese and English only) Corrigendum to C 99/3
C 99/4 Programme Evaluation Report 1998-99
C 99/5 Audited Accounts FAO 1996-97
C 99/6 Report on Follow-up to the World Food Summit Plan of Action
C 99/7 No document
C 99/8 Programme Implementation Report 1996-97
C 99/8-Corr.1 Corrigendum to C 99/8
C 99/9 Report on Progress in the Revision of the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources
C 99/9-Rev.1
(French only) Revision of C 99/9
C 99/10 Applications for Membership in the Organization
C 99/10-Sup.1 Supplement to C 99/10
C 99/10-Sup.2 Supplement to C 99/10
C 99/11 Election of Council Members
C 99/12 A Strategic Framework for FAO 2000-2015 Version 4.0
C 99/12-Corr.1
(Spanish only) Corrigendum to C 99/12
C 99/12-Sup.1 Supplement to C 99/12
C 99/13 Admission to the Session of Representatives and Observers of International Organizations
C 99/13-Sup.1 Supplement to C 99/13
C 99/14 Outcome of the Rotterdam Conference on Prior Informed Consent (PIC)
C 99/14-Sup.1 Supplement to C 99/14
C 99/15 No document
C 99/16 Arrangements for the 30^th Session of the Conference
C 99/17 Appointment of Representatives of the FAO Conference to the Staff Pension Committee
C 99/18 Appointment of Director-General (Note by the Secretary-General of the Conference and Council)
C 99/19 Appointment of Independent Chairman of the Council
C 99/19-Corr.1 Corrigendum to C 99/19
C 99/19-Corr.2 Corrigendum to C 99/19
C 99/INF/Series 
C 99/INF/1 Report of Informal Meeting of Observers from International Non-Governmental Organizations (INGOs)
C 99/INF/2 Guide on Conduct of Plenary Meetings
C 99/INF/3-Rev.1 Provisional List of Delegates and Observers
C 99/INF/4 Provisional List of Documents
C 99/INF/5 Statement by the Director-General
C 99/INF/6 Presentation of the B.R. Sen Awards (1998 and 1999)
C 99/INF/7 Presentation of A.H. Boerma Award 1998-99
C 99/INF/8 Presentation of the Edouard Saouma Award 1998-99
C 99/INF/9 21^st McDougall Memorial Lecture
C 99/INF/10 Margarita Lizárraga Medal
C 99/INF/11 Provisional Checklist of Documents for Commission I
C 99/INF/12 Provisional Checklist of Documents for Commission II
C 99/INF/13 Financial Position of the Organization
C 99/INF/14 Implementation of 1998 Regional Conference Recommendations
C 99/INF/15 FAO Members, Council Members, Members of the Council Committees and of the World Food Programme Executive Board
C 99/INF/16 Statement of Competence and Voting Rights Submitted by the European Community (EC) and its Member States
C 99/INF/17 Multilateral Treaties Deposited with the Director-General (Status as at 31 August 1999)
C 99/INF/17-Sup.1 Supplement to C 99/INF/17
C 99/INF/18 Extracts from Council Reports
C 99/INF/19 Notification of Membership in the Open Committees of the Council 2000-2001
C 99/INF/20-Rev.1 Outcome of the Conference on the Multifunctional Character of Agriculture and Land (Maastricht, Netherlands, September 1999)
C 99/INF/21 6^th Progress Report on the Implementation of the Plan of Action for Women in Development
C 99/INF/22 Panel of Eminent Experts on Ethics in Food and Agriculture
C 99/INF/23 No document
C 99/INF/24 No document
C 99/INF/25 Information Note on Biosafety
C 99/LIM/Series 
C 99/LIM/1 Preparations for the 30^th Session of the FAO Conference (Extract from CL 117/REP)
C 99/LIM/2 Report of the Nominations Committee
C 99/LIM/3 United Nations/FAO World Food Programme (Extract from CL 116/REP)
C 99/LIM/4 Programme Implementation Report 1996-97 (Extract from CL 115/REP)
C 99/LIM/5 Programme Evaluation Report 1998-99 (Extract from CL 116/REP)
C 99/LIM/6 Programme of Work and Budget 2000-01 (Extract from CL 117/REP)
C 99/LIM/7 Strategic Framework 2000-2015 -Version 4.0 (Extract from CL 117/REP)
C 99/LIM/8 Amendments to the General Rules of the Organization (Extract from CL 116/REP)
C 99/LIM/9 Amendments to the General Regulations and Rules of WFP (Extract from CL 116/REP)
C 99/LIM/10 FAO Audited Accounts 1996-97 (Extract from CL 115/REP)
C 99/LIM/11 Scale of Contributions 2000-2001 (Extract from CL 116/REP)
C 99/LIM/11-Corr.1 Corrigendum to C 99/LIM/11
C 99/LIM/12 After Service Medical Coverage (Extract from CL 115/REP)
C 99/LIM/13 Amendments to the Financial Regulations (including Draft Resolution) (Extract from CL 117/REP)
C 99/LIM/14 First Report of the General Committee
C 99/LIM/15 Second Report of the General Committee
C 99/LIM/16 First Report of the Credentials Committee
C 99/LIM/17 Cooperation Agreement with INFOPECHE (Extract from CL 117/REP)
C 99/LIM/18 Cooperation Agreement with Lake Victoria Fisheries Organization LVFO (Extract from CL 117/REP)
C 99/LIM/19 Cooperation Agreement with INFOPESCA (Extract from CL 117/REP)
C 99/LIM/20 Use of Gender-Neutral Language in Basic Texts (Extract from CL 117/REP)
C 99/LIM/20-Rev.1
(French only) Revision to C 99/LIM/20
C 99/LIM/21 International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture
C 99/LIM/22 First Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 99/LIM/22-Sup.1 Supplement to C 99/LIM/22
C 99/LIM/23 Third Report of the General Committee (Election of Council Members)
C 99/LIM/24 Fourth Report of the General Committee
C 99/LIM/25 Fifth Report of the General Committee
C 99/LIM/26 Second Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 99/LIM/27 Second Report of the Credentials Committee
C 99/LIM/28 Sixth Report of the General Committee (Appointment of the Independent Chairman of the Council)
C 99/LIM/29 Third Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 99/LIM/30 Seventh Report of the General Committee
C 99/REP/Series 
C 99/REP/1 to Draft Report of Plenary
C 99/REP/12 
C 99/REP/12-Sup.1 
C 99/REP/13 to 
C 99/REP/15 
C 99/I/REP/1 to Draft Report of Commission I
C 99/I/REP/4 
C 99/II/REP/1 to Draft Report of Commission II
C 99/II/REP/3 
C 99/PV/Series 
C 99/PV/1 First to Sixteenth Verbatim Records, Plenary
C 99/PV/2 Rev.1 
C 99/PV/3 to 
C 99/PV/10 
C 99/PV/10-Sup.1 
C 99/PV/11 to 
C 99/PV/16 
C 99/I/PV/1 to First to Seventh Verbatim Records, Commission I
C 99/I/PV/7 
C 99/II/PV/1 to First to Ninth Verbatim Records, Commission II
C 99/II/PV/9 
C 99/DJ/Series 
C 99/DJ/1 to Daily Journals of the Conference
C 99/DJ/9 
APPENDIX D
COOPERATION AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION FOR MARKETING INFORMATION AND COOPERATION SERVICES FOR FISHERY PRODUCTS IN AFRICA (INFOPÊCHE)
AND
THE FOOD AND AGRlCULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS (FAO)
The Contracting Parties
Considering
that INFOPÊCHE was established with the assistance of FAO as a concrete step towards carrying out the objectives, strategies and programmes of action adopted by the World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development, convened in Rome in 1984, by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Considering
that INFOPÊCHE is an independent intergovernmental organization established by an Agreement, adopted on 13 December 1991 by a Conference of Plenipotentiaries convened by the Director-General of FAO, which entered into force on the 23 December 1993 and for which the Director-General of FAO is the Depositary,
Considering
that Article 13 of the Agreement establishing INFOPÊCHE provides that "the Contracting Parties agree that there should be cooperation between INFOPÊCHE and other international fisheries institutions and other organizations which may contribute to the work and further the objectives of INFOPÊCHE. INFOPÊCHE may enter into agreements with such institutions and organizations. Such agreements may include, if appropriate, provision for participation by such organizations in activities of INFOPÊCHE ",
Considering
also that the Governing Council of INFOPÊCHE, at its Fifth Regular Session on 20 March 1998, decided to propose a cooperation agreement with FAO with a view to reinforcing existing relations between INFOPÊCHE and FAO and to formalizing cooperation between the two organizations,
Considering
further that paragraph 1 of Article XIII of the FAO Constitution states that "in order to provide for close cooperation between the Organization and other international organizations with related responsibilities, the Conference may enter into agreements with the competent authorities of such organizations, defining the distribution of responsibilities and methods of cooperation",
Recognizing
the interest which FAO has in the promotion of cooperation relating to development of fisheries in the African region,
Have agreed as follows:
I. A close relationship shall be established and maintained between INFOPÊCHE and FAO.
II. FAO shall participate in meetings of the Governing Council and in other technical committees of INFOPÊCHE as an observer.
III. INFOPÊCHE shall be invited to participate in the sessions of the Conference and the Council of FAO in an observer capacity.
IV. FAO shall, as far as possible, and in conformity with the constitutional instruments and decisions of its competent bodies, give due consideration to requests for technical assistance made by INFOPÊCHE.
V. As far as possible and within the mandates of both organizations, FAO shall use INFOPÊCHE as an executing agency for fishery marketing projects in Africa.
VI. INFOPÊCHE and FAO may, in appropriate cases, agree to convene under their auspices, according to arrangements to be made in each particular case, joint meetings concerning matters of interest to both organizations.
VII. INFOPÊCHE and FAO may, through special arrangements, decide upon joint action with a view to attaining objects of common interest.
VIII. INFOPÊCHE and FAO may, when they consider it desirable, set up joint committees or working parties, on conditions to be mutually agreed in each case, to consider matters of common interest.
IX. Subject to such arrangements as may be necessary for the safeguarding of classified material, INFOPÊCHE and FAO shall arrange for the fullest exchange of information and documents concerning matters of common interest.
X. The Fishery Industries Division and GLOBEFISH at FAO Headquarters in Rome, in collaboration with the FAO Regional Office for Africa in Accra, shall serve as focal points for liaison between INFOPÊCHE and FAO.
XI. The Contracting Parties may decide by mutual agreement to extend the scope of their cooperation as appropriate.
Entry into force
The present Agreement shall enter into force as soon as it has been approved by the appropriate Governing Bodies of both organizations.
APPENDIX E
COOPERATION AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE LAKE VICTORIA FISHERIES ORGANIZATION (LVFO)
AND
THE FOOD AND AGRlCULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS (FAO)
The Governments
of the Republic of Kenya, the United Republic of Tanzania and the Republic of Uganda, hereinafter referred to as the "Contracting Parties",
Considering
that LVFO was established as an independent intergovernmental organization by a Conference of Plenipotentiaries held on 30 June 1994 in Kisumu, Kenya, and that the Director-General of FAO is the Depositary of the Convention establishing it,
Considering
that paragraph 2 of Article XIX of the Convention for the Establishment of the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organization provides that "The Organization will continue its working relationship with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)...",
Considering
further that paragraph 1 of Article XIII of the FAO Constitution states that, "in order to provide for close cooperation between the Organization and other international organizations with related responsibilities, the Conference may enter into agreements with the competent authorities of such organizations, defining the distribution of responsibilities and methods of cooperation",
Recognizing
the interest which FAO has in the promotion of cooperation relating to fisheries among the riparian countries of Lake Victoria,
Have agreed as follows:
I. A close relationship shall be established and maintained between LVFO and FAO.
II. FAO shall be invited to participate in the meetings of the Council of Ministers, the Policy Steering Committee and the Executive Committee, as well as in the meetings of the Fisheries Management Committee and the Scientific Committee of LVFO as an observer.
III. LVFO shall be invited to participate in the sessions of the Conference and the Council of FAO in an observer capacity.
IV. As far as possible and within the mandates of both organizations, FAO shall use LVFO as an executing agency for fishery projects in Lake Victoria.
V. LVFO and FAO may, in appropriate cases, agree to convene under their auspices, according to arrangements to be made in each particular case, joint meetings concerning matters of interest to both organizations.
VI. LVFO and FAO may, through special arrangements, decide upon joint action with a view to attaining objects of common interest.
VII. LVFO and FAO may, when they consider it desirable, set up joint committees or working parties on conditions to be mutually agreed in each case, to consider matters of common interest.
VIII. Subject to such arrangements as may be necessary for the safeguarding of classified material, LVFO and FAO shall arrange for the fullest exchange of information and documents concerning matters of common interest.
IX. The Fishery Policy and Planning Division at FAO Headquarters in Rome, in collaboration with the FAO Sub-regional Office for Southern and Eastern Africa (SAFR) in Harare, shall serve as a focal point for liaison between LVFO and FAO.
X. The Contracting Parties may decide by mutual agreement to extend the scope of their cooperation as appropriate.
Entry into force
The present Agreement shall enter into force as soon as it has been approved by the Governing Bodies of both organizations.
APPENDIX F
COOPERATION AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CENTRE FOR MARKETING INFORMATION AND ADVISORY SERVICES FOR FISHERY PRODUCTS IN LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN (INFOPESCA)
AND
THE FOOD AND AGRlCULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS (FAO)
The Contracting Parties,
Considering
that INFOPESCA was established in 1977 as an FAO/UNDP project,
Considering
that INFOPESCA was established as an independent intergovernmental organization by a Constituent Assembly held on 18 February 1994 in San José, Costa Rica, and that the Director-General of FAO is the Depositary of its Constitution,
Considering
that paragraph 1 of Article 17 of the Constitution establishing INFOPESCA provides that "INFOPESCA shall seek to establish an agreement with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and to build a close working relationship with the FAO Network of Regional Fish Marketing Information and Technical Advisory Services" and that paragraph 2 of the same Article 17 provides that "INFOPESCA shall accept that a representative of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, appointed by its Director-General, shall participate in all its meetings, but without the right to vote",
Considering
further that paragraph 1 of Article XIII of the FAO Constitution states that "in order to provide for close cooperation between the Organization and other international organizations with related responsibilities, the Conference may enter into agreements with the competent authorities of such organizations, defining the distribution of responsibilities and methods of cooperation",
Recognizing
the interest which FAO has in the promotion of cooperation relating to fisheries among the countries of Latin American and the Caribbean,
Have agreed as follows:
I. A close relationship shall be established and maintained between INFOPESCA and FAO.
II. FAO shall participate in meetings of the General Assembly, the Executive Committee and the Consultative Committee of INFOPESCA as an observer.
III. INFOPESCA shall be invited to participate in the sessions of the Conference and the Council of FAO in an observer capacity.
IV. As far as possible and within the mandates of both organizations, FAO shall use INFOPESCA as an executing agency for fishery and aquaculture projects in Latin America and the Caribbean.
V. INFOPESCA and FAO may, in appropriate cases, agree to convene under their auspices, according to arrangements to be made in each particular case, joint meetings concerning matters of interest to both organizations.
VI. INFOPESCA and FAO may, through special arrangements, decide upon joint action with a view to attaining objects of common interest.
VII. INFOPESCA and FAO may, when they consider it desirable, set up joint committees or working parties, on conditions to be mutually agreed in each case, to consider matters of common interest.
VIII. Subject to such arrangements as may be necessary for the safeguarding of classified material, INFOPESCA and FAO shall arrange for the fullest exchange of information and documents concerning matters of common interest.
IX. The Fishery Industries Division and GLOBEFISH at FAO Headquarters in Rome, in collaboration with the FAO Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean (RLAC) in Santiago, shall serve as focal points for liaison between INFOPESCA and FAO.
X. The Contracting Parties may decide by mutual agreement to extend the scope of their cooperation as appropriate.
Entry into force
The present Agreement shall enter into force as soon as it has been approved by the Governing Bodies of both organizations.
APPENDIX G
SCALE OF CONTRIBUTIONS 2000-2001
(1999 and 1998 Scales shown for comparative purposes)
Member Nations
Scale a/
Scale
1999 b/
1998 c/
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Congo, Democratic Republic of
Cook Islands d/
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati d/ f/
Korea, Republic of
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People's Democratic Republic
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands f/
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova, Republic of
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niue d/, f/
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau f/
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
San Marino f/
Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland e/
Syria
Tajikistan
Tanzania, United Republic of
Thailand
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Togo
Tonga e/
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States of America
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Viet Nam
Yemen
Yugoslavia
Zambia
Zimbabwe
a/ Derived directly from the UN Scale of Assessments for 2000 as adopted by General Assembly Resolution 52/215 of 22 December 1997.
b/ Derived directly from the UN Scale of Assessments for 1999 as adopted by General Assembly Resolution 52/215 of 22 December 1997.
c/ Derived directly from the UN Scale of Assessments for 1997 as adopted by General Assembly Resolution 49/19 B of 23 December 1994.
d/ The Secretariat of the UN Committee on Contributions advised that the "theoretical probable" rate of this member of FAO, which is not a member of the UN, would be the minimum rate, i.e. 0.01 percent
e/ The contribution rates of these two members of FAO which are not members of the United Nations, are derived from the percentages at which they are called upon by the UN to contribute to certain UN activities.
f/ New Member Nation admitted at the Thirtieth Session of the Conference.
Table of contents
