<title>Reforming FAO - Into the new Millenium</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
In recent years, global events have brought into focus the United Nations system as a whole, altering the general perceptions of its role and prompting reform. It was against this background that a review of FAO's programmes, structure and policies was initiated in early 1994. The review paved the way for a comprehensive and ongoing reform process, intended not only to adapt the Organization to the changing external environment but, above all, to enable us to assist our Member Nations more effectively.
The reform process has been dynamic and sustained, benefiting from extensive consultations with FAO's stakeholders and other international organizations, from opinions expressed by development experts at numerous meetings and from discussions with FAO staff. In embarking on such a formidable task, consideration was given to the strengths and achievements that the Organization had built up over 50 years of operation as a centre of excellence for agricultural and rural development, as well as to the constraints encountered in fulfilling its mandate.
Reforming FAO: into the new millennium presents the principles that have been followed, detailing the measures taken and the results achieved to date. The major surgery carried out on FAO's structure, governance mechanisms and operational and financial procedures has lent a much greater degree of coherence to our wide-ranging and multidisciplinary activities. Considerable progress has been made in improving the planning, coordinating, monitoring and auditing of FAO's action in priority areas. At the same time, a concerted effort has been made to cultivate constructive partnerships - within the intergovernmental community and with civil society - that contribute to the Organization's lead role in achieving global food security, and hence to the successful accomplishment of its mission. Finally, the reform process has led to a strategic vision for the future, documented in The Strategic Framework for FAO: 2000-2015, the corporate blueprint that defines our core objectives and
strategies as well as providing a timetable and methodology for their implementation.
The guiding theme of reform has remained "food security", and this has ensured continuity of purpose as well as consistency with the mandate set out in FAO's Constitution. The process has focused on the Organization's dual role, clarifying the distinction between its normative and operational activities with a view to optimizing efforts to secure "food for all" as the common development goal of all Member Nations.
Effective development is achieved through improvements in the production and distribution of food and agricultural products, including greater access to supplies and higher nutrition levels and living standards of all people. I believe the reform process has greatly enhanced FAO's capacity to work towards this goal and to succeed in its mission: "Helping to build a food-secure world for present and future generations".
Jacques Diouf
FAO Director-General
<section>2</section>
Preamble
Dr Jacques Diouf was elected Director-General of FAO for a six-year term, beginning in January 1994, at a time of great change and high expectations. Accordingly, he was charged with the task of preparing FAO to face the challenges of a post cold war era.
In 1997, FAO published an interim document entitled Reforming FAO: the challenge of world food security. This reviewed the measures taken by the Organization to improve its efficiency and effectiveness, decrease costs and ensure the relevance of its work to the needs and expectations of Member Nations.
The present document complements the 1997 edition and extends the analysis to cover the initiatives taken and the changes made in key areas of the Organization over the 1994-1999 period. The information and analysis presented here reveal that the past six years of reform have resulted in a leaner, fitter and more focused organization. In partnership with Member Nations and civil society at all levels, a transformed FAO continues to strive towards the difficult but vital goal of universal food security. FAO is now better prepared for the challenges that lie ahead and is entering the new millennium with confidence. Nevertheless, the Organization needs to consolidate the changes made and to explore new opportunities for implementing its mandate better and for achieving, in particular, the goals set by the 1996 Rome Declaration on World Food Security and World Food Summit Plan of Action as well as, more recently, those defined in The Strategic Framework for FAO: 2000-2015.
<section>3</section>
The principles of reform
THE NEW EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT
FAO'S INTERNAL STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES
THE REFORM PROPOSALS
FAO/19578/G. BIZZARRI
<section>4</section>
The new external environment
FAO's reform is grounded in the trends and changes that are sweeping the global political and economic scene. While the trend towards more open and market-oriented economies continues, many countries, together with the international community, are also confronted with issues that cannot be fully addressed by market forces. These include:
* the security and stability of socio-economic systems, as witnessed in the incidence of recent conflicts and financial crises;
* non-economic concerns, including environmental sustainability and safety issues;
* technologies undergoing rapid developments, particularly in the areas of information, communication and biotechnology; and
* the increased audience and role of non-governmental groups, whether profit- or non-profit-making, national or transnational.
These developments have a direct bearing on FAO, a worldwide intergovernmental organization and part of the United Nations (UN) system which is, itself, redefining its role and undergoing reform following the collapse of a bipolarized and confrontational international system.
Successfully reforming FAO has demanded a clear understanding of this new environment, which will affect the Organization's operations in the years ahead as well as its capacity to contribute to the overarching aims of achieving food security for all. With regard to the changing global context, several salient factors are worth noting:
Transformation of the international economic system. Since the establishment of the World Trade Organization (WTO), trade and financial markets have become increasingly integrated and, concomitantly, regional and subregional trading arrangements have multiplied. International agreements are burgeoning as countries recognize the need for greater discipline and cooperation in addressing common issues. Such developments reduce the range of domestic policy options, and many developing countries are having to make difficult choices without the capacity to assess fully the possible options and their consequences. The application of internationally defined rules and mechanisms - of an increasing scope and technical sophistication - now requires countries to have more knowledge and analytical capacity in the legal, technical and economic aspects of diverse and complex matters.
Changes in international finance. International financial flows to development have undergone dramatic transformations and their erratic performance has occasionally led to severe economic shocks. Private financial flows have become the main source of development finance, but market forces have tended to concentrate these flows on a handful of countries and sectors with higher prospects for returns. In turn, official development assistance (ODA), which represents the critical source of finance for the remaining countries and sectors, has been on a steady decline, raising the risk of divergence between the world's wealthier and poorer economies. Agricultural development and support to food security in the low-income food-deficit countries (LIFDCs) are among the areas to have been most severely affected by reductions in ODA.
Non-economic concerns. Over the past two decades, many governments have pursued market-oriented policy reform and structural adjustment. Economic policy reform has often been accompanied by negative effects and high levels of risk, particularly for the poorer population groups, and this has stressed the social fabric beyond reasonable limits. Increasing recognition is given to the fact that market forces are not adequate for tackling some areas of concern, such as food security, environmental and safety issues and, more important, poverty.
Changing consumer demands and urbanization. While world food supplies are growing overall, there have been shifts in demand. In many developing countries, cities account for a rapidly increasing share of the population, which has major implications for food and agriculture both in rural and peri-urban areas. Consumer demand is diversifying more towards processed, convenient and safe products, while access to food is becoming more complicated as an increasing proportion of supplies is acquired through market exchange. The rapid urbanization under way calls for a reappraisal of urban-rural linkages, food security and social stability.
Growing pressure on natural resources. The sustainability of development activities is being challenged on many fronts. Both population and economic growth can have adverse environmental and ecological consequences, resulting in even greater pressure on the world's natural resource base. The main challenge is to increase food production to meet the needs of a growing population without threatening the world's climate or biological diversity or the availability and quality of its forest, fisheries, land and water resources.
Technology and information gap. Rapid scientific and technological advances, particularly in biotechnology and electronics, may widen the prevailing gap between developed and developing countries. The international implications of such developments are compounded by the issue of intellectual property rights. The information gap between producers and consumers also widens as food chains become more complex at the processing and trading stages, thereby raising concerns about food safety and human health and prompting calls for greater transparency and precaution.
Persistence of poverty and food insecurity. Despite increasing global food supplies, too many people continue to suffer from food insecurity, particularly in LIFDCs. While the number of undernourished people has decreased by 40 million since 1990-1992, a closer look reveals that this improvement has resulted from reductions in only 37 countries, totalling almost 100 million people. In another 59 countries across the developing world, the number of hungry people has actually increased by almost 60 million. In addition to the hundreds of millions suffering from undernourishment, various other forms of malnutrition affect an unacceptable proportion of the population. In a world where the population is growing by about 80 million each year and is likely to reach 7.3 billion by 2015, widespread food insecurity remains a major obstacle to development and a top priority for action.
Decline in official development assistance for agriculture
Relationship between security and food insecurity. The World Food Summit Plan of Action explicitly recognized that a peaceful environment is a fundamental condition for the attainment of sustainable food security. More recently, a report by the International Peace Research Institute, entitled To cultivate peace - agriculture in a world of conflict, identified the strengthening of agriculture in developing countries where it is the predominant economic activity as a prerequisite for development and, ultimately, for the reduction and/or prevention of conflicts that lead to warfare. The same message is evoked in an article by the former United States President Jimmy Carter (The International Herald Tribune, 17 June 1999), stressing the fact that agricultural development and access to food are not only technical, economic and ethical issues but are also at the root of peace and security.
Increasing number of food emergencies. Food and agricultural emergencies have multiplied over time as a result of natural disasters, such as droughts, fires, floods and pests and diseases, and disasters caused by human action such as war and internal conflict. Unforeseen disruptions to economic systems can also result in emergencies that have similar adverse impacts on local populations. The people most severely affected by disasters are often those living in rural areas, but the disruption of agricultural and food systems can have serious consequences for both rural and urban populations, and it is generally the resource-poor who are most vulnerable.
FAO/20668/E. YEVES
In the wake of war or civil strife, FAO helps
to rebuild food and agricultural production capacity
<section>5</section>
FAO's internal strengths and weaknesses
A reform of FAO was necessary not only in response to the changing global context, but also to accommodate changes in the Organization's internal environment. Members have been seeking a wider range of services and programmes, while the Organization's resources and capacity have been negatively affected by a declining budget.
When proposing the reform in June 1994, the Director-General explained that it was intended to put FAO in a better position to serve its Member Nations by restructuring the Organization, refocusing its priorities, increasing its global outreach, improving resource management and enhancing its efficiency.
Against this background, the strategy adopted was to build on the strengths of the Organization and to identify and overcome its weaknesses. FAO's strengths include:
* The confidence that Member Nations have in the Organization's expertise and experience in working towards the goals of its mandate; its ability to take a global view of problems; and its capacity to identify and argue for common solutions, independently of specific ideological or national perspectives.
* Together with its extensive field office structure, the Organization's worldwide networking capacity - based on direct links with government departments, academic and research institutions and other national and international bodies.
* The unique blend of operational and normative experience of the Organization's staff, dedicated to the cause of multilateralism in line with the principles of the International Civil Service.
* The technical assistance that the Organization offers to countries, without commercial or political bias. To provide governments with the support they need, FAO relies on the basic competence and specialized expertise of its core staff as well as highly qualified external experts - drawn from an extensive corporate roster - all equipped with the necessary technical, managerial and linguistic skills.
Despite these strengths, an objective analysis of FAO's first 50 years had revealed certain lacunae and weaknesses that needed to be addressed in the reform process. For example, an excessively fragmented and diffused organizational structure prevented the Organization from concentrating on key areas and detracted from its ability to achieve high-quality results. There was a need to set clearer priorities, to incorporate cross-sectoral issues such as gender and people's participation into mainstream activities, and to clarify the complementarity of its normative and operational activities. FAO was too centralized, with a large proportion of staff based at headquarters and therefore remote from the complex problems experienced in the field. The Organization was inadequately prepared for delivering services to its members in a cost-effective way because of its centralized and bureaucratic procedures and resistance to change, including the adoption of modern office and
communication technologies and new approaches to human resource management.
There was also insufficient recognition of how national management capacities in agricultural development had evolved, and the Organization was failing to take advantage of local expertise and human resources to improve its effectiveness through capacity building and cost reduction. Substantive dialogue was lacking among Member Nations and between the Member Nations and FAO's Secretariat. Moreover, the planning process was limited to the two-year budget cycle and a four-year Medium-Term Plan, and it therefore lacked strategic vision.
FAO/19270/R. JONES
FAO takes a global view of problems, identifying common
solutions independently of ideological or national perspectives
<section>6</section>
The reform proposals
In May 1994, the FAO Council considered the proposals put forward by the Director-General after his review of the Organization's programmes, structure and policies, as authorized by Conference Resolution 10/93. The Council approved the proposals, which consisted of:
* changes in organizational structure;
* new policies, including the implementation of progressive decentralization;
* shifts in programme priorities.
FAO/11763
Restructuring was intended to enable FAO to increase its
global outreach and serve its Member Nations more effectively
<section>7</section>
The reform and its results:
RESTRUCTURING
DECENTRALIZATION
MODERN MANAGEMENT
THE FOCUS - FOOD SECURITY
NEW PARTNERSHIPS WITH KEY STAKEHOLDERS
INNOVATIVE APPROACHES
ENHANCING EFFICIENCY AND TRANSPARENCY
IMPROVED RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
<section>8</section>
Restructuring
To enable FAO to fulfil its mandate better and contribute effectively to the achievement of world food security - a goal conveyed by its slogan "Food for All" - FAO embarked on the most significant restructuring since its foundation. The aim was to remodel the Organization so that it could adapt to the changing external environment and be more effective.
DEFINING FAO'S DUAL ROLE
To start with, a clear distinction was made between normative and operational activities in the technical departments. In particular, to improve the coherence of services provided to Member Nations while also strengthening their country focus, the Development Department was transformed into a new Technical Cooperation (TC) Department. This department serves as the hub for operational work, provides policy advice, implements field operations, manages FAO's Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP), provides investment support services through its Investment Centre Division (TCI) and mobilizes external resources. Within the TC Department, a Policy Assistance Division (TCA) was created to provide Member Nations - at their request - with policy advice related to national development policies, programmes and strategies in the agricultural and rural sector. In cooperation with other external partners in development, TCA assists Member Nations in the formulation or reformulation of
policies and strategies aimed at creating a favourable economic environment for food security and agricultural and rural development and at ensuring that agriculture receives adequate consideration in macroeconomic adjustment programmes. Policy training is also provided as part of national capacity building in the field of policy analysis and formulation. To ensure the coherence of services provided, the Organization has a mechanism whereby all its interventions in a given country are organized within a programming framework.
FAO cooperates with multilateral and bilateral assistance agencies, the private sector and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Within the TC Department, the Unit for Cooperation with Private Sector and NGOs (TCDN) was set up in 1994 to provide a focal point for policy matters and to coordinate cooperation with private sector and civil society organizations, including business associations at the national and international levels, multinational corporations and a range of independent supporting organizations and intermediaries.
In response to the need to concentrate on issues of sustainability and to follow up on the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), FAO established the Sustainable Development (SD) Department. Formed from existing units in FAO's Agriculture and Economic and Social Departments, this new department combines expertise in gender and population issues, natural resource management, research and technology, extension and communication, human and institutional resources, and people's participation, making it a unique organizational resource for normative work in sustainable development.
Within the Economic and Social (ES) Department, in line with the priority set by the FAO Council on policy advice, the Agriculture and Economic Development Analysis Division (ESA) was established in 1995. It provides a focal point for economic and policy research and analysis, thus strengthening the Organization's normative functions. In collaboration with academic and research institutions, the division contributes to the generation of global knowledge and scientific thought concerning agricultural development and social issues. Through sector policy analysis and project appraisal methodologies, ESA also ensures a greater integration of concepts related to the environment, hunger and food security. It focuses on multidisciplinary analyses of agricultural and rural development programmes and projects, the role of agriculture in the development process and comparative agricultural development at the country and regional levels.
Also in 1995, the Office for Coordination of Normative, Operational and Decentralized Activities (OCD) was set up to facilitate the functioning of decentralized structures and ensure adequate substantive and administrative interaction between all geographical levels of the Organization.
Organization Chart (1999)
The General Affairs and Information (GI) Department underwent a major restructuring, with the introduction of new technologies and more emphasis on external contracting for translation and publishing. A resulting development in the area of corporate communication was the major reorganization of the Information Division (GII) in late 1998, which consolidated the former press, radio and television branches into a single Media Relations Branch. Media officers in the new branch received training so as to have the versatility to work with journalists in both print and broadcast media.
FAO/20800
Restructuring has strengthened the
country focus of FAO's programmes
<section>9</section>
Decentralization
The decision to pursue a policy of further decentralization was based on three objectives:
* to bring the Organization's technical and operational expertise much closer to those countries and regions where the need is greatest;
* to reduce costs; and
* to make the best use of national capacities, which had increased substantially over the last decades.
Decentralization prompted the Organization to find a new balance between competing requirements. The objective of moving technical expertise closer to where it was needed had to be balanced against the need to maintain a critical mass of expertise at headquarters so as to uphold FAO's role as a centre of excellence. This meant delegating authority to officers at decentralized locations while retaining adequate control and stewardship of resources and transparent reporting lines to senior management and the Organization's governing bodies. It also entailed relocating and retraining staff, but keeping reorganization costs to a minimum. New procedures were designed to ensure the availability of highly specialized expertise as well as facilitating interdisciplinarity as and when required. In view of these considerations, the process of decentralization was progressive and included the following components:
STRENGTHENING THE REGIONAL OFFICES
The first step was to strengthen the existing Regional Offices in Accra, Bangkok, Cairo, Santiago and, to a lesser extent, the Rome-based Regional Office for Europe. A number of functions of direct relevance to the respective regions were transferred to Regional Offices, including policy assistance, field programme development and most technical support services for ongoing projects. The Regional Offices also took on full responsibility for organizing Regional Conferences and meetings of other regional bodies. It proved more effective to undertake these activities from within the region than from headquarters, as the competent officers in Regional Offices can react to requests from the various parts of their region more quickly and more cost-effectively. Furthermore, the cost of support staff is generally much lower at Regional Office locations than at headquarters.
To allow the Regional Offices to undertake their new functions, a number of technical, policy and programme officers' posts were transferred to these offices in the course of 1995 and 1996, mainly from headquarters but also from FAO's former Joint Divisions with the regional Economic Commissions of the UN (these have since been replaced by other cooperative arrangements). Professional staff in Regional Offices were organized into technical groups, corresponding to each of the technical departments at headquarters, and into a Policy Assistance Branch. To ensure that activities at the regional level are fully integrated within the Organization's corporate programme and are of the required quality, Professional officers in the Regional Offices are selected by their respective "parent" division at headquarters. The parent division approves their annual programme of work and ensures the technical quality of their output.
Regional Representatives, together with their Deputies, are responsible for the management of their office, providing managerial and administrative leadership as well as ensuring interdisciplinarity in the preparation and implementation of programmes of work. To this end, they are delegated a substantial degree of authority. An Internal Auditor, reporting directly to the Inspector-General at headquarters, has been outposted to each Regional Office.
The Regional Offices have also been provided with the following essential tools and means:
* Electronic communication and information systems facilities, allowing Regional Officers to share information with each other through a local area network, and with headquarters through a wide area network. These were installed as part of the communication infrastructure project described in the section Modern office and information technology.
* Support staff, through a major recruitment and training effort.
* Clear instructions and guidelines, through the review of administrative and financial procedures, described in the section Replacement of administrative and accounting systems.
* Sufficient office space, with support from the host country. In Accra and Santiago, new premises were required, and these were generously provided by the Governments of Ghana and Chile.
FAO's network of decentralized offices
ESTABLISHING SUBREGIONAL OFFICES
Five Subregional Offices were established to assist clusters of countries that share similar problems and are located far from their Regional Office. After extensive consultation with the Member Nations and the host countries concerned, new offices were set up in: Harare (Zimbabwe) for Southern and East Africa; Apia (Samoa) for the Pacific Islands; Bridgetown (Barbados) for the Caribbean; Tunis (Tunisia) for North Africa; and Budapest (Hungary) for Central and Eastern Europe.
To minimize costs, all Subregional Offices, except in Central and Eastern Europe, were established in countries where FAO Representations already existed. Each Subregional Office is composed of a small, multidisciplinary team of technical officers, geared to the requirements of the subregion, and of a Policy Assistance Unit. As in Regional Offices, these technical officers work under the managerial and administrative leadership of the Subregional Representative. Their parent division at headquarters is responsible for their selection and for ensuring the technical quality of their work.
DECENTRALIZING OPERATIONS
After the initial stage, it became evident that it would be more effective to decentralize most of the Field Operations Division (TCO) to the Regional Offices - so as to create synergies and ensure that Technical Officers, Policy Assistance Officers and Operations Officers could work on field projects as a team, during both the preparation and the implementation stages.
This aspect of decentralization was progressively implemented over approximately two years, starting with the creation of an Operations Branch in Bangkok, in September/October 1996, and followed by the opening of Operations Branches in the Regional Offices in Santiago and Cairo during 1997 and in the Regional Office in Accra in early 1998. Interregional and emergency projects continue to be managed from headquarters, as do projects implemented in Europe.
IMPROVING LINKS AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL
Along with the expansion of expertise in the Regional and Subregional Offices, the following steps have been taken to make FAO Country Offices more effective by improving linkages with developing Member Nations while at the same time reducing costs:
* A more selective approach is being adopted in the recruitment of FAO Representatives (FAORs), with priority being given to candidates with advanced academic training and adequate professional experience in agricultural development or related fields. This will enable the Organization to provide high-level policy advice directly to governments and to provide leadership in food and agricultural policy matters within the UN Resident Coordinator System.
* In line with the Organization's policy to strengthen collaboration with key partners, FAORs have been encouraged to increase their contacts with the Ambassadors of Member Nations as well as with representatives of funding institutions and civil society organizations, such as the relevant committees of national parliaments, departments of commerce and agriculture, universities, the private sector and NGOs.
* The internationally recruited Programme Officers, previously assigned to Country Offices, have been replaced by National Professional Officers (NPOs), who have similar, and sometimes better, qualifications and are employed under local salary scales. With their knowledge of national conditions, NPOs enhance the content and impact of FAO's programmes.
* The General Service staffing structure of all Country Offices has been reviewed and rationalized, allowing the elimination of 81 posts.
* The number of countries with which the Organization maintains links through the accreditation of an FAOR residing in a neighbouring country has been increased, from 26 in 1994 to 30 in 1999.
* A National Correspondents scheme has been established for those countries where the Organization cannot assign an FAOR to reside in the country. National Correspondents are senior civil servants who devote a certain percentage of their time to assisting the Organization with a number of liaison functions. They are jointly designated by the Member Government and FAO and are allocated a limited budget to cover some operational costs. They also receive a modest salary supplement. As of October 1999, some 20 National Correspondents had been appointed out of a planned total of 35.
* The Small-scale Facility was set up in September 1998 to help FAORs obtain short-term but essential technical advice, which usually cannot be funded from other sources. With this facility, which permits the engagement of local consultants for short periods, the responsiveness of FAORs to the needs of governments has increased.
Distribution of budgeted posts^1 (all categories) before and
after decentralization and restructuring
Location
Category
No. of posts in
January 1994^2
No. of posts in December 1999^3
Increase/decrease
Country Offices
International Professional and higher categories
National Professional Officers
General Service
Liaison Offices
Professional and higher categories
General Service
Regional Offices, Subregional Offices and Joint Divisions
Professional and higher categories
General Service
Decentralized offices
Professional and higher categories
General Service
Headquarters
Professional and higher categories
General Service
All locations
Professional and higher categories
General Service
TOTAL
(Percentage)
Percentage of posts decentralized
Professional and higher categories
General Service
^1 To facilitate comparison, the figures include all budget sources, i.e. Regular Programme as well as other funding sources.
^2 1996-97 Programme of Work and Budget base, which restated the 1994-95 budget in terms of the new programme structure.
^3 1998-99 Programme of Work and Budget (approved), including posts filled at the level of Deputy and Assistant Director-General (ADG) ad personam.
GLOBAL IMPACT OF DECENTRALIZATION
In January 1994, out of a total of 4 093 posts, 2 859 were based at headquarters and 1 234 (30 percent) were based in decentralized locations. Less than five years later, the Organization's total number of established posts was reduced by 584 (14 percent).
However, this global reduction conceals the completely new shape of the Organization, since 756 posts were abolished at headquarters and 79 in Country Offices, in contrast to the other decentralized offices which have had their total establishments increased by 251 posts overall. In particular, the number of Professional staff at the regional and subregional levels nearly doubled. As a result of these changes, the proportion of decentralized posts has increased from 30 to 40 percent: 31 percent of posts in the Professional and higher categories and 46 percent of General Service posts have now been decentralized.
FAO/SANTIAGO REGIONAL OFFICE
FAO's Regional Office for Latin America and
the Caribbean has moved to new and
improved premises provided by the Government of Chile
<title>Reforming FAO - Into the new Millenium</title>
Modern management
PLANNING
In accordance with the Director-General's proposals to strengthen the strategic management of the Organization, a long-term planning framework was envisaged in addition to the six-year Medium-Term Plan and the biennial Programme of Work and Budget.
In September 1997, the Programme and Finance Committees considered a comprehensive proposal for the formulation of a Strategic Framework, with a time horizon of 10 to 15 years. In November 1997, the FAO Conference adopted Resolution 6/97, Strengthening the FAO 2000 Project, placing particular emphasis on the need for broad-based consultations within existing structures in the formulation of a Strategic Framework. During the process that followed, wide-ranging consultations were held, not only with FAO's membership but also with partners and among staff. Successive drafts of the Strategic Framework document were produced and examined in 1998 and 1999 by the Programme and Finance Committees and the FAO Council, and by the Committees on Commodity Problems, Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry as well as ministerial meetings on fisheries and forestry. This culminated in November 1999, when the FAO Conference approved the final version of The Strategic Framework for FAO:
The Strategic Framework, to be revised approximately every six years, has been designed to establish a longer-term perspective for FAO's work and indicate the Organization's mission and vision as well as its strategic objectives. The Medium-Term Plan, to be updated each biennium, translates the long-term strategic goals identified into a coherent, six-year programme of work and defines the subsidiary objectives and outputs. Finally, the Programme of Work and Budget covers the resource implications and implementation details for a two-year time slice of the Medium-Term Plan.
COORDINATION
Modern management tools have been crucial in improving the Director-General's capacity to coordinate the work of the Organization efficiently and effectively. Senior Management Meetings have been held regularly since 1994, chaired by the Director-General or, in his absence, the Deputy Director-General. Participants include the Deputy Director-General, all Heads of Department and the Directeur de Cabinet, who consider important policy issues prior to their eventual discussion at the larger Programme and Policy Advisory Board (PPAB). Comprising all Division Directors and chaired by the Director-General, the PPAB generally meets monthly. The Senior Management Group also examines urgent matters that cannot wait for the next PPAB session as well as matters that are not suitable for discussion by such a large group. To date, the Director-General has chaired about 80 Senior Management and 50 PPAB meetings.
In 1999, the Senior Officer Information Forum (SOIF) was established for the dual purpose of focusing the PPAB agenda on policy issues and creating a forum for disseminating information on FAO's current activities to all Division Directors. SOIF meetings are chaired by the Deputy Director-General.
Fora for internal information exchange
To ensure adequate discussion of corporate issues and to provide a forum for information exchange and interaction, permanent horizontal committees or groups have been introduced within FAO. The aim is to prevent situations where individual services or divisions develop activities and projects in isolation from others - limiting themselves to their own list of consultants - and thus fail to benefit from the comparative advantage of multidisciplinarity. Since January 1994, a number of permanent committees and groups of this type have been established and/or revised as part of a system in which FAO projects, programme proposals and activities are no longer relegated to single divisional programmes but, instead, result from interdisciplinary collaboration. The committees and groups are currently as follows:
Special Programme Joint Committee (SPJC), Special Programme Policy Committee (SPPC) and Special Programme Implementation Committee (SPIC). Arrangements have been made at headquarters to ensure constant multidisciplinary monitoring and regular evaluations of the Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS), both at the overall programme level and at the country level. The Joint Committee, chaired by the Director-General, ensures the overall coordination of the Special Programme, oversees its implementation and monitors its progress. The Policy Committee is responsible for overall policy guidance and the Implementation Committee is responsible for overseeing all operations from project preparation to evaluation and impact assessment.
EMPRES Steering Committee. This Committee provides policy guidance and facilitates decision-making on substantive and operational matters relating to the Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases (EMPRES). It monitors overall progress, reviews the general orientation, scope and approaches of EMPRES, including environmental concerns, and oversees coordination between EMPRES and FAO units as well as between FAO and its external partners. The Committee is chaired by the Director-General and comprises Assistant Directors-General (ADGs) and Directors from relevant Departments and Divisions of the Organization.
Emergency Coordination Group. With the significant restructuring that the UN's interagency humanitarian coordination mechanisms have undergone over the last two years, FAO has been called on increasingly to participate in coherent and systematic UN responses to complex emergencies.
In order to enhance FAO's institutional capacity to respond to increasing demands for humanitarian assistance, the Emergency Coordination Group (ECG) was reorganized and strengthened in 1999. In addition to an expanded membership, representing the Organization's multidisciplinary expertise, the ECG's revised mandate covers a broader scope of issues related to prevention and preparedness. Its new terms of reference include: ensuring coherent preventive action and a systematic response from all the concerned units within FAO and maintaining a high profile and strong voice in interagency consultative fora for emergencies; convening in the event of large-scale natural disasters and human-induced emergencies or economic crises and ensuring that coordinated action is taken; arranging for action plans to be prepared for each stage of the Organization's interventions and monitoring activities; and identifying appropriate measures with which to strengthen FAO's capacity for resource
mobilization.
Committee on Ethics in Food and Agriculture. To ensure that the Organization keeps abreast of the increasing public interest in the ethical issues related to food and agricultural technologies, this internal Committee was established in 1998 at the ADG level and is chaired by the Deputy Director-General. It is assisted by a Subcommittee of specialist staff, and an external Panel of Eminent Experts on Ethics in Food and Agriculture is to be established in 2000. The Committee, Subcommittee and Panel will consider a range of technical issues, including the ethical dimensions of natural resource use and of new technologies such as genetically modified organisms, and will advise the Director-General on ethical questions in relation to food and agriculture.
Interdepartmental Committee on Women in Development. This Committee was established to ensure the continued and effective development and coordination of activities in the context of the revised FAO Plan of Action for Women in Development. Among other tasks, it coordinates, provides policy guidance and facilitates decision-making on normative and operational matters relating to women in development. It does this mainly by monitoring progress made in the implemention of the Plan of Action at headquarters and in the field. In addition, it periodically assesses the overall results and impacts of the Plan and reports back to the PPAB and the Senior Management Group.
FAO/20270/G. DIANA
FAO is intensifying its efforts to assist Member Nations in improving the role and status of rural women
Corporate Communication Committee. Prior to 1994, FAO had no clear mechanism for defining key corporate messages or for communicating them effectively to the general public and to major target audiences such as policy-makers, researchers, NGOs and the media. Furthermore, technical departments planned and budgeted for publications, but not necessarily for other information products.
To redress this situation, a Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy was formulated. It hinges on a cross-organizational planning process and encompasses all communication activities. FAO's publishing programme plays an essential role in the implementation of the Policy and Strategy, which is monitored by the Corporate Communication Committee (CCC). The CCC, replacing the former Publications Committee, advises on related proposals for inclusion in the Programme of Work and Budget and also monitors the implementation of FAO's language policy. Departmental and Regional Communication and Publishing Committees have also been set up to facilitate the formulation of communication and publishing plans, which are submitted to the CCC for review and approval.
Information Management and Technology Committee. In 1982, the Organization established an interdepartmental forum called the Information System and Resources Committee (ISRC) to ensure effective computer usage and the coordinated development of information systems. Since then, there have been significant developments in computer and communication technologies, mostly driven by the emergence of the Internet, and the focus has shifted away from the technology and more towards the management of information. In recognition of the strategic importance of these developments, the Information Management and Technology Committee (IMTC) was set up to replace the ISRC in 1999. The IMTC is chaired by the Deputy Director-General and its members include all ADGs and Directors of the divisions that are most directly concerned with information management and technology, including OCD which also represents the Decentralized Offices. The IMTC is a policy and coordination group, assisted by
two subcommittees, one dealing with information management and the other with information technology. Each subcommittee advises the IMTC on policy matters and serves as the Organization's interdepartmental forum for discussing and coordinating projects and activities.
World Food Day/TeleFood Policy Coordinating Committee and Operational Committee. The Policy Coordinating Committee, chaired by the Director-General, provides policy guidance and direction, including overall orientation and yearly priorities, on matters related to the World Food Day/TeleFood Programme. The Operational Committee monitors and reports regularly on the implementation of World Food Day Special Events/TeleFood Programme activities in individual countries and linguistic country groups; identifies problem areas and defines appropriate responses; and submits specific issues for consideration by the Director-General.
FAO/11874
FAO Ambassadors (from left): Dee Dee Bridgewater, Gina Lollobrigida, Miriam Makeba and Rita Levi-Montalcini
Advisory Committee on Occupational Health and Safety. This Committee advises the Director-General on matters relating to the health and safety of staff both at headquarters and in the field. It requests and reviews reports on potential hazards and serious or frequent accidents as well as analysing patterns of service-incurred accidents, illnesses and deaths. Advice is then given on measures to improve the safety of working methods and procedures and the ergonomics of workplaces.
Investigation Panel for Sexual Harassment. In accordance with recommendations made by the UN Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC), in 1996 the Director-General approved a policy on the prevention of sexual harassment in FAO, including procedures for dealing with complaints of sexual harassment. The Panel is composed of three staff members, appointed by the Director-General after consultation with staff representatives. Members are appointed for two years and serve in their personal capacity. The Panel conducts its own investigations, including interviews with the complainant, the alleged offender, and any witnesses or others who may be able to provide relevant information.
Ad hoc meetings chaired by the Director-General
Despite his heavy travel obligations, the Director-General has continued to maintain close contact with headquarters staff by holding ad hoc meetings. Since 1994, he has held about 500 group meetings and about 900 individual meetings with staff members for specific purposes. Topics have included major decisions made by the FAO Conference, the impact of decentralization and restructuring, and the Organization's response to the emergencies in Rwanda and, more recently, Kosovo Province. In both of these emergency situations, the staff's response to the Director-General's appeal for volunteers to assist in the field was extremely encouraging.
TRAINING
An essential part of the reform in FAO's management style has been the Director-General's strong emphasis on staff training. Most staff members have had to adapt to a number of changes as a result of reform, including new functions, new tools and methods of work and, often, new duty stations. Consequently, training needs were vast, particularly in the field of information technology.
In 1996 and 1997, a comprehensive assessment of training needs was carried out and a corporate staff development plan drawn up. Training priorities were set in line with overall corporate strategies, and included support to organizational development; maintaining FAO as a centre of excellence; improving organizational effectiveness through enhanced deployment of information technology; and increased training support for decentralized offices. At the same time, the percentage of staff costs allocated by each division or office to training increased from 0.66 percent in 1996/97 to 1 percent in 1998/99.
A major skills development programme has been delivered to support the implementation of the Oracle project, the new modular system for administration and financial management (see the section Replacement of administrative and accounting systems, p. 57). By the end of 1999, about 1 000 staff, of which about two-thirds at headquarters and one-third in Regional Offices, had participated in Oracle training courses. With the implementation of Oracle Tutor, it has also been possible to deploy procedures, training guides and user manuals to FAO staff through the use of the Intranet. This is an important step in the provision of training support through the use of distance learning technology.
STAFF MOTIVATION
Staff motivation is essential to the life of an organization, and motivation will inevitably be affected by a reform of the magnitude experienced by FAO. It has not always been easy for staff, many of whom have had to transfer to new positions and/or locations - meaning their families, too, have had to adapt to a new situation. Other staff members were separated from the Organization, although always through consensual means.
In early 1994, all vacant posts had been frozen pending a decision by the FAO Council regarding the programme, structure and policies of the Organization, and so they were subsequently available for redeployment purposes. Nevertheless, the cases of all staff members affected were individually reviewed by the two Redeployment Task Forces, comprising representatives of FAO management and of the respective Staff Associations. The Redeployment Task Forces identified the most appropriate solutions, giving due consideration to personal situations as well as the interests of the Organization. Requiring extensive consultations, this large and complex exercise started in early 1995 and was successfully completed in April 1998.
Considerable effort has gone into identifying and meeting the needs of staff. One example, mentioned earlier, is the work of the Advisory Committee on Occupational Health and Safety in promoting health and safety awareness and supporting information and training programmes on accident and disease prevention, as well as its advice regarding major technological changes that could affect the health of staff.
The Director-General and senior management, in close dialogue with staff representatives, have attempted to satisfy the personal needs of staff. Space at headquarters was recently allocated for staff recreational and sports activities. Unfortunately, it was not possible to set up a child care centre on the premises because the space available for this purpose did not comply with Italian Government regulations. It is generally recognized, nevertheless, that the working environment at headquarters has improved. Moreover, the expanded use of modern information technologies (further explained in the section Modern office and information technology) has helped to improve both the motivation and productivity of staff by providing better tools and working conditions.
Charter for the Office of the Inspector-General
Recent years have brought increasing recognition of the importance of a strong oversight function within the UN system. While FAO has a relatively clear and well-documented audit regime, the various elements and statements that it comprises have not previously been consolidated into an official charter. The Director-General, with the full support of the Finance Committee, therefore decided that a charter should be developed and enshrined in the Organization's regulatory framework.
The resulting Charter for the Office of the Inspector-General provides the blueprint for FAO's internal audit and serves as a comprehensive tool for ensuring that management controls are relevant and up to date. It lays down the mission and scope of work, including accountability and the degree of authority and independence assigned to the Office as well as the professional standards expected of its staff. Also included are procedures for communicating the results and recommendations to management.
Of particular interest are Paragraphs 6, 7 and 8 in the section on Authority:
* Paragraphs 6 and 7 indicate that the Office of the Inspector-General has free access to all material and information relevant to the subject under review, and is authorized to communicate directly with all levels of staff and management in order to discharge its responsibilities.
* Paragraph 8 emphasizes that the Office of the Inspector-General is available to receive complaints or information concerning the possible existence of fraud, waste, abuse of authority, etc. It sets out the right of staff to communicate with the Inspector-General with full assurance of confidentiality and without fear of reprisal.
The Director-General is convinced that the work of the Office of the Inspector-General will continue to add value to the Organization's collective efforts to accomplish the mandate entrusted to it by Member Nations.
PERFORMANCE CHECKS
Another important aspect of modern management has been the strengthening of the control actions carried out by management to establish performance standards, measure and evaluate performance and take corrective action where appropriate. As part of the all-encompassing review of FAO's programmes, structure and policies, initiated in 1994, all Regional Offices, Country Representations and Liaison Offices were reviewed by the Internal Audit Office. As a result of this comprehensive global audit exercise, internal auditors were deployed to the four major Regional Offices. A programme of regular local audits was instituted - providing for regular reviews of accounting records, cash, banking and other procedures - and a more intensive monitoring system was put in place.
The function of internal auditing, inspection and management control has continued to evolve, and the concept of comprehensive auditing has now been integrated into an interdisciplinary approach that combines the financial, compliance and value-for-money aspects of auditing with inspection and investigation. As a result, FAO's Internal Audit Office was transformed into the Office of the Inspector-General in October 1997. At the same time, the Director-General decided to make the Inspector-General's annual activity report available to the Finance Committee. Members of the Committee welcomed this increased transparency and cooperative spirit between the Secretariat and representatives of Member Nations.
This spirit was further enhanced early in 1999 when the Director-General announced that any other report communicated to him may be made available to the Finance Committee if the Inspector-General deems it necessary. It was also decided that the Finance Committee should be consulted whenever there is a change of Inspector-General. Finally, the Charter for the Office of the Inspector-General was established.
Close cooperation between the Inspector-General and the External Auditor is maintained through frequent meetings and exchanges of work plans. Moreover, the External Auditor has access, on request, to any of the Inspector-General's reports. This link in the accountability chain has been further strengthened by the Director-General's instruction that it should be an automatic and standard procedure.
Letters to the field
Greater efficiency has been seen in the internal management of FAOR offices since the system of six-monthly Management Letters was introduced. The aim is to enable units at headquarters to provide FAORs with comprehensive and consolidated feedback on a variety of subjects, so as to improve the functioning of Country Offices. In order to ensure regular checks on the use of resources, the Management Letters are combined with a system of audits by private companies of all local operations carried out by field projects that maintain their own bank accounts.
J. SPAULL
The Strategic Framework is designed to strengthen strategic
management and to shape FAO's course in the years ahead
<title>Reforming FAO - Into the new Millenium</title>
<section>1</section>
The focus - food security
From the outset, FAO's reform has been strongly rooted in the belief that, to be truly universal, the Organization must identify and respond to the diverse needs of Member Nations that are at different stages of economic and social development.
With the reform under way, it was soon evident that many developed countries were concerned about information and statistics, trade, standards and the negotiation and implementation of international agreements. Most developing countries, on the other hand, were more interested in concrete action taken by the Organization to: improve the productivity and security of agriculture; fight pests and animal and plant diseases; implement pilot projects for transferring technology; prepare feasibility studies of projects so as to attract investments; assist in providing early warning of problems and corresponding assistance; identify needs, mobilize support and undertake emergency operations in the event of natural or human-induced disasters; and undertake consultations and provide policy and technical advice.
FAO, therefore, had to ensure not only that its priorities reflected these different needs, within the limit of available resources, but also that they respected the principles of comparative advantage and partnership within the UN system and with the Bretton Woods institutions.
To enhance its responsiveness, FAO first had to sharpen its focus. It was guided in this task by views expressed by Member Nations in questionnaires and by its field and headquarters staff as well as through broad debates by its governing bodies. In the light of the most urgent needs identified, a careful examination was then made of FAO's comparative advantages and multidisciplinary strengths. The Director-General's ensuing proposal that food security should be the guiding theme of FAO's programmes was endorsed by the FAO Council, and it was further decided that the Organization should also target pest prevention and control, sustainable agriculture and the promotion of international standards as they relate to food security.
OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES
In the 1994 review of FAO's programmes, structure and policies, it was concluded that the Organization should concentrate on alleviating constraints to the production of, and access to, food in LIFDCs, i.e. those countries whose food supplies lag behind the increased demand of their growing populations. To ensure the best possible support to Member Nations and development partners, a substantive refocusing was applied to all of the Organization's activities, and in particular those of its Field Programme. As a basis for this sharpened approach, the Director-General defined the Five Guiding Principles of the FAO Field Programme:
1. Ensure continuing interaction between the Organization's normative and operational activities so that they are mutually supportive.
2. Draw the maximum benefit from the Organization's comparative advantage and intervene where such an advantage is known to exist.
3. Ensure that Field Programme activities have a tangible impact on the living conditions of the least privileged rural populations, which should constitute FAO's core target groups.
4. Build and/or reinforce national capabilities to ensure continuity of action, promote sustained self-reliance and manage natural resources effectively.
5. Promote broader partnerships.
In order to ensure that all new projects and programmes are in harmony with this new strategy, all those funded by TCP, SPFS and other extrabudgetary sources are now screened by the Programme and Project Review Committee (PPRC). Headed by the ADG of the Agriculture (AG) Department and including representatives from all divisions of FAO, the PPRC reflects a collaborative approach to technical assistance, ensuring better coordination between the needs of Member Nations and the Organization's wide-ranging expertise.
Special Programme for Food Security
The same approach is embodied in the SPFS, a multidisciplinary programme focusing FAO's activities in its specific areas of competence and comparative advantage in agricultural and rural development, including the collection, analysis and dissemination of information as well as the provision of policy advice and planning and technical assistance. The SPFS provides a programmatic framework for many of these activities, directing FAO's wide-ranging expertise towards food security. It was launched in 1994 after obtaining the unanimous approval of the 106th session of the FAO Council, and its concept was further endorsed by world leaders at the World Food Summit in 1996. Indeed, it should contribute substantially to participating countries' efforts to achieve the Summit's objectives.
The objective of the SPFS is to assist LIFDCs in rapidly increasing agricultural production and in improving access to food, through a participatory approach and on an environmentally sustainable basis. In addition to production, productivity and stability of food supplies, the Programme addresses all aspects of agricultural and rural development related to food security, including farming systems, processing, trade and marketing, credit, extension and the elimination of poverty. A strong emphasis is placed on raising farmers' net incomes, generating rural employment and ensuring social equity as well as gender sensitivity. By mid-December 1999, more than 75 developing countries had applied to participate in the SPFS, which at the time was operational in 54 countries, including 32 in Africa, 13 in Asia and the Pacific, 7 in Latin America and 2 in Eastern Europe. The lessons learned since the Programme began have contributed to a phased and more structured approach to food
security activities, which gain from interlinked objectives, strategies, components and institutional support.
Implementing the SPFS
SPFS implementation takes place in two phases. The microeconomic phase, referred to as Phase I, lasts approximately three years and involves about 30 demonstration sites in each participating country.
It consists of four major activities:
* water control - to ensure steady production despite vagaries of the climate;
* sustainable intensification of plant production systems;
* diversification, particularly through small animal production, artisanal fisheries and aquaculture; and
* the analysis of socio-economic constraints.
The objective of the macroeconomic phase, referred to as Phase II, is to create an environment that is favourable to agricultural production, processing, marketing and access to food; that facilitates increased private and public investments in agricultural activities and services; and that helps raise farmers' incomes.
Phase II has three main components:
* a food security and agricultural sector policy reform - to overcome socio-economic constraints at the macro level;
* a three-year agricultural investment programme - to address infrastructure and other physical constraints;
* the preparation of project feasibility studies - for the purpose of expanding the Programme's pilot projects.
South-South Cooperation. One of the key factors in the success of the SPFS is the use of experts and technicians under the South-South Cooperation initiative, whereby a critical mass of field technicians and experts (about 100) from more advanced developing countries are assigned for at least two years to countries participating in the SPFS. There they work directly with crop producers, animal breeders, fishers and other farmers to increase their productivity and production and improve the community's access to food. This initiative is based on solidarity among the developing countries and thus requires modest financial support for implementation.
The low cost of the initiative is a welcome advantage in times of serious financial constraints. The costs of cooperation are shared by FAO, the host (recipient) government and the cooperating government. Under the terms of the agreement, until the scheme becomes operational, FAO provides the technicians with international air travel, an installation grant of US$300 and a monthly supplementary remuneration of US$300. After this initial period, FAO arranges for bilateral and multilateral contributions to continue the funding. The recipient government provides accommodation, local transport and an additional monthly payment of US$300, often financed by bilateral and multilateral institutions. The cooperating country retains responsibility for the continued payment of salaries and other entitlements of its nationals who have been sent abroad.
More than 20 advanced developing countries have already expressed their intention to participate in the initiative, which is currently operational in 12 countries. The 1996 Viet Nam/Senegal agreement was the first cooperation scheme to be launched under the SPFS. Agreements have also been signed between China and Ethiopia, India and Eritrea, Morocco and the Niger, Morocco and Burkina Faso, Viet Nam and Benin, China and Mauritania, Egypt and the United Republic of Tanzania, Bangladesh and the Gambia, Egypt and Djibouti, Viet Nam and Madagascar, and China and Bangladesh.
FAO has also mobilized further resources from different development partners and entities, including bilateral and multilateral donors, international and regional financing institutions and banks, NGOs and the private sector. At the multilateral level, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), the World Food Programme (WFP) and the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships (UNFIP) are funding SPFS-FAO activities in a number of countries. UNDP is supporting the implementation of the SPFS in Rwanda, Madagascar and Albania; IFAD is funding SPFS activities in Zambia; and WFP is interested in supporting Yemen and Rwanda. UNFIP is supporting the SPFS in Cambodia, Nepal and Zambia. In Angola, the SPFS is jointly executed by FAO, IFAD and WFP and funded by Italy.
The SPFS in operation
In a number of cases, activities planned within the SPFS framework are directly financed through trust fund arrangements between FAO and a donor - for example, France, Belgium, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Spain and the Republic of Korea. In other cases, host countries contribute directly to financially supporting the implementation of the SPFS, as in Nigeria, where the government has recently approved unilateral trust fund arrangements for a total amount of US$45 198 000, and in Senegal, where the government has allocated US$5 million for the implementation of the SPFS.
With regard to financing institutions and the regional development banks, in 1997 FAO signed memoranda of understanding with the World Bank, the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB) for the promotion of rural development and food security within the SPFS framework. The three banks agreed to provide soft loans - and in some cases grants - for Phase I activities, at the request of the national governments concerned. Several projects have been submitted to these banks for consideration. By the end of 1999, the AfDB had agreed to make available US$8 million (US$1 million per country) to support the Programme in Cameroon, Cape Verde, Ghana, Guinea, Malawi, Mauritania, Mozambique and the United Republic of Tanzania. The IsDB has committed itself to supporting the SPFS in the Gambia, Djibouti, the Niger, Guinea and Comoros. The IsDB has already approved funding of US$994 155 for the Gambia and is in the process of approving US$3.2 million for
Djibouti, while the financing of other countries mentioned above is in the approval process. Moreover, discussions are in an advanced stage with the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) for its involvement in the Programme.
Emergency Prevention System
A second FAO priority programme, the Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases, referred to by its acronym EMPRES, was also launched in June 1994. The Animal Disease component of EMPRES aims at strengthening FAO's role in the prevention of and immediate response to emergencies caused by major epizootic diseases of transboundary importance. The initial thrust in this component has been against rinderpest, with an emphasis on activities carried out under the Global Rinderpest Eradication Programme (GREP).
Eradicating rinderpest
GREP links rinderpest campaigns in Africa and Asia and collaborates with national, regional and other international organizations to provide a forum through which activities can be coordinated and technical support delivered. In the 1980s and early 1990s the incidence of rinderpest was widespread in many parts of tropical Africa and West and South Asia, whereas it is now reported to be restricted to just three foci - in the southern Sudan, southern Somalia and Pakistan.
EMPRES also covers serious transboundary diseases and pests that constrain food security, adversely affect animal health or impede international trade in livestock and animal products. The activities undertaken within the framework of EMPRES - surveillance for causal agents, contingency planning, preventive action and veterinary intervention during disease emergencies - must be seen in the context of the system's primary elements, i.e. early warning, early reaction and the improvement of control and eradication methods through research networking.
Considerable progress has been made over the past few years in developing the early warning system operated under EMPRES. Efforts have been two-pronged, consisting of training - through manuals and workshops - and software development - through TADInfo, the Transboundary Animal Disease Information system for surveillance, data storage and analysis. TADInfo is a hierarchical system that assists surveillance at the national and regional levels and supports early warning at the national, regional and global levels. The related software is currently being deployed in several countries in Africa. Initially, TADInfo is intended to be the main template for supporting surveillance in tropical Africa, North Africa and the Near East in collaboration with projects funded by the European Community (EC), the United Kingdom's Department for International Development (DFID) and IFAD.
Desert locust control
The desert locust is one of many transboundary plant pests that cause serious emergencies in agriculture. It is of economic importance for many countries in Africa, the Near East and Southwest Asia. It can multiply rapidly and move across borders in dense swarms, which frequently cover more than 100 km2. In 1988 alone, 24 countries reported desert locust swarms and had to initiate control operations, often over millions of hectares. Under the Desert Locust component of EMPRES, a donor-supported field programme has been developed in areas where outbreaks and plagues originate (i.e. the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden). In addition, pilot activities have been implemented in West Africa and Southwest Asia.
As part of EMPRES early warning activities, desert locust surveillance operations and information exchange networks have been substantially improved and strengthened. Progress in early reaction has been reflected in the ability of affected countries to respond to outbreaks efficiently and quickly. In the Red Sea region during the winter of 1997/98, an outbreak that could have developed into a plague was brought under control as a result of early and effective control operations. Important advances have also been made in methods to reduce the use of chemical pesticides and in the early detection of locust infestations. A preliminary analysis of economic and policy issues in desert locust management has also been completed under EMPRES.
While the FAO Council wishes EMPRES to develop a programme for major transboundary diseases and pests in general, it has also endorsed the principle of key priorities within EMPRES. Thus, in close collaboration with other international organizations, EMPRES is evolving into a forum for concerted action on six major epizootic diseases - rinderpest, foot-and-mouth disease, peste des petits ruminants, contagious bovine pleuropneumonia (CBPP), Rift Valley fever and lumpy skin disease.
Emergency operations
Humanitarian assistance is an integral part of FAO's mandate to help raise levels of nutrition and standards of living, particularly in rural areas of the developing world. Emergencies are absorbing an increasing proportion of international aid, and FAO's emergency operations have, of necessity, increased since 1994. In the 1997-98 biennium, the Organization implemented 187 emergency projects, for a total value of US$157.3 million, to assist disaster-stricken populations in resuming food production and other life-sustaining activities in the immediate post-disaster phase. Today, working closely with other UN organizations, national governments and NGOs, FAO is delivering emergency assistance through more than 110 emergency projects in more than 50 countries - including Kosovo Province, Iraq, the Democratic Republic of Korea, countries throughout Africa and also in Central America.
Growth in FAO's emergency relief operations
Rapid response to development needs
The Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) was established as an integral part of FAO's Regular Programme in 1976 to respond to urgent and unforeseen requests from Member Governments. In Resolution 9/89, the FAO Conference noted that the resources available to TCP had fallen from 14.1 percent of the total budget in 1986-87 to 12.8 percent in 1988-89 and further to 11.8 percent in the allocation for 1990-91. To counter this trend, it invited the Director-General to make every effort to restore TCP resources to their former level of 14 percent of the total Regular Programme budget and, if possible, to raise them to 17 percent. As a result, TCP's proportional share in the Regular Programme appropriation increased from 12.5 percent in 1994-95 to 13.8 percent in 1998-99, in spite of an overall decline in the budget during the same period.
The guiding principles for the use of TCP resources continue to be the criteria initially approved for the Programme by the governing bodies. As a result of the changing environment in which FAO's Field Programme is carried out, i.e. with increased capacities on the part of national institutions and a greater availability of qualified expertise from developing countries, the use of national expertise and technical cooperation among developing countries (TCDC) has increased. At the same time, the share of international consultants employed declined from 43 percent in 1994-1995 to 10 percent in 1998-1999. In terms of person-months, two-thirds of the total expertise provided are now recruited within the recipient countries while the remaining expertise is recruited in approximately equal shares under TCDC or UN consultancy conditions. On the other hand, the provision of supplies and equipment increased from 19 to 31 percent during the same period.
TCP's budget growth since 1994-95
(US$ million)
Technical Cooperation Programme
TCP Unit
Total
Total Programme of Work and Budget
FAO/20915/K. PRATT
Many countries have requested TCP assistance for implementing their national SPFS projects
International commitments made as a result of follow-up to the World Food Summit have prompted many developing countries to request TCP assistance in implementing their national SPFS projects. This assistance has been channelled towards selected SPFS activities in the recipient country, for example water control, and has been on the condition that it is integrated into national programmes approved by the government concerned. FAO has also drawn on TCP funding to supplement donors' support for urgent and unforeseen training requirements related to the Uruguay Round trade negotiations.
FAO, like all other UN agencies, has had to face a reduction in resources over the last six years. Regular Programme funds approved by the FAO Conference fell from US$673 million for 1994-95 to US$650 million for 1998-99. During the same period, however, two developments took place:
* FAO allocated an increased share of its budget to field activities through TCP and the SPFS, thus increasing the percentage share of this allocation in the Regular Programme budget from 11.7 percent for 1992-93 to 15.3 percent for 1998-99.
* Trust Fund donors' total annual delivery to FAO's Field Programme increased from US$180.8 million in 1993 to US$206.8 million in 1998, showing that FAO's partners were confident in the Organization's continuing capacity to provide technical assistance effectively.
NORMATIVE ACTIVITIES
In the 1994 review of FAO's programmes, structure and policies, it was deemed important to clarify the distinction between normative and operational activities, both in organizational terms (i.e. so that previously dispersed units dealing with closely related issues could be consolidated) and in terms of identifying and specifying which resources should support the work. As a result of the clearer distinction, it is easier for staff to focus their energy and expertise on their specific tasks. At the same time, a particular effort has been made to reinforce the complementarity and synergy of the normative and the operational activities conducted by the Organization.
FAO Web site on agricultural trade
A multilingual Internet site on Agricultural Trade is available at www.fao.org/ur/. It features Uruguay Round-related pages including FAO studies on the impact of the Uruguay Round and information on FAO's technical assistance and activities concerning:
* the Agreement on Agriculture;
* the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS);
* the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT); and
* the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS).
The site also offers a question-and-answer service to facilitate the discussion of issues as they arise as well as any relevant documentation made available on multilateral trade negotiations as they proceed.
The Uruguay Round Agreements
The value of FAO's dual role, and the positive interaction between its normative and operational functions, is illustrated in the assistance provided to Member Nations in relation to the Uruguay Round Agreements (referred to increasingly as the WTO Agreements). Incorporating agriculture for the first time under operationally effective rules and disciplines, these Agreements represent a milestone in the multilateral trading system. Yet, many countries require technical assistance in order to fulful their Uruguay Round commitments in agriculture, forestry and fisheries and to benefit from the results. Because of its unique specialist expertise in international agriculture, forestry and fisheries, FAO is well placed to provide that assistance.
Since the Agreements were signed in 1994, the Organization's trade-related assistance has been stepped up. In 1996, additional impetus to its technical assistance in Uruguay Round-related matters was provided by the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and World Food Summit Plan of Action: Objective 4.3 of the Plan of Action commits FAO and other organizations to continue assisting developing countries in preparing for future multilateral trade negotiations so that they become "well-informed" and equal partners in the negotiation process. Furthermore, in November 1997 the FAO Conference urged the Organization to intensify its assistance to developing countries in adjusting to the new trading environment, complying with commitments under the Marrakesh Agreement and preparing for future trade negotiations.
FAO responded with the following initiatives:
Strengthening of the FAO Liaison Office in Geneva. As the main interface between FAO and WTO, this Liaison Office has been strengthened with a new team of senior staff experienced in economic and trade matters. The team offers on-the-spot assistance to country delegations in Geneva.
Training programme. A new training programme on the existing Uruguay Round Agreements has been launched. Concentrating specifically on those Agreements that have a bearing on agriculture, forestry and fisheries, the programme is intended to enhance the national capacity of participating countries in preparing for future WTO trade negotiations. It includes: training in the effective implementation of Codex Alimentarius standards, guidelines and recommendations so that participating countries can meet the requirements of the SPS and TBT Agreements; and training in procedures to improve the quality and safety of foods in domestic and international trade. The programme is designed for all FAO member developing countries and countries in transition.
Codex Alimentarius and the International Plant Protection Convention
Since the conclusion of the Uruguay Round in December 1994, in parallel with the wider adoption and practical application of normative instruments, certain normative-operational synergies have been gaining importance - prime examples being the work of the joint FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission and the function of the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC).
Codex standards, guidelines and other recommendations are internationally recognized points of reference under the Uruguay Round Agreements. Through the Codex Alimentarius Commission, FAO has strengthened its role as facilitator of international food trade to become the leading source of technical advice to developing countries on the introduction and application of Codex standards as well as on the establishment of efficient and effective food control structures. Short seminars and workshops have been staged to inform government officials, industry and consumers about the importance of the Codex Alimentarius and the Agreements. Longer-term development projects, funded through TCP or by external donors, have involved the revision of national regulations to comply with the Codex Alimentarius, technical training and the upgrading of physical facilities.
Codex Alimentarius Commission
The twin objectives of the Codex Alimentarius Commission are to protect the health of consumers and ensure fair practices in the food trade by elaborating internationally acceptable food standards. The Codex Alimentarius currently comprises:
* 204 food standards
* 43 codes of practice
* 2 805 maximum residue limits (MRLs) for agricultural and veterinary chemicals
* 1 284 food additives and contaminants
The IPPC has rapidly evolved from an international treaty deposited with FAO into a dynamic body with, inter alia, standard-setting responsibilities directly linked to a multilateral trade agreement. This development marks a significant change in phytosanitary and trade policy, which supports provision for safe trade within the objectives of free and fair trade. In line with this expanded policy scope, FAO also recognizes the importance of trade in the achievement of food and economic security.
The IPPC has assumed a major role in trade regulation since being identified in the SPS Agreement as the body responsible for establishing the international standards for phytosanitary measures recognized by WTO members. In order to reflect the provisions of the SPS Agreement and other developments at WTO, the Convention underwent a second revision (it had previously been revised in 1979). FAO played a facilitating role in the relevant process of government consultations, which began in 1995 and resulted in the New Revised Text of the IPPC approved by the FAO Conference in 1997.
International Plant Protection Convention
International Standards for Phytosanitary Measures (ISPMs) adopted since 1995:
* Principles of Plant Quarantine as Related to International Trade
* Guidelines for Pest Risk Analysis
* Code of Conduct for the Import and Release of Exotic Biological Control Agents
* Requirements for the Establishment of Pest Free Areas
* Glossary of Phytosanitary Terms
* Guidelines for Surveillance
* Export Certification System
* Determination of Pest Status in an Area
* Guidelines for Pest Eradication Programmes
* Requirements for the Establishment of Pest Free Places of Production and Pest Free Production Sites
Pesticides
Another normative instrument in which the Organization has provided strong leadership is the FAO International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides. A large amount of work went into the formalization of the Prior Informed Consent (PIC) procedure, designed to protect pesticide-importing countries.
PIC requires that countries are informed of, and that they officially sanction, the import of banned or severely restricted pesticides and chemicals before any shipment is made. Between 1994 and 1998, jointly with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), FAO participated in, and at times led, a number of interagency meetings and intergovernmental negotiations, which culminated in the Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in International Trade, adopted on 10 September 1998.
Eighty countries signed the Final Act of the Conference of the Plenipotentiaries on the PIC Procedure and 72 countries and the European Union (EU) have since signed the Rotterdam Convention - which will enter into force when the 50th instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval, or accession has been deposited. Until such time, FAO and UNEP are providing the interim secretariat and support for the Convention's operation. A major new element in the PIC procedure is the oversight function, which includes the addition or removal of chemicals subject to the Convention and will be carried out by the Conference of the Parties.
Genetic resources for food and agriculture
Agricultural genetic resources, developed by farmers and farming communities over millennia, are the basis for sustaining and further developing food and agricultural production. Many of these resources are at great risk of loss, and action to ensure their conservation and sustainable use is a priority. FAO's intergovernmental Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (CGRFA) is recognized as a major international forum for the development of policies and the negotiation of agreements on genetic resources for food and agriculture. In 1995, the FAO Conference broadened the mandate of the CGRFA (until then the Commission on Plant Genetic Resources - CPGR) to cover all components of genetic resources of relevance to food and agriculture, beginning with plant and farm animal genetic resources. The following year, the CGRFA convened the Leipzig International Technical Conference, at which 150 countries adopted the Global Plan of Action for the Conservation and
Sustainable Utilization of Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. The Leipzig Conference also received the first Report on the State of the World's Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. The governing bodies have underlined the significance of the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources, which governments are currently revising through the CGRFA. In 1999, the 30th session of the FAO Conference stressed the importance of successfully completing negotiations for its revision as an international instrument for the conservation and sustainable utilization of plant genetic resources, and for access to these resources, in ensuring global food security and sustainable agriculture. The revised Undertaking is expected to be a binding instrument regulating access to, and the sharing of benefits from, plant genetic resources for food and agriculture. The Conference also endorsed genetic resources in general as a high-priority area.
Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture
The FAO Conference launches negotiations for revision of the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, in harmony with the Convention on Biological Diversity
Agreements are signed with 12 International Agricultural Research Centres (IARCs), whereby 500 000 ex situ accessions held in their gene banks are brought into the International Network of Ex Situ Collections under the Auspices of FAO
The scope of the Commission on Plant Genetic Resources (CPGR) is broadened to cover all components of agricultural biological diversity of relevance to food and agriculture in a step-by-step manner, and the Commission is renamed the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (CGRFA)
The Global Plan of Action is adopted by 150 countries at the International Technical Conference on Plant Genetic Resources in Leipzig, Germany. The first Report on the State of the World's Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture is submitted to this Conference
The CGRFA asks FAO to coordinate the preparation of the first Report on the State of the World's Animal Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture
The CGRFA considered animal genetic resources for the first time in 1999. To provide the necessary information base for establishing priority needs and actions, governments agreed that FAO should coordinate the country-driven Report on the State of the World's Animal Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, within the context of the Global Strategy for the Management of Farm Animal Genetic Resources. Covering both normative and operational activities, the Strategy is being developed by FAO as a framework for assisting governments in analysing the value of avian and mammalian breeds, and in planning the conservation of those at risk, as well as their use and development for sustainable intensification.
Forestry
For the global forestry sector, this is a time of rapid and complex political, institutional and technological change. There is heightened international concern about continued forest degradation and loss, and yet there is unprecedented public commitment to forest conservation. Public involvement in forest management decisions is increasing, and a growing number of organizations and institutions from a wide range of social and scientific disciplines are becoming involved in global forestry issues.
Partnership and coordination. Since 1994, FAO has intensified activities and set clear priorities under its forestry mandate, including partnerships at the national, regional and global levels. The Organization was heavily involved in the Commission on Sustainable Development and its Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (IPF) from 1995 to the completion of its work in 1997 and, since then, it has participated in the Intergovernmental Forum on Forests (IFF). This involvement and support entailed the outposting of an FAO staff member to the IPF/IFF secretariat, the production of technical background papers and participation in numerous technical meetings. Evolving from FAO's former Tropical Forests Action Plan, national forest programmes (NFPs) are now an internationally accepted means for helping countries develop the capacity to manage their forest resources. Significantly, FAO has decentralized staff involved in support to NFPs to each of the Regional Offices.
FAO has also taken the leadership of the informal Interagency Task Force on Forests (ITFF), a high-level group that has brought together UN agencies and other international bodies since 1995 to coordinate their inputs into the forest policy process.
Dialogue and cooperation. In addition, the role of the Committee on Forestry (COFO), FAO's neutral forestry forum for policy and technical dialogue among its Member Nations, has been strengthened. COFO sessions in 1995, 1997 and 1999 have increasingly given more opportunity for information and satellite meetings and for the review of global forestry issues. To provide an opportunity for the exchange of views on international arrangements and mechanisms, and to secure high-level political support to the ongoing discussions, ministerial meetings were organized in 1995 and 1999 in conjunction with COFO. Both meetings were attended by ministers responsible for forests or their representatives while, in 1995, separate meetings were also held for international NGOs and private sector representatives. The first ministerial meeting produced the Rome Statement on Forestry, recognizing the critical importance of forests to the welfare, livelihood and food security of all people and
future generations and to the life support system of the entire planet. In 1999, the national and international challenges of the sustainability issues in forestry were considered. The outcome of this second meeting was the Rome Declaration on Forestry, which was unanimously adopted by participants who pledged to work more closely together, fostering international cooperation and promoting cross-sectoral policies and activities that support sustainable forest management.
Information management and analysis. Equally as important as the substantial changes in the content of the Forestry (FO) Department's work have been the changes in the way it is carried out - the use of powerful computer modelling capabilities and the development of the Web site being good examples. FAO has historically collected statistical information on forest products and resources. The emphasis is now on expanding the fields of data collected, carrying out fuller analyses and widening dissemination of the resulting information and knowledge. For example, the Global Forest Resources Assessment, which is a comprehensive and authoritative FAO report on the state and change of forest resources worldwide, has increased its publication frequency from every ten years to every five years. It has continued to improve the accuracy of its assessments of global forest cover and deforestation and has expanded its scope to include indicators of forest health and forest-based
biodiversity.
The dissemination of information has been improved since 1995 through the biennial publication of State of the World's Forests, which provides the latest information on forest area, forest management and products, and policy and institutional developments worldwide. New statistical series have been or are in the process of being started, covering non-wood forest goods and services, forest fires, genetic resources and educational and research establishments.
Fisheries
In the face of decreasing financial resources, the FAO Fisheries (FI) Department has devised a series of innovative approaches to respond to the growing demands of Member Nations and other stakeholders. The department has developed a broad portfolio of normative activities while also supporting field operations to promote the development of sustainable fisheries and increase the contribution of fishing to food security. These normative activities include:
Transformation of FAO regional fishery bodies (RFBs). These bodies have been revitalized to reinforce regional cooperation and handle new responsibilities. Since 1995, the secretariats of all RFBs have been decentralized to their respective regions and the network of FAO bodies has been streamlined. Two bodies had became redundant and were abolished, while the remaining nine were strengthened technically, even though some of their subsidiary bodies were abolished. The remaining RFBs are undergoing progressive reform from being simple fora for consultation and the exchange of information into financially autonomous structures with the capacity to take regional action on fisheries conservation and management.
FAO regional fishery bodies
* APFIC - Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission
* CECAF - Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic
* CIFA - Committee for Inland Fisheries of Africa
* COPESCAL - Commission for Inland Fisheries of Latin America
* EIFAC - European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission
* GFCM - General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean
* IOTC - Indian Ocean Tuna Commission
* RECOFI - Regional Committee on Fisheries
* WECAFC - Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission
Implementation of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. The aim of the Code, adopted by the FAO Conference in October 1995, is to promote sound fisheries management and development and to improve fisheries governance. An interregional programme to support implementation activities began in 1998, and activities are currently under way in Southeast Asia and the Western Central Atlantic. This programme also provides the FI Department with a unique, integrated framework for its overall activities.
Expansion of fisheries information networks. A major development over the last five years has been the use of new information technology, such as CD-ROMs and the Internet. Through these media, FAO has increased the coverage of fishery statistics and information available within the World Agricultural Information Centre (WAICENT). It has developed a large departmental Web site and produced a prototype FAO Fisheries Atlas on CD-ROM in parallel with the UN Atlas of the Oceans. Also under way is the development of the Fisheries Global Information System (FIGIS), which is designed to provide a comprehensive flow of information on fisheries and related issues, including policy, standards and improved practices.
Publication of The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. Responding to the need for more careful monitoring and analysis of international development in fisheries, this biennial report first appeared in 1995. It documents trends in production, utilization and trade, reviews progress made in addressing major issues in sustainable fisheries and aquaculture, and discusses the global outlook for the fisheries sector.
The significant role of fisheries in achieving food security and generating employment led the Organization to raise related issues with Member Nations' competent ministers. In March 1995, a ministerial meeting was held at FAO headquarters to discuss policies for sustainable and responsible fisheries and aquaculture. This first ministerial meeting on fisheries adopted the Rome Consensus on World Fisheries, recommending that appropriate action be taken to:
* eliminate overfishing;
* rebuild and enhance fish stocks;
* minimize post-harvest losses;
* develop sustainable aquaculture and fisheries; and
* promote the role of fish and fishery products in the alleviation of malnutrition worldwide.
In early 1999, a second ministerial meeting in Rome endorsed the International Plan of Action for Management of Fishing Capacity, developed within FAO. Participants also agreed to support an initiative for a plan of action to deal with illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing, including support to the adoption of vessel monitoring systems (VMS).
Legal advisory services
FAO's Legal Office has continued to provide legal advisory services to governments on land, water, fisheries, plants, animals, food, forestry, wildlife and national parks, the environment and biodiversity as well as general agricultural issues regarding institutions, trade and economic reform. Working closely with FAO's technical units, the Legal Office has assisted governments in the preparation and revision of laws, regulations, agreements and other legal texts while also advising on institutional structures and compliance with international law. For example, it has been involved in the preparation or revision of a number of instruments, in particular the revision of the IPPC, the revision of the Asia-Pacific Plant Protection Agreement and the revision of the Agreement for the GFCM, the Compliance Agreement and the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries as well as the preparation of a new Agreement for the establishment of the IOTC and the creation of RECOFI. It has
also been advising on the revision of the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources.
Capacity building through participatory training of national officials and consultants constitutes an important element in most legal advisory projects, which are currently under way in 70 countries, including all regions.
In 1998, to commemorate the 50th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Legal Office published The right to food: in theory and practice. Featuring articles by international experts, including both civil society and UN representatives, as well as by FAO operational and normative units, the publication discusses the right to food as one of the basic human rights included in the Universal Declaration. It examines the obligations that its fulfilment entails for governments, civil society and the international community, and summarizes specific measures that are being taken by the various sectors.
FAO/20419/G. BIZZARRI
Food security, including people's access to available
supplies, is the guiding theme of FAO's programmes
<section>2</section>
New partnerships with key stakeholders
PARTNERSHIPS AT HEADQUARTERS AND IN THE FIELD
In the quest to deliver services in a more cost-effective and sustainable manner and to promote alliances with partners involved in development, starting in 1994 FAO launched a series of partnership programmes. The aim is to promote the national and collective self-reliance of developing countries by fostering collaboration among the experts and institutions of Member Nations. Since their introduction, the programmes have proved to be valuable instruments in allowing the Organization not only to contribute to national capacity building, but also to render its services more efficiently. Separate programmes focus on: experts for technical cooperation among developing countries and technical cooperation among countries in transition (TCDC/TCCT); visiting experts from academic and research institutions; retired experts; and on-the-job training for young professionals.
The use of experts for TCDC/TCCT. Under this partnership programme, developing countries and those in transition lend their experts to other developing countries or regions, thereby exchanging experience and knowledge in a pragmatic and mutually beneficial manner. Exchanges effected under the TCDC/TCCT Experts Programme are based on a system of shared responsibilities and costs. The experts are recruited from all sectors of society - including government and parastatal bodies and institutions, the private sector and NGOs - and assignments cover a wide range of FAO programmes and projects as well as normative work. By the end of 1999, the governments of 114 developing countries and 11 countries in transition in Central and Eastern Europe had signed the Framework Agreement to participate in the programme and 1 770 experts had been hired.
Visiting experts from academic and research institutions. This programme was was launched to reinforce collaboration between FAO and institutions of international repute in the struggle to eradicate hunger, alleviate poverty and attain global food security. The programme draws the high-level expertise of academic and research institutions into FAO's priority programmes, thereby enhancing its role as a centre of excellence. The institutions provide highly qualified academics and researchers to work interactively with senior technical personnel in FAO for up to one year. All associated costs are shared between the releasing institution and FAO. By the end of 1999, 34 countries and 7 regional and international institutions had endorsed the programme, and some 370 high-calibre visiting experts had made valuable contributions to priority areas of FAO's programmes.
The use of retired national and international experts from FAO as well as other UN organizations. FAO and UN retirees are another source of experience and skills that can be used to enrich the pool of national and international experts involved in the Organization's programmes and projects. Since retired experts already receive a pension, they accept a lower rate of remuneration. At the same time, not only do they bring a lifetime's experience and commitment to assignments but they lend a broader perspective and insight to the problems that countries face in developing their agricultural sectors. Since the programme was launched in 1995, 72 countries have signed the related Agreement and 1 470 retired experts have been hired. Signature of the Agreement is aimed at securing government support in promoting and publicizing the Programme.
The provision of on-the-job training for young professionals. Capacity building is the basic goal of all of FAO's technical cooperation activities. The Young Professionals Programme, launched in late 1997, aims to strengthen and upgrade national capacities by providing qualified young professionals from developing countries with on-the-job training in the implementation of FAO's priority activities. The costs of training young professionals from developing countries and countries in transition are shared by the employer and FAO. Candidates from developed countries may also join the programme provided that their assignments are funded by their government or employer. FAO provides a stipend based on local rates. As of December 1999, 32 young professionals had been recruited to work under the supervision and guidance of FAO staff. This initiative is already making a valuable contribution to the work of the Organization and is building up the international community's pool of
development expertise.
The use of services contributed on a voluntary basis. The Volunteer Programme was launched in June 1999, in response to the expressed interest of Member Nations, to allow individuals to support FAO's work through the voluntary contribution of their services. The programme is expected to increase partnerships with professional organizations, community groups and special interest groups as well as postgraduate students.
Volunteers may be taken on for up to six months for activities that are not covered by established posts so there is no overlap with regular employment opportunities within the Organization. Since the programme began, a total of 32 volunteers, from a variety of countries and regions, have contributed their services to the Organization.
FAO/11885
David Harcharik, FAO Deputy Director-General, with Patrizia Toia, Italian Minister for European Affairs, and Manfredo Incisa di Camerana, ADG/Special Adviser to the Director-General (FAO)
PARTNERSHIPS WITH MEMBER NATIONS
While contacts with Member Nations are generally maintained through the Permanent Representatives to FAO (121 out of 181 representatives are located in Rome) and through the countries' senior government officials, it is felt that certain matters require the special and personal attention of the Director-General. Travel to Member Nations therefore constitutes a major part of the Director-General's duties as head of a UN specialized agency, particularly one with a membership as large as FAO's. Visits to Member Nations, following official invitations from the respective state authorities, are part of the approach adopted by the Director-General to enhance conditions for effective partnerships with individual countries.
These visits have given the Director-General the opportunity to meet directly with Heads of State and/or Government, who are the final arbitrators and decision-makers in matters concerning the Organization. He has also met with ministers and high-level ministerial officials, for example from Agriculture and related Ministries (Fisheries, Forestry, Natural Resources, Environment, etc.); from Foreign Affairs Ministries, whose portfolios invariably cover UN matters and, in particular, reform of the UN system; from Finance Ministries, for budget and financial matters; and from International Cooperation Ministries or Departments responsible for providing development assistance; and with speakers and chairpersons of parliamentary agricultural committees, which have a role in voting on the national budget and in determining government action.
The number of officials to be met by the Director-General is further increased by the fact that, in some countries, there are frequent changes of government. Altogether, since 1994 the Director-General has met with more than 1 000 Heads of State or Government, Secretaries of State and ministers, either during official country visits or at international meetings. These occasions also offer the Director-General an unparalleled opportunity for discussion with FAORs and local heads of UN organizations and, when time permits, for visits to FAO's field operations.
At the same time, efficient communications services have permitted the Director-General to maintain close contacts with headquarters from almost anywhere in the world. Thus, issues requiring urgent action or a decision on his part have been immediately brought to his attention by the Cabinet and a reply sent the same or the following day. All other issues are dealt with by the Deputy Director-General, who keeps a report on action taken during the absence of the Director-General.
Permanent Representations. In addition to the Director-General's visits to Member Nations, the Permanent Representations have remained a firm point for close relations. From January 1994 to the end of 1999, the Director-General received more than 700 visits from Ambassadors and Permanent Representatives to FAO, and nearly 900 high-level official delegations from Member Nations. These contacts tend to be more frequent before the convening of the FAO Council and Conference, in order to initiate and facilitate dialogue between FAO's Secretariat and Member Nations. Moreover, meetings are convened with the regional Permanent Representatives' groups so that they may be informed of the proceedings of important meetings. In particular, these group meetings are held systematically to discuss and attempt to reach consensus on agenda items prior to the Regional Conferences, the FAO Council and Conference, and ministerial meetings. Finally, bimonthly meetings are held with newly
appointed Permanent Representatives to FAO in order to orient them and familiarize them with the Organization's current and planned work.
PARTNERSHIPS WITHIN THE UN SYSTEM AND WITH CIVIL SOCIETY
It has become increasingly evident that cooperation and collaboration at all levels are essential for the eradication of hunger and poverty. Over the past six years, therefore, FAO has been strengthening its partnership agreements with other UN organizations as well as with civil society, including NGOs, charities and research institutions.
WFP/S. DOUGHERTY
(From left) Fawzi H. Al-Sultan, IFAD President, Catherine A. Bertini, WFP Executive Director, Jacques Diouf, FAO Director-General
Relationship with the Rome-based agencies
In dealing with global agricultural issues, rural development and poverty alleviation, the three Rome-based UN food agencies - FAO, IFAD and WFP - have continued to work together closely with the aim of enhancing the impact of their technical expertise, financial assistance and food aid.
Since 1994, in a genuine effort to promote an "alliance for agricultural development", there has been greater collaboration in the formulation of new policies and practical approaches to overcoming hunger as well as in the development of best practices for handling crises and facilitating recovery and development. Tripartite policy and technical meetings are held regularly to determine modalities for mutual cooperation and to identify specific areas and programmes for further follow-up and joint or complementary operations. In addition to the multifaceted collaboration that takes place in the field, steps have also been taken at the headquarters level to establish a cost-sharing system. This would entail the use of facilities available within the three organizations, particularly for conference services, administration, information technology and library and documentation services.
Coordinated relief and rehabilitation
FAO has also strengthened its partnerships for responding to complex emergencies resulting from natural disasters. It has reinforced its collaboration at the field level with other members of the UN Inter-Agency Standing Committee on Humanitarian Assistance. In certain cases, new agreements were drawn up to ensure a coordinated and effective approach by the key partners in providing such assistance. For example, agreements were concluded with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and WFP, containing collaborative arrangements for, inter alia, assessing agricultural relief and rehabilitation needs, supplying agricultural inputs to refugees and providing emergency assistance to local food producers.
FAO also cooperates actively with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), as manifested through the secondment of an OCHA officer to its emergency services since January 1999.
FAO and NGOs - partners in humanitarian assistance
FAO works closely at all stages of emergencies with international aid agencies, private charities and other NGOs dedicated to humanitarian assistance. In complex emergencies, the Organization's main implementing partners are often NGOs, contributing to the monitoring and assessment of needs and to the management of relief operations.
FAO provides NGOs with technical advice for ensuring that their operations in the food and agricultural sectors are of an acceptable standard. NGOs cooperate with the Global Information and Early Warning System (GIEWS) as providers and users of information, and with the Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information Mapping System (FIVIMS).
To strengthen these partnerships further, FAO's policy is to:
* develop formal partnership agreements with major NGOs with which cooperation is ongoing;
* promote dialogue with NGOs aimed at improving the relief-rehabilitation-development continuum;
* coordinate action with NGOs to assist governments in food security monitoring.
Supporting frameworks for UN development assistance
In 1997, the UN Secretary-General invited specialized agencies to take part in the preparation of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF). A key component of UN reform proposals, the UNDAF process is designed to provide a framework for the UN system's support activities at the country level. FAO agreed to participate and actively contributed to the formulation of UNDAFs in 19 pilot countries. FAORs have been instructed to participate fully and to collaborate closely with their colleagues in country teams as well as with the respective governments, in order to maximize the UN system's support for country priorities. Led by the Resident Coordinator, the UNDAF process is to be undertaken in a manner that respects the mandates, competence and accumulated experience of the different specialized agencies, funds and programmes, making full use of the respective comparative advantages. It is now being expanded beyond the pilot countries.
FAO is also supporting the preparation of the Common Country Assessment (CCA), which is an important element in the development of UNDAF. Similarly, in 1999 FAO agreed to cooperate fully in the World Bank-sponsored Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF), which is to be prepared under the leadership of the respective governments with support from the concerned development agencies. The CDF initiative is to be carried out in close relationship with UNDAF.
Linking agricultural research efforts
FAO has long recognized the important role played by IARCs in supporting and supplementing the Organization's efforts in agricultural research and in strengthening National Agricultural Research Systems (NARS) within the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). FAO has made a considerable effort to strengthen its relationship with CGIAR at various levels. In 1994, 12 IARCs brought 500 000 accessions of plant genetic resources that they held into the International Network of Ex Situ Collections under the Auspices of FAO - a move made in recognition of the intergovernmental authority of FAO and the Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (CGRFA) in setting policy for the Network. This arrangement provides the intergovernmental coverage under which the IARCs hold this material in trust for the international community.
In the same year, a Task Force was formally established, comprising five representatives from each participating organization (FAO, UNDP, UNEP and the World Bank). On 31 October 1996, the Declaration and Plan of Action of the Global Forum on Agricultural Research (GFAR) was adopted by CGIAR members in Washington, DC. The Plan of Action provided a framework for mobilizing the world's scientific community in support of global agricultural research to achieve food security, alleviate poverty and ensure the sustainable use of natural resources. It was within this framework that the NARS Steering Committee secretariat was established in 1998. Hosted by FAO, as a distinct unit attached to the Office of the Director of the Research, Extension and Training Division in the SD Department, the secretariat's main function is to strengthen the regional and subregional fora of NARS and to promote partnerships among NARS and other stakeholders in GFAR.
Strengthening cooperation with development banks and financing institutions
FAO has also taken steps to strengthen its coordination and cooperation with international partners so as to ensure the continued implementation of its programmes despite the prevailing environment of budgetary constraints. Since 1994, the Organization's joint activities with multilateral financing institutions have led to increased loans for agriculture.
The Organization's focal point for such interaction is the Investment Centre Division (TCI), which currently has cooperative agreements with 20 of these institutions. With the requisite support from other technical divisions within FAO, TCI assists developing and transition countries in the formulation of investment projects that will attract external financing. Currently, FAO investment support work is running at a high level: about 43 percent of commitments to agriculture and rural development by the World Bank and the International Development Association (IDA) - amounting to more than US$1 billion per annum - are to projects formulated by TCI. In addition, about 30 percent of IFAD's projects and a number of the agricultural projects financed by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and other regional development banks are prepared by TCI.
To enhance such collaboration further, staff members have been outposted from TCI to some of its partner financing institutions, including the World Bank, the AfDB, the AsDB and the IDB. A similar arrangement is foreseen with the IsDB.
Investment generated with TCI support since 1994
Year
No. of projects
Total investments
External loans/grants (as a share of total investments)
(US$ million)
As a result of strengthened relations since 1994, the AsDB has contributed some US$3 million to cofinanced project preparation by TCI. Of the nine projects prepared by TCI for the AsDB, six have already been approved for a total amount of more than US$330 million. Under its new president, the AsDB is planning to refocus all its activities around poverty reduction. Future collaboration with FAO will consequently cover related areas, in particular food security. The AsDB has already provided financing for the SPFS in Nepal, and cooperation in support of food security, particularly in relation to the SPFS, is likely to increase.
Cooperation with the EBRD has also been strengthened significantly. Relations between FAO and the EBRD were formalized in March 1994, with the signature of a memorandum of understanding which defined the nature of joint activities to be undertaken; namely assistance to countries in transition in the identification, formulation and supervision of investment projects and in investment-related sectoral reviews in the agribusiness sector.
The memorandum of understanding also put forward cost-sharing arrangements whereby FAO and the EBRD agreed to bear, respectively, 30 and 70 percent of mission-related expenses. Cooperation between the two was facilitated further when a more detailed framework agreement was signed in October 1997. This agreement had an original duration of two years and a ceiling of US$700 000. In less than two years, the full amount stipulated under the framework agreement had been utilized, with 18 assignments undertaken in nine of the countries in which the EBRD operates. Since the inception of the cooperation programme, the EBRD Board has approved six FAO-formulated projects for total costs amounting to US$169.7 million. In October 1999, the EBRD's Technical Cooperation Committee decided to extend the framework agreement by another two years, increasing the ceiling to US$975 000.
CREATION OF LIAISON OFFICES IN JAPAN AND BELGIUM
With a view to reinforcing its cooperation with the Government of Japan - one of its major contributors - and with international organizations based in that country, in 1996 FAO established a Liaison Office in Yokohama. This office also facilitates communication and cooperation with academic, public and non-governmental institutions in Japan. Similarly, in the same year, FAO established the Liaison Office with the European Union and Belgium, based in Brussels, to serve as an interface between the Organization and the EC. The two offices provide information, establish relevant contacts and strengthen the support of donor countries and institutions for FAO's activities and programmes.
FAO/21714/J. KOELEN
By fostering cooperation among the experts and institutions of Member Nations,
FAO's partnership programmes are an effective means of national capacity building
<section>3</section>
Innovative approaches
THE WORLD FOOD SUMMIT AND ITS FOLLOW-UP
The process of identifying the priorities and needs of Member Nations - a vital stage in FAO's reform process - was given a major boost by the World Food Summit, which reinforced the emphasis on world food security. Held in November 1996, the Summit was attended by representatives of 185 countries and the EC, including 112 Heads or Deputy Heads of State or Government. Participants pledged to fight the scourge of hunger and malnutrition with a new determination and agreed on a concerted Plan of Action. It was a historic event, which delivered a fundamental message: although hundreds of millions of people around the world still suffer from hunger and malnutrition, world food security is an achievable goal.
The Summit set the conceptual, political and technical blueprint for ongoing efforts to eradicate hunger in all countries, with the immediate goal of halving the number of undernourished people by no later than the year 2015. The challenge in the follow-up period was to ensure that the measures set out in the Plan of Action were translated into practical actions aimed at reaching or, preferably, surpassing the Summit's target. FAO has since undertaken a series of concrete follow-up measures:
Monitoring and follow-up by the Committee on World Food Security. Prior to the Summit, FAO's Committee on World Food Security (CFS) - which is open to all FAO and UN Members interested in participating in its work - was charged with guiding the preparation of texts for the World Food Summit. The Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food Summit Plan of Action are products of the Committee's work. The Summit subsequently entrusted the CFS with the responsibility for monitoring and reporting on implementation of the Plan of Action. The CFS has since met four times to discuss, among other things, procedures for handling the follow-up process and to receive reports on implementation. It is also responsible for monitoring progress in the development of the Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information Mapping System (FIVIMS), which is called for in the Plan of Action.
The seven commitments of the World Food Summit
1. We will ensure an enabling political, social, and economic environment designed to create the best conditions for the eradication of poverty and for durable peace, based on full and equal participation of women and men, which is most conducive to achieving sustainable food security for all.
2. We will implement policies aimed at eradicating poverty and inequality and improving physical and economic access by all, at all times, to sufficient, nutritionally adequate and safe food and its effective utilization.
3. We will pursue participatory and sustainable food, agriculture, fisheries, forestry and rural development policies and practices in high and low potential areas, which are essential to adequate and reliable food supplies at the household, national, regional and global levels, and combat pests, drought and desertification, considering the multi-functional character of agriculture.
4. We will strive to ensure that food, agricultural trade and overall trade policies are conducive to fostering food security for all through a fair and market-oriented world trade system.
5. We will endeavour to prevent and be prepared for natural disasters and man-made emergencies and to meet transitory and emergency food requirements in ways that encourage recovery, rehabilitation, development and a capacity to satisfy future needs.
6. We will promote optimal allocation and use of public and private investments to foster human resources, sustainable food, agriculture, fisheries and forestry systems, and rural development, in high and low potential areas.
7. We will implement, monitor, and follow-up this Plan of Action at all levels in cooperation with the international community.
Preparation of national agricultural development strategies - horizon 2010. In close collaboration with Member Nations, 150 strategies for agricultural development have been prepared for developing countries and countries in transition. The aim of these strategies is to provide a long-term perspective for government action in the agricultural sector as well as an objective framework for dialogue between the countries and development partners regarding priorities for technical and financial assistance up to 2010. Many countries have approved these strategies, which have then been submitted to the donor community as a basis for mobilizing resources for country-level implementation of the World Food Summit Plan of Action.
Preparation of regional strategies and programmes for agricultural development and food security. Recognizing that national strategies needed to be harmonized within a framework of regional agricultural development strategies, FAO, in cooperation with regional economic groupings, has integrated the national strategy papers of countries belonging to the major intergovernmental organizations. The resulting documents synthesize the main recommendations and identify common problems and issues related to agricultural production, access and trade up to 2010 as well as the lines of action required at the regional and subregional levels. As with the national strategy papers, these documents also assess the investment needs of the agricultural sector.
Launching of the Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping System. FIVIMS received full support from the FAO Conference in 1997 and is gradually being developed in collaboration with other UN agencies, national institutions and NGOs. The system is being established at the national and international levels, building on existing information systems and mechanisms. By supporting the development of national information systems and raising the awareness of policy-makers and civil society of food insecurity and vulnerability, the FIVIMS initiative is expected to result in improved policy formulation; improved programme management; better design and targeting of interventions; and more effective intersectoral and interinstitutional dialogue. It is hoped that this will result in the sustainable reduction of both transitory and structural undernourishment over time.
Publication of The State of Food Insecurity in the World. As a means of reporting on the state of global food insecurity, in 1999 the Organization published the first edition of a report that documents the number of undernourished people in both developing and developed countries. The first report noted that the number of undernourished people in the developing world declined by 40 million between 1990-92 and 1995-97. However, the report emphasized that, to achieve the World Food Summit goal of halving the number of undernourished people to 400 million by 2015, reductions would have to be accelerated significantly, from the present 8 million to 20 million fewer undernourished people each year.
ACC network on rural development and food security
Countries with Thematic Groups on Rural Development and Food Security
Africa (27)
Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Cte d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Asia (15)
Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cambodia, China, India, Maldives, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Samoa, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Viet Nam
Latin America and the Caribbean (13)
Bolivia, Chile, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela
Near East (9)
Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Yemen
Establishment of the ACC Network on Rural Development and Food Security. To ensure appropriate interagency coordination of World Food Summit follow-up at the field level, the ACC Network on Rural Development and Food Security was established in April 1997. Jointly managed by FAO and IFAD, in close collaboration with WFP, the Network involves a two-tiered informal mechanism: at the country level, Thematic Groups on Rural Development and Food Security operate within the UN Resident Coordinator system; and at the headquarters level, a network of interested organizations supports the country-level groups. The overall Network currently includes 20 UN organizations that support and participate in country-focused Thematic Groups. Comprising concerned partner organizations (including UN agencies, national institutions, bilateral donors and civil society organizations), the Thematic Groups set their agenda and implement activities in respect of national needs and priorities.
THE GENDER ISSUE
At its 28th Session in October 1995, the FAO Conference adopted the revised FAO Plan of Action for Women in Development (1996-2001). The plan requires that FAO intensify its efforts to assist Member Nations in improving the role and status of rural women. It also stipulates that the integration of women in agricultural and rural development should be a continuing consideration in the formulation, implementation and evaluation of programmes and projects.
FAO/11872
The main aim of the Consultation was to promote gender-responsive development policies
In further recognition of women's crucial role in agriculture, FAO convened the High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information in October 1999. The Consultation was organized to raise awareness of the need to collect and disseminate information on the central role of women in agricultural and rural development, and consequently to improve policy- and decision-making processes to achieve sustainable livelihoods and food security in rural areas, without gender-based discrimination. By bringing together the relevant policy- and decision-makers, planners and researchers and development agents, the Consultation aimed to encourage the formulation and implementation of gender-responsive development policies. At the same time, the occasion permitted an exchange of views on a strategy for action for the production and improvement of information on rural women's contribution to the economy, and on the methods and means for this information to be widely disseminated,
particularly among policy-makers.
The strategy for action was considered during the meeting and was recognized as a useful and important tool with which Member Nations could improve the gender-sensitivity of their programmes. It was nevertheless recognized that there is a need to formulate short-, medium- and long-term strategies so that the information gathered reaches decision-makers and planners while, at the same time, sensitizing public opinion. The findings of the Consultation will be examined in 2000 during the mid-term review of the implementation of the Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women, held in Beijing in September 1995. They will also serve, in 2001, to formulate the revised FAO Plan of Action for Women in Development.
SMALL ISLAND DEVELOPING STATES
In line with the UN's efforts to address the particular needs of Small Island Developing States (SIDS), the FAO Conference in 1997 stressed the need to recognize the constraints faced by these countries and invited the Organization to consider the possibility of organizing an International Conference on Agriculture in SIDS as part of follow-up to the World Food Summit. In 1998, the 115th Session of the FAO Council reiterated the call for special attention to SIDS and appealed to donors for generous support to the planned conference. As stated in Commitment Three of the World Food Summit Plan of Action, "Small Island Developing States face the threat of land loss and erosion due to climate changes and sea level rises and have particular needs for their overall sustainable development. Improvements in trade, transportation, communication, human resources, stabilization of income and higher export earnings will increase food security in these countries."
The Special Ministerial Conference on Agriculture in Small Island Developing States was thus convened, at FAO headquarters in March 1999, with the objective of developing a mission-specific plan of action consisting of programmes and projects and including the necessary funding mechanisms. The outcome was a Ministerial Declaration and the Plan of Action on Agriculture in SIDS, which provides a basis for activities in support of sustainable agricultural development in these states as part of follow-up to the World Food Summit. Actions and policies are particularly designed to:
* prepare SIDS for participation in multilateral trade negotiations on agriculture, with a focus on the impact of such negotiations on agricultural trade, and on the future role that regional trade arrangements involving SIDS will have in mutual trading systems;
* develop priority programmes for sustainable, intensified and diversified agricultural production, including forestry and fisheries;
* address problems related to natural resource management and protection of the environment.
TELEFOOD AND SPECIAL FUND PROJECTS
In accordance with the World Food Summit Plan of Action's call to mobilize civil society, in 1997 FAO launched TeleFood, a major international event involving a variety of media and fund-raising events at the global, regional and national levels, including a concert televised around the world. TeleFood takes place in connection with World Food Day, which is observed each year on 16 October, the day FAO was founded in 1945.
The main aims of TeleFood are to raise public awareness of world hunger and food security issues and to mobilize resources for a large number of small projects that help poor farmers, herders, foresters and fishers - particularly women - improve their production and marketing of food as well as access to it.
FAO/20743
FAO TeleFood projects provide basic inputs such as small animals, seeds and tools for food production
In the first three years of the campaign, it is estimated that approximately 500 million people around the world viewed TeleFood and related programmes and approximately US$6 million were collected. FAO Conference Resolution 3/97 approved the Director-General's decision to allocate the proceeds of TeleFood, in their entirety, to financing practical, grassroots projects. All donations collected are therefore used exclusively to finance TeleFood Special Fund projects, with no money diverted for administrative costs, external expertise, training or meetings. These microprojects require up to US$10 000 each for the procurement of tools, inputs and other essential supplies. Many of the projects also generate income, providing beneficiaries with much-needed cash to pay for health care, housing, education and other essentials.
By the end of 1999, more than 500 TeleFood microprojects had been approved in more than 100 countries. Activities include small-scale water harvesting, irrigation and drainage schemes; protection from droughts and floods; intensifying plant, small animal and fish production with environmentally safe technologies; introducing a diversity of farming approaches that allow increased productivity; and sustainable agricultural and rural development projects.
COOPERATION WITH CIVIL SOCIETY
Developments experienced over the past 50 years, together with the evolving role of government and non-governmental institutions in modern society, have revealed the need for intergovernmental organizations to enlist the cooperation and support of the broad range of non-governmental actors that make up civil society. In recognition of this situation, the World Food Summit Plan of Action called on governments to launch national Food for All campaigns, marshalling all sectors of civil society and their resources to help implement the necessary measures for achieving world food security.
Closer relations with NGOs and other civil society organizations
While FAO has a long tradition of cooperation with NGOs and other civil society organizations (CSOs), its partnerships needed to be reaffirmed and updated. The establishment of the Unit for Cooperation with Private Sector and NGOs within the TC Department in 1994 was a first step in this direction. Subsequently, FAO's cooperation with NGOs and other CSOs was thoroughly reviewed in consultation with external partners and with FAO's headquarters units and decentralized offices. Since the review and resulting FAO Policy and Strategy for Cooperation with Non-Governmental and Civil Society Organizations, the exchange of information has increased, further facilitated by the development of electronic communications, which has stimulated input from NGOs and CSOs to discussions on topics ranging from the sustainability of agriculture to recent experiences in land reform. FAO is increasing its contribution to capacity building of CSOs to help them take on new roles in the provision of
services and to participate in policy formulation. Successful results have been obtained in initial joint efforts in resource mobilization, including the involvement of Rotary International in the funding of TeleFood projects in various countries.
Encouraging private sector participation in FAO programmes
Studies conducted by FAO for the World Food Summit clearly indicated that the private sector could make a substantive contribution - in terms of technologies, systems and skills - to the attainment of food security goals. As a result, the Organization endorsed a policy of expanded cooperation with the private sector, the aim being to foster partnerships with private institutions to stimulate and support collaborative activities that will enhance FAO's effectiveness. These collaborative agreements adhere to a set of principles, which are based on legal, ethical and operational criteria and which ensure, inter alia, that cooperation conforms to FAO's mandate; is fully transparent; promotes economic, environmental and social sustainability; and provides for the full accountability of all partners concerned. Specific protocols embodying these principles are included in partnership initiatives when these involve individual enterprises that do not have official relations with the
Organization.
Involving the private sector in the World Food Summit process was, in itself, a challenge, requiring the rapid updating and coordination of the Organization's widespread relations with trade and business associations. However, FAO managed to bring these organizations together at its headquarters for the first time in 30 years, and they made valuable contributions to the Summit's documentation and debate. The International Agri-Food Network (IAFN), which grew out of the Summit process and comprises the major agribusiness associations, will continue to cooperate with FAO as a global private industry network. Since 1996, FAO's policy regarding the private sector has evolved with a view to attracting increased private sector participation in all programmes involving partnership activities.
Creating an enabling environment: interparliamentary action
While the commitments of the World Food Summit were made by governments on behalf of states, they can only be honoured if parliaments and their members are fully involved in the implementation process. Combating food insecurity requires resolute and everyday action by parliaments, whose role is to provide the necessary legislative framework. Parliaments are also required to adopt the national budget and to allocate resources to agriculture and other sectors that are essential to the achievement of food security, while also monitoring their efficient use.
During the World Food Summit, the Italian Parliament invited parliamentarians from around the world to meet in Rome for a Parliamentarians' Day, organized by the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). In their Declaration, the parliamentarians committed themselves to promoting the implementation of the World Food Summit Plan of Action within their respective parliaments and requested IPU to set up, in cooperation with FAO, a mechanism to monitor the parliamentary-level implementation of the Summit's commitments. To identify priority actions to be taken by parliaments and by the IPU, the IPU Conference and Council subsequently convened a specialized interparliamentary conference in Rome from 29 November to 2 December 1998.
Interparliamentary Conference on Attaining the World Food Summit's Objectives through a Sustainable Development Strategy
In order to ensure food security for all and the practical realization of the right to food, the Conference recommended (in its Final Document, para. 47) that the following measures be adopted by parliaments and their members in each country:
* Establish specific mechanisms to facilitate a systematic and coordinated follow-up at the parliamentary level of the commitments undertaken by States at the various world summits organized by the United Nations system in the last decade of this century, including the 1996 World Food Summit;
* Harmonize existing laws and, as appropriate, adopt new legislation so as to develop a comprehensive legislative framework conducive to achieving food security for all;
* Utilize fully the parliamentary oversight function with a view to ensuring governmental compliance with the commitments undertaken at the World Food Summit;
* Work towards the establishment of national food security councils with representation from relevant governmental agencies, civil society, academia and the research community, the media and other groups;
* Hold a parliamentary debate on food security issues every year on 16 October, World Food Day.
CORPORATE COMMUNICATION POLICY AND STRATEGY, INCLUDING WAICENT
An important element in the reform of FAO was the development of a more coherent approach to communication, through the formulation and implementation of the Corporate Communication Policy and Strategy and the replacement of the former Publications Committee with the Corporate Communication Committee (see the section Coordination, p. 20). The policy aims at ensuring the consistency of the Organization's messages and the quality of its information products. In particular, it addresses the changes introduced as a result of the new communication technologies which, among other things, provide an opportunity for decentralizing the production and dissemination of information. It also enourages technical departments to draw on the specific skills of FAO's Information Division in the planning and production of information products that will deliver key messages effectively to the intended audiences.
The Organization is now well into the implemention of the policy and strategy. The technical departments have participated in a planning process that covers the full range of information activities and products - print publications and brochures, CD-ROMs, Web sites, multimedia presentations and exhibits, radio programmes, videos and media liaison and other outreach activities. A parallel process has taken place in Regional and Subregional Offices, which are responsible for all communication activities within their geographical areas. In addition to communicating regularly with governments, technical counterparts, media and NGOs, these offices also distribute corporate information materials and produce their own materials or repackage information to cater for local needs and audiences. Plans for communication activities undertaken by FAOR offices are prepared in consultation with the Regional Information Officers and constitute an important input to the regional and corporate
communication plans.
With regard to the media itself, there have been frequent and improved relations with the Organization. By the end of 1999, the Director-General had granted 230 interviews and press conferences at headquarters and another 170 in the field. In September 1999, the Presidents of Senegal and Cte d'Ivoire inaugurated the "UEMOA Club de la Presse", a press room which benefited from the generous donations of members of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU).
FAO/11834
Pope John Paul II delivers a special message before the World Food Summit - the Summit set the blueprint for global efforts to eradicate hunger
<section>4</section>
Enhancing efficiency and transparency
GOVERNING BODIES
In November 1993, the FAO Conference requested the newly elected Director-General to review the working methods of the Conference. The first outcome of this review was to change the duration of the Conference. Traditionally, Conference sessions had been relatively long, lasting between 19 and 21 days. As one of several measures aimed at improving the efficiency of the sessions, the Director-General proposed that their duration should not exceed two weeks, and that their agenda should contain only those matters that require action by the Conference, as opposed to the Council.
In approving the proposals in November 1994, the Council stressed that this first step should be viewed as only part of a continuing process to improve the governing bodies' cost efficiency and effectiveness. Significantly, the 1995 session of the Conference lasted only 12 days and the 1997 session 11 days.
In 1995, the Council decided that a standing item on achieving savings and efficiency in governance should be included on the agenda of Joint Meetings of the Programme and Finance Committees and agreed that the next step should be a review of all FAO statutory bodies and panels of experts, the number of which had increased considerably over the years. To eliminate obsolete statutory bodies and ensure more task-oriented and time-bound working arrangements for those remaining, a small contact group (which consulted the regional groups of Permanent Representatives), thoroughly examined the work of the bodies concerned. At its 1997 session, the Conference decided to:
* abolish 14 commissions and committees and two panels of experts, and also recommend that these statutory bodies abolish 68 of their subsidiary bodies;
* request the Director-General to consult with other organizations with a view to securing alternative arrangements for, or the abolition of, 15 other commissions, committees or panels that had been established jointly with other organizations; and
* recommend to the Codex Alimentarius that it should continue its review of the usefulness of nine of its subsidiary bodies.
The 1997 Conference also called on the members of regional bodies set up under Article XIV of FAO's Constitution to provide such bodies, where appropriate, with their own financial resources - either through cooperative programmes or other voluntary contributions, or through the establishment of autonomous budgets financed from mandatory contributions. Two years after this Conference resolution, about 100 commissions, committees, panels and working parties had been abolished. Additional suggestions to improve the work methods of the Conference further will be considered by the 83rd session of the Programme Committee in November 2000.
INCREASED RECOURSE TO EXTERNAL EXPERTISE
Since taking office, the Director-General has established a general policy of making systematic recourse to external, independent experts for review, evaluation and advice. At the outset of his mandate, he requested three high-level external experts to assist him in identifying measures to make the Organization more effective. As a result, broad-based measures were recommended to shape the orientations and structures of the Organization and proposed by the Director-General to the 106th Session of the Council in June 1994 for approval.
Subsequently, panels of high-level experts were set up to provide independent policy and strategic advice on FAO's response to the evolving challenges in its fields of activity. Thus, world-renowned external experts and specialists were invited to participate in high-level panels for:
* the Forestry Department;
* the Fisheries Department;
* the Economic and Social Department;
* the Sustainable Development Department;
* the Special Programme for Food Security; and
* Civil Society Involvement in Follow-up to the World Food Summit.
These panels, in the spirit of peer review, analysed the framework of policies, programmes and procedures in their respective sectors and submitted recommendations on how FAO could engage more effectively in the global dialogue on related issues. While the panels initially reported directly to the Director-General, it was decided that, in order to ensure increased transparency and allow for greater interaction with Member Nations, the recommendations of the panels should be drawn to the attention of the governing bodies concerned.
Recourse to external expertise has also been applied in other key areas of the Organization's work. Following the restructuring of all departments, the Director-General instructed that the Administration and Finance (AF) Department be reviewed further to ensure that its management and organizational structure was fully aligned with FAO's current and future requirements and to identify areas for improvement in efficiency and quality of service. The management consultants Coopers and Lybrand were hired to carry out the review and, in addition, external consultants (Montage IT Service, Canada) were asked to support the implementation of the Oracle financial system. The organizational changes recommended for the AF Department have now been made, and installation of the Oracle system has essentially been completed, with its deployment to departmental and divisional budget holders throughout the house under way. Parallel to the review of the AF Department, external advice was
sought regarding a management review to determine the appropriate staffing levels and grade structure of the Organization. The follow-up to the grade structure review will be a long-term undertaking, building on past and present efforts to rationalize the grade structure for Professional staff and to lower the ratio of General Service to Professional posts.
The Conference, the Council and the Programme Committee have underlined the importance of evaluation both as a means of accountability and as a tool for learning lessons for future improvement. As a consequence, consultations have been extended to include external expertise for in-depth evaluative assessments of selected programmes and activities. Specialist consultants were engaged for the thematic review of participatory approaches as well as the thematic evaluation of TCP food quality control projects. The reports produced were then commented on by external peer reviewers and, in the case of the Programme on Agricultural Support Systems, external specialists reviewed the draft report with the programme staff concerned.
One other area where external advice is consistently sought is in the management of the Organization's investments. At its 24th session in May 1998, one of the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Investments was to combine the former internal Credit and Investment Committees to form a single Investment Committee. The responsibilities of the new Committee are to: manage short- and long-term assets; to advise on investment policies for each distinct pool of assets; formulate strategies for each pool of assets - including the mix of external and internal management, the number and type of external managers and the benchmarks for such managers as well as appropriate investments and the currency composition of such investments; and advise on credit risk policy and specific treasury hedging and borrowing transactions.
REPLACEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND ACCOUNTING SYSTEMS
One major project in the improvement and streamlining of FAO's administrative and financial control procedures is the replacement of the custom-made, mainframe-based FINSYS/PERSYS administrative and accounting systems, which have proved inadequate, with a modular system based on Oracle and other software packages.
The new system has been designed to streamline administrative procedures and reduce the cost of administration and financial control. It is based on a modern philosophy of budget accounting, which requires line managers, i.e. the budget holders, to be fully accountable for the use of funds allocated for their projects and programmes. It also improves the productivity and efficiency of transaction processing and the flow of financial information. The system is being implemented in two phases: the first, covering the financial stream, became operational in May 1999 following the initial revision of the financial, administrative and operational manuals in 1998 and 1999; the second, to replace PERSYS and the Payroll component of FINSYS, is to be implemented later. A thorough evaluation of administrative procedures, functions and tasks is foreseen after the new system has been operational for some time.
MODERN OFFICE AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
A key aspect of the reform process has been the widespread deployment of modern office and information technologies throughout the Organization. This has required a considerable investment in terms of both human and financial resources, but it is essential for achieving efficient decentralization and improving the speed and quality of work at headquarters.
FAO/12842
The use of modern communication technologies has increased FAO's efficiency and enhanced its global outreach
Between 1994 and 1999, more than 3 000 new personal computers incorporating advanced workstations were deployed at headquarters. They are continuously upgraded with the latest software and allow staff members to work simultaneously with different applications, from word-processing and spreadsheet software to e-mail and numerous other applications available at headquarters through the FAO Intranet. The installation of the new workstations and applications was accompanied by a large-scale computer training programme for staff.
Similar developments have gradually been introduced in the equipment and communications of decentralized offices, and this has greatly improved the electronic exchange of information. Decentralized offices use software similar to that in use at headquarters and can access headquarters services and information through the Internet. The effect has been a radical improvement in the volume and quality of communication within the Organization as well as a reduction in the time taken to address critical issues. By May 1999, all Regional, Subregional, Liaison and FAOR offices had e-mail services, and all except 13 offices also had full Internet access and were thus able to use the FAO Internet site and access information through it. The few offices that continue to be without Internet access are handicapped either by the absence of a local service provider or by the poor quality of available providers.
Donation of used computers
FAO's desktop computers are assumed to have a working life of four years. In 1988, a programme was instituted to donate machines that are still operable but not sufficiently powerful to run FAO's current standard software.
Distribution of used FAO computers as of December 1998
Receiving entity
No. of computers donated
Government entities and institutions
Permanent Representations in Rome
SPFS projects
TCP projects
Other FAO projects
TOTAL
In 1995, only a small number of the Permanent Representations to FAO had e-mail addresses that could be accessed by FAO, which restricted the possibility of communicating information quickly and inexpensively to these Representations. Although a few countries were already moving towards electronic communication, it was decided to assist developing countries by providing their Representations with a used computer, an e-mail address and access to the Internet through a local service provider. Training for a number of staff of the Permanent Representations and limited technical support were also provided. Thanks to these measures, Permanent Representations have ready access to all the information available on FAO's Web site and can receive and download documents electronically, with corresponding savings in time and money for both the Organization and the installation of facilities. Other rooms have been equipped with upgraded technical facilities, such as new audiovisual and
microphone systems.
Several other rooms will be built or renovated in 2000. Projects include the construction of a Conference Registration Centre, to be funded by the Government of Turkey, and improvements to the Japan Lounge, the Austria Room, the Nordic Lounge, the Georgia Room, the Mexico Room and the Cuba Room, to be funded by the respective governments. A new FAO Shop will also be built.
With generous support from the Government of Italy, major structural works have either been completed or are in progress, including the extension of the air-conditioning system to all headquarters premises, the installation of a centralized power generation system, the upgrading of the electrical system in one headquarters building and the fencing of the FAO compound. Among the projects planned for the immediate future is the restructuring of the David Lubin Memorial Library.
<section>5</section>
Improved resource management
BUDGETARY FACTORS
The reform process has been implemented during a period of very tight financial constraints for the Organization. The approved Programme of Work and Budget for 1994-95, amounting to US$673.1 million, was already a "no growth" budget, and it was subsequently reduced owing to a substantial shortfall both in the payment of assessed contributions and in the receipt of arrears, which were supposed to fund the budget for that biennium up to an amount of US$38 million. Under the circumstances, there was no alternative but to reduce expenditure.
In the light of this negative experience, arising from the Organization's reliance on the payment of arrears for funding its budget, in 1995 the FAO Conference agreed to return to the normal financial practice of funding the budget only with assessed contributions for future biennia. For the 1996-97 biennium, the Conference approved a budget of US$650 million only, nearly US$60 million less than the sum requested to retain a zero-growth level. The Organization had to adjust to this lower level through efficiency improvements as well as through a substantial reduction of programmes.
For the 1998-99 biennium, the Conference approved a zero nominal budget of only US$650 million, representing a reduction of 3.7 percent in real terms. This required a further cost-cutting exercise to protect priority activities to the extent possible. In 1999, the Conference approved a US$650 million budget for the third time. Again it was necessary for FAO to absorb increased costs, estimated to be more than US$4 million for the 2000-2001 biennium. This relatively minor amount of necessary cost absorption was principally due to favourable developments on currency exchange markets, i.e. the strengthening of the US dollar against the Euro and the Italian lira, currencies in which FAO incurs a substantial share of its total expenditures.
The Programme of Work and Budget for the 2000-2001 biennium embodied the first attempt to apply an enhanced programming methodology to FAO's technical activities, a move endorsed by the Conference in 1997. Planned activities are now presented more clearly and in line with results-based budgeting principles, including a more precise definition of objectives, time frames and intended outcomes.
Selected cost-saving measures taken since the beginning of the reform process
Reform measure
Estimated saving per year (US dollars)
Reduction of administrative and financial posts
(approx.) 3 million
Elimination of middle management positions
(e.g. by abolishing posts of assistants to Department Heads or Division Directors)
(approx.) 4 million
Downgrading of vacant posts, where appropriate
(in line with overall objective of improving the grade structure)
3 million
Replacement of internationally recruited programme staff in Country Offices by NPOs
5 million
Reduction in overall number of General Service positions
(partly as a result of office automation and outsourcing in selected areas)
10 million
Decentralization
(savings particularly resulting from differences in General Service employment conditions between headquarters and most decentralized locations)
7 million
Reductions in travel costs
(through non-endorsable tickets, etc. for duty travel - more than half of total savings - and reductions in volume and duration of travel through decentralization, greater use of technology and tighter controls)
11.9 million
New arrangements for production of documents and publications, including outsourcing and remote translation
6 million
More advantageous tariffs for telecommunications obtained through international competitive bidding
2 million
Reduction in duration of governing bodies' meetings and in length of their documents
2 million
GAINING FROM EFFICIENCY
Given the above financial constraints, the pressing need to achieve savings naturally influenced the choices made in the reform process. This was not the only consideration in the search for greater effectiveness, as the major proposals for change had already been submitted to and approved by the Council in June 1994. It can be said, however, that the reform process and the need to identify savings were in fact mutually reinforcing.
Other savings have been achieved in a more indirect way or are difficult to estimate because the amount actually saved is dependent on a number of assumptions or external factors. This is particularly the case for the savings achieved by divisions or projects by substituting international consultants with TCDC/TCCT experts or with visiting or retired experts under the respective partnership programmes (the average monthly cost of an international consultant is at least twice that of experts employed under these arrangements). The number of experts recruited under these programmes has grown to more than 3 600. The fact that the number has increased siginificantly can be attributed to the growing conviction of Member Nations and institutions that there are benefits to be derived from the Organization's partnership programmes.
In order to reduce the financial commitments extending beyond the period covered by FAO's approved Programme of Work and Budget, a new policy was introduced in 1996 whereby staff members holding a fixed-term appointment and assigned to posts included in the programme would have their contracts extended up to the end of the biennium, unless there were specific reasons to consider a shorter extension. Besides contributing to sound financial management, this measure also facilitated the streamlining of procedures for the consideration of proposed extensions of fixed-term appointments, since all such proposals are prepared before the biennial Conference and decisions are taken as soon as the Programme of Work and Budget for the following biennium is approved. Staff members' basic benefits are also protected under the new system because contracts are normally extended for at least one year.
Other cost reductions have been made possible through the use of headquarters teleconferencing facilities, inaugurated at the end of 1996, for meetings with staff and/or partners in other locations or for interviewing candidates for appointments. In 1998, 62 interviews were conducted using these facilities, at a total cost of US$7 438. Had all the candidates been brought to headquarters, the Organization would have spent about US$120 000 in travel costs.
Overall, the savings achieved through reform measures are estimated to be about US$50 million per year, which corresponds to 15 percent of FAO's current annual budget of US$325 million. It is evident that the reform process also incurred costs - for instance, through the transfer of about 100 staff members to a new duty station, the expansion or establishment of decentralized offices, the improvements in communication services and the procurement of computer hardware and necessary software. However, these are one-time costs, which have been quickly offset by the savings achieved, most of which are recurrent.
HUMAN RESOURCES
For a technical organization such as FAO, there is no doubt that its staff are its most valuable resource. The reform process, combined with the need to achieve substantial savings, has had a major impact on staff, who have had to face a period of uncertainty and increased pressure. However, by involving staff in the decision-making processes and through regular and open communication about the problems that have had to be resolved, the Organization has succeeded in mobilizing significant staff commitment to the reform. At the same time, it has taken the opportunity to begin the complex exercise of improving its personnel administration practices.
FAO/17986
FAO's staff are undoubtedly its most valuable resource
As a result of the abrupt reduction in the Organization's budget for the 1994-95 biennium, followed by the zero nominal growth budget for 1996-97, there was a global net reduction of 584 posts. However, as explained in the section Global impact of decentralization, p. 18, 756 posts (26 percent of the total) were abolished at headquarters while, in the Regional, Subregional and Liaison Offices, 172 posts were established. These changes, combined with several transfers of functions and posts between different headquarters units, meant that almost every post in the Organization was affected in some way by the restructuring and decentralization process. In addition, the functional statements and staffing levels of all units have been reviewed, as have the job description and classification of many posts. The result is an improved organizational and grading structure in which:
* substantive and technical functions have been preserved to the maximum extent possible, following the guidance of the governing bodies - the net post reduction in the General Service was 512 compared with 72 posts in the Professional category, taking into account the creation of 65 NPO posts;
* the average grade has been reduced by the downgrading of vacant posts where appropriate, particularly at the highest levels of both Professional and General Service categories, and by the elimination of middle-level management positions.
Distribution of budgeted Professional and higher category posts,
before and after decentralization and restructuring
Grade
January 1994
December 1999
Increase/decrease
Percentage change
ADG and above1
D-2
D-1
P-5
P-4
P-3 or NO-C
P-2 or NO-B
P-1 or NO-A
^1 Including posts filled at the level of Deputy Director-General and ADG ad personam.
Note: NO = National Officer.
Broadening geographic distribution
While the freeze on external recruitment is still in force for the General Service category at headquarters, except for temporary assistance or in cases when there are specific requirements that cannot be met by existing staff resources, recruitment in the Professional category had been resumed by the end of 1994. Since then, efforts have consistently been made to broaden the geographic distribution and improve the gender balance among staff members in the Professional and higher categories. A number of initiatives have been taken to identify suitable candidates from Member Nations that are either non-represented or seriously underrepresented, as well as to identify more women for consideration in the normal selection process. In doing so, the Organization has naturally continued to give paramount importance to securing the highest standards of professional and technical competence, and selection has been restricted to short-listed candidates judged suitable to fill the
relevant posts. For the last 100 Professional staff appointments made by the Director-General, the order of preference recommended by the Professional Staff Selection Committee has been followed in 80 percent of the cases, with internal staff being selected in 48 percent of the cases.
Good progress has been made in balancing geographic distribution: the proportion of non-represented Member Nations among the Professional staff dropped from 54 in January 1994 to 21 in November 1999. During the same period, the number of underrepresented Member Nations fell from 14 to 10. It should also be noted that, between the beginning of November 1993 and the end of November 1999, FAO's membership increased from 160 to 180 countries and one member organization.
Balancing gender representation
While overall progress made with regard to gender balance in the Professional and higher categories has been less evident, there have nevertheless been noticeable improvements in specific areas. Since January 1994, the proportion of women has increased from 4 to 11 percent in the Director category and from 23 to 26.5 percent in the Professional category. There is no doubt that further progress needs to be made, particularly in the decentralized offices. To push the process forward, each department has been requested to establish its own target regarding the proportion of female staff members to be attained within a reasonable time frame. At the same time, the Organization has sent all Permanent Representations in Rome a Note Verbale, soliciting female candidates for posts in the Professional and higher categories.
Streamlining recruitment
In 1998, a Task Force was established to review the selection and recruitment procedures for Professional staff. The aim was to make these procedures more effective while continuing to ensure that staff are selected through a competitive and transparent process. In the light of the recommendations made, a number of improvements have been introduced in order to shorten the recruitment time frames, particularly through appropriate vacancy management and forward planning, and procedures have consequently been streamlined.
Significant financial support for headquarters improvements since 1996
Sponsor
Works funded
Gabon
Construction of the Espace Gabon
West African Economic and Monetary Union
Construction of UEMOA Club de la Presse
Italy
Renovation of the Green Room
India
Renovation of the India Room
Progetto Marmo/Veneto Region of Italy
Flooring of the Atrium
Canada
Renovation of the Canada Room
Malaysia
Renovation of the Malaysia Room
Indonesia
Renovation of the Indonesia Dining Room
Saudi Arabia
Upgrading of technical facilities in the King Faisal Room
Netherlands
Renovation and technical upgrading of the Queen Juliana Room
Austria
Renovation and technical upgrading of the Austria Room
Pakistan
Refurbishing and upgrading of facilities in the Pakistan Room
HEADQUARTERS PREMISES
Building on the momentum created by the World Food Summit, the active policy of seeking external sponsorship for headquarters modernization and improvements has continued. Many Member Nations have generously financed the renovation of existing rooms or the installation of facilities. Other rooms have been equipped with upgraded technical facilities, such as new audiovisual and microphone systems.
Several other rooms will be built or renovated in 2000. Projects include the construction of a Conference Registration Centre, to be funded by the Government of Turkey, and improvements to the Japan Lounge, the Austria Room, the Nordic Lounge, the Georgia Room, the Mexico Room and the Cuba Room, to be funded by the respective governments. A new FAO Shop will also be built.
With generous support from the Government of Italy, major structural works have either been completed or are in progress, including the extension of the air-conditioning system to all headquarters premises, the installation of a centralized power generation system, the upgrading of the electrical system in one headquarters building and the fencing of the FAO compound. Among the projects planned for the immediate future is the restructuring of the David Lubin Memorial Library.
FAO/11836
Several improvements have been made to FAO headquarters
premises - the Atrium during the World Food Summit
<section>6</section>
The way ahead: 2000-2005 and beyond
STRATEGIC VISION
MEDIUM-TERM VISION:
FAO/20424
<section>7</section>
Strategic vision
The reform carried out by FAO since 1994 has provided a solid foundation from which the challenges of the new millennium can be addressed. It has produced definite priorities, decentralized operations, modernized management and streamlined procedures, while also fostering recognition - among staff, Member Nations and partners - that FAO can only achieve its mission if it maintains the foresight and flexibility to make reform an ongoing process.
Although the process of reform necessarily involved an examination of FAO's past practices and present problems, the need to build on existing strengths to address current and future challenges has always been emphasized. At the same time as implementing structural and programme reform measures, the Organization undertook a major review to identify the challenges it would be facing and to map out appropriate strategies. The results of this review are synthesized in The Strategic Framework for FAO: 2000-2015, which was approved by the 30th session of the FAO Conference in November 1999 (see the section Planning).
Corporate strategies to address the needs of Member Nations
* Contributing to the eradication of food insecurity and rural poverty
* Promoting, developing and reinforcing policy and regulatory frameworks for food, agriculture, fisheries and forestry
* Creating sustainable increases in the supply and availability of food and other products from the crop, livestock, fisheries and forestry sectors
* Supporting the conservation, improvement and sustainable use of natural resources for food and agriculture
* Improving decision-making through the provision of information and assessments and fostering of knowledge management for food and agriculture
AO/20648/V. NARAVANE
The Strategic Framework projects a clear vision of the direction to be taken by FAO up to 2015, including core objectives and an implementation programme. The mission spelled out for FAO is "to help build a food-secure world for present and future generations", which is fully consistent with the corporate focus that has guided the reform process. To accomplish its mission, FAO will focus on five strategies that address Members' needs.
These clearly defined strategies, which are based on the principles of interdisciplinarity and partnership, reflect the reforms carried out by FAO since 1994 and set the Organization's agenda for action and continuing reform over the next 15 years.
FAO/19716/G. BIZZARRI
FAO's mission is helping to build a food-secure
world for present and future generations
<section>8</section>
Medium-term vision: 2000-2005
FOCUS ON PRIORITIES AND COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGES
Without excluding any of the priority areas identified in the Strategic Framework, FAO's activities in the medium term will focus on five main areas that represent the Organization's priorities and comparative advantages:
1. Special Programme for Food Security. FAO will work to extend both the geographical scope and the programmatic depth of the SPFS. Phase I activities will be extended to include all LIFDCs and to cover additional agro-ecological zones and programme components in countries where the SPFS is already operational. In countries where significant results have already been achieved, steps will be taken to launch Phase II. In addition, the Special Programme itself will be adjusted to address new challenges to national food security. As migration from rural areas to towns and cities accelerates, for example, agricultural activities in and around urban centres will play a crucial role in providing food and income opportunities for the rural poor. The SPFS will provide a framework for increased interdisciplinary support from FAO to urban and peri-urban agriculture.
2. Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases. The scope and impact of both the plant and animal activities carried out under EMPRES will be increased. With well-established control operations in the central locust-breeding area around the Horn of Africa and the Arabian Peninsula, the Desert Locust component will expand on the pilot activities initiated in the Western Region (spanning the Sahelian and Mediterranean countries of North Africa) and in the Southwest Asian zone. Additional resources will also be dedicated to research on more environmentally benign methods of locust control, including the use of biological techniques. The Animal Disease component of EMPRES has set itself the goal of eradicating rinderpest completely by the year 2005.
3. Ensuring food quality and safety. In the future, FAO will undoubtedly be called on to play a greater role in responding to "crises" related to the quality and safety of food products and the impact of biotechnology and other new agricultural techniques. Various FAO units and bodies will serve as sources of scientifically based information and fora for evaluation, discussion and negotiation. Within their mandates, the appropriate bodies, such as the CGRFA and the FAO-WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission will prepare guidelines and codes of conduct and determine international standards and regulatory frameworks.
4. Promoting fair trade. As the liberalization of markets continues, FAO will redouble its efforts to help Member Nations and their farmers take advantage of the opportunities offered by globalization while avoiding the pitfalls. The Organization will apply its unparalleled experience in agricultural production and trade to improve the capacity of developing countries and countries in transition to participate effectively in the Millennium Round of multilateral trade negotiations. In addition, FAO's AG and SD Departments will implement programmes designed to help small farmers respond to the challenge of globalization by increasing productivity and incomes, improving farm-level economic analysis, planning and decision-making, and helping cooperatives compete and survive in global markets.
5. Supporting the conservation, improvement and sustainable use of natural resources for food and agriculture. FAO will continue to consider the conservation of natural resources as a top priority, with a particular emphasis on areas where its experience equips it to provide leadership and coordination for international efforts. The Organization will expand and strengthen its efforts in such areas as water quality and availability, plant and animal genetic resources, soil conservation and improvement, and integrated resource management systems.
APPLYING ADVANCED TOOLS FOR INCREASED IMPACT AND EFFICIENCY
During the next six years, through WAICENT, FAO will expand the use of Internet technologies to provide access to more information as well as to improved analytical tools. New tools for mapping and graphing data dynamically will allow WAICENT to present statistical and geographical information in numbers, words and images. New systems will promote the innovative use of information technologies to improve agricultural research, extension and education systems. In addition, both FI and FO Departments will launch new global information systems - FIGIS and the Forestry Information System - linking information and databases not only from FAO but from numerous other agencies and research institutes.
The effort to streamline administrative procedures will also continue, bringing with it the potential for increased efficiency and further reform. Plans for the medium-term future include the implementation of an Enterprise Resource Planning functionality and a corporate Data Warehouse and Management Information System, designed to expedite management decision-making and reduce administrative costs. These are envisaged as component parts of an integrated support system that will include: financial accounting and management; human resources management; programme planning; and budget preparation, work planning and implementation monitoring.
BROADENING PARTNERSHIPS AND ALLIANCES
An increased commitment to collaborative activities is emphasized both in The Strategic Framework for FAO: 2000-2015 and in the Organization's Medium-Term Plans. While continuing to strengthen its partnerships at the national and international levels, FAO will open and expand new relationships with subnational governments, with regional and national financing institutions, and with the private sector, NGOs and other CSOs. For example, FAO will reach beyond national governments to encourage policy dialogue and improve access to FAO technical meetings for municipal, provincial and regional governments. Similarly, while reinforcing relationships with international and regional financing institutions, FAO will establish and strengthen ties with such institutions at the subregional and national levels. In addition, FAO's recently established principles and guidelines for cooperation with the private sector will be put into practice, opening important new channels of communication
and cooperation without compromising FAO's independence or neutrality.
Special attention will also be given to strengthening the links and potential for synergy among the UN family of organizations, particularly among the Rome-based organizations. The Organization will also lend its support to the UNDAF process, including the CCA, and to the World Bank's CDF initiative. FAO will contribute to the debt-reduction initiative and the development of a new vision of the relationships between sound monetary policy, economic growth, poverty reduction and social equity, initiated by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). It will help ensure that agriculture is given priority as an essential sector and that food security is the primary goal in poverty alleviation measures initiated as part of debt-reduction agreements.
PERFECTING THE MANAGEMENT PROCESS
The Organization will continue sharpening its efforts to improve the management process, as set out in the section Modern management.
Over the medium term, two key elements will be addressed:
* Planning and coordination, including new tools for defining time-bound objectives with clearly defined outputs and performance indicators; the introduction of a more comprehensive evaluation regime; and increased delegation of budget management responsibility to programme managers.
* Motivation, including the implementation of a human resources development action plan that fosters gender equality, promotes initiative and teamwork and defines accountability for human resource management.
By honing its strengths and improving its work practices - including the use of technology - to facilitate collaboration with partners who share common objectives, FAO will continue to enhance its effectiveness as an agent for development. Moreover, by focusing on clear priorities and comparative advantages, as well as on its potential for interdisciplinary collaboration, the Organization will combine continuity of purpose with flexibility of approach in order to accomplish its mission in the networked world of the new millennium.
FAO/20979
The SPFS will be extended to additional agro-ecological zones
and adjusted to meet new challenges to food security
<section>9</section>
Acronyms
ACC
Administrative Committee on Coordination (UN)
ADG
Assistant Director-General
AF
Administration and Finance (Department)
AfDB
African Development Bank
AsDB
Asian Development Bank
AG
Agriculture (Department)
CCA
Common Country Assessment
CCC
Corporate Communication Committee
CDF
Comprehensive Development Framework
CFS
Committee on World Food Security
CGIAR
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CGRFA
Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture
COFO
Committee on Forestry
CPGR
Commission on Plant Genetic Resources (superseded by CGRFA)
CSO
civil society organization
DFID
Department for International Development (UK)
EBRD
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EC
European Community
ECG
Emergency Coordination Group
EMPRES
Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases
ES
Economic and Social (Department)
ESA
Agriculture and Economic Development Analysis Division
EU
European Union
FAOR
FAO Representative
FI
Fisheries (Department)
FIGIS
Fisheries Global Information System
FIVIMS
Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information Mapping System
FO
Forestry (Department)
GFAR
Global Forum on Agricultural Research
GFCM
General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean
GI
General Affairs and Information (Department)
GIEWS
Global Information and Early Warning System
GII
Information Division
GREP
Global Rinderpest Eradication Programme
IAFN
International Agri-Food Network
IARC
International Agricultural Research Centre
IDA
International Development Association
IDB
Inter-American Development Bank
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
IFF
Intergovernmental Forum on Forests
IMF
International Monetary Fund
IMTC
Information Management and Technology Committee
IOTC
Indian Ocean Tuna Commission
IPF
Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (superseded by IFF)
IPPC
International Plant Protection Convention
IPU
Inter-Parliamentary Union
IsDB
Islamic Development Bank
ISPM
International Standard for Phytosanitary Measures
ISRC
Information System and Resources Committee (superseded by IMTC)
ITFF
Interagency Task Force on Forests
LIFDC
low-income food-deficit country
MRL
maximum residue limit
NARS
National Agricultural Research Systems
NFP
national forest programme
NGO
non-governmental organization
NPO
National Professional Officer
OCD
Office for Coordination of Normative, Operational and Decentralized Activities
OCHA
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UN)
ODA
official development assistance
PIC
Prior Informed Consent (Procedure)
PPAB
Programme and Policy Advisory Board
PPRC
Programme and Project Review Committee
RECOFI
Regional Committee on Fisheries
RFB
regional fishery body
SD
Sustainable Development (Department)
SIDS
Small Island Developing States
SOIF
Senior Officer Information Forum
SPFS
Special Programme for Food Security
SPIC
Special Programme Implementation Committee
SPJC
Special Programme Joint Committee
SPPC
Special Programme Policy Committee
SPS
Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
TBT
Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade
TC
Technical Cooperation (Department)
TCA
Policy Assistance Division
TCCT
technical cooperation among countries in transition
TCDC
technical cooperation among developing countries
TCDN
Unit for Cooperation with Private Sector and NGOs
TCI
Investment Centre Division
TCO
Field Operations Division
TCP
Technical Cooperation Programme
TRIPS
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
UNCED
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
UNDAF
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
UNFIP
United Nations Fund for International Partnerships
UNHCR
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
WAEMU
West African Economic and Monetary Union
WAICENT
World Agricultural Information Centre
WFP
World Food Programme
WHO
World Health Organization
WTO
World Trade Organization
