<title>From farmer to planner and back: Harvesting Best Practices. </title>
<section>1</section>
preface
THE INFORMATION USED AS THE BASIS FOR THIS PUBLICATION HAS BEEN BROUGHT TO US BY DEDICATED AND DILIGENT FAO FIELD PROJECT STAFF WHO ARE DIRECTLY INVOLVED WITH THE ACTIVITIES OF WOMEN AND MEN FARMERS. THESE HIGHLY TRAINED, ENTHUSIASTIC PROFESSIONALS WERE PARTICIPANTS IN THE FROM FARMER TO PLANNER AND BACK: HARVESTING BEST PRACTICES WORKSHOP HELD IN ROME FROM 8-12 DECEMBER 1997. THE OBJECTIVE OF THE WORKSHOP WAS TO HARVEST THE PARTICIPANTS' BROAD-BASED, HANDS-ON KNOWLEDGE AND USE IT AS THE BASIS FOR A PLANNING FRAMEWORK THAT WOULD FACILITATE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PLANNING PROCESSES IN WHICH RURAL WOMEN AND MEN ARE ENSURED A VOICE.
From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices reflects the long-standing and active commitment of the Women in Development Service of FAO's Women and Population Division to identify, develop and disseminate methodologies for gender-responsive rural development approaches that are equitable, participatory and sustainable.
With this publication, we introduce you to the workshop participants, through a photo-essay introduction. We give you an overview of their activities and contributions through The Key Issues paper that draws upon information from case studies written about their projects, and we introduce The Responsive Planner, the planning framework that is based on the best practices and lessons learned in the field projects.
The workshop, funded by the Government of Norway, was part of the Service's overall effort to implement FAO's World Food Summit Plan of Action and its Plan of Action for Women in Development, 1996-2001 which promote food security and improved rural livelihoods through agricultural and rural development.
We are pleased to share what we have learned from those who are listening to women and men farmers and working to strengthen their voices at every level of agricultural development planning. It is our hope that their knowledge of what works and what does not work at field level will provide us, and other partners in rural development, with a more realistic understanding of rural people's capacities and constraints, so that we in turn, may offer them better support through agricultural development programmes and services that meet their specific needs and priorities.
Sissel Ekaas
DIRECTOR · WOMEN & POPULATION DIVISION
Sustainable Development Department
<section>2</section>
introduction
THROUGHOUT HISTORY, THE POMEGRANATE (PUNICA GRANATUM) HAS BEEN AN IMPORTANT SYMBOL IN MANY CULTURES. THE ANCIENT BABYLONIANS CONSIDERED THE EVERGREEN POMEGRANATE TREE A SYMBOL OF EVERLASTING LIFE. THE ROMANS, ESPECIALLY IN MEDIEVAL TIMES, CONSIDERED THE POMEGRANATE TREE SYMBOLIC OF PARTNERSHIPS. IN SANSKRIT WRITINGS, THE TREE REPRESENTED THE VEGETABLE WORLD AND SYMBOLIZED SUSTENANCE. THE SANSKRIT ASSOCIATION WITH SUSTENANCE, THE BABYLONIAN SYMBOL FOR EVERLASTING LIFE AND THE ROMAN ASSOCIATION WITH PARTNERSHIP CAN BE MODERNIZED TO EQUATE WITH FOOD SECURITY, SUSTAINABILITY AND WORKING TOGETHER FOR DEVELOPMENT.
With this in mind, the pomegranate was chosen as the symbol for a unique workshop held at the Rome headquarters of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). The workshop was called From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, and was funded by the Government of Norway. The workshop brought together field-level participants from 12 FAO field projects throughout the developing world to discuss best practices for incorporating gender issues into development planning.
In still other cultures, the open pomegranate fruit with its hundreds of seeds, represents fertility and abundance. This means more than fertility of soil, plants, livestock and oceans. It also represents fertility of the mind. This workshop was all about harvesting fertility of the mind, i.e. the participants' collective knowledge and experience in participatory planning. It was about using the abundance of that harvest as the basis for a framework that would offer guidance on how to make planning in the agriculture sector more responsive to gender and how to ensure that rural women and men have a voice in these planning processes.
This publication offers a three-tiered look at the harvest of the workshop. It starts with a glimpse of what happened at the workshop itself with a photo essay that conveys the excitement and intensity of the participants as they worked, shared and learned together. This is followed by two substantive documents: The Key Issues paper which synthesizes and analyses case studies from the field projects whose representatives participated in the workshop and The Responsive Planner which offers a refreshing, new framework for participatory, gender-responsive agricultural development planning, based on the issues and the best practices that were highlighted and discussed during the workshop.
<section>3</section>
AND EXPERIENCE
THE FROM FARMER TO PLANNER AND BACK: Harvesting Best Practices workshop represented the mid-way point in a long process of testing methodologies for involving rural women and men in agricultural development planning. It grew out of preparations for the Fourth World Conference on Women when FAO's Women in Development Service provided funds for national committees to prepare sector reports on the situation of rural women to include in the national reports each country was required to prepare for the Conference.
A review of the reports found several constraints to improving the situation of rural women that were common to every country. All of the reports recognized that there is very little gender disaggregated data and information available to planners and policy-makers. Moreover, rural people are rarely involved in planning processes and thus planners and policy makers do not know what women's and men's most pressing problems are. There is a lack of formal mechanisms to inform planners of rural people's needs, or to create a space where rural men and women can express their views and participate actively in decision-making on how agricultural projects, programmes and policy are formulated and carried out.
In an effort to fill these gaps and support local planning processes in which rural people - especially rural women - would have a voice, FAO launched pilot projects in Namibia, Nepal and the United Republic of Tanzania as part of an inter-regional project "Improving Information on Women's Contribution to Agricultural Production for Gender-Sensitive Planning", financed by the Government of Norway.
The goal was to improve communication channels among men and women farmers, extension agents and planners by using participatory research and supporting consultative planning processes. This required training planners and extensionists to work in a participatory manner with rural people, to help them solve problems of food insecurity and rural underdevelopment.
More than 200:
flip chart sheets were produced by the participants who enjoyed the opportunity to work informally within small groups.
The challenge was how to communicate field-based information about rural peoples' needs to the planners. The microlevel processes and gender relationships had to be made visible to planners at all levels, with the expectation that such information would influence how they think and, more importantly, how they set policy and plan interventions.
As the three projects got underway, useful lessons began to emerge. These were among the first FAO projects that tested gender-sensitive participatory rural appraisal (PRA) and explored how to set up mechanisms for needs-based planning processes. In order to evaluate these experiences, the Women in Development Service organized the workshop to bring together nationals who had worked on the three pilot projects.
When the small
groups made their reports to the plenary, their words and thoughts were simultaneously recorded in three languages on flip charts by the facilitators. This allowed for easier compilation of participants' ideas about best practices so that their collective knowledge could be used to develop the global participatory and gender-responsive agricultural development (PGRAD) planning framework, known as The Responsive Planner.
While planning the workshop, the Service discovered that other FAO pro-jects were experimenting with similar issues of gender, participation and planning. It was obvious that representatives of these other projects should also participate in the workshop. As a result, with the benefit of funding from the Government of Norway, the workshop was able to invite field staff from 12 FAO projects to come to Rome to discuss and share their experiences. The Service also asked staff of 11 of the projects to prepare case studies looking at the lessons learned, describing how project staff conducted participatory planning and/or describing their efforts to make planning procedures more responsive to gender and other differences among farmers. The case studies analysed several challenges to gender-sensitive and participatory planning such as entry point, tools, capacity-building, linkages and institutionalization of the approaches.
Twenty field staff
from the FAO projects participated along with 15 staff members from the Women and Population and other FAO technical divisions, as well as international consultants who had been involved in the projects and had written the case studies. The field participants had an average of ten years of hands-on practical experience. It was a week-long blending of working groups and plenary meetings.
The Key Issues paper, written as a synthesis of ten of the case studies, reviews and analyses the lessons learned and places them in the context of the larger planning picture.
Gender and participation are two ideas that have been used in development processes around the world for more than two decades. Each has generated new ways of thinking and working, in consequence of which there is now a wealth of literature and a vast array of methods, all aimed at achieving similar goals of social inclusion and empowerment.
Yet it is only recently that gender analysis and participatory development came together. And as was seen by the enthusiasm of the participants at this workshop, gender and participation make a powerful team. The problem is that rhetoric has run far ahead of meaningful application.
The working
group sessions were facilitated by FAO staff members. The overall task of the FAO projects was to involve rural women and men in agricultural planning processes. But the specific objective of the workshop was to provide the opportunity for participants to share their experiences with others working in similar situations and facing similar constraints, and to use that information to develop a framework that would provide a guide to planners.
There have been several years of exploration and experimentation with plenty of failures. But, as FAO and these workshop participants recognized, there has also been a rich harvest of successes.
Simultaneous translators
also joined the group sessions, to allow the participants to express themselves freely. This resulted in a very positive geographical mix at each table where global experiences could be shared.
It is imperative that both the successes and failures be recognized and used as a basis for further progress. Understanding gender issues is fundamental to understanding the overall equation for food security. Building on the knowledge and experiences of rural women and men when planning agricultural programmes and services has never seemed more promising than it is today. Gender-sensitive use of participatory tools and approaches not only provides useful information to agricultural planners, it strengthens women's voice in the planning process.
The discussions
sought answers to three central questions: How to conduct planning processes that fully involve both rural women and men? How to influence current planning procedures to make them more responsive to gender and other differences among farmers? How to get agricultural planners and field-based workers to respond to the priorities of different groups of men and women farmers?
With this workshop, gender issues, participatory methods and agricultural planning were given a unique venue. With this publication, The Key Issues are presented for further study or analysis and The Responsive Planner, the framework that grew from the workshop, will enable field workers and planners to share the harvest - a harvest of best practices.
The workshop
convened in Rome 8 to12 December 1997.
A note about workshop participation:
The participants came from FAO projects in the following countries: Namibia, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Senegal, Tanzania, Zambia, Nepal, India, Honduras, Costa Rica, Tunisia, Pakistan and Afghanistan. In addition, the Improving Household Food Security and Nutrition project in Luapula Valley in Zambia sent its National Project Director using its own funds, and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) sponsored a representative who had worked on the FAO Programme for Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries (IDAF) in West Africa. Unfortunately, representatives of the Afghanistan project and one participant from the Pakistan project were denied entry visas into Italy and were unable to attend. Although 11 case studies were prepared, The Key Issues paper only includes the findings from ten of the studies, because the study from the United Republic of Tanzania project was not available at the time the analysis was written.
The best practices
brought to the meeting by the participants were harvested through: exercises to clarify the preliminary elements of the proposed framework; dividing into small groups with each assigned a different perspective to discuss (small-scale farmers, district-level planners and implementers, or national-level planners); and plenary sessions to integrate and share the working group findings.
There were no
speeches from international experts. The aim of this workshop was to allow the participants to come up with their own answers. And they did.
The workshop had
scheduled time to plan follow-up activities in each country, but the participants were so enthusiastic with their unhindered three-language communication, they chose to continue their group work. They unanimously decided to postpone the follow-up planning until after the workshop.
A basket of fresh
pomegranates always in view to remind the participants of the theme of the workshop - Harvesting Best Practices.
<section>4</section>
PARTICIPATION IN
AGRICULTURAL
DEVELOPMENT
PLANNING
PLANNERS THROUGHOUT AFRICA, ASIA, LATIN AMERICA and the Near East are increasingly called upon to use methods that are participatory, that are bottom-up, and that will benefit women as well as men. But this rarely happens, mainly because it simply is not clear just how to conduct participatory planning or how to change current planning procedures to make them more responsive to gender and other differences among farmers.
But the experience of the From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices workshop shows that progress is being made. There were 12 FAO projects represented, each actively involved in testing and/or using participatory planning tools and methods to find solutions for diverse agricultural development needs. Gender needs were also recognized, in the sense of ensuring that both women and men had a voice in the planning exercise and that their needs were recognized.
The workshop organizers recognized that in order for the participants to get the full value of their workshop experience, they needed an understanding of how their work fit within a global picture. Case studies were commissioned from each project, with authors asked to follow prescribed outlines which would give an overview of the projects themselves, the types of tools and methodologies being used, the levels of success or degrees of problems encountered. The hope was that by sharing this information, other participants as well as other interested groups could learn from the trials and errors.
Each of the case studies included: i) an overview of the national situation, including geographical and historical information as well as information about the policy environment for agricultural development, gender and participation; ii) a project summary, including its objectives, rationale and strategy; iii) a chronology of important activities and how they were implemented; and iv) lessons learned, including a critical analysis of what contributed to the shortcomings and successes of the project, with a focus on the gender-participation-planning nexus.
Within the "lessons learned" segment, the case studies reported specifically on six inter-related areas: the entry point at which the project became involved in the agricultural planning process; the tools and methods used; capacity-building, especially training in gender analysis and participatory methods; the gender information produced; the linkages with planning processes and related organizations; and institutionalization.
This paper reviews ten of those case studies, from the projects listed below, and provides an analytical overview of the roles of gender and participation in planning. It provides specific information on the good practices and problems revealed by the case studies, with the hope of promoting a wider dialogue on how best to pursue the goal of increasing responsiveness of agricultural planning to the priorities of different groups of farmers, women and men alike.
Africa
Ethiopia "Improving Client Oriented Extension Training in Ethiopia" (GCP/ETH/051 /NET)
Namibia "Improving Information on Women's Contribution to Agricultural Production for Gender Sensitive Planning" (GCP/NAM/005/NOR) and "Training for the Integration of Women in Agriculture and Rural Development" (TCP/NAM/ 4451/NAM)
Senegal "Reboisement villageois dans le Nord-Ouest du Bassin Arachidier" (Previnoba) (GCP/SEN/029/NET)
Asia
India "Development of Small-Scale Livestock Activities in Sikkim" (TCP/IND/ 4451(A))
Nepal "Improving Information on Women's Contribution to Agricultural Production for Gender Sensitive Planning" (GCP/NEP/051/NOR)
Latin America
Costa Rica "Apoyo a las Mujeres Productoras del Area Rural en el Marco de un Enfoque de Genero" (TCP/COS/4552 (T)
Honduras "Apoyo a la Mujer Rural Para su Acceso a Recursos de Producción" (GCP/ HON/017/NET))
Near East
Afghanistan "Promotion of Farmers' Participation through the Implementation of Animal Health and Production Improvement Modules (AHPIM) in Afghanistan" (TCP/AFG/4553(T))
Pakistan "Participatory Upland Conservation and Development" (GCP/INT/542/ITA)
Tunisia "Définition d'une politique et elaboration d'une stratégie et d'un Plan d'action en faveur des femmes rurales" (TCP/TUN/4555)
Gender and participation in agricultural planning
ANSWERING BACKGROUND QUESTIONS
This section provides background information for discussion of the case studies by briefly describing the major processes involved in agricultural planning and by explaining what "gender- and difference-sensitive participatory agricultural planning" actually means.
Although there are important linkages between agricultural policy-making and agricultural development planning, the two are quite distinct. This paper focuses on agricultural planning.
Who is involved?
* Agricultural policy-makers are the elected or appointed officials, high-level civil servants and, in some cases, aid donors who wield the political and financial power to:
* set goals for the agricultural sector (such as growth, food security, regional equity);
* develop strategies to pursue these goals (such as giving priority to export crops, commercial farms, smallholders);
* set price, input, credit and land policies designed to induce farmers, technicians and others working in the sector to make decisions that will achieve policy objectives.
Agricultural planners develop national, regional and district plans, programmes and projects that are compatible with the goals, strategies and policies set by policy-makers. Planners may be economists, social scientists or technical specialists employed in the planning units of ministries of agriculture or their various line agencies, such as extension or livestock services, or in national or international development non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and agencies. Managers may also be involved in planning, especially in programme planning for line agencies.
In addition to governmental institutions, planning takes place in international organizations (e.g. FAO) as well as in private agencies, NGOs, commercial establishments and on individual farms. Thus, to some extent, everyone involved in the agricultural sector is a planner. Nonetheless, to be clear, in this paper the term "planner" is reserved for government planners.
Stakeholders are all the people and organizations who stand to gain or lose from a particular policy, programme or project. They are all actors and interest groups in the agricultural sector who are not planners. Many people and groups have a "stake" in the results of agricultural planning, including men and women farmers from different socio-economic, ethnic or age groups, livestock owners, commercial farmers, agricultural wage labourers, fishers, employees and owners of agricultural processing or marketing enterprises, farmers' organizations, elected officials, civil servants and representatives of international agencies.
Farmers, as referred to in this paper, are men and women who engage in small-scale, livestock, crop and fish production and processing as their primary economic activity and who have limited land, capital, educational and labour resources.
How has agricultural planning evolved?
In the 1960s and 1970s, macroeconomic national planning was heavily promoted and widely practised. National plans set growth targets, broke them down by sector, analysed macroeconomic constraints on growth, and developed national and sectoral strategies. Large-scale public, parastatal and private-sector projects were often included in the ubiquitous five-year plans, but projects were rarely planned in detail since their funding was usually not assured. The lack of planners trained in project preparation was an important constraint on overall agricultural planning (FAO, 1984: 8). Large projects were often included in a plan specifically to attract international financing.
National and agricultural sector plans often included price, input, research and extension policies designed to promote rapid economic growth. The emphasis on growth kept the focus on better-endowed regions, large commercial enterprises and export sectors, sometimes exacerbating regional and local income inequalities and often failing to alleviate poverty (Labonne, 1988; FAO, 1985). The smallholder subsistence sector was generally neglected.
This situation changed in the 1970s when major donors began to favour a new breed of integrated rural development (IRD) projects. IRD projects included both social and economic activities and usually focused on the smallholder sector, sometimes even on subsistence-oriented farming systems. The major objective, however, was still to increase the amount of marketed output. Nonetheless, there was a new focus on targeting specific population groups - the poor, the landless, women and the young - with a wide array of services. In some cases, especially in Latin America, these groups were expected to participate in the design of the services they needed (Young, 1993: 47). In most cases, however, participation was not carried down to the village level, and most "services" targeted at women were related not to their productive activities, but to health, education, water supply, etc. - in other words, to their reproductive concerns.
A new form of rural development research, the farming systems research and extension approach (FSR/E), was also developed in the late 1970s and early 1980s, bringing a call for interdisciplinary and more participatory methods to the agricultural research establishment. The impact of FSR/E on agricultural planning and on major agricultural sector projects was, however, limited. This was because most large-scale agricultural projects either targeted or worked mainly with so-called "progressive farmers", who were almost invariably better-off male smallholders or larger commercial farmers. Furthermore, FSR/E was rarely able to integrate all members of the farming household into its analysis or to consider male-female relations at the intra- or interhousehold level (Young, 1993: 52).
Feminist critics of male-biased development projects found inspiration in the FSR/E approach for their work in developing gender analysis. So did the proponents of participatory methods who were seeking ways to make project planning more "bottom-up" (Young, 1993: 47-48). This resulted in the beginnings of gender and agricultural literature and gender and planning literature, as well as the beginnings of a process that was to transform many of the methods and tools of rapid rural appraisal (RRA) into a method that became known as participatory rural appraisal (PRA).
In the 1970s, concern with both poverty and inter-regional disparities also led to the emergence of decentralized, area-based agricultural planning (regional and/or district planning), beginning in India and other parts of Asia in the 1970s and moving to Africa and other parts of the developing world in the 1980s (FAO, 1985; Labonne, 1988). The objectives of area development planning are combined growth and poverty alleviation, and regional "balance" or equity. Participatory planning methods, however, have rarely been used in decentralized planning processes. National plans and projects, regional and district plans, and IRD projects have all usually been developed in a top-down manner (Maetz and Quieti, 1987; Belshaw, 1988; Bendavid-Val, 1990 and 1991).
The debt crisis of the 1980s shifted the emphasis of government policy (with considerable encouragement from international creditor agencies) back to growth, which was pursued by focusing development efforts on regions, farm enterprises and crops with the highest "growth potential", i.e. private-sector commercial agriculture and export crops. This time, however, growth was to be pursued by changing the structure and reach of the government itself, specifically by reducing government involvement and shifting many of its functions to the private sector. Thus, demands for stabilization and structural adjustment, led by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank, resulted in widespread reductions in government budgets and staff. Major efforts at national planning were discouraged.
The resurgence of policies that favoured commercial and export agriculture again exacerbated disparities among regions and households. Eventually, the serious negative effect that many "adjustment" policies had on the poor was recognized. This stimulated interest in local area planning and generated proposals for microprojects to alleviate poverty. Among the methods advocated to plan both medium- and small-scale area-based projects were RRA (Conyers, 1993: 108-9) and, more recently, PRA.
RRA methods involved consultation mainly with village leaders and local informants from district line agencies, resulting in a strong male bias. The same was true of early efforts to use PRA, although this situation is changing. However unintentional, a male bias has also permeated in regional and district planning (Maetz and Quieti, 1987: 37-8; Bendavid-Val, 1990: 7 and 1991: 49).
By the late 1970s, it had become clear that growth-focused policies and projects had negative effects on women and this produced a feminist critique that was soon extended to a comprehensive critique of planning itself (Palmer, 1979; Buvinic, 1986). The critique was often accompanied by suggestions for new approaches to planning, complete with a set of tools for gender analysis and gender-sensitive planning (Overholt et al., 1984; Poats et al.,1988; Young, 1988; Feldstein and Poats, 1989; Ostergaard, 1992; Moser, 1993; Young, 1993). The projects represented at the workshop drew both inspiration and methods from this work.
During the 1980s, increasing concerns about poverty and the need to understand its effects on local communities led to a reworking of RRA methods and the development of a new set of planning tools called PRA.^1 The feminist development community quickly realized the power of PRA methods for highlighting gender issues and in the 1990s produced the PRA gender analysis literature (Feldstein and Jiggins, 1994).
Mainstream agricultural planning literature, although it promotes decentralized area planning for poverty alleviation and participatory methods for better integration of local priorities into area plans, has rarely taken gender-focused literature into account (FAO, 1986; Maetz and Quieti, 1987; Belshaw, 1988; Bendavid-Val, 1990 and 1991). A few works mention the importance of women, but do not integrate gender into the body of analysis or into the methods advocated. Similarly, "women's components" have often been attached to projects that otherwise ignore gender issues.
In fact, gender analysis has rarely, if ever, entered the planner's tool kit. Neither has PRA, except in a very limited way that tends to confine participation to the official village leadership. In agricultural planning, decision-makers and senior planners have been far more highly trained in the technical aspects of projecting supply and demand, setting targets and allocating resources, than in taking account of socio-economic and gender differences among farmers. The case studies confirm that many people from the older generation of decision-makers are sceptical of bottom-up planning and especially of the need to integrate gender analysis into agricultural planning processes. Several case studies remarked that agricultural officers and field workers had never previously been exposed to either PRA or gender analysis.
The projects described in the case studies demonstrated the relevance of these tools for gender-responsive planning. The next challenge is to work out how to adapt planning procedures so that they are more responsive to the information these tools can generate.
What are the different types of agricultural planning?
The structures, processes and relative importance of the different levels of planning vary from country to country. Any project attempting to work with a particular system needs to study it in its local context. Nevertheless, a basic familiarity with the common features of most agricultural planning systems helps to determine where and to whom the information produced by gender-sensitive participatory processes can be directed in order to increase planning's responsiveness to gender and other differences among farmers.
Development planning, including agricultural planning, can be divided into two basic categories: centralized and decentralized. In a centralized planning system all major policy, planning, programming and budgeting decisions for the sector as a whole and for subsector line agencies are made at the national level. In a decentralized system, responsibility for a large number of planning, programming and budgeting decisions is devolved to regional and/or district levels. A separate regional or district planning apparatus may be formed to develop an area-based investment plan. The decentralization of planning and agricultural administration tends to bring problem analysis and planning closer to regional and local realities.
The decentralization process is of particular relevance to participatory planning. It is spreading geographically (particularly in Africa) and intensifying in areas where it is already established (parts of Asia and Latin America), and decentralization is often introduced with the explicit goal of increasing farmers' participation in planning.
In a decentralized system, the national level focuses on setting goals and targets and on formulating agricultural policies to guide government agency programming and project planning and to influence decision-making in the private sector. National planners also provide budgetary and technical support and coordination, as well as monitoring and evaluation services, for lower levels of planning. They are often involved in designing large-scale projects at national and regional levels.
Regional or area planning is the middle level of a decentralized planning system. This is where plans and programmes initiated at lower levels are brought together and coordinated and where attempts are made to reconcile them with the policy and budget constraints set at the national level. Regional planners may also be involved in the design and implementation of nationally designed projects operating in the region. Regional planners usually provide technical and administrative assistance, as well as training, for district planners and institutions involved in local planning and project development.
District planning takes place in subsector line agencies, as does district extension programming, and in multi-agency institutional or community settings where local projects are designed and implemented. At this level, elected local councils, NGOs, private and farmers' organizations often participate in project and programme planning alongside district planners and line agency technicians. In the past, the lack of funding for more independent programming and planning at local levels has inhibited district planning but, as government administrative decentralization is increasingly pursued, more funding decisions are being passed down to regional and district levels. A more binding constraint on local area planning, especially on IRD planning (which may involve crops, livestock, natural resource management, research, extension, credit, marketing and social sectors in a single project) has been the lack of experience in working in multidisciplinary teams and a lack of
appropriate planning methodologies (Maetz and Quieti, 1987).
Village- or community-level planning is still rare. As decentralization takes hold, however, village planning is likely to become increasingly important. It has two basic functions: providing information for higher planning levels by means of participatory problem analysis; and setting community priorities and action plans that can be carried out either independently or with outside assistance. But decentralized planning brings with it new constraints, approaches and demands.
Not all of these elements are present in every country, and they may not necessarily be new in every context, but they are common enough to constitute a relatively new planning environment. And this new environment is conducive to participatory agricultural planning that responds to gender and socio-economic differences.
Planning must become more participatory for several reasons. Among the most compelling is the failure of many development projects and programmes to meet their objectives when farmers do not respond as expected. The old habit of blaming farmers' ignorance and backwardness has lost its appeal, especially as it is now clear that many farmers, including the resource-limited, many women farmers and some pastoralists, face constraints that make it impossible for them to respond as expected. In addition, the success of community development programmes based on participatory planning, implementation and monitoring processes has demonstrated that rural communities are interested in development and will work to make plans and projects succeed as long as those plans respond to local priorities. Finally, the push for democratization has added an important political dimension to the demand for more participatory, bottom-up planning.
The increasing importance attached to taking women into account also stems, in part, from the mediocre performance of projects that ignore women's roles in farming systems. Two decades of gender-sensitive project evaluation has resulted in a growing recognition that many projects, while improving men's situations, actually made women worse off. Other factors have gradually shifted attitudes at both international and national levels, among them pressure on donors and governments to respond to women's needs as farmers, and the momentum created by the major international conferences on population, the environment and women. The rapid expansion of women's organizations throughout the world and their growing links with one another have added a political thrust to this issue.
A far less positive factor in the current environment is the often extreme pressure on governments to reduce their budgets in order to meet structural adjustment and stabilization targets. This factor has an impact at many levels, from the cutting of planning funds and personnel, to the prioritizing of "men's" export crops and the restriction of funds for government services such as extension, marketing and credit for women farmers. This means that great attention must be paid to cost-effectiveness in generating and using information that can promote gender-responsive policy, programme and project development.
Decentralization and agricultural planning
DECENTRALIZED PLANNING AFFECTS THREE MAIN ELEMENTS OF AGRICULTURAL PLANNING:
new constraints, especially the reduced availability of operational funding and the loss of staff by many government agencies as a result of structural adjustment;
new approaches, including government administrative decentralization and regional and district interdisciplinary planning; and
new demands, for participation, bottom-up planning and taking women into account.
Although this new planning environment has, in many places, evoked a positive political response, planners are still faced with the question: What exactly should be done? There are no easy answers, but there are already promising new approaches for involving different groups of farmers, including women and the poor, in agricultural planning. The projects described in the case studies demonstrate the relevance and usefulness of several of these new gender- and difference-sensitive participatory approaches.
What is Participation?
The term "participation" is open to very broad interpretation - even within a single agricultural planning process, different stakeholders may give it different definitions. Participation does not always involve all stakeholders, and may be limited to certain groups (or "levels") within a community. An FAO study of multilevel planning for agricultural development in Asia and the Pacific (FAO, 1985: 89-90), for example, found that participation took place at a number of different levels:
1) participation limited to elites (mostly elected representatives);
2) participation in which people are asked to legitimize or ratify projects that have been identified and formulated by government, but do not participate in the detailed planning and management of the project;
3) participation in which people are consulted from the very start and take an active part in the planning and management of projects;
4) participation in which different social and occupational groups are represented in all planning, coordination and evaluation mechanisms devised at all levels, including the highest policy-making level; and
5) participation in which the representatives in 4) actually control the decisions at all levels.
The FAO study points out that, as of 1985, "experience in the various countries shows that the modes of participation in 4) and 5) have not effect-ively materialized" (ibid. p. 90). While this may no longer be strictly true, participation even at level 3) is still quite rare. Planning projects that promote participatory agricultural planning need to analyse current levels of participation in order to understand the changes that will be required to reach higher levels. The exact meaning of "participation" also needs to be clearly defined.
Tools for participation
Participatory rural appraisal: a set of tools that facilitate a research and action process managed by the local community. It is an exceptionally relevant and powerful way of involving communities in the information generating, analysis and priority setting phases of agricultural planning. Specific tools such as village resource maps, problem trend lines and institutional profiles assist in the analysis of community issues. Other tools such as farming systems' diagrams, seasonal calendars, daily activity profiles and household resource maps can be combined with gender analysis to analyse the livelihood systems of different socio-economic groups. A third set of tools helps communities and different socio-economic/gender-based focus groups identify and prioritize their problems and resource needs and to develop group or community action plans. PRA is very similar to the French méthode accélérée de recherche participative (MARP), and the two terms are used interchangeably in
this paper.
The analysis of difference: a way of identifying stakeholder groups at the local level. Gender, age, wealth/ income, ethnic or religious affiliation, caste, occupation and education all are indicators of difference. One tool for analysis of difference is participatory socio-economic ranking, in which community representatives divide the households of an area into different categories, defined according to area-specific criteria. Thus, the community itself identifies the socio- economic differences that are important. This tool allows a planning team to form small homogeneous focus groups, representing the different socio-economic categories. When a focus group uses the tools of participatory planning separately, its own particular constraints, resources, needs and priorities are more likely to be appropriately analysed and represented.
To make agricultural planning more responsive to the priorities of men and women farmers from different socio-economic groups, projects need to foster participation among as wide a range of stakeholders as possible. The ideal would be to have the active involvement in planning of representatives from all groups with a stake in the policy, programme or project. Some of the projects at the workshop experimented with the analysis of difference, an important method for identifying and involving different stakeholders at the community level.
What is Gender Analysis?
The current policy environment advocates involving women, but does not necessarily promote an analysis of gender issues in all policy formulation processes or in programme planning and implementation. Gender analysis is a methodology to study the different roles and responsibilities of women and men, the differences between men's and women's access to and control over resources, and the consequent variations in constraints, needs and priorities. Incorporating gender analysis into the tools of participatory agricultural planning helps planners understand how to modify the structure of policies and programmes so that women are involved equally with men. Gender analysis can demonstrate why some projects and policies have negative consequences for women.
Gender analysis identifies established patterns of gender-based inequality in economic life. It can, therefore, be seen as threatening to more advantaged stakeholders in the agricultural planning process. In many cases, senior staff or planners have been found to be more resistant to gender analysis than farmers and government field staff. And in some cases, the use of gender analysis tools at the community level may even foster a level of conflict that is detrimental to women's interests. To avoid such negative outcomes, local women should decide whether specific gender analysis tools are best used in mixed sex settings or by women alone. Where gender relations are hierarchical (i.e. in the vast majority of cases), participatory methods such as PRA should always include a separate women's problem analysis and probably a women's community action plan as well.
Does agricultural planning recognize gender differences?
It is difficult to judge how responsive current agricultural planning is to gender and socio-economic differences. The mainstream agricultural planning literature seems to pay very little attention to gender issues. Two textbooks on agricultural planning and policies published in the early 1990s (Mollett, 1990; Ellis, 1992) have chapters on women, but only Ellis has integrated gender issues into each topic. A review of ten recent volumes in FAO's Training Materials for Agricultural Planning series found that some volumes treat gender issues explicitly while others include them under the broader category of socio- economics.
In contrast to the neglect of gender issues in the mainstream agricultural planning literature, there is a rapidly growing literature specifically focused on gender and agricultural planning which has arisen from the "women's movement". Since the 1970s' critiques of the negative effects of development projects on women (Palmer, 1979), and the pioneering text outlining the so called Harvard framework for gender analysis (Overholt et al., 1985), there has been an explosion of literature on gender issues in agriculture, much of it giving practical guidelines and tools for gender analysis and project planning.^2 This is the literature from which the projects represented at the workshop took their inspiration, as well as many of their methods.
The very existence of this extensive literature raises the question: Why has it not had more of an impact on the mainstream agricultural planning literature? Much of the answer involves timing. The great bulk of the gender and planning literature was produced in the late 1980s and the 1990s.^3 Another part of the answer may be the isolation of women's issues in technical and academic discourse, a fate that has been shared by gender. However, the rapidly growing literature on gender, agriculture and planning has had a significant impact in helping to build the policy environment in which many governments are now mandating planners to increase participation and to involve women.
What is responsive planning?
Given all of the previous discussion, gender- and difference-sensitive participatory planning can be defined as agricultural development planning that responds to the diverse priorities of different groups of farmers, where these differences are based on gender, age, ethnicity, race and other socio-economic factors. Planners are aware of the differences and of how best to respond to them because the different groups of men and women farmers have taken an active part in planning agricultural development activities.
Analysis of ten case studies
PROJECT GOALS, APPROACHES, METHODS AND TOOLS
Six of the ten projects analysed here aimed at making some level of agricultural planning responsive to the priorities of women and men farmers (Costa Rica, Ethiopia, India, Namibia, Nepal and Tunisia).^4 The Honduras project also had important impacts on policy in its later phases. The remaining projects (Afghanistan, Pakistan and Senegal), although they did not focus on influencing planning, used participatory and gender-sensitive methods that contributed to the analysis of what works, how and why.
This section analyses the factors that affected project outcomes, both successes and problems. It starts with an outline of the projects' various policy environments and then uses the six analytical categories (entry point, tools and methods, capacity building, gender information, linkages, and institutionalization) that all case writers incorporated in their studies.
The goal of most projects was to increase the responsiveness of agricultural planning to the priorities of men and women farmers, focusing on those with few resources. In most cases this goal reflected national policy directives to increase farmers' participation and to make sure that women's interests were reflected in plans and policies. Thus the projects were attempting to facilitate the realization of a goal shared by national planners.
The approach chosen was to demonstrate the relevance and usefulness (to agricultural planning) of participatory, gender-sensitive and socio-economic difference-sensitive participatory methods. Some projects also tried to increase the potential for gender-responsive planning by working to strengthen women's groups. Most trained local staff in the methods and tools used.
The methods varied from project to project, but usually included gender analysis and PRA or MARP. Some projects formed socio-economically similar and gender-specific focus groups so that PRA tools could be used separately - not only by men and women, but by subsectors such as poor men and young women.
The tools associated with these methods were chosen from those already described in the literature, combined (gender analysis tools, for example, were incorporated into PRA tools) or adapted to reflect local situations and focus group differences. In some cases, new tools were invented, reflecting the fact that PRA and gender analysis tools are evolving rapidly. Examples of specific tools used are described below.
THE PROJECTS AND THEIR POLICY ENVIRONMENTS
The policy and planning environments encountered by the projects varied considerably, from those that were highly favourable to the introduction of gender-sensitive methods for participatory planning (Costa Rica, Ethiopia and Namibia) to the extreme case of Afghanistan, where women's involvement in productive activities has been drastically curtailed. In the early phases of the Senegal and Honduras projects (the mid-1980s), there was relatively little interest in gender roles per se and little concern with supporting women's production or organization at the government level. This changed in the 1990s, when the policy environment became more favourable to women's issues and to the concept of people's participation. Gender analysis, however, is still not acceptable in certain policy environments, e.g. Pakistan. In some countries, information about gender roles, constraints and priorities is still very scarce. Furthermore, in many cases, planners and decision-makers do not
necessarily think that participatory planning requires the participation of both men and women farmers, much less representatives from resource-limited and minority population groups. This means that projects advocating gender-sensitive participatory methods must demonstrate their relevance and applicability to planning.
In Namibia, the Improving Information on Women's Contribution to Agricultural Production for Gender-Sensitive Planning project (1995 to 1997) focused on influencing the responsiveness of national agricultural planning. The project's hypothesis was that information gathered using participatory research could make the gender and socio-economic relationships on which farming systems are based more visible to planners. The project collaborated closely with another FAO project that was training agricultural extension staff in participatory extension training techniques in an effort to foster a client-responsive extension approach. "Clients" was understood to include women farmers, women heads of household and rural youth. Trained extension workers conducted PRA in four agro-ecological zones. University researchers incorporated the PRA-generated information into region-specific case studies, and regional and national workshops brought it to the attention of agricultural planners.
The policy and planning context in Namibia was highly favourable; there was a good fit between the gender-sensitive, participatory orientation of the National Agricultural Policy, which was passed in the project's first year, and project efforts to train agricultural officers in gender-sensitive, participatory methods. The National Agricultural Policy facilitated the project's efforts to interest planners and senior agricultural staff in gender-sensitive participatory tools for agricultural planning.
The Nepal project (1996 to 1997) focused on increasing the gender-responsiveness of district-level planning. Although FAO was assisting the government in formulating district agricultural plans during the project's implementation period, it was not associated with that effort. The project was located in the Women Farmers' Development Division of the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA). Project staff trained district officers from a wide variety of agencies (agriculture, livestock, extension, irrigation, cooperatives and the agricultural development bank) in PRA and gender analysis. Trainees then conducted PRA in seven villages in Nepal's three agro-ecological zones. District workshops had been planned to bring farmers together with district planners to discuss the community action plans resulting from the PRA, but they were cancelled under the pressure of time. Top-level planners who attended a project-sponsored national workshop suggested that, although there is a will to make
planning gender- and needs-responsive, planners do not yet know how to change agricultural planning procedures. The project only had time to show how information could be generated, not how planning might be changed in response to that information.
Ethiopia's Improving Client-Oriented Extension Training project (1995 to 1996) aimed at promoting gender-responsive extension planning. The country's decentralization policy encouraged local-level planning, and created a helpful environment for the project. The project was designed in a participatory manner by the national project coordinator, six national extension experts and an international extension education adviser. It began by training trainers in PRA and gender analysis methods using a local-language training guide and video based on information gathered through PRA conducted by staff. The trainees then trained field staff in three regions (24 women and 58 men), who in turn carried out PRA in 15 villages. This was followed by a second training of trainers (TOT) to improve the PRA and gender analysis training materials. Previous reforms of the extension system had not succeeded in incorporating gender issues, so the project decided to provide additional extension
programme training. Extension officers and field agents were assisted in analysing the implications of the information generated by PRA and using it to plan specific extension programmes for the villages concerned. The project made many efforts to involve planners, line agency managers and local officials in project activities. These efforts included an inception workshop, regional and zonal awareness-raising workshops and invitations to attend PRA training sessions and community meetings.
The India Development of Small-scale Livestock Activities project (Sikkim, 1995 to 1996) also combined gender analysis and PRA, and added the rapid appraisal of tenure and participatory monitoring. When the project was initiated, Sikkim, one of India's most isolated Himalayan states, had a policy environment in which agricultural policies and programmes paid no attention to gender roles and responsibilities. No information was available in the Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services Department about gender- or age-specific roles in farming or livestock-rearing systems. The project trained a small group of mid-level field staff as trainers, using practical, field-based tools for looking at differences in access to livestock production resources according to gender and age. The new trainers trained local field staff, and together they conducted PRA aimed at understanding farmers' constraints, priorities and training needs for goat and chicken husbandry. Planners in the
Forestry and the Rural Development Departments, as well as in the Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services Department, all became interested in the effectiveness of participatory methods for generating gender information that is relevant to line agency programming and regional planning.
In Tunisia the on-going Policy and Strategy in Favour of Rural Women project (1996 to 1997) was mandated by government to assist in integrating rural women's issues in the Ninth Five-Year Plan. In the early 1990s, the government decentralized decision-making and management to the regional level and encouraged local experimentation with participatory rural development planning. Government's request for a project focused on rural women reflected its growing interest in gender-sensitive participatory approaches to agricultural planning. The project developed a methodology based on participatory surveys, using MARP tools to generate information on women's activities in three subsectors: agroforestry (the subject of the case study); irrigated agriculture; and fisheries. The tools focused primarily on women rather than on gender differences. Participatory analysis of the data was conducted with men as well as women. In the future, the project plans to formulate credit, training,
technological support and group organization programmes in the subsectors where women are most active.
The Government of Costa Rica explicitly requested the Support for Women in Rural Areas in a Gender-Focused Framework project (1996 to 1997) to analyse gender issues in order to reduce the gender inequalities ex- perienced by rural women. The agricultural sector was undergoing a series of reforms aimed at increasing its competitiveness in the global economy. Policies were initiated to develop participatory extension methods, encourage negotiation with farmers and strengthen rural credit, all with the aim of increasing economic efficiency. Government wanted a high level of participation, calling for "the active participation of male and female producers and their organizations in the definition of policies, and in the identification, implementation, monitoring and control of activities". The project, implemented in the Atlantic region, focused on three major areas of concern: training of technical staff, planners and extensionists to create the national capacity and ability to
transform the government's concern with gender into effective policies; strengthening of both rural women's organizations and public institutions to increase the demand for gender-sensitive policies and the capacity to develop them; and working at the policy level to identify problems related to the differences in impact that policies and programmes have on men and women and to dev-elop policies that overcome gender-based inequalities.
The Honduras case study covers a series of related "women's projects" (1983 to 1997) aimed at increasing the recognition of rural women as agricultural producers and strengthening producer groups in the agrarian reform sector. The projects worked with the National Agrarian Institute, which is the land reform and land registration agency, and with the Secretariat of Natural Resources, the government's main vehicle for extension and other agricultural services. In the 1980s there was little or no institutional recognition of women's productive roles in the rural sector, especially in agriculture. The projects thus began with a focus on income-generating activities, gradually expanding to include literacy and management training. By the 1990s, women's need for land and other productive resources was beginning to gain institutional recognition. Ironically, this change coincided with the advent of structural adjustment which stripped the National Agrarian Institute of its powers
to reallocate land and severely reduced the capacity of the Secretariat of Natural Resources to provide technical services such as extension. The project reacted by developing the training of rural women volunteers as paratechnicians (promotoras campesinas) capable of helping women plan their own projects, including the organization and management of savings and credit groups. This methodology was gradually institutionalized. The long-term capacity building effort has been directly responsible for the increasing involvement of women in farmers' organizations and of women's NGOs in the planning process.
In Afghanistan, the Animal Health and Livestock Production Programme (1994 to 1997) began to confront gender issues when FAO amalgamated it (in 1995) with a new project called Promotion of Farmers' Participation through the Implementation of Animal Health and Production Improvement Modules (PIHAM). PIHAM introduced participatory methods that revealed women's extensive knowledge and role in livestock and poultry rearing and convinced the veterinary staff from the animal health project that, without including both women's and men's knowledge about animals, project interventions were unlikely to be effective. PIHAM trained female veterinary staff in participatory methods for livestock extension. They, in turn, modified the training material to make it more practical for women. The context in which this work was carried out was, however, extremely unfavourable. The long period of civil war had wiped out nearly all vestiges of government services in rural areas. As the Taliban
forces took over, women's rights to engage in almost any productive activities outside the home were increasingly denied. The project faced tremendous obstacles in training female staff, but the women veterinarians persevered to involve village women in participatory training and livestock monitoring.
From its outset in 1986, Senegal's Northwest Groundnut Basin Village Reforestation (PREVINOBA) project opted for a strategy of popular involvement to deal with deforestation and erosion in the groundnut basin. But participatory dialogue and exchange soon highlighted the fact that people's concerns went beyond the simple framework of rural forestry. As a result, the second phase of PREVINOBA had the broader mandate of drawing up local land development and management plans that reconcile people's interests with policy orientations in the sector, restore and conserve the environment and improve production, all within the framework of sustainable development. The current phase (1995 to 1999) emphasizes consolidation of the lessons learned for expansion. It aims at establishing control by farmers' organizations and NGOs, in addition to government structures. PREVINOBA did not set out to focus on women's participation, but the context in which it operated forced gender issues to
be taken into account. The absence of rural men for the greater part of the year meant that women became indispensable in the design and set-up of land management plans. The project also responded to the needs identified by women, including improved ovens, millet mills, oil presses and access to credit and to literacy classes.
In Pakistan, the Inter-Regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation (1993 to 1997) had separate men's and women's programmes to comply with cultural norms. The women's programme encountered significant resistance from senior management in the Forest and Wildlife Department over the incorporation of gender analysis into its participatory methods. In the end, the programme was obliged to restrict its use of PRA tools to the assessment of women's problems and priorities. In spite of the severe ecological problems, conservation was a low priority for women, so the project made the organization of women's associations the final step in each PRA exercise. It provided training in income-generating activities and helped women to organize village savings and credit organizations. The project's concern with natural resource management was developed through a series of slide shows to stimulate discussion. Although the women eventually developed the discussion topics and slide
shows themselves, it is unlikely that they will have a significant impact on the area's serious environmental problems, primarily because the owners of lucrative orchards are engaging in heavy-duty pump irrigation, an activity that has already severely lowered the water table and threatens, if continued, to force the population to abandon the area altogether.
ENTRY POINTS
Planning takes place at many levels:
* national level for policy-making, national project planning and resource allocation to subsector programmes;
* subnational and institutional levels for line agency planning and programming and for the planning of regional or district projects;
* field or local area level for community planned projects and for farmers' individual planning.
The projects being reviewed had to decide what their entry points were, in other words, where and how they could enter the planning system.
The entry points for five of the projects (Afghanistan, Ethiopia, India, Namibia and Nepal) were very similar - the training of field-level extension agents in PRA and gender analysis so that they could gather information that is useful for gender-responsive planning. The levels of planning for which gender-specific information was gathered varied from the national (Namibia and Tunisia), to the district or regional (Costa Rica and Nepal), the subsectoral (Ethiopia, Honduras and India) or the project itself (Afghanistan, Pakistan and Senegal). The Tunisia project was the only one that began with an explicit attempt to involve a planning agency in defining its needs. The Costa Rica project began with a detailed study of planning processes. The highly successful Ethiopia project began with participatory planning of the project itself.
Gender sensitive planning model - Nepal
This diagram illustrates how the project in Nepal attempted to facilitate a process of participatory, gender responsive planning at the district level. The project started by training a wide range of district officers and field staff in PRA and gender analysis. PRA was conducted with separate groups of men and women farmers, with the aim of providing gender-specific information and developing community action plans as potential inputs for district planning. The project's use of separate men's and women's focus groups was an attempt to assure that women's needs and priorities would be represented equally with men's. However, when men and women farmers were brought together to produce a single community action plan, in most cases women's priorities were overshadowed by men's. The project had planned to organize district-level workshops where farmers would discuss their community action plans with district planners. This would have provided a direct link to district planning
and, if implemented, would have evolved into a best practice. Nepal was one of the few projects that attempted to forge such a direct a link with planning processes. (But, as mentioned earlier, the district workshops were cancelled.)
Ethiopia's client-oriented extension training project began with a participatory approach to the planning of its own activities. The project was jointly designed by the national project coordinator, six national extension experts and an international extension education adviser. Project staff then prepared materials for a TOT programme by conducting preliminary PRA in three regions to provide local examples for an Amharic-language training guide entitled How to make your extension programme client-oriented. The primary entry points were field-level extension agents and farmers.
The entry point for Tunisia's Technical Cooperation Programme, Policy and Strategy in Favour of Rural Women, was the project's request to the Department of Planning to define its needs for data on women. The project then trained the field workers who made up the research team, conducted a statistical survey to provide data on rural women's productive activities and engaged in participatory research using PRA to elicit information about women's and men's separate priorities in the area of economic activities for women. The Tunisia project seems to be the only one that began by consulting the national planning agency on its needs.
The Costa Rica project, which was explicitly mandated to use gender analysis in order to understand and correct women farmers' under-representation in agricultural services, promoted an extensive and participatory process for the detailed review of all aspects of agricultural policy. Planners, agricultural specialists, NGOs and representatives of rural organizations participated in the development of this process. One of the main characteristics of the Costa Rica project was that it took action, simultaneously, at three levels: the community level, working with grassroots' organizations and rural workers; the regional level, in connection with decentralized agencies from the agricultural sector and local government; and the national level, with planners, national NGOs and representatives from the major farmers' organizations. As stressed in the case study's analysis of the project's entry point, these activities took place simultaneously because each was seen to have
critical feedback for the others. This project is one of the few that conducted a detailed study of planning before it entered the planning system.
Namibia's Improving Information on Women's Contribution to Agricultural Production for Gender-Sensitive Planning project was executed in close collaboration with a second project focused on training extension workers in PRA and gender analysis. This provided the project with an obvious entry point, i.e. the extension agents trained in PRA and gender analysis could be used to collect gender-specific information on the farming systems in the country's four major agro-ecological zones. The PRA was expected to produce gender, socio-economic and location-specific information that could be used by national agricultural planners who had recently been mandated to integrate women farmers into all policies and programmes.
India's Sikkim Livestock project began by training agricultural and community development officers as trainers. The areas covered included analytical problem-solving and pedagogical skills as well as interdisciplinary work, participatory methods and gender analysis. The newly trained trainers conducted PRA and gender analysis training for field staff who, in turn, carried out PRA in a series of villages to produce information that could be used in the planning of livestock services. TOT as an entry point improved the likelihood of activities being sustained after a project comes to an end.
In Honduras, when the project started in 1983 there were no institutional mechanisms for working with rural women as productive agents. This prompted the project to work directly with rural women, organizing small groups to encourage income-generating projects for crop and animal production and providing credit for their implementation.
Senegal's reforestation project's entry point was to work directly with villagers. In most cases however, village authority was exercised by male village and religious chiefs. Women were traditionally absent, although the eldest were consulted before final decisions were made. With the backing of village authorities, PREVINOBA was able to build partnerships with village organizations, including women's advancement groups. Given men's absence for most of the year, women were organized into collectives for the majority of reforestation and cultivation activities, including orchard management. For a few activities, such as the installation of windbreaks, both men and women were involved.
In Pakistan, the staff of the women's programme of the natural resource management project conducted PRA exercises with village women as its entry point for each of the areas in which it worked. Since the PRA demonstrated that women had little interest in environmental conservation activities, the exercises culminated in the formation of women's associations which planned their own activities, largely income-generating projects.
The entry point of Afghanistan's PIHAM project was the training of veterinarians from the staff of the existing Animal Health and Livestock Production Programme in gender-sensitive PRA and project monitoring. The participatory work with farmers that followed this training had a major impact on improving veterinarians' attitudes towards farmers.
TOOLS AND METHODS
Most of the projects at the workshop used some form of PRA and/or gender analysis. Projects that used PRA combined with gender analysis and the analysis of difference were particularly successful in demonstrating their relevance and practicality for gender-responsive participatory planning.
PRA, when combined with gender analysis and the analysis of difference, is both powerful and relatively cost-effective^5 because it serves three functions simultaneously.
1) It is an efficient method of collecting the information on gender and other differences among farmers that is needed for gender-responsive planning.
2) The method is easy to learn and helps field workers to understand rapidly the gender, socio-economic and technical issues in local farming systems.
3) It is an effective means of involving different groups of farmers in problem analysis and planning.
Tools
Some of the most important PRA and gender analysis tools used in the projects are described in the table on page 32 that was taken from the Nepal case study. The information gathered using these tools was illustrated on large posters and analysed by different focus groups or by the community as a whole. Both focus groups and communities prioritized problems (using, for example, pair-wise ranking) and analysed the feasibility of potential solutions. PRA exercises often concluded with the development of a community action plan or with separate action plans that reflected the specific priorities of different focus groups. The table on page 33 which was taken from the Namibia case study shows a framework for gender analysis and PRA.
The action plans and other information generated by PRA tools can be used as inputs for bottom-up planning. When compiled and analysed at district or higher levels, focus group priorities and action plans provide information that can make programme, area and policy planning more responsive to gender and socio-economic differences.
Gender analysis and PRA tools
Example from Nepal (Sontheimer et al, 1997)
TOOL
PURPOSE(S)
Social and resource mapping
Indicate spatial distribution of roads, forests, water resources, institutions
Identify households, their ethnic composition and other socio-economic characteristics/variables
Seasonal calendar
Assess workload of women and men by season
Learn cropping patterns, farming systems, gender division of labour, food scarcity, climatic conditions, etc.
Economic well-being ranking
Understand local people's criteria of wealth
Identify relative wealth and the different socio-economic characteristics of households and classes
Facilitate formation of focus groups to work with other PRA and gender analysis tools
Daily activity schedule
Identify daily patterns of activity based on gender division of labour on an hourly basis and understand how busy women and men are in a day, how long they work and when they have spare time for social and development activities
Resources analyses
Indicate access to and control over private, community and public resources by gender
Mobility mapping
Understand gender equalities/inequalities in terms of men's and women's contact with the outside world
Plot the frequency, distance and purposes of mobility
Decision-making matrix
Venn diagram
Understand decision-making on farming practice issues by gender
Identify key actors and establish their relationships with the village and local people
Pair-wise ranking
Community action plan
Identify and prioritize the problems experienced by men and women
Assess the extent to which women's voices are respected when men and women work together to identify solutions for the problems prioritized by women
Understand development alternatives and options, and give opportunity to men and women to learn from each other's experiences and knowledge
It is important to remember, however, that participatory tools will not automatically reflect gender or other differences among community groups when they are used in community-wide meetings. PRA tools, in fact, have often been used in a manner that is insensitive to critical differences within communities, including gender. It is thus essential to combine PRA, gender analysis and the analysis of difference in order to understand socio-economic and gender-based difference.
The gender analysis and PRA framework
Example from Namibia (Sonttheimer et al, 1997)
STAGE IN GENDER ANALYSIS
ANSWERS THE QUESTION(S)
RELATED PRA TOOLS
CONTEXT
What is getting better?
What is getting worse?
In terms of the environmental, economic, social and political patterns that support or constrain development.
Village maps
Wealth ranking
Problem trend diagrams
Institutional (Venn) diagrams
ACTIVITIES
Who does what?
In terms of the division of labour for productive and reproductive activities.
Daily activity profiles
Seasonal calendars
Mobility maps
RESOURCES
Who has what?
In terms of access to and control over resources and benefits.
Gender resource mapping
Decision-making matrices
Income and expenditure matrices
WORK PLAN FOR SUCCESS
What should be done?
In terms of providing government services that will be sustainable, effective and equitable, and in terms of community implemented projects.
Identifying problems
Identifying potential solutions
Preliminary feasibility analysis
Ranking problems and opportunities
Community action plans
Project experiences with participatory methods, such as PRA and MARP, demonstrate the potential of participatory tools to generate information that is relevant to planning in a variety of agricultural subsectors. They also demonstrate the importance of using participatory methods in conjunction with gender analysis and the analysis of difference in order to incorporate less powerful people into the participatory process.
Among the PRA tools used, several projects found seasonal calendars and daily activity profiles to be the most useful for demonstrating the significant contribution of women's labour and knowledge to agricultural production processes. Problem- and opportunity-ranking when used separately by men and women revealed important gender differences in constraints and priorities.
Methods
The Nepal project found that women's voices tended to be lost when men's and women's separate analyses were brought together to develop a community action plan, suggesting that, when action plans are used, they should be developed separately by all focus groups, thereby allowing the priorities of non-dominant groups to be communicated to planners. Several projects remarked that, since PRA requires a great deal of community involvement and effort, it is important to plan for follow-up support, such as the opportunity to discuss action plans with planners or to have a project or service (such as extension) actually assist in meeting the priority needs identified by the PRA.
The Ethiopia and Namibia projects demonstrated the importance of training extension officers and agents in how to use PRA and gender analysis-generated information to plan extension programmes that are customized to meet the needs and priorities of different client groups. The issue of exactly how planners can respond to farmer-generated information needs to be addressed more directly. These and other methods are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Focus groups. In Ethiopia, India, Namibia and Nepal the use of focus groups made up of people from similar socio-economic levels gave disadvantaged sectors of the community a voice in the PRA process and facilitated the identification and analysis of the specific constraints and priorities of young men and women, the elderly, the poor, etc.
Use of local cases for PRA training. The projects that based their PRA and gender analysis training on local cases were able to be especially sensitive to the types of gender, socio-economic, ethnic and age differences that are relevant to gender- and difference-responsive agricultural planning in areas in which the training was taking place. These projects had particularly successful training programmes, in part because the tools were obviously relevant to the analysis of local situations.
Interdisciplinary PRA facilitation teams. The India project developed an important method of using newly trained facilitators to carry out PRA. Interdisciplinary two-person PRA implementation teams were formed with staff from different government departments. Whenever possible, the teams were made up of a male and a female member. Teams were rotated every day so that technical officers and field agents would be exposed to a variety of professional skills and gender attitudes. The team leader floated among the teams working in each village. This approach was successful in convincing sceptical team members of the value of gender analysis. It also gave farmers access to staff from several government departments.
Adaptation of PRA and gender analysis tools to local circumstances. Those carrying out PRA in Nepal found that they needed to make very special efforts in order to ensure that women speak in PRA sessions, even when PRA is conducted in separate groups of men and women. When mixed sessions are held, facilitators must be able to handle male dominance in discussions. In Ethiopia, it was essential that work was carried out in single-sex groups when learning about labour activities and gender differences in access to and control over resources, because cultural barriers prevent women from speaking out on sensitive issues in the presence of men. In Afghanistan, the situation of civil strife and the Taliban-imposed restrictions on women required the modification of many PRA tools. The project, nonetheless, used a wide variety of means to get people involved. In Pakistan, project management's resistance to gender analysis and to using the information generated by PRA to modify
project implementation prompted the women's programme to use PRA to establish partnership with women's groups rather than as a tool for obtaining information relevant to future project planning.
Statistical surveys as supplements to PRA-generated information. The Namibia project found that the information generated by PRA and gender analysis alone could not provide adequate data on the frequency of gender and other group differences. Hence researchers from the university, who were familiar with PRA and other participatory methods, were engaged to supplement the PRA-generated information with survey data and information from secondary sources. The Tunisia project also combined participatory-generated data with more standard surveys to help the government define a strategy and plan of action for integrating women into the Ninth Five-Year Plan.
Participatory impact monitoring. The India project used a method of participatory impact monitoring in which staff and consultants made frequent informal visits to project participants. These visits concentrated on the emerging issues that village women and men viewed as significant, with a special focus on who was benefiting and how. Participatory monitoring identified both positive and negative outcomes, many of which were unexpected.
Strengthening of grassroots organizations. The Costa Rica, Honduras, Pakistan and Senegal projects stressed the importance of strengthening grassroots organizations, especially women's groups, so that they could make better use of existing government services and improve their negotiating skills for demanding better services. The Honduras project worked to strengthen women's groups, first by training women volunteers as agricultural extension "linkage agents" and then by training volunteers as "paratechnicians" capable of supporting women's micro-enterprises and local savings and credit associations. The Costa Rica project taught organizational management and project formulation and management skills. Its workshops for grassroots women's organizations identified common gender problems in each local area, and helped to create a regional rural women's association that could analyse regional problems and bring them to the attention of planners. The Nepal case study suggests
that, when PRA tools are used, farmers learn valuable skills such as problem analysis and priority ranking which they can use when lobbying for support from government and other agencies.
Involvement of senior staff and decision-makers in gender-responsive participatory planning activities. India's Sikkim livestock project had little difficulty in forging supportive relations with the newer generation of managers appointed in the Animal Health and Veterinary Science Department during the latter period of the project. Initially, however, many staff of the Animal Health and Veterinary Science Department were reluctant to accept such unconventional approaches as PRA and gender analysis. Some, including the national project director, never fully accepted the project's methods, but the majority gradually came to recognize the relevance of gender-responsive approaches for livestock programme planning. The project accomplished this by constantly raising the problem of appropriate targeting, insisting on asking who does what and how should that affect who gets extension services. Interdepartmental workshops facilitated dialogue among Forest Department, Rural
Development Department and Animal Health and Veterinary Science Department staff, enabling people who were interested in gender-sensitive participatory methods to encourage their more reluctant colleagues to try them.
The Ethiopia project also used a wide variety of methods to involve senior staff in project activities: inception workshops in each project area; invitations to open or closed training sessions; invitations to attend PRA sessions; and workshops to discuss the results of PRA activities. The Namibia project conducted a special workshop for planners on the analysis of difference and the implications of PRA results for policy-planning. The Costa Rica project to a large extent used FAO's Socio-economic and Gender Analysis (SEAGA) approach, considering three interrelated levels of analysis/work - the macrolevel, the intermediate level (both subsectoral and institutional) and the local level (including regional) - using participatory methods and tools. The project mainly used a workshop format and interdisciplinary working groups to involve various levels of government personnel in gender analysis and to promote gender analysis of existing agricultural policies among planners. The
methodology developed by the Honduras projects facilitated the use of gender analysis at all levels, with the aim of permeating public and private agencies with an understanding of women's productive roles.
Establishing a mechanism that responds to community planning efforts. The Ethiopia, Nepal and Tunisia case studies all emphasized that successful PRA and MARP depends on adequate response and follow-up mechanisms. Farmers engaging in full PRA, which includes the development of a community or group action plan, are anxious to have institutional support for their plans. This is a critical issue for projects of this sort. It may also be a reason for planners' hesitation to use PRA or other methods that encourage full-scale bottom-up planning.
Direct training in client-responsive agricultural programming. The client-oriented extension training project in Ethiopia found that, after training extension agents in the use of PRA and gender analysis to generate information for planning, field agents and officers were still not sure how to use the information in planning their own programmes and work plans. It was, therefore, important to develop training modules that dealt directly with how to incorporate information into extension programming. This experience suggests that projects to promote gender- and difference-responsive agricultural planning should consider adding specific training modules to help planners to apply the information generated by PRA and gender analysis into actual planning processes.
Capacities built at each level after project introduction
ACTOR
CAPACITIES BUILT
Village women
Women farmers exchanged experiences; learned about the responsibilities of keeping livestock, e.g. mating time; increased ability to record/monitor changes (reporting forms); learned how to record disease patterns and vaccination times (seasonal calendars); learned importance of talking to experienced women; realized that their role in livestock management was greater than they thought (labour analysis); learned how to identify many causes of problems; found solutions based on resources at hand; developed easier, cheaper, more effective practices (input/output charts).
Village men
Learned how much women are involved in livestock (labour analysis, seasonal calendars, etc.) and the importance of discussing problems, finding diagnoses, etc. with them; improved relationships between villagers and staff; gained many of the same capacities as women (see above).
Male and female
Project initiators
Attitude and behaviour towards farmers changed ( "no longer proud");
learned how to talk and listen to people; learned how to give others a chance to talk; worked from the bottom-up rather than top-down; learned that farmers have useful knowledge (through adult learning methods and PRA methods - listening exercises, role plays, etc.).
Veterinary field units
Improved overall capacity to understand importance of participatory approaches; learned from initiators through staff discussions, sharing.
Project management staff
Gained participatory training skills for key project management (participation in initial training modules); used participatory methods for monitoring and project design (transfer of skills from training, e.g. women's programme revisions); learned from mistakes and how to correct same; improved overall planning capacity (through better understanding of community needs, direct contact and continuous monitoring of project pilot and replication phases); recognized that, without the involvement of women, key livestock information is incomplete (through participating in early project training and analysis).
NGOs
Became more aware of the farming systems in their area and elsewhere (through exchange related to project processes); learned how to modify training (manuals).
UN agencies in Afghanistan
Raised their awareness of the importance of community participation in planning (through sharing of project experiences with other UN agencies); developed potential for sharing of methods with other projects/programmes in the future.
CAPACITY BUILDING
In the great majority of cases, capacity building consisted primarily of training of government line agency officers and field workers in participatory methods and/or gender analysis. Projects using PRA and gender analysis methods conducted short introductory training sessions and subsequently trained field officers "on the job" during actual PRA and gender analysis village exercises lasting from five to ten days each. Project staff conducted the initial training. In the three cases where a TOT approach was used (Ethiopia, India and Namibia), project staff trained the trainers who then trained other local-area staff. The table on the following page summarizes the sort of effects that projects had on capacity building.
Successful PRA was conducted by field staff who had received only three to five days of preliminary training in PRA and gender analysis tools, because becoming competent in the use of participatory approaches is more dependent on practice than on detailed theoretical training. On the other hand, it was found that further training after conducting a PRA is important to consolidate and develop further participatory planning skills.
Opportunities for trainees to analyse the results of the PRA and to adapt their tools and methods to reflect local realities better were important components of training in some projects (Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Namibia). Several projects emphasized the importance of spreading formal training sessions and workshops over time so that intervening experiences could be analysed and integrated into planning processes. The Ethiopia project found that training in specific extension planning procedures was needed so that field staff could apply what they had learned from conducting PRA to their own work.
Some projects (Costa Rica, Honduras, Pakistan and Senegal) directly trained women farmers in group organization as well as technical skills. Pakistan also taught PRA, Senegal taught MARP and Honduras and Costa Rica taught gender analysis at this level (as did the other projects using these methods). Some projects (Costa Rica, Ethiopia and Namibia) provided informal and formal training at planning and line agency management levels.
In Namibia formal TOT was conducted in three separate sessions spread over the course of the project. The first TOT focused on the analysis of difference and PRA training, after which trainees conducted PRA. The implementation of PRA and gender analysis exercises helped trainees to gain a clearer understanding of such concepts as gender roles, farming systems and client-responsive extension approaches. During the second TOT, the initial PRA findings were reviewed, case studies were prepared for the training of other extension agents and trainees were taught basic principles of adult education. The third, initially unforeseen, TOT session was on preparing trainees to conduct regional-level workshops in which the PRA results were to be shared with planners. The use of multiple training sessions interspersed with practical application of PRA was key to the success of the project's capacity building efforts.
The Ethiopia project also used a TOT approach. Before conducting the first TOT, project staff prepared materials based on local situations, wrote an Amharic-language guidebook on how to make the extension programme client-oriented, and produced a video based on pilot PRA exercises. The first two-week TOT covered extension, adult education, gender analysis and PRA. The new trainers then trained local subject-matter specialists and field agents from each project zone. PRA lasting from eight to ten days was conducted in five villages. A second three-week TOT session reviewed the experience of implementing PRA, improved the training materials and discussed ways of using PRA-generated information in planning extension programmes. At this point, it was decided that the trainers should also train district-level extension agents in how to use PRA information to develop their individual work programmes. Although the direct training of field agents in practical extension planning had
not been foreseen in the original project plan, the case study suggests that it was, in fact, an essential step in assisting planners and field agents to use PRA information to make their own planning processes responsive to gender and other differences among farmers.
The Ethiopia case study mentions the fact that the project's use of participatory methods in its own internal planning processes proved to be a major factor in the success of its capacity building programme. The training objectives, content, location and length were all planned jointly by the zonal and regional coordinators, the international extension adviser and the national project coordinator.
The India Sikkim Livestock project also focused heavily on training. It conducted TOT for agriculture and community development staff, covering problem analysis (factors affecting livestock production), goat and poultry production, livestock marketing, PRA, gender analysis, rapid appraisal of tenure, and interviewing techniques. The new trainers then trained other staff and farmers in PRA and livestock issues. The project also sent staff for training in other countries, e.g. to a course in natural resource management and participatory methods conducted by a Kenyan NGO and to a course in PRA in Ethiopia. By the end of the project, two key staff members had become fully qualified trainers.
The Nepal project trained a wide variety of district development officers from agriculture, livestock, irrigation and extension departments. It also trained officers for women's development and agricultural development banks, as well as a few of the staff from the MOA's Women Farmer Development Division. The 15 to 20 people trained in each of three districts then carried out PRA in two or three villages each. Lack of time was a major constraint to the effectiveness of the training. Only four days were used to present all the PRA and gender analysis concepts and tools for the PRA exercises. Given the team's lack of previous experience with these tools, project staff had to take a stronger lead than they wished in the PRA in order to ensure that good- quality data were produced. The Nepal case study supports the finding of the Ethiopia, India and Namibia projects that a comprehensive training strategy, based on several training events, is needed if line agencies are to be able
to use participatory approaches in their normal work. In Nepal, lack of time for TOT meant that, except for the project trainer himself, there are still no MOA staff who can teach PRA and gender analysis methods for agricultural planning or provide follow-up training for the first group of trainees.
Projects focused on specific subsectors, such as livestock, extension or women's microenterprises, usually conducted technical training for farmers as well as training in participatory methods. In some cases, projects also focused on training farmers in participatory monitoring (Afghanistan and India) and in methods for strengthening group organizations (Costa Rica and Honduras). Some case study analysts suggested that experience with PRA tools provided farmers with ways of gathering evidence that could help them negotiate with government agencies.
Training in gender analysis for all levels of planners, from policy-makers to technicians and women's organizations, was a major focus of the Costa Rica project. By giving people at all levels a common language for the analysis of gender issues, the project attempted to maximize joint learning and positive feedback both horizontally and vertically within the planning hier-archy. The case study emphasizes the importance of conducting TOT workshops as a way of creating national capacity and generating the basis for expansion and replication. At the end of the project, the women in development (WID) units and the planning divisions of the agricultural sector's various institutions started a similar process in order to expand the experience and contribute to the deepening of previous learning.
A key capacity building focus in the Honduras projects was the technical training of village women volunteers as intermediaries between women's groups and extension agents. A specific methodology was developed which, when the extension service was privatized, made it possible to train large numbers of rural women volunteers as paratechnicians who could help women's groups to conduct social and financial feasibility analyses of income-generating projects. These volunteers were also trained in the financial and managerial aspects of forming and administering rural savings and credit banks. The training method was made up of modules that allowed trainees to apply what they had learned and compare problems and experiences.
The Honduras projects also trained government agency staff in gender analysis. This effort culminated in gender analysis workshops for national and regional agricultural agency directors and for all rural project directors in the country. These were among the few projects represented at the workshop that actually conducted training workshops at the agency and project director level.
Given the absence of government institutions in Afghanistan, the training element of the PIHAM project concentrated on its own staff and that of the associated Animal Health and Livestock Production Programme, as well as on farmers. Experiences were also shared with NGOs and United Nations agencies.
GENDER INFORMATION
Many of the projects were implemented in areas where government staff had little information on gender roles in different agricultural activities, gender-specific constraints on labour time and gender differences in access to and control over resources. Generally, there was no knowledge of gender differences in farmers' priorities for government support or training.
PRA and gender analysis exercises generated both well known information on the sexual division of labour and some surprising new information on women's roles and responsibilities in what have been regarded as "men's spheres". In many cases, the implications of changing gender responsibilities on involving women in extension programmes that had previously focused on men were obvious. More difficult challenges to planning resulted from information regarding women's limited land rights and their difficulties in replacing absent husbands caused by their lack of socio-cultural authorization to engage in "male tasks". Nepal's PRA produced information that was highly relevant to planning, including data on the importance of women's decision-making for land use, their nearly total exclusion from extension training, and the emphatic priority they gave to training for themselves.
In subsector-focused projects, participatory methods informed by gender analysis provided information on: women's priorities and support needs that can be incorporated into line agency programming; and issues that need to be tackled at higher policy levels, such as women's lack of secure land rights, excessive labour burdens and limited mobility. Several projects noted that this type of information from the field was the most powerful means they had for convincing planners and senior managers that participatory methods and gender analysis are effective and efficient means of providing the information needed for gender-responsive agricultural planning.
In Nepal, PRA revealed that women play crucial roles in household decision-making over the use of land. This information was critical to planning for extension, natural resource management, crops, livestock and forestry. The men's and women's mobility maps developed during PRA showed that women did not travel to the agricultural subservice centre located outside the village (where agricultural training normally took place), and did not attend the village development committee meetings, go to school or even travel to the health clinic. Discussions of these maps revealed the reasons for women's rare, or non-existent, opportunity to participate in extension training courses. Women's priority rankings showed that extension and other forms of skills training were their highest priorities. This was vital information for extension programme planners, and convinced them that extension training for women must be carried out in the village itself.
In Namibia, PRA reconfirmed well-known aspects of the gender division of responsibilities -women for crop production, men for livestock. It also revealed that, as men emigrate in search of urban work, women are increasingly involved in large livestock management and in other tasks in the "male domain" such as ploughing. Senior managers and planners had not been aware of these changes in the gender division of labour. The new knowledge made it clear that women, and men, need better access to veterinary services, training in range management and improved livestock and crop production, and assistance with ploughing, cattle marketing and fodder subsidies.
Ethiopia's client-oriented extension training project found that women work twice as many hours as men in agricultural peak seasons and nearly three times as many in the off-season. This information convinced extension staff that they must bring extension training to the villages if women were to participate. Daily activity schedules also helped extension agents to identify the periods of the day when women normally work in groups, thereby revealing when male extension agents would be culturally sanctioned to work with them. Gender analysis of resource control revealed why women have little incentive to help their husbands with field crop production, while priority ranking helped extension agents identify areas in which women would be receptive to extension advice.
In India, PRA revealed strong socio-economic differences among villages. The sexual division of labour also varied. These intervillage differences underlined the importance of engaging in participatory, locally based extension planning for both livestock and cropping activities. The PRA showed that, even though all household members are involved in goat rearing, young girls are the ones who are pulled out of school when herd sizes increase. This fact convinced project planners that poultry, which is under female control and requires less work than goats, should be prioritized. Participatory monitoring showed the advantage of this choice. Women's small earnings from the sale of eggs and chickens allowed them to improve nutrition levels in the household and even to amass enough savings to face most financial emergencies without borrowing from money-lenders.
In Afghanistan, the PIHAM project highlighted gender-differentiated roles and responsibilities in livestock management, showing the magnitude of women's involvement in and knowledge of livestock rearing. Project staff came to realize that, unless both women's and men's knowledge about animals were included, effective responses to livestock production constraints could not be developed.
In Tunisia, PRA reaffirmed women's important roles in agriculture and natural resource management. Seasonal calendars showed that women tend to diversify the sources of their income as much as men do. Men's and women's priorities for women's income-generating activities differed somewhat, with men favouring activities that would keep women closer to home, while women gave their highest priority to livestock rearing (including large livestock), which currently takes up much of their time and for which they have mastered the skills.
In Honduras, a joint study, conducted by the projects and the National Agrarian Institute, provided information about women's land rights and land tenure situation. This prompted the National Agrarian Institute to modify definitions of "producer" and "farm" in order to incorporate women's names when couples register land and to give female-headed households the right to register land in their own names.
The Costa Rica project revealed that women's roles in agricultural production on small farms, commercial farms and non-farm enterprises in the informal sector had been severely underestimated.
LINKAGES
Forging links with planning processes at national and regional levels was a great challenge for most of the projects. Only the three projects (Costa Rica, Honduras and Namibia) seem to have had a significant impact at the highest levels of planning. Although this is also the aspiration of the on-going Tunisia project. Nepal had planned to forge strong linkages with district planners, but the severe reduction of the project's life span, owing to delays in recruiting staff and the cancellation of the planned district workshops, meant that these links were initiated, but not consolidated. Projects with short implementation periods had far more difficulty in forging significant national linkages than longer-term projects had. Most of the subsector projects (i.e. those in livestock, extension and agroforestry) promoted linkages with planners and managers by organizing sensitization and/or results workshops for senior management at regional and national levels. Many projects also
developed horizontal linkages with other line agencies at the district level by involving their field agents in PRA and gender analysis training and implementation and by inviting their senior staff to regional or national workshops. Ethiopia went furthest in developing linkages with non-governmental agencies, especially with aid agencies and local NGOs. Even so, these links, while useful for mobilizing support for PRA training, did not succeed in convincing donor agencies or NGOs to assist communities with their local plans.
The Namibia case study provides a series of lessons regarding linkages, some of which demonstrate the positive effect of placing the project within the planning apparatus rather than in a "women's unit". The project was especially well placed to develop links throughout Namibia's centralized planning system because the national project coordinator was the Deputy Director of the Division of Rural Development Planning. The national project coordinator played a pivotal role in integrating gender issues into the National Agricultural Policy, and was clearly supportive. On the other hand, a lack of support from middle management (especially from supervisors of the extension field staff participating in PRA and gender analysis training and exercises) during the early phase of the project created problems for effective implementation of PRA training. The project gradually overcame these problems by organizing workshops to introduce middle management to the project's objectives and
methods and to emphasize their links with the gender policies in the National Agricultural Policy. The information produced by PRA was fed into a gender action plan, which itself was later integrated into the National Agricultural Strategy. In its last phase, the project conducted a two-day workshop for senior MOA staff, led by the two FAO training consultants who had designed the project's TOT. The objective was to produce a clear endorsement of gender analysis and participatory approaches to gender-sensitive agricul-tural planning, and in this it was strikingly successful. The key to its success was the project's ability to use facts from the field to demonstrate how PRA and gender analysis produce information relevant to the gender-responsive agricultural planning that the ministry was being mandated to conduct.
The Nepal project created institutional linkages in the form of steering committees composed of the heads of agricultural departments and other agencies at both national and district levels. These committees were not effective for reasons that provide important lessons for other projects. The project's central steering committee, which included the National Planning Commission and the Agricultural Development Bank of Nepal, as well as directors of the MOA's planning division and major departments, was not used as a forum in which to discuss project strategies or to make major project decisions. As a result, it did not generate serious interest in the project on the part of top management. In addition, the district steering committees were poorly designed. They should not have been separate entities because the decentralization process in Nepal already included district coordination committees as mechanisms for district-level planning. When the project introduced a separate
committee, district staff perceived the project as something outside their regular programme of work rather than as a supportive mechanism for integrating gender-sensitive planning techniques into their normal planning processes.
The Ethiopia client-oriented extension training project created linkages with planners and stakeholders at several levels. Communication between rural clients and the district (woreda) extension staff was promoted through awareness raising workshops. Regional and national workshops established vertical links between extension planners at national, regional and local levels, as well as links with other organizations, such as those for rural women's affairs. Links with aid agencies were especially strong; those working in project areas sometimes assisted with the project's PRA training. It should be noted, however, that donors and NGOs could not be counted on to assist villagers with their community action plans. Each agency had its own programme, and none was flexible enough to respond to villagers' bottom-up assistance requests. (This echoes the difficulty that regional or district planning has often faced when trying to reconcile plans imposed from the top with new demands
from the base in bottom-up planning.) The project also had links with research stations, but was not successful in promoting strong links between research and farmers - another well-known problem for programmes trying to promote farmer-participatory research.
The project used an innovative approach in dealing with these obstacles to bottom-up development. It forged links with such politicians as district and local council members. These links were very important because, when district council members were aware of the need to address village-level constraints, they could encourage government line agencies and local NGOs to assist. Finally, it is interesting that project staff felt that the project benefited from not being located in the rural women's affairs department where it might have been taken less seriously by the extension department and other agencies.
The India project was located in the Animal Health and Veterinary Services Department but it also drew the Forest Department and the Rural Development Department field staff into its PRA and gender analysis activities. Using largely informal methods and workshops to draw attention to the implications of PRA results on departmental programming and interdepartmental cooperation, the project fostered (apparently for the first time) collaboration at the senior, middle management and field extension levels across all three departments.
The women-focused projects in Honduras participated in three important national bodies: the Committee for the Integration of Rural Woman in Agrarian Reform; the Commission of Coordination and Development for Rural Woman which linked peasant organizations, NGOs and government institutions; and the Inter-Institutional Technical Committee which worked to assure a more equal place for rural women in the commercial agricultural sector. The projects' close relationship with the land reform agency helped ensure that the reform of land tenancy regulations would favour women. Links with government line agencies and rural financial institutions were aimed at ensuring that women would be incorporated in new programmes.
The Costa Rica project promoted an extensive participatory process with the various institutions and organizations involved in rural development - official institutions, NGOs, farmers' and rural women's organizations. Support for the rural women's project created links with national and subsector planners by involving them in seminars, consultations, courses and group work as well as in the formulation of the project's own methods for identifying problems, objectives and actions. As part of this process, institutional mechanisms for dealing with gender issues were identified by planners and senior managers. The project also worked to establish interinstitutional links with the university, NGOs, farmers' organizations and rural labour unions. It assisted women's organizations in forming regional federations.
The Tunisia project, created to define a strategy and plan of action for integrating rural women into the Ninth Five-Year Plan, brought the results of its participatory planning methods to the attention of decision-makers and planners by seeking their opinions about the technical, economic and institutional feasibility of men's and women's proposals for supporting women's economic activities. PRA results were also presented to the leadership of the Department of Forestry and the NGO, ATLAS, in a day-long workshop in which both men and women farmers participated.
In Senegal, the elaboration of an Area Development and Management Plan, currently being sponsored by the PREVINOBA reforestation project, expects to involve local development agents from various agencies in a joint planning exercise in the near future.
In Afghanistan, the disintegration of former government agencies during the civil war, as well as the current climate of political uncertainty, have meant that links have only been made between the two FAO projects and the NGOs and United Nations agencies with whom project results were shared.
In Pakistan, the lack of functioning government agencies in the project area, together with women's highly constrained mobility, inhibited the establishment of links between rural women and government agencies, NGOs and even women in neighbouring communities.
INSTITUTIONALIZATION
Projects met with different levels of success in their attempts to create an enabling environment for participatory and gender-responsive approaches. Two projects (Honduras and Namibia) affected national planning; Namibia because the success of its methods was effectively communicated to national planners, and Honduras because the projects were involved in many national committees and commissions formed to integrate women's needs and priorities into national policies and regulations. After structural adjustment drastically reduced the Honduran Government's ability to serve the small farm sector, the project refocused its efforts. The Costa Rica project's widespread gender analysis training and its creation of a core of trainers and a set of training mat-erials for diverse audiences will facilitate the institutionalization of gender analysis into a wide variety of public- and private-sector agencies. The existence of a policy environment that encouraged planners and line
agency staff to take an interest in gender-sensitive participatory approaches facilitated the institutionalization of project methods.
The Nepal project's efforts to influence district planning were frustrated by lack of time and resources, but other projects that worked with local extension services, for example, Ethiopia and Namibia, expect to have their gender- and difference-responsive, participatory methods incorporated into extension training. India's success in the field improved senior staff perceptions of gender-responsive participatory approaches in the livestock, forestry and community development departments, improving the prospects that the project's methods will be integrated into agency operating procedures in the future.
Both Namibia and Nepal attempted to produce guidelines for gender-responsive planning, but neither Namibia's Gender Action Plan for gender-responsive agricultural planning nor Nepal's guidelines for gender-responsive district planning were particularly successful, in large part because they remain insufficiently grounded in current planning processes. The Tunisia case study provides a number of suggestions for the better integration of gender issues into planning which involve restructuring planning agencies. Some projects did not have enough time to study actual planning processes or to pursue institutionalization by adapting their methods to planners' practical needs.
The Namibia project showed how official policy can create a more enabling environment for gender-responsive participatory approaches when the National Agricultural Policy was published during project implementation. The National Agricultural Policy's emphasis on gender and participation prompted middle-level and senior managers to take the project much more seriously. A workshop for planners and senior managers on the analysis of difference and other project methods convinced the managers of the usefulness of these methods to planning. The project's successful TOT in gender-sensitive participatory methods for agricultural planning encouraged the extension service to incorporate PRA and gender analysis training into the annual retraining programmes for extension workers, an important step towards the institutionalization of participatory methods.
The Namibia project's planned final output was to have been an action plan for gender-sensitive agricultural policies and programmes. The plan was weak, however, because the actions proposed were too broad to guide actual planning processes; some were not even gender specific. This stemmed, in part, from the fact that inputs for the action plan were requested from top management before they fully understood the issues that the project was attempting to deal with. More importantly, there was not enough time during the regional workshops to discuss adequately the issues to be included in the action plan and to develop practical strategies for dealing with them. Finally, there were no funds to implement the gender action plan. In response to this situation, the project's governing committee decided to incorporate the best components of the gender action plan directly into the National Agricultural Strategy. Since all agricultural planners must follow the guidelines of the
National Agricultural Strategy, this is a better way of incorporating gender issues into planning than publishing a separate gender action plan would have been.
Nepal's final output was also to have been a guide, this time for integrating gender issues into district-level planning. The guide was a top priority for the project's national coordinator (head of the Women Farmers Development Department) because Nepal's top planners view district planning as the route for passing information about farmers' needs into the national planning system. Unfortunately, the project had only one year for implementation (caused by delays in start-up). This seriously hampered any efforts at institutionalization. In order to save time, the national coordinator cancelled the planned district workshops in order to dedicate more time to preparing a national seminar to discuss issues with top planners. This decision meant that the communities that participated in the PRA were unable to present their community action plans to district planners. This was frustrating to project staff as well as to the men and women farmers who welcomed the opportunity to
discuss their priorities with district planners. The cancelled workshops would also have been an important source of useful inputs for the guide itself.
With only one year for implementation, there was not enough time to train district officers and Women Farmers Development Department staff in gender-responsive participatory methods. The project was also less effective than it could have been because it failed to make linkages to existing district planning processes. The project's placement in the Women Farmers Development Department, rather than in the technical divisions of the Ministry of Agriculture responsible for planning, also kept it too far from the planners it was trying to reach.
The Ethiopia case study points out that the project's location in the Extension Division of the MOA, rather than in the Women's Affairs Department, helped to institutionalize its approach, because senior extension officers and field staff were the central players in the project. As in Namibia, the policy environment and institutional structure became increasingly supportive of client-oriented, gender-sensitive participatory approaches to extension while the project was being implemented: the National Policy on Ethiopian Women was published; women's affairs units were established in all line departments; district and local councils were established to facilitate bottom-up planning; and a participatory demonstration and training extension system was developed. The project's emphasis on the training of trainers fitted well into this new institutional context because it provided the extension department with the means to train personnel in participatory client-oriented extension
methods.
While these are encouraging developments, the case study emphasizes that other changes are needed if institutionalization is to be fully achieved:
* in PRA and gender analysis methods and client-oriented extension planning should be part of pre-service training for new extension agents.
* More TOT is needed to extend the client-oriented approach to other regions.
* Better links with agricultural research would help extension services to respond to client-identified technical problems.
* Budgetary and programme changes should be made so that all line departments can respond better to demands from the grassroots.
* Staff at regional, district and zonal levels need training in various types of local planning, including extension programming, to help them adjust to the new level of autonomy and decision-making power they are expected to wield under the new decentralization policy.
In contrast to the cases just discussed, the policy environment of India's small-scale livestock project was not enabling because there was no formal policy mandate for gender-sensitive or participatory approaches in agriculture. However, neither was there strong opposition from top or middle management at the Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services Department to the project's proposal to work with gender analysis and participatory tools. As a result, lessons from the field could be filtered upwards towards planners, bringing gender issues to the attention of senior planners in the animal husbandry and veterinary services, agriculture, forestry, rural development and planning departments. The recent appointment of a new generation of directors in the Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services Department and in planning has created new opportunities to institutionalize gender-sensitive programmes and policies, but the absence of funding is still a serious constraint,
especially for TOT which is needed to incorporate project methods in pre-service and in-service extension training.
The progress and problems of the Honduras projects' attempts to institutionalize gender-sensitive policies are a cautionary tale, warning of the perils of directing all institutionalization efforts to government agencies (as most projects have done) in this era of structural adjustment. The story began with successes. The projects' close relationships with the agrarian reform agency helped effect institutional changes in land distribution and registration that benefited women. Project-supported revisions of agricultural subsector policies also began to assure the incorporation of women into new agricultural programmes and opened up women's access to rural banks. Attitudes in government agencies, which in the mid-1980s had seen development as a masculine affair, had changed significantly, especially among technicians and field agents who had become acutely aware of gender inequalities in access to state services. All this progress was dealt a heavy blow in January 1994, when
structural adjustment brought drastic institutional changes. The agrarian reform agency lost its ability to redistribute land, limiting the women farmers' possibilities of obtaining new land. The major agricultural service agency was severely reduced in size. Agricultural research and extension for the commercial sector was privatized, leaving very weakened public research and extension services for the small farm sector. Modernization and export stimulation policies privileged the large commercial estates without considering the social and economic consequences for small farmers. The overall result is that the promotion of participatory and gender-responsive development planning has lost a lot of ground in the public sector and in institutions.
The projects reacted to these changes by reorienting their activities toward the private sector, focusing on strengthening the capacity for self-management in women's associations and local farmers' organizations. In place of the training of rural women volunteers as extension linkage agents, projects began to train them as paratechnicians equipped with organizational development and technical skills that were useful for work with women's microenterprises and rural savings and loan associations. The projects also increased their focus on women wage workers in commercial agricultural enterprises by participating in the Inter-Institutional Technical Commission that promotes gender equality among agricultural workers.
In Costa Rica, the project worked to develop capacities for gender analysis and gender-responsive planning in a wide range of institutions in the Atlantic region and at the national level. The task was facilitated by Costa Rica's recent decentralization process and by the development of national policies to support gender equality. The project promoted the institutionalization of gender-responsive planning by: training a core group of gender analysis trainers to use a similar approach and to adapt it to different institutional environments; testing the FAO Socio-economic and Gender Analysis (SEAGA) training material and developing a wide variety of courses and materials for teaching gender analysis to different audiences such as extensionists, planners, educators and rural organizations; providing agricultural technicians with multidisciplinary experiences that incorporated gender analysis; and involving high-level decision-makers from the Agricultural Sector Planning
Secretariat in a variety of project activities.
The Tunisia Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) on Policy and Strategy in Favour of Rural Women is an on-going project that has not yet started to institutionalize its methods, but the case study makes suggestions for increasing the gender-responsiveness of agricultural planning. The MOA should create gender and development (GAD) units at central and regional levels. The central GAD unit, with representatives from the planning, finance, extension and training departments, would evaluate the impact of programmes and projects on rural women and develop training programmes in gender analysis. At the regional level, multidisciplinary teams of district field officers should be established to plan regional projects using an integrated, gender-responsive participatory approach. The multidisciplinary regional GAD units would: develop gender-sensitive terms of reference for project design and implementation missions; define monitoring and evaluation indicators that take account of
gender differences; provide information to various departments on women's roles in the agricultural sector; and provide support to the women's extension units.
Best practices
ALTHOUGH THERE IS A WELL RECOGNIZEDneed for agricultural planning to be more responsive to the priorities, constraints and needs of different groups of farmers, bringing this about is no easy task. The projects reviewed in this paper have demonstrated many effective methods for generating the information that planners need and bringing it to their attention. A few projects even worked directly on the problem of how to change planning processes so that they respond to diverse needs. Although more still needs to be done, much has been learned from the activities of the FAO field projects reviewed in this paper.
To summarize, the following table outlines the best practices emerging from this experience.
Best practices
Example from Afghanistan (Hill, 1997)
ENTRY POINTS
PROJECTS
Use participatory planning when designing the project's implementation strategy.
Ethiopia
Make a detailed review of planning processes.
Costa Rica
Consult national planners about their information needs.
Tunisia
TOOLS AND METHODS
Combine PRA with gender analysis and the analysis of difference.
Ethiopia, India, Namibia, Nepal
Form gender, socio-economic and/or age-specific focus groups to work with the PRA and gender analysis tools.
Ethiopia, India, Namibia, Nepal
Adapt PRA and gender analysis tools to local needs.
Afghanistan, Ethiopia, India, Namibia, Nepal, Pakistan, Senegal
Work with multidisciplinary PRA teams and assure that they have both male and female members.
India
Supplement PRA information with surveys.
Namibia, Tunisia
Provide follow-up: train extension agents to customize training; build capacity of community-level volunteers.
Ethiopia, Honduras
Use participatory monitoring.
Afghanistan, India
CAPACITY BUILDING
Train trainers in PRA and gender analysis over several sessions and intersperse training with practical experience.
Ethiopia, Honduras, India, Namibia
Use training of trainers to involve higher level professional staff in learning and teaching PRA and gender analysis.
Ethiopia, Honduras, India, Namibia
Base PRA training on local case materials.
Ethiopia, Namibia
Involve planners and senior managers in special training/discussion workshops designed specifically for them; invite them to PRA training sessions.
Costa Rica, Ethiopia, India, Namibia
Teach methods for responsive planning based on PRA generated information.
Ethiopia
Train women's groups in negotiating and group development skills; support women's organizations.
Costa Rica, Honduras
LINKAGES AND INSTITUTIONALIZATION
Promote links with planners and managers by inviting them to participate in discussions of implications of project results for agricultural development planning
Ethiopia, India, Namibia, Tunisia
Promote links with the private sector, women's groups, farmers' organizations, NGOs and donors through training, workshops, information sessions and involving them in PRA and gender analysis exercises
Afghanistan, Costa Rica, Ethiopia, Honduras, India
Facilitate institutionalization by locating the project in a subsector line agency or a national, regional or district agricultural planning agency.
Ethiopia, Honduras, India, Namibia
Suggest in-service and pre-service training in gender- responsive participatory planning methods.
Ethiopia, India, Namibia
references
Belshaw, D.G.R.(1988) Linkages between policy analysis, national planning and decentralized planning for rural development. Training Materials for Agricultural Planning No. 18. Rome, FAO.
Ben Boubaker, A. 1997. Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Tunisia. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Bendavid-Val, A. (1990) Rural area development planning: a review and synthesis of approaches. Training Materials for Agricultural Planning No. 21. Rome, FAO.
Bendavid-Val, A. (1991) Rural area development planning: principles, approaches and tools of economic analysis. Vol. 1. Training Materials for Agricultural Planning No. 27/1. Rome. FAO.
Bifani, P. 1997. Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Costa Rica. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Bureau of Applied Research in Anthropology (Working Draft) Macro-level Handbook. Socio-economic and Gender Analysis (SEAGA) Programme. Rome. FAO.
Buvinic, M. (1986) Projects for women in the Third World: explaining their misbehavior. World Development, 14: 5.
Clark/Egerton Universities et al. (1991) Participatory rural appraisal handbook. Worcester, MA. USA, Clark University Program for International Development.
Conyers, D. (1993) Guidelines on social analysis for rural area development planning. Training Materials for Agricultural Planning No. 34. Rome, FAO.
Eckman, K. 1997. Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Sikkim. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Ellis, F. (1992) Agricultural policies in developing countries. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.
FAO (1984) Planning agriculture. Policy Analysis Division. Rome.
FAO (1985) Toward improved multilevel planning for agricultural and rural development in Asia and the Pacific. Economic and Social Development Paper No.52. Rome.
FAO (1986) Guide for training in the formulation of agricultural and rural investment projects. Five volumes. Development Policy Studies and Training Service, Policy Analysis Division. Rome.
Feldstein, H.S. & Jiggins, J. eds. (1994) Tools for the field: methodologies handbook for gender analysis in agriculture. West Hartford, Conn., USA, Kumarian Press.
Feldstein, H.S. & Poats, S.V. eds. (1990) Working together: gender analysis in agriculture. Vol. 1: Case Studies. Vol. 2: Teaching Notes. West Hartford, Conn., USA, Kumarian Press.
Gittinger, J.P. (1966) The literature on agricultural planning. National Planning Association, Center for Development Planning, Planning Methods Series No. 4.
Goetz, A.M. (1995) Institutionalizing women's interests and gender-sensitive accountability in development. IDS Bulletin, 26: 3(1-10).
Hakimian, H. & Teshome, A. (1993) Trainers' guide: concepts, principles and methods of training with special reference to agricultural development. Two volumes. Training Materials for Agricultural Planning No. 33/1 and No. 33/2. Rome, FAO.
Harrison, E. (1995) Fish and feminists, IDS Bulletin, 26: 3(39-47).
Hill, C. (1997) Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Afghanistan. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Huisinga Norem, R. (Working Draft) Intermediate-level Handbook. Socio-Economic and Gender Analysis (SEAGA) Programme. Rome, FAO.
Kane, M. (1997) Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Pakistan. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Kardan, N. (1995) Conditions of accountability for gender policy: the organizational, political, and cognitive contexts, IDS Bulletin, 26: 3(11-22).
Labonne, M. (1988) Modalites de planification agricole en Afrique francophone subsaharienne. Etude FAO developpement economique et social No. 72. Rome, FAO.
Maetz, M. & Quieti, M.G.(1987) Training for decentralized planning: lessons from experience. Vol. 1. Training Materials for Agricultural Planning No. 29. Rome, FAO.
Mhina, E. (1997). Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Tanzania. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Mollett, J.A. (1990). Planning for agricultural development. Second edition. Aldershot, UK, Avebury.
Moser, C.O.N. (1993). Gender planning and development: theory, practice and training. London, Routledge.
Ndiaye, O.K. (1997) Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Senegal. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Ostergaard, L., ed. (1992) Gender and development: a practical guide. London, Routledge.
Overholt, C. et al. (1984) Gender roles in development projects: a case book. West Hartford, Conn., USA, Kumarian Press.
Palmer, I. (1979) The Nemow Case: case studies of the impact of large-scale development Projects on women: a series for planners. New York, the Population Council.
Percy, R. (1997) Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Ethiopia. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Poats, S.V. et al. (1988) Gender issues in farming systems research and extension. Boulder, Col., USA, Westview Press.
Saiz, M. (1997) Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Honduras. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Sontheimer, S. (1997) Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Namibia. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Sontheimer, S., Bir Basnyat, B. & Maharjan, K. (1997) Gender and par-ticipation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Nepal. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Thomson, A. & Metz, M. (1997) Implications of economic policy for food security: a training manual. Training Materials for Agricultural Planning No. 40. Rome, FAO.
Wilde, V. (1998) Field Handbook. Socio-Economic and Gender Analysis (SEAGA) Programme. Rome, FAO.
Young, K., ed. (1988) Women and economic development. Oxford, UK, Berg and Paris, UNESCO.
Young, K. (1993) Planning development with women. London, Macmillan.
endnotes
1. See Clark/Egerton Universities et al., (1991) for an early version of a PRA handbook. For a more comprehensive set of PRA methods see the current versions of FAO's multiple-volume guidebooks to participatory macro-, intermediate- and field-level planning in its Socio-Economic and Gender Analysis (SEAGA) Programme of the Women in Development Service.
2. Among the most important book-length treatments are: Poats et al., 1988; Feldstein and Poats, 1990; Ostergaard, 1992; Moser, 1993; and Feldstein and Jiggins, 1994.
3. FAO's Women in Development Service is currently developing an important new set of training materials under the Socio-economic and Gender Analysis Programme (SEAGA). These materials will be of great interest to any rural planners seeking practical tools for using participatory approaches and gender and socio-economic analysis to enhance agricultural and rural development planning processes.
4. The Namibia and Nepal projects were part of a pilot FAO Technical Assistance Programme entitled Improving Information on Women's Contribution to Agricultural Production for Gender-Sensitive Planning, funded by the Government of Norway and carried out from 1995 to 1997. The United Republic of Tanzania project was also part of this programme.
5. While PRA and gender analysis methods for generating planning-relevant information are probably very cost-effective compared with standard statistical surveys, they may also need to be supplemented with surveys to verify the frequency of certain findings. These surveys can be more focused and will not need to include issues already clarified by participatory methods. Participatory methods require multiple interviews and interactions between government and/or NGO staff and farmers, which can raise the cost of information gathering and also shift it to different line agencies, a process that may create budgetary problems.
<section>5</section>
PLANNING
BEST PRACTICES FROM BUSINESS and best practices from participatory development: this may seem a strange pair but as I have been reading through books on "the management revolution" and through case studies on gender and participation, I have been astounded by the parallels. For example, the top concern of the chief executives of the world's most successful businesses is "creating total client responsiveness". This sounds strikingly similar to what we are trying to achieve with participatory and gender-responsive planning.
The guiding principles and objectives outlined in this document are one of the outcomes of the FAO Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices. The women and men who participated, all of whom have hands-on experience with the implementation of participatory gender-responsive development work in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Near East, made it clear where the constraints continue to lie. I learned that the greatest barrier to mainstreaming gender and participation in agricultural development stems not from the field, but from the very institutions we work with.
The Responsive Planner, I have taken the workshop participants' lessons and linked them with the lessons learned in the private sector. This may sound a little farfetched, but many of today's struggles in participatory development have already been overcome in the private sector. Granted, businesses are driven by different motives; they struggle to profit from volatile market forces. But they have found new and successful ways of working towards objectives that we also seek in the world of agricultural development, such as effectiveness, efficiency, adaptability and responsiveness to diversity and change. These new ways of working include strategic planning, participation, decentralization and demand-driven services. Sound familiar?
The challenge
THERE IS AN UNMET CHALLENGE IN THE WORLD of agricultural development. That challenge is to mainstream participation and gender issues. Meeting this challenge requires changes in the procedures and operations of the large agricultural development institutions, and in the responsibilities of the planners who work within them.
Agricultural development that is explicitly participatory and gender-responsive is often found only in short-term, small-scale pilot projects or in small budget sub-programmes of larger projects. Limited support, naturally, translates into limited impact. Meanwhile, the bulk of large-scale and long-term agricultural development programmes, managed by the large national and international institutions, continue as before, with little or no attention to the microlevel complexities raised by gender and participation.
Institutional Responsiveness
Institutional responsiveness refers to the variety of ways in which large-scale agriculture institutions in government or civil society can respond - with services, training, inputs, technical advice - to the needs, priorities and requests of smaller-scale organizations and communities of women and men. It is about flexibility. Responding to the priorities of local farmers entails creating or strengthening institutional mechanisms for learning and responding to diversity and change.
INSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIVENESS IS NOT A STATIC COMMODITY.
Good institutional responsiveness in one place may be quite different from that in another place. An understanding of responsiveness may evolve over time, due to changes in the social/political environment, changes in the physical/economic environment, changes in farmers' needs and aspirations, or changes in the institutions' experience or mandate. The overall objective of creating institutional responsiveness is effective agricultural development based on rural people's real needs.
The responsibility of large agricultural development bureaucracies in participation is to respond to the needs of women and men farmers - each in their own right - by providing the best services possible. The use of participatory methods to enable farmers to plan their own development activities is necessary but insufficient. There must be follow-up.
The staff members of FAO Headquarters in Rome learned a lot about these issues from the planners and project staff from Africa, Asia, LatinAmerica and the Near East, who participated in the FAO Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices. These participants, brought a number of important lessons to FAO. First, they shared a wide variety of ways of making participatory planning and monitoring methods more explicitly gender-responsive. Second, they confirmed that the livelihood strategies and priorities of women usually differ from those of men, as well as from what development professionals often assume. Third, they demonstrated new processes for linking gender-disaggregated field information to policy-makers. Many policy-makers are now well aware of the gender/participation jargon and most agricultural development policies at least mention the importance of women and community participation.
Participatory Rural Appraisal
PRA has evolved so fast, and continues to evolve so differently, that no final description can serve. At one stage PRA was called "an approach and methods for learning about rural life and conditions from, with and by rural people", with the emphasis on learning by outsiders. The prepositions were then reversed to read `by, with and from', as the analysis and learning shifted from `us' to `them'. Then the term PRA came to cover more than just learning. It extended into analysis, planning, action, monitoring and evaluation. It was also used to describe a variety of approaches as they evolved in different countries, contexts and organizations. To cover these, it was described in May 1994 as: `a family of approaches and methods to enable rural people to share, enhance, and analyse their knowledge of life and conditions, to plan and to act'... To this can now be added `and to monitor and evaluate'. For some, too, it is now a philosophy and a way of life which stresses
self-critical awareness and commitment to the poor, weak and vulnerable.
- Chambers (1997:104)
FAO also learned that the "and Back" part is still very weak. Agriculture institutions still lack the mechanisms for responding to the voices of rural women and men. Without exception, the experience in all 12 countries participating in From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, showed that the positive impacts of gender and participation are sustained only when institutional policies, procedures and norms support them.
All too often, the use of participatory approaches, such as Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA), is introduced during implementation of already de-signed programmes. The priorities revealed by the PRA may contradict those already fixed by the programme and the institution may be unable or unwilling to make the necessary changes. Both farmers and field staff, who are often the only people to receive training in participatory approaches, can becomedisillusioned.
The workshop participants all stressed that for these approaches to work, they must permeate the entire system. This means from the grassroots up - all the way up - and back again. Sufficient resources and time must be allocated and political commitment must be sincere if field-level staff and local women and men are to remain motivated to work through analysis and change. A major constraint to participatory gender-responsive agricultural development is the lack of institutionalization.
The institutionalization of gender and participation cannot occur on a large scale without the involvement of large-scale institutions, such as ministries of agriculture, large non-governmental organizations (NGOs), the FAO, donor agencies and others. But for large institutions to support increased and higher-quality participation in more places means more than focusing on local women and men. It also means changing the institutions themselves. Even though these large bureaucracies have an advantage of scale over local groups, the disadvantage is that their working procedures are usually neither participatory nor gender-responsive.
Institutionalization
Institutionalization is about mainstreaming and long-term commitment. When something is institutionalized it is part of an on-going process - it is not a special or one-time-only event. Institutionalization of participatory gender-responsive agricultural development (PGRAD) planning means that participation and gender issues are merged with, or transform, the vision, mandate, priorities and procedures of the institutions responsible for agricultural development. The overall objective of institutionalization is sustainability.
Yet, more and more, the large bureaucracies of agricultural development have a growing interest in gender and participation. This interest has grown, in part, because knowledge of local conditions and local priorities has proven to be essential to improving food security and natural resources management and, in part, due to pressure from progressive donors and NGOs. But, the internal systems, structures and procedures of development institutions are not as conducive as they could be. Work tends to be organized around standardized, bureaucratic procedures, including fixed targets, tight deadlines and inflexible budgets, which inhibit more flexible, innovative practices. The challenge of integrating gender and participation cannot be met without dealing with this web of internal bureaucratic elements.
The From Farmer to Planner and Back workshop participants were explicit about where the weaknesses lie. They said that the focus on the field-level and policy-level has left out the middle: those who plan agricultural development programmes and oversee their implementation. Planners have been left out which has had negative consequences for participatory efforts as a whole. While many field staff (and some policy-makers) have learned new approaches and skills for gender analysis and participation, planners have continued with status quo planning procedures, many feeling threatened by the changes that they do not understand. In some cases, the participatory work of field staff has been curtailed by traditional planning processes and supervision criteria. But the planners have little room for manoeuvring unless the institutions they work in change too.
The workshop participants were asked to tackle this challenge explicitly and worked to draft their recommendations for a participatory and gender-responsive planning framework. Their recommendations, which form the backbone of this document, emphasized the need to:
* use participatory methods to empower women and men to express their needs and aspirations;
* build linkages and partnerships among stakeholders at all levels;
* build communication channels to facilitate the flow of information up, down and across the planning ladder;
* open dialogue and build consensus to allow farmers and planners at all levels to make decisions together about appropriate actions; and
* follow-up community based planning efforts and commitment of resources (both financial and human).
Framework - Diagram of Workshop Participants' Recommendations
The institutional challenge then is not only determining how to make single institutions more participatory through internal organizational change, but also developing more collaboration and linkages between and among institutions which may not have worked together in the past. Participatory development on a large scale requires learning to build cross-sector partnerships at all levels, between local and external organizations, as well as among civil society, governmental and private institutions. When and how to develop such partnerships or coalitions are critical strategic questions. New ways of planning and management are needed which can operate across institutional and power differences, while keeping the participation of the grassroots women and men at the centre of the process.
Identifying key principles to guide the process of institutional change is a useful starting point. The Responsive Planner proposes such principles, with its hypothesis that for agricultural development institutions to become responsive, they must become "learning organizations". The challenge is to flatten and soften hierarchy, in order to develop a "rapid response task culture". In other words, to adopt and promote procedures, norms and rewards that embrace field-level realities of diversity and change, and encourage open-ended listening at all levels.
Functions also must be clarified before new processes can be designed. The Responsive Planner focuses on the responsibilities of one of the key players within agricultural development institutions - the planner. Without the dedicated support and participation of agricultural planners, in real terms rather than merely an adoption of the rhetoric, PGRAD will not succeed. Planners (who often hold management positions) are crucial.
The Responsive Planner offers both broad principles and specific planning steps. By dealing with agricultural development institutions as a whole - as well as with the roles of the planners within them - it is hoped that each of us will find several ideas that will help us respond better to rural people's needs.
THE PLANNERS
Planners can play many different roles. Micro-level planners are often logical framework specialists. They strive to capture the complexities of agricultural development within simple cause-effect formulas, while also listing the factors that might derail them. The macro-level planners usually turn their skills to 5-year and 10-year national agricultural development plans, policy framework papers, poverty assessments, food security strategies and special papers setting out how the country will implement the resolutions of various international conferences. Planners also often act as facilitators of decision-making by policy-makers, as technical experts in sectoral areas, or both. Planners are also analysts of existing or potential strategies, or strategists themselves.
The traditional tasks of planners
Benadavid-Val (FAO, 1991)
Promote a common language and conceptual base among planning participants
Develop and help interpret quantitative data and qualitative information, including information related to monitoring and evaluation of past development projects
Facilitate consensus building
Coordinate with other types of planning for the area and lend assistance to those other types of planning
Maintain an ordered planning process and make good use of planning tools appropriate to each planning process step
Keep the focus of planning on a practical course of action that aims at what can be controlled through the planning process
Help to manage and coordinate planimplementation
You do not have to have the title of "planner" to be a planner. Many women and men whose work contributes to the planning of agricultural development are policy-makers, project managers, technical officers, supervisors or even consultants.
The Responsive Planner is written especially for:
* planners and managers of international development agencies (including the FAO), who are responsible for the finance, design, backstopping, monitoring or evaluation of agricultural development projects or programmes;
* planners working in (or with) ministries of agriculture, including the departments of livestock, fisheries and forestry, who need guidelines and encouragement to align planning procedures to gender issues and participatory approaches;
* planners and managers working in large NGOs that focus all or part of their resources on enhancing the food security and livelihoods of rural women and men; and
* all agricultural development workers who are occasionally frustrated with those field workers, extension supervisors, project managers, or government, NGO or UN staff members who do not fully recognize the importance of gender and participation.
THE PLANNERS' DILEMMA
Agricultural development planning, as a profession and as a system, has developed many axioms over the past decades. But in the past 20 years, the conditions that led to the emergence of these universal truths have blown apart.
The work of agricultural development planning carries enormous responsibility, influencing the wellbeing of hundreds, thousands or even millions of women, men and children. It must be carried out with integrity. But, as agricultural development planners we need to confront a core learning dilemma. We know that we (like everybody) learn best from experience--but we do not experience the direct consequences of our decisions. It is not our own farms, our own livelihoods, or the household food security of our own families which are affected.
Agricultural development institutions are taking an increasingly active interest in gender issues and participatory approaches because of four main forces (Thompson, 1998).
1) Survival. The pressures of structural adjustment, rising debt, declining terms of trade, economic liberalization and market integration are forcing many government agencies to reduce the size of their civilservices and thus their capacities for direct service provision. In the drive for survival, governments are searching for new ways to do more with less. In some cases, the state is doing this by establishing new partnerships with local and international NGOs, many of whom strongly promote gender and participation issues.
2) Donor Pressure. The donor community has been instrumental in stimulating national and international agencies' growing interest in gender and participation. With increasing frequency, donors are placing conditions on grants and loans to governments, requiring them to support community participation and to ensure that women benefit.
3) Failure. During the past two decades, "blueprint" development strategies have been shown to be ineffective in meeting the basic needs of large numbers of marginalized, vulnerable people. The standardized, reductionist approaches to agricultural development have proven incapable of addressing the complex realities of poor people, which are locally specific, diverse and dynamic.
4) Success. The successful application of gender-responsive participatory approaches, especially by NGOs but also by public sector agencies, has attracted the attention of planners. These success stories have demonstrated that it is possible for large-scale agricultural development agencies to implement people-centred approaches and attain positive results.
Let's face it. Planning without attention to gender and participation is easier than planning with it. It requires attention to endless variations of micro-level details. It requires both high-level analytical skill and great humility. It forces us to recognize diversity and change. But it also leads us to more successful, more equitable and more sustainable agricultural development because we learn exactly what is needed in a particular place, by particular groups of people. Gender and participation permit us to plan on the basis of facts, rather than assumptions or generalizations. With participatory, gender-responsive planning, the planner's chief job is to dismantle dysfunctional old axioms and prepare people and institutions to deal with the realistic complexities of diversity and change.
What is PGRAD?
Benadavid-Val (FAO, 1991)
Participatory, gender-responsive agricultural development planning (PGRAD) responds to the differing priorities of different groups of farmers where those differences are based on gender, age, ethnicity, race, religion, wealth and other socio-economic factors. Planners are aware of these differences and of how best to respond to them because the women and men in the groups have taken an active part in planning the agricultural development activities. It is a process in which both farmers and planners commit to follow-up plans together. This requires dialogue and consensus-building. Monitoring is central to PGRAD because plans must be adapted as needed, to support processes for evolving and strategic planning.
Gender-responsive planning means first learning about how gender shapes the opportunities and constraints that women and men face in securing their livelihoods within each cultural, political, economic and environmental setting. Because women and men have different tasks and responsibilities, and different livelihood strategies and constraints, they must each be listened to. There is overwhelming evidence that development must address the needs and priorities of both women and men in order to be successful.
Participatory planning means that local women and men speak for themselves. After all, it is only the local farmers who know the details about the local ecology, and of the linkages among their family members' activities in food and cash crop production with livestock, forestry, fisheries and artisanal activities. And only they know how these are managed and by whom, and under what constraints. The knowledge and practices of farmers need to be recognized by planners and built upon in development activities.
Taking on all these complex issues is not easy. Herein lies the dilemma for agricultural planners. On the one hand, understanding complexity is necessary to provide agricultural programmes and services that are truly responsive to needs and priorities. If we are not dealing with complexity we are not dealing with reality. On the other hand, it is not realistic to expect planners to deal with thousands, perhaps millions, of micro-level differences. What then, can they do? The easy answer is to say what "not" to do. It is not a matter of attaching gender and participation to existing planning processes - these are not simple add-ons (Sheperd, 1998). It is the entire process of agricultural development planning that must change (and is changing). Any agricultural development institution contemplating adoption of a PGRAD approach soon re-cognizes that methods and training alone will not convert a conventional, technically-oriented, bureaucratic institution into a more
gender-responsive, learning-oriented, strategic organization. The institution's mandates, management procedures, reporting systems and supervisory methods must also be reoriented.
Anything But Simple
We find women and men evolving farming systems which are non-linear, multi-story, sequential, interactive, and mixed and managed in many different ways, forming and fitting micro-environments, making their land more heterogeneous and its enterprises more diverse, and multiplying labour-intensive internal linkages. All these demand a continuity of intensive management. All move in a direction opposite to the simplifying, standardizing, management- and labour-sparing farming systems of industrial and green-revolution agriculture.
- Chambers (1997:170)
THE WINDS OF CHANGE
Planning requires looking forward. It is largely a creative activity. But planning also has a concrete impact. It involves mobilizing resources and people, often in large numbers, to do new things. That is not to say that we make plans without looking back - reflecting on past experience and events - or looking around - learning from what other organizations have learned and identifying their best practices.
The world of agricultural development planning has not been standing still. New models, pressures and opportunities have emerged. The philosophical tide has turned away from concepts familiar to planners, such as order, sequence and predictability, towards new less manageable concepts such as variability, risk and diversity.
In addition to gender and participation, a responsive planner builds upon other changes already taking place. He/she draws upon the trend towards decentralized planning and demand-driven agricultural services, which are well known to agricultural planners. Perhaps less familiar to many planners, but of great relevance to PGRAD, are the areas of strategic planning and progressive management for learning organizations. Ideas, principles and best practices from all of these areas, from both the public and private sectors, are incorporated into The Responsive Planner.
Decentralized Planning
Decentralization makes the most sense when agricultural development has to deal with a multitude of complex issues. It is also a policy priority for many governments, driven either by changing political ideologies and/or by budget constraints. Decentralization means moving decision-making down the planning hierarchy where, to the greatest degree possible, operational functions and certain support services are transferred to intermediate and local government levels, producer organizations and civil institutions. The underlying principle is that decentralization should lead to increased efficiency because support services can meet producers' needs in a more timely and appropriate manner on the basis of local diagnoses.
Decentralization means moving away from an exclusively supply-based approach to development, led by centralized policies that take no account of local conditions, to one that is more demand-based (though not exclusively so). Supply-based policies are largely ineffective since they lack mechanisms for adjusting to the specific problems of each region, sector or type of producer. Centralized planning also means centralized information systems. When information is concentrated at the central government level, the rural population is prevented from knowing about the institutional, economic and technological environment in which they must develop, and therefore cannot play an effective role in planning.
While decentralized planning holds promise for increasing the responsiveness of agricultural institutions, it does not always do so. Decentralization can provide a policy context in which gender sensitive and participatory approaches are more likely. But decentralized planning can take many forms, some of which are not participatory. Local authorities to whom a range of powers have been devolved, in the fields of finance, policy design, and resource management, for example, can choose to accumulate rather than share power. In some cases, central governments encourage local authorities to use PRA and related methodologies to involve local people in research, planning and resource-management activities that are part of the process of implementing democratic decentralization. The governments of Bolivia, Uganda, India, the Philippines, Colombia and Mexico are all experimenting with ways of scaling-downgovernment and scaling-up participatory approaches.
Demand-driven Agricultural Services
More and more, farmers are being viewed as "clients" for whom agricultural services must be tailored. The definitions and roles of extension and extension agents are changing, especially because of the need to cover the information and training needs of a diverse, heterogeneous clientele. Public agricultural extension services are being restructured and reoriented in order to respond to the need for participation by a wide range of stakeholders, to improve responsiveness and accountability, including sensitivity to gender issues, and to include non-conventional messages that incorporate environmental issues. These agricultural services are decentralized and open to multiple delivery mechanisms, including delivery by private-sector enterprises, NGOs and producer associations. The result is called "demand-driven" or "client-responsive" agricultural services. This innovative approach is being incorporated into national extension systems that promote a variety of services and
methods of delivery within a unified policy framework (Crowder, 1998).Vietnam, Ethiopia and Namibia, to name only a few, are countries experimenting with demand-driven agricultural services.
In the past, extension was simply expected to close the gap between what the farmers actually do and what they should do. Extension was automatically assumed to know what was best for farmers. But in a client-responsive extension system, the focus is on extension as a communication process. Are extension agents and farmers talking and listening to each other? Are they jointly and critically reflecting upon the applicability of the technologies at hand? Grandiose planning gives way to an effort to listen, learn and respond.
Another key concept in client-responsive extension is pluralism. It is increasingly acknowledged that the complexity of agricultural development demands an array of technological solutions and service structures, including a readiness to adapt and change these packages as situations change and understanding increases. Pluralism also means recognizing that farmers are not all alike; there can be tremendous differences in needs and priorities among farmers according to whether they are rich or poor, male or female.
The features and benefits of demand-driven agricultural services
Nielson and Crowder (1998)
DECENTRALIZED ADMINISTRATION OF FIELD EXTENSION SERVICES
Through local organizations and governments, farmers participate in designing, funding, governing, executing and evaluating extension programs and in defining the needs that extension addresses. Anticipated benefits:
Farmers can hold extensionists responsible for results
Extensionists are responsive to farmers' needs
Extensionists earn trust and credibility
Extension programs reflect farmers' own knowledge of local conditions and practices
EXTENSION SERVICES ARE COST-SHARED
Costs of extension are shared with local governments, with farmers' associations, with NGOs and/or donors, and, as appropriate, with individual farmers themselves. Anticipated benefits:
Budgetary burden on national government is reduced
Local and national capacity for sustaining extension programs is strengthened
Paying clients (i.e., local governments, etc.) are empowered to hold extensionists accountable for providing relevant, effective services
OUTSOURCED EXTENSION SERVICES
Extension is contracted-out rather than delivered by civil servants. Anticipated benefits:
Extension is more operationally efficient
Extensionists are more accountable for their performance and results
A range of providers can be employed to deliver extension services
Extension staff are more likely to be promoted for good performance and dismissed for poor performance
EXTENSION SERVICES ARE INTEGRATED WITH RESEARCH
Mechanisms are created to allow farmers and extensionists to attract researchers to work with them on collaborative applied research on farmers' fields. Formal and informal means are established to ensure that farmers have a voice in decisions affecting research priorities, funding, execution, and evaluation. Anticipated benefits:
Farmers, extensionists, and researchers learn from each other in the field
Research becomes relevant to the constraints and opportunities of farmers
Progressive Management for Learning Organizations
While agricultural development has been shifting from blueprints to participation, the parallel shift in the business world has been from mass production to flexible specialization. Standardization has been replaced by variety and rapid response.
The world's most successful companies, such as Apple, IBM, Honda and Royal Dutch/Shell, have had to turn their planning and management practices upside down and inside out, in order to survive. They have been driven by the discipline of the market and the opportunities and imperatives of new technology. In other words, they have had to respond to incredibly complex, diverse and changing situations. It is also remarkable that, after years of experimentation and adaptation (with perhaps the world's most highly paid management consultants) they have all settled on the same strategy: to become learning organizations (Bryson, 1995; Peters, 1987 and 1994; and Senge, 1994).
In learning organizations, people continually expand their capacity to produce extraordinary results. Learning is used to enhance abilities to respond rapidly to changes in development needs, with the procedural flexibility such changes require. It is a mix of both behavioural and technical disciplines, drawn from both the East and theWest.
The following are the core disciplines of the learning organization.
As the world becomes more interconnected and business becomes more complex and dynamic, work must become more `learningful'. It is no longer sufficient to have one person learning for the organization.... It's just not possible any longer to `figure it out' from the top, and have everyone else following the orders of the `grand strategist'. The organizations that will truly excel in the future will be the organizations that discover how to tap people's commitment and capacity to learn at all levels in an organization.
- Senge (1990:4)
Systems thinking: seeing things as a whole. The focus is on seeing inter relationships, for seeing patterns of change rather than static snapshots. It is also a set of specific tools, including feedback. Systems thinking is used for dealing with greater complexity and faster change. It helps planners see those structures that underlie complex situations and discern high from low leverage change.
Personal mastery: personal excellence and proficiency. It is a personal commitment to lifelong learning, always striving to do better. People with a high level of personal mastery never "arrive". They are acutely aware of their ignorance as well as their core competencies.
Mental models: recognizing the deeply ingrained assumptions, generalizations and mental pictures that influence how we understand our work and how we take action. Questioning our mental models opens us up to inquiry, reflection and learning.
Building shared vision: creating a shared understanding of what the institution is trying to achieve. Shared vision is vital for learning organizations because it provides the focus and energy for learning. An institution's vision defines its mission and clarifies its future course and priorities. Moreover an important and socially justifiable vision is a source of inspiration to its stakeholders, including staff members.
Team learning: aligning and developing the capacities of all stakeholders to create the desired results. It has three dimensions: i) to tap the potential of many minds in dealing with complex issues; ii) to support innovative and coordinated action, in which each team member knows that the others can be counted on to act in complementary ways; and iii) to influence other teams (at other levels), and vice versa, through dialogue, discussion and listening (Senge, 1990).
People working in learning organizations are working on themselves as well as working on their systems of operation. Decentralization of certain management tasks and responsibilities to field staff and beneficiaries is a practice that already has great legitimacy in the business world.
Strategic Planning
Strategic planning is a process designed to produce fundamental decisions and actions that shape and guide what an institution is, what it does and why it does it (Bryson, 1995). For the past 35 years, strategic planning has been a standard part of management practice in the business world. Only in the last ten to 15 years has strategic planning become the standard practice of large numbers of public and non-profit organizations. Strategic planning was introduced at FAO Headquarters in Rome, in 1997.
Compared to the logical framework traditionally used by agricultural development institutions (which is based on a model of cause and effect and not conducive to changing conditions), strategic planning offers a number of advantages. First and foremost, strategic planning allows planners to work with the realities of diversity and change. Second, it includes intense attention to all levels of stakeholders and their interests. Third, before identifying strategic issues to focus on, strategic planning requires the identification of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats posed by the environments both external (environmental, economic, political, social) and internal (policies, staffing, procedures) to the institution. Finally, through intense monitoring (by the stakeholders), strategic planning evolves. It is an iterative, rolling process - adapting as new needs and priorities emerge. In other words, there is not one plan, at least not for very long. Instead, there
is a disciplined, realistic and responsive process of planning. Strategic planning provides a way of blending content and process.
Cautions and Limitations
Because The Responsive Planner has a global audience, and because conditions will be different in each specific planning situation, it outlines a planning approach that is process oriented and open-ended, while still giving some direction. This is risky. It assumes cooperation and support from and among policy-makers and planners at all levels, as agricultural development planning is not the job of any one individual. It also assumes that planners will adapt it, using their own creativity and skills to respond to their own planning contexts.
The ideas offered in this framework will be perceived by many planners as a support or articulation of actions already in process. For others, they may be perceived as a challenge or threat to current ways of working. Either way, this Framework is just a frame. It is one proposal for structuring a core set of ideas, principles, issues and questions into the planning process. It can be a beginning or it can be a stepping stone. As planners gain more experience in facilitating PGRAD, the subject will surely grow and change.
A Declaration of Assumptions
All planning frameworks are constructed on the basis of certain assumptions - and these assumptions need to be stated clearly. The Responsive Planner's greatest assumption is that planners are human beings, with both minds and hearts. For our minds, The Responsive Planner is based on best practices. It draws upon what has been proven to work-- in both the public and private-sectors. But it is also based on a value system that promotes equity and empowerment for those who currently suffer inequity and marginalization.
The Responsive Planner also assumes that planners do not mind a bit of innovation in their work. While planners see some of their roles and tasks changing, some even devolved completely, there are new roles and responsibilities to take their place. These new responsibilities are immensely important to successful participatory and gender-responsive planning and challenging to the individual planner.
Creating extraordinary responsiveness
WHAT IS THE ROLE OF THE PLANNER in PGRAD? The responsive planner is a proactive problem solver. He or she is not just passively planning, but actively seeks ways to enable practical actions to be taken faster. As learners, enablers and advocates, planners can create extraordinary responsiveness by practising decentralized and fast-paced facilitation across formerly sacred sectoral boundaries. The role of the planner is to make things happen.
PLANNERS AS LEARNERS
What does it mean to be an agricultural development planner in an increasingly interdependent, interconnected and constantly changing world? It means that we must give up the presumption that we know exactly what we are doing. We do not - and we cannot - know everything necessary to formulate plans that meet the highly complex and ever changing needs of women and men farmers. This is because we are unavoidably ignorant in at least three ways.
1) We do not fully understand the complex realities in the field. We have no viable theories of change that fully acknowledge economic, environmental, social, technological and political linkages. We cannot even predict agricultural production beyond the next season.
2) Even if we had all the information we would still disagree about its implications. There are always multiple theories as to why conditions are as they are and no way to settle on the one simple interpretation.
3) What we choose to pay attention to, to seek or to avoid is strongly influenced by our professional training, education and experience. Even as we claim rational reasons for what we do or do not do, we may be missing important points, because we tend to focus on what is familiar to us.
Each planner must challenge conventional wisdom, especially cause and effect relations that have been considered axiomatic. Since new truths are not yet clear, the planner must become a good learner. We must learn to see planning as a learning process. Therefore we must see ourselves as learners, and allow others to see us as learners. This may not be easy at first. Many planners have received a lifetime of training in being forceful, articulate advocates and problem solvers. We know how to present and argue strongly for our views (backed up by piles of data). But when we are forced to deal with more complex and interdependent issues (such as household food security) we begin to realize that no one person knows the answer. The most viable option is to work with our clients (women and men farmers suffering food insecurity) to arrive at the most promising strategies.
To meet our responsibilities as learner-planners, we must become obsessed with listening. Responsiveness requires listening. Listening to farmers must become every planner's business. Listening is strategic. It reveals the big and little things that can pose stumbling blocks to responsiveness, equity, efficiency, etc. The listening learner-planner is the one most likely to quickly perceive changes in the environment.
Learning
It takes two Chinese characters to represent the word "learning". The first character means to study. It is composed of two parts: a symbol that means, "to accumulate knowledge," above a symbol for a child in a doorway. The second character means to practice constantly, andit shows a bird developing the ability to leave the nest. The upper symbol represents flying; the lower symbol, youth. For the Chinese then, learning is ongoing
- Senge et al., (1994)
Listening is not simple. Since it must be practised if we are to be effective learners, it must become a mindset. Our ways of listening must change - and new ways must be created. Traditional modes of listening- such as ministry meetings, donor meetings, village meetings and national meetings - are important. But new modes also are needed, because the numbers and diversity of peoples to whom we listen must be broadened. For example, we must ensure that we are tapping into women's listening posts. We must also make sure that we are listening to and learning from those working closest to the farmers, such as extension workers and community group leaders. They must get a thorough hearing with those higher up the planning ladder. We must also find ways to listen directly to women and men farmers. We must listen to them frequently. We must listen systematically - and unsystematically. We must listen for facts - and for perceptions. We must listen "naively".
Seeing ourselves as learners is a long-term approach of continuous listening and continuous adaptation. We should always seek to learn more about how to create extraordinary responsiveness.
Characteristics of good learners
Good learners get out from behind their desks and go to where the farmers are. They spend a minimum of four weeks annually in the field. They join PRAs, local stakeholders' workshops, field demonstrations, etc. Listening and learning are part of their terms of reference.
Good learners construct settings that maximize naive listening. Though they have some key questions to ask, they do not go with predetermined ideas about what they want to hear.
Good learners are intent on listening, not preaching. They take what they hear seriously.
Good learners provide quick feedback on what they hear. They act on what they hear.
Good learners provide quick feedback on what they hear. They act on what they hear.
PLANNERS AS ENABLERS
There is a "surprise factor" in the participatory process that causes difficulties for traditional models of planning. While a programme may be geared up to deliver, crop protection activities, for example, a PRA exercise may reveal that the farmers have a completely different set of priorities. How should planners respond?
It is common sense to start with local perspectives. We must keep our focus on enabling women and men in communities and local institutions to define and interpret their own realities and not interpret for them. Our job is to respond with the best services and programmes that we can offer. But this is seldom a straightforward job.
In truly participatory approaches (which are rare), the menu of development options is wide open. It is up to the farmers to decide what they want from development. But a word of caution is warranted here: participatory activities will have little impact if the participants do not have access to relevant information. Rural people, especially women, often have limited exposure to development options; they may be unaware of new marketing or employment opportunities, new methods for increased production or improved technologies. Women may ask for tie-and-dye training, not because this is a truely lucrative activity, but because it is the only activity they are aware of. For this reason, as a PGRAD enabler, planners must ensure that communities are exposed to an expanded menu of viable development options (including their relative costs, benefits and risks) so that participatory plans will be based on informed choice.
Even in objective-focused participatory approaches, which are increasingly common (such as participatory programmes for household food security), the range of relevant problems and priorities that may be raised by various groups of farmers is very large. As PGRAD enablers, planners must be ready to facilitate the delivery of a wide variety of technical services. And these cannot be limited to tidy sectoral boundaries, say fisheries here and livestock there. Sectoral boundaries are meaningless to farmers. The highest priorities of many agricultural development programmes today, i.e. household food security and natural resources management, require coordination across sectors.
As enablers, planners should spend a majority of their time seeking ways to make the whole system of agricultural services more responsive. First, planners must ensure that women and men farmers have access to relevant information. Second, planners must become expeditors, barrier destroyers and facilitators. Our role is to find ways to speed up actions, especially those actions requiring cross-sectoral and inter-institutional cooperation. Planners work to eliminate the sectoral barriers or traditional roles that constrain, prevent or slow actions.
PLANNERS AS ADVOCATES
Agricultural development planners do not live by pie charts alone - nor by bar graphs nor three-inch statistical appendices to 300-page reports. We live, reason and are moved by true-life conditions, principles and personal ethics.
Principles and ethics mediate all of the actions of agricultural development institutions, of UN agencies, of governments, of NGOs. But assumptions that planners working within big bureaucracies are just paper pushers tend to overlook the fact that many sincerely care about the impact of their work. There are countless agricultural development planners who are motivated, at least in part, by altruism and their aim is to make things better for those who are less fortunate or in need.
A key role for responsive planners is to advocate empowerment with equity. Empowerment with equity increases the involvement of socially and economically marginalized people in decision-making that affects their lives. The assumption is that participatory approaches empower local women and men with the skills and confidence to analyse their situations, reach consensus, make decisions and take actions that will improve their circumstances.
Definitions of empowerment
(Crawley,1998:25-26)
Empowerment is about people gaining the ability to undertake activities, to set their own agendas and change events.
Empowerment is a concept that goes beyond the issue of participation. It is more than simply widening access to decision-making. It implies enabling people to understand the reality of their situation, to reflect on the factors shaping that situation, and most critically, take steps to affect changes to improve it.
Empowerment of women implies "adding to women's power". An empowerment focus involves the radical alteration of the structures that reproduce women's subordinate position as a gender.
But empowerment without equity is a risky business. Whether empowerment is good depends on who is empowered and how their new power is used. If those who gain are outsiders who exploit, or a local elite that dominates, the poor and disadvantaged may be worse off (Chambers,1997). Without concern for equity, the tendency would be for men rather than women to be empowered, the better-off rather than the worse-off, and members of higher-status groups rather than those of lower status. The challenge is to advocate a process in which the weaker are empowered and equity is served.
Paying attention to equity means paying attention to poor rural women, as well as others who are socially and economically marginalized. We know this is important because we have learned that misunderstanding or ignoring women's needs not only affects the women themselves but also has a negative impact on the immediate family and the wider community. We have also learned that an appropriately constructed equity approach, which is basically an inclusion approach, can help raise women's confidence, open up space for their views and ease oppressive gender relations.
Definition of Equity
Equity can be defined as that which is fair and just. Equity is not the same as equality because equity represents value judgements about what is fair, whereas equality is about being exactly the same in quantity, degree or value.
- Ingles, Musch and Qwist-Hoffman, 1998
While planners are not in a position to empower rural women and men directly, we can create some of the conditions that enable equitable empowering processes to take place. All too often (inadvertently and unaware perhaps) we do the opposite - undermine or create tough barriers. Good practice: advocate empowerment with equity which is a valid objective for agricultural development programmes. The advocacy can take many different forms. Planners can advocate empowerment with equity in speeches, programme documents and policy papers. It is even more important for planners to ensure that everyone is listening to women and other marginalized groups, and that relevant information and services are directed to them. At every stage of the PGRAD process and during every meeting, whether national, district or local, we must always ask the tough questions: Who is participating? Who is benefiting? Who is not? Why not? and What can we do to improve the situation?
FIVE STRATEGIES FOR CREATING RESPONSIVENESS
With a goal as ambitious as creating extraordinary responsiveness to the complex and ever changing priorities of farmers, planners need proven strategies for getting started. The strategies given below are based firmly on lessons learned from the business sector and from evaluations of agricultural development programmes.
Amplify the Best
All too often we focus only on what is wrong and what is missing. It is even more important to identify, value and affirm that which works and has gone well within the context of our agricultural development institutions. Amplify the best of what is already practised. Start by locating and illuminating the reasons programmes or activities were especially responsive, where staff had exceptional commitment to meeting the priorities of women and men farmers. Seek to discover the factors and forces which allowed them to be so responsive.^ 2 These resources - actual experiences and skills - are powerful seeds and momentum builders with which planners increase their responsiveness.
An organization that reflects good capacity is somewhat like a festive curry meal. Making the meal requires skills, dedication, fresh ingredients, and good timing. There are staple ingredients that are understood as being essential - transparent management systems, clear communication, participatory work approaches - but there are also specific ingredients and spices that can only be selected by the people of that place. And, in the end, it is only they who will be able to put all the ingredients together in a recipe, select just the right cooking utensils, and make a curry that will truly reflect what they and their communities enjoy most.
- William Postma (1998:60)
The extraordinarily responsive planner is a clearinghouse and walking newsletter, a diffuser of best practices, passing on and sharing success stories, so that efficient learning throughout the entire system is facilitated. Such planners assiduously seek out examples of cross-sectoral multi-functional activities that went smoothly and fast, under ordinarily complex and trying conditions. We find out who makes it happen and praise him or her- as an example to others. Learning from experience - with a focus on positive experience - ensures that we do not plan the future on the basis of whims and fashions, but rather on plans planted in firm and fertile ground.
Learn to Love Diversity
In PGRAD, we recognize that communities are neither homogeneous in composition nor concerns, nor necessarily harmonious in their relations. We use gender analysis as a planning tool to understand how gender influences the roles and relationships of people throughout all their activities, including their labour and decision-making roles. It is also important for understanding the position of women and men relative to one another, and vis-à-vis the institutions that determine their access to land and other resources, and to the wider economy.
Many participatory development programmes have not dealt adequately with the reality of community differences, including age, wealth, religion, caste, ethnic and, in particular, gender differences. Looking back, it is apparent that "the community" has often been viewed naively, as an internally equitable collective. Too often there has been an inadequate understanding of the internal dynamics and differences that are so crucial to positive outcomes (Guijt and Shah, 1998).
It is well-documented that development efforts in which women are marginalized are destined to fail. Using gender analysis helps planners establish an environment in which women and men can both prosper. Gender analysis, in other words, never focuses only on women. Good practice: include an analysis of both women's and men's positions, views and priorities. We seek to understand the constraints and priorities of both women and men, relative to one another, focusing on where they overlap as well as where they differ.
Gender analysis helps us learn about diversity. A frequent mistake is to assume that gender analysis treats women and men as single identifiable categories. Not so. Good practice: combine an analysis of gender differences with other locally meaningful differences - such as caste, ethnicity, race and wealth.^3 It is called gender analysis because within any single socio-economic category, e.g. low caste agricultural labourers, there are always gender-determined differences that have important implications for development.
Gender analysis helps us break away from stereotypical assumptions and generalizations about what women and men do, and what they want from development. It helps us focus on the facts. Therefore it also reveals how the constraints and priorities for agricultural development may vary from one village to another, and among various groups of people within a village.
This does not mean communities are not important to agricultural development. They certainly are. But the assumptions of homogeneity or harmony have been replaced with recognition of multiple interests within communities. We have learned to love diversity and to recognize its implications for creating extraordinary responsiveness. In PGRAD, we emphasize "specialist" rather than "mass" or "blueprint" thinking.
Learn to Appreciate Change
Change, by definition, means disruption. Both the macro- and micro-level contexts for PGRAD planning are rife with change. Agricultural development institutions have become more tightly interconnected with volatile economic, environmental, political and social changes. These changes reverberate at every level of society - from village to state and beyond. Every place is different from every other place - and every place is changing.
While some changes, such as those brought by natural disasters, are swift, others are gradual. One of the gradual changes is the shifting dynamics of gender relations. Changes in gender relations are by no means a simple issue. They are interconnected with environmental, economic, technological, political and social changes. But they can have profound effects on the success or failure of agricultural development. Nor can it be assumed that these changes are always bad. Girls' increasing access to education, for example, is a positive change.
In many parts of Africa, a worrying gender issue is the absence of useful social and economic roles for men in the face of high unemployment, and their loss of traditional activities which contributed to their households' well being. This has negative effects for men, women and children in terms of their household food security. Dealing with this kind of change with a gender-responsive approach means seeking to respond with services which benefit all individuals within the household. It may, for instance, be of top priority (to both women and men) to increase the dry-season production options of men.
Acknowledging change challenges traditional planning models. Complexity, ambiguity and diversity can be difficult for planners. Under conditions of continuous and accelerating complexity and change, how can we plan agricultural development programmes and services that will be extraordinarily responsive?
At the micro-level, participatory methods help us learn about change. For agricultural development planning, participation means farmers analyse their own problems, prioritize their own options, and plan, implement and monitor their own development activities. Good practice: a participatory analysis of change with a cross-section of women and men, including changes experienced (e.g. deterioration in the natural resource base, new economic opportunities) and changes desired (e.g. improved fodder production, increased access to clean drinking water) (Wilde, 1998). Over time, the very act of participating in development activities creates important physical, economic and social changes, e.g. an expanded irrigation system, or empowerment of the most marginalized groups to plan their own development activities.
For dealing with macro-level changes, progressive business managers use systems thinking. Systems thinking is a discipline for seeing the whole picture, for seeing interrelationships rather than linear cause-effect chains, for seeing processes of change rather than snapshots of the moment. Because it helps planners see the structures than underlie complex situations and to discern high from low leverage change, systems thinking is used for dealing with greater complexity and faster change (Senge, 1990:68-69).
Success will come to those who embrace change - constant change - not those who attempt to eliminate it. Stability and predictability are gone forever (they never really existed) and therefore must not be the implicit or explicit goals of agricultural development plans. We can master change by focusing on patterns and processes, and by constantly working on responsiveness and enhancing the capabilities of others to do so. We must learn to see changes as opportunities.
The Parable of the Boiled Frog
If you place a frog in a pot of boiling water, he will immediately try to scramble out. But if you place the frog in room temperature water, and don't scare him, he'll stay put. Now, if the pot sits on a heat source, and if you gradually turn up the temperature, something very interesting happens. As the temperature rises, the frog will do nothing. In fact, he will show every sign of enjoying himself. As the temperature gradually increases, the frog will become groggier and groggier, until he is unable to climb out of the pot. Though there is nothing restraining him, the frog will sit there and boil. Why? Because the frog's internal apparatus for sensing threats to survival is geared to sudden changes in his environment, not to slow, gradual changes.
- Senge, 1990
Fail Forward
Faced with the complexity, diversity and dynamism of gender-participation issues in combination with volatile environmental-economic-political-social conditions, it is only to be expected that mistakes will be made. But errors that are recognized and embraced can lead quickly to extraordinary responsiveness. Lessons from mistakes are needed to "fail forward"-- to learn to do better (Peters, 1987).
Responsive planners must be open to learning from mistakes, always seeking to do better next time. Such an attitude requires a high degree of critical self-awareness and willingness to embrace error. The latter is perhaps the most difficult personal attribute to develop (Chambers, 1997). Professional insecurity and career pressures usually lead us to hide or minimize the errors we commit, be they of judgement or action.
If we don't make utter fools of ourselves from time to time, we grow smug - that is, we do not grow at all.
- Peters (1994:278)
Learning depends absolutely on embracing error. The most competent planners know that errors will happen as plans are implemented. They design mechanisms for participatory monitoring in advance so they will learn about mistakes as soon as they occur, and use the resulting understandings to continually adjust the plans. Failing forward is an operational precondition for responsiveness - the capacity to learn from errors, adjust and improve.
Defer to the Field
Embracing complexity, continuous learning and always seeking to improve - these words cannot be repeated enough. No one denies where the answers are: in the field. Unfortunately a certain distance is institutionalized between planners and the field. This distance blocks, blurs and distorts understanding. Many big mistakes have been made in agricultural development programmes -usually because they were designed by those who were physically, organizationally, socially and cognitively distant from the people and conditions they were planning and prescribing for (Chambers, 1997).
What are the practical implications? Rethink control. The long-term success of a participatory process depends more on the skills and enthusiasm of the field staff than on any other single factor. In learning organizations, the organizational chart looks like a reverse pyramid, with field-level people on top and supervisors and planners below them in a support and facilitation role. In other words, we must defer to those who are in the field or close to the field. The job of all responsive planners - from national to district levels - is to enhance the ability of the field staff to do its job better. The most effective planners empower others to act and grow. In a traditional hierarchical organization, the top level thinks and the local level acts. In a learning organization, we have to merge thinking and acting in every individual.
Ironically, the most lightly regarded staff in agricultural development organizations, public or NGOs, are those who are closest to the farmers and most directly responsible for the quality and responsiveness of services delivered. This must change if total farmer responsiveness is to become reality. The responsive planner spends time with field staff members, gives them recognition, listens to them, empowers and trains them, and gives them the technical support they need, making sure that the systems are in place which allow them to do their jobs to the fullest extent possible.
Deferring to the field means unleashing field staff's commitment by giving them the flexibility to act rapidly, to respond directly to farmers' needs and to be responsible for the results. We must delegate to act horizontally too. Delegation has traditionally meant pushing decision-making to the lowest level. But there is another level of delegation which is growing in importance--delegation to farmers and to field staff as part of a horizontal planning process which seeks fast connections with other women farmers, farmers' groups, entrepreneurs, etc. and across sectoral functions without having to check up the ladder first.
Leadership Still Counts - The Myths of Participatory Management
(Barlow, 1998, based on Harvard Management Update April Edition)
Myth No. 1. Shared management means eliminating conflict among staff. In fact, with more ideas expressed, there may be more conflict. This clash generally produces better ideas.
Myth No. 6. In a bottom-up organization, the boss has to accept what his or her underlings decide. Despite shared responsibility, the boss still has final responsibility. Actually this isn't the real problem. Underlings often spend their time trying to evade responsibility, not take more of it. The leader must invest time encouraging them to make decisions.
Myth No. 2. It's a soft way to manage. In reality, it's a hard way - perhaps harder for those at the top than when they simply told everyone what to do. Managers must encourage field staff to make decisions and take responsibility for their actions. And the boss must admit at times that he or she doesn't know all the answers.
Myth No. 7. Team commitment to a decision is more important than the quality of the decision itself. Not in the real world. As long as there is need for any organization's services, good decisions must be made. Just bear in mind that there is no such thing as a perfect decision. And the old cliché about two minds being better than one became a cliché because it was true.
Myth No. 3. The emphasis on collaboration means the end of competition among staff members. Indeed, such competition can and should continue. The leader's challenge is to keep that competition focused on performance, not on internal politics.
Myth No. 8. The team may make the decision but the boss has the vision. Involvement by the team usually means a better vision - since team members bring a wide variety of knowledge into the process.
Myth No. 4. Under this kind of management, the boss no longer makes decisions. He or she still does. The difference is they may not necessarily be his or her decisions: "Our job today is to determine how we are going to cut the budget," not, "Keep guessing until you arrive at the cuts I want".
Myth No. 9. It takes forever to reach decisions. The meetings to decide might last longer. But leaders no longer must spend hours lobbying individual members before and after meetings to get the decision they want.
Myth No. 5. The boss never makes autonomous decisions. Autonomous decisions usually come on rare occasions when the boss has privileged information, or when everyone else gets bogged down in a trivial matter and the boss needs to get everyone focused on more important matters.
Myth No. 10. It takes a long time for bottom-up management to achieve results. Research shows just the opposite. Immediate good results are usually apparent. And in the long run, as the teams gain more experience, the quality of those decisions get better.
Changing from the inside out
PLANNERS DO NOT WORK IN A VACUUM. They work within institutions - generally large bureaucracies - where the cultures, procedures and methods of operation are far from conducive to PGRAD. How can a large agricultural development bureaucracy support and encourage its planners to create extraordinary responsiveness? How can a gender perspective be promoted and sustained to the point that it is institutionalized and still remain responsive to the variety of women and men's experiences and priorities? Through people. People must become the primary source of value added, to be optimized.
GET A RAPID RESPONSE TASK CULTURE
Like everything else, institutions have a culture and this culture exerts great influence on what can and cannot be accomplished by their staff members. Institutionalization of PGRAD requires a "rapid response task culture" that draws planners, policy-makers, programme managers and farmers into a relationship that is cooperative and action-oriented.
It is the "role culture", not the task culture, which is typical of large bureaucracies (Handy, 1993). The role culture - which works by logic and rationality - can be illustrated as a Greek temple. The institution rests its strength on its columns, which correspond to sectoral functions or specialities. The work of the columns, and the interaction between the columns, is controlled by clearly defined roles (e.g. job descriptions), procedures for communications (e.g. required sets of memoranda) and rules for decision-making. They are coordinated at the top by a narrow band of senior management, the pediment. If the separate columns do their jobs, as prescribed by the rules and procedures, this should be the only coordination needed-and the ultimate result will be as planned.
The Greek Temple
This Greek temple institution will succeed as long as it operates in a stable environment. When next year is like this year, so that this year's rules will work next year, then the outcome will be good. But Greek temples are insecure when the ground shakes, i.e. there is change. Role cultures are slow to perceive the need to change and slow to change even when the need is seen.
The task culture is job or project orientated. Its accompanying structure can be best represented as a net, with some strands thicker and stronger than others. Much of the power and influence lies at the interstices of the net, the knots. The task culture seeks to bring together the resources, the right people at the right level, and let them get on with their jobs. Influence is based more on expertise than on position. Influence is also more widely dispersed and each individual tends to think he or she has more of it. The task culture is adaptable. Groups, project teams or tasks forces are formed for specific purposes and can be reformed, abandoned or continued, as necessary. The net institution works quickly since each individual has a high degree of control over his or her work, is monitored by results, and enjoys easy working relationships within the institution because relationships are based on mutual respect.
Agricultural development experience, including integrated rural development, multi-sectoral nutrition planning, farming systems research, national food security planning and poverty alleviation planning, has shown that the traditional role culture is not well-suited to such integrated, cross-sectoral, multi-sectoral or participatory programmes. In all cases, different departments have been thrown into conflict over priorities and resources, decision-making has been disrupted or slow, and planners and managers have been ill equipped to handle new levels of complexity (Maxwell, 1996).
One striking feature of the process approaches advocated by participatory development workers is that they correspond closely to a task culture approach. The key features of a task culture, namely innovation, flexibility, participatory leadership, result-orientation, are all found in process models for participation. Good practice: for institutionalization of PGRAD, shift from a role culture (hierarchical bureaucracy) which typically uses a blueprint approach to planning, to a task culture (learning organization) which promotes a process approach to planning.
In today's world, learning organizations and private-sector business managers prefer the task culture. With its emphasis on groups, expert power and rewards for results, it is the institutional culture most in tune with current ideologies of change and adaptation, individual freedom and low status differentials. But its virtues should not be exaggerated. When resources are not available to all those who are able to justify a need for them, when money and people have to be rationed, planners begin to feel the need to control allocations and to set priorities. Alternatively staff members begin to compete, using political influence for available resources. This new state of affairs necessitates procedures and planning processes to help managers and planners to make strategic decisions.
GENDER-RESPONSIVE PROCEDURES
One of the most fundamental tasks for the PGRAD institution is to mainstream gender issues, not only in its fieldwork - but also inside its own offices.
The word "gender" is probably the most misunderstood word in development today. At best, many development planners see it as useless jargon, relegating it to that extra (but required) paragraph in programme and policy documents. At worst, it causes feelings of anger and hostility.
Gender can be defined as the social differences in female and male roles, rights and relations that are:
* learned (they are not the direct result of biological differences);
* dynamic (they change over time);
* multifaceted (they vary within and among cultures) and
* influenced by class, age, caste, ethnicity and religion.
Gender issues are controversial because they are relationship issues - and therefore politically and culturally sensitive - not between individuals, but between classes of females and males. As a fundamental organizing principle of all societies, these relationships colour and mediate all forms of social and economic activity, at all levels. It is about understanding these relationships. Gender is about addressing dynamics that are harmful, inequitable and unfair. And it is about ensuring that both women and men have a say in their own lives.
Slowly, gender issues are gaining legitimacy in development institutions. It is increasingly recognized that gender issues are inter-linked with the issues of human rights, equity and fairness. Gender issues have also proven to be closely linked to efficiency and success. This link is especially strong in agricultural development.
WHAT DOES MAINSTREAMING GENDER MEAN?
UNDP (1998)
The legitimacy of gender equality as a fundamental value is reflected in development choices and institutional practices
Gender issues are recognized not just as "women's issues" but as issues that affect all of society
Gender equality goals influence mainstream economic and social policies that deliver major resources
Gender equality is pursued from the centre rather than from the margins
Women participate as decision-makers in defining social values and development directions
Women as well as men are in a position to influence the entire agenda and basic priorities
There are collective efforts by women to redefine the development agenda
Within all types of development institutions, women's exclusion is most striking in the case of agricultural institutions and services, despite the prevalence of evidence that women are central to agriculture in most agrarian economies. Across Africa for example, where women are responsible for 60 percent of total agricultural output and 80 percent of food production, they receive less than 2 percent of contacts with extension workers. It has also been observed that the bias against women farmers increases in intensity as the value of agricultural service increases. This is also true for other agricultural institutions such as marketing boards, research institutions and credit agencies. That these services overlook women raises serious doubts about the gender-neutrality of agriculture institutions (Goetz, 1992).
Before institutions can ensure gender-responsive outcomes on the outside, they must work on the inside. No matter how clear policies and responsibilities might otherwise be, without gendered procedures, the bureaucracy can undermine PGRAD. The lack of female staff, for example, has often proven a barrier to reaching women farmers. Good practice: make a "gender scan" of the organization at three levels: institutional mandate, organizational culture and structure, and human resources (Sprenger, 1996). This scan, useful for revealing where internal staffing and operational procedures may require adjustment, includes the following questions.
MANDATE
* Does the institution have a clear gender policy? Is this gender policy accompanied by a strategy with timeframe and allocation of responsibilities?
* Are adequate financial resources allocated for implementation of the gender policy? Are funds explicitly earmarked for gender-related activities?
* Does the institution conduct its strategic planning, monitoring and evaluation in a gender-disaggregated manner?
* Do the activities of the institution contribute to the empowerment of women and to changing inequitable gender relations?
ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE AND STRUCTURE
* Does top management fully promote the gender policy? Does everyone feel ownership of the gender policy?
* Are staff with specific gender expertise located in key positions? Are gender specialists participating in key decision-making processes?
* Is gender stereotyping addressed and countered by individual staff members? By management?
* Does the institution have a reputation for integrity and competence on gender issues?
* Does the institution comply with gender-sensitive behaviour, for example, in terms of the language used, images and materials displayed and procedures on sexual harassment?
* Does the institution have the physical infrastructure and arrangements to facilitate women's presence and mobility?
* Are there effective mechanisms for coordination, consultation and institutional gender learning among various divisions of the institution, both horizontally and vertically?
* Is there sufficient gender-disaggregated information to do the job well?
HUMAN RESOURCES
* Is management committed to promoting female staff representation at all levels? Is this commitment translated into concrete goals and timeframes?
* Do selection criteria for new staff members include capacity to deal with gender issues in practical terms?
* Do women and men receive equal wages for equal work at all levels? Do they have equal opportunity for career development and promotion?
* Are gender issues discussed during staff performance appraisals? Is good performance on gender issues rewarded, recognized and shared with others?
* Is there a gradual increase of gender expertise among all staff members as a result of training?
FOUR CAPABILITY BUILDING BLOCKS
The capabilities required to institutionalize PGRAD are numerous, touching upon every aspect of work. While the task may appear daunting, the capabilities needed are already at hand. Lessons learned from both private and public sector institutions show the way.
Think Horizontal
Shifting the institution's entire orientation from vertical (hierarchical) to horizontal (fast, cross-sectoral, cooperative) is one of the most dramatic requirements of institutionalizing PGRAD. Horizontal thinking is partnership thinking. We must see agricultural development as a joint venture of stakeholders, including government, NGOs, donors, UN agencies and private business, while keeping the voice of women and men farmers in the centre of the process. Creating responsiveness is as much about inter-institutional change as it is intra-institutional.
Considerable knowledge is revealed when planners and practitioners from different areas come together to work for PGRAD. Everyone must look at the whole together. Good results in a complex system depend on bringing in as many perspectives as possible. By its very nature, PGRAD points out interdependencies and the need for collaboration. Thus, we must make sure that the institution is open to working together with all the relevant stakeholders to pave the way for fast, cross-sectoral solutions.
Dividing an elephant in half does not produce two small elephants
There is a Sufi tale about three blind men who encountered an elephant. It is a large rough thing, wide and broad, like a rug," said the first, who was grasping an ear. The second, who was holding the trunk, said, "I have the real facts. It is a straight and hollow pipe." And the third, who was holding a front leg, said, "It is mighty and firm, like a pillar." Are the three blind men any different from the directors of livestock development, fisheries and crop production in many agricultural development institutions? Each sees their sector's problems clearly, but none see how they interact with the others. The Sufi story concludes by observing that, "Given these men's way of knowing, they will never know an elephant.
- Senge, 1990
Establishing partnerships is especially important in the early stages of adapting to a gender-responsive and participatory approach, when many of those concerned will not welcome the changes. Good practice: twinning - pairing people or groups within and between institutions, and between levels in institutions, to support one another. The purpose is to establish a direct horizontal link between those facing similar challenges, in order to channel expertise and knowledge from one to the other, through regular, formal and informal contacts between colleagues on both sides. The strong point of this strategy lies in the horizontal and collegial aspect of the relationship, its flexibility, and easy access to regular advice. Twinning is most successful however if it has a clear focus, such as development of methods for participatory monitoring and evaluation.
Share Information to Share Power
There are few greater liberating forces than the sharing of information. Knowledge is power - it always has been, it always will be. Without the power of information, there will be no responsive action.
Those with less power, e.g. women and men farmers, tend to have less access to information and less power in defining what sorts of knowledge and information are useful in agricultural development. Many in this position also accept the superiority of the knowledge of those in more powerful situations, such as village leaders, extension workers and planners who often feel confident about the superiority of their own knowledge. One of the biggest contributions of PRA experiences to date has been its challenge to the superiority of professional knowledge over that of the non-professionals.
The world today is dealing with a host of new variables surfacing and changing at lightening speed. Therefore, the institutions of agricultural development must have access to a variety of information sources to match the complexities of the field, or risk being led to erroneous conclusions. The demands and complexities of PGRAD have at least two possible information-related risks: distortion and overload.
We all Guess Wrong Sometimes!
I think there is a world market for about five computers.
- Thomas J. Watson
Chairman of IBM 1943^4
Information distortion is a great peril of responsive planning. Most information used for agricultural planning, especially nationally and internationally, comes professionally packaged. But there may be many distortions behind the tidy columns and computer-generated graphics. Most information systems are designed to protect planners from trivia and complexity so that our minds are clear as we confront "big picture" decisions. Instead our minds are all too likely to be empty of all but the findings of the pre-packaged data, leading to uninformed decisions. One of the most pervasive examples is the lack of gender-disaggregation in agricultural statistics which can create enormous distortions in understanding field-level realities and lead to ineffective, even harmful, development programming. Good practice: include the use of gender-responsive PRA methodologies in addition to gender-disaggregated statistics.
Too much information can have a counter-productive effect, as no one will have enough time to digest it. Hence the importance of original presentations and summary reports that present only the most pressing issues. Macro-level development information flowing down to communities, and micro-level information flowing up from communities to planners needs to be made user-friendly. Horizontal channels of communication and information sharing - farmer to farmer, women's group to women's group, NGO to NGO, etc. also are key to PGRAD. Having the capacity to ensure adequate information transfer, vertically and horizontally, is a priority and should be built into the institution's routine functions.
Communication media can help overcome barriers of information access, illiteracy, language, inter-cultural differences and physical isolation. Good practice: well-designed communication strategies that establish dialogue with rural people, involve them in their own development and relay information useful for improved farming. Key strategies and media tools for improving the dissemination and sharing of agricultural knowledge include rural radio to reach remote audiences, video for training illiterate farmers, multi-media campaigns for widespread dissemination of better practices, and, where available, tele-training and electronic networking using the new information technologies. The challenge is to combine the use of communication media with audience participatory processes in order to achieve empowerment through information sharing. The challenge is also to ensure that women and other marginal groups have full access to these communication channels.
The Power of Information
Gender-disaggregated PRA information and gender-disaggregated statistical information provide critical confirmation that the institution sees women and men farmers as partners and problem solvers. The absence of such information confirms the farmers' invisibility in agricultural planning.
Useful information begets more (useful) information. When a lot of information is around - visually and publicly accessible - people start asking all sorts of useful questions, and require more (and more relevant) information.
Farmer-to-farmer, farmer-to-planner and planner-to-farmer methods of information sharing inhibit upper-level power plays that may reduce flexibility and speed. Information hoarding is a key method of hoarding power. Information availability inherently shifts skill and responsibility to the field and facilitates empowerment.
The widespread availability of information is the basis for day-to-day problem solving, which abets continuous improvements. Without information, improvements are highly unlikely.
Train Everyone, Lavishly
When people are seen as the prime source of value added, it becomes clear that they can never be trained too much.
While training is not sufficient, it is essential, for creating responsive institutions.^5 Training is a key component in shaping and influencing the institutionalization of PGRAD. To have lasting impact, the training focuses not only on preparing staff members to use innovative field methods, but also on improving their communication and analytical skills. It encourages staff members at all levels to take increased responsibility for their own learning and supports the development of competencies such as adaptable, transferable skills. This kind of training fosters an environment in which staff members from different levels feel encouraged to communicate and able to work together constructively. This means concentrating on attitudes, behaviour and principles, as well as key methodological concepts and techniques. Of course, the training must be context specific.
Good practice: design a capacity-building process that moves forward not only the staff of the institution, but also its partners and counterparts as well as women and men farmers. It is important that everyone becomes familiar with similar processes, methods and tools for PGRAD. Today, in many countries there is a hodge-podge of approaches with everybody doing their own thing and little coordination among them. Below is an outline of a process for developing a PGRAD training programme. The focus is on bringing existing capacities together in a common approach, and filling in the gaps, as required.
Make training a priority. The most important ingredient for moving toward an effective capacity-building process is commitment. Training must have political as well as financial support.
Designate a training coordinator. A resource person must be given responsibility, at least temporarily, to coordinate the development of acapacity-building process. This person must be familiar with both PGRAD objectives and with participatory methods of training, and be in a position to communicate with farmers and with all of the institutions involved.
Carry out a needs' assessment. A detailed needs' assessment clarifies the technical and methodological needs of both farmers and implementation staff, including planners. The purpose of a needs' assessment is to identify the gaps between "what is" and "what should be".
Set training objectives. Final objectives for training should be based on the findings of the needs' assessment. This could include: i) raising awareness, e.g. about the relevance and applicability of participation and gender issues and an integrated cross-sectoral approach to PGRAD; ii) expanding the menu of methods, e.g. for communication, gender analysis, participatory planning and participatory monitoring; and iii) expanding the menu of technical skills, e.g. for horticulture or poultry development in response to farmers' priorities.
Select priority training topics. A finalized list of priority training topics is set on the basis of the training objectives. It is also recommended that the following general categories of training topics be given serious consideration: strengthening local organizations, animation training, participatory communications, gender analysis, participatory planning and monitoring, and responsive planning. Good practice: ensure that gender issues are fully integrated into all training topics.
Identify training capacities. Once the training needs and priorities are identified, capacities to deliver the appropriate training courses must be found. Training capacities must include: knowledge of agricultural development and household food security issues, extension and farming systems, gender analysis and poverty alleviation approaches; knowledge of adult learning theories and experience with participatory training methods; experience in communications methods and training materials' development; general management skills including planning, budgeting, logistics and supervision of personnel; and an overall willingness to listen and learn from the trainees of all levels. Of course, no one person will have all of the training capacities needed. Good practice: for long term institutionalization, select the most promising institution (or team of institutions) and build up their capacities to deliver PGRAD training on an on-going basis.
Design a capacity-building strategy. It is recommended here that there be less focus on study tours to other countries and more focus on building-up training capacities within each institution or each country. This would benefit PGRAD in the long run. Good practice: start with training-of-trainers (TOT).
Design the training programme. Once needs, priorities, capacities and strategies are identified, it is finally time to design a training programme. The programme should provide an overview of all the training courses to be delivered, over a certain time period, showing a balance between methodological and technical topics, and explaining how the programme will meet the needs revealed in the needs assessment. Good practice: intermittent training stretched over a longer period so that trainees have the opportunity to use their new skills and knowledge and to bring work-related challenges into future courses.
Implement and evaluate the training programme. When it comes to implementation, we must look back--to the first point. Implementation will not happen unless there is strong support and coordination. The institution(s), and the trainers will not be able to tackle the challenges of continuously introducing new skills and new knowledge in new ways and in a timely manner, unless they have the necessary support. The training strategy must have the flexibility to learn from successes and failures. For this reason, training evaluation must be included at every step. Good practice: evaluate methods and processes, as well as materials and information, and the skills of the trainers themselves, so that areas for improvement can be identified continuously.
Plan to follow up. Training opens windows of opportunity, but these windows can quickly shut again unless appropriate follow-up activities are planned. Typically, where well designed, trainees leave workshops with increased awareness and enhanced skills. But the trainees' capacities to use what they have learned, over the long-term, often depends on institutional structures and supports. Further, as the PGRAD process proceeds, new needs will surely emerge at all levels.
Use the Sandwich Model to Monitor Responsiveness
Everybody, high or low on the organizational ladder, has a supervisor who is responsible for monitoring his or her performance. Senior field workers-who are monitored by regional supervisors who are monitored by management at the national level, and so on--monitor field workers. Even the Minister of Agriculture or director of an international agriculture agency, must answer to others.
Although monitoring by supervisors is important, it is not sufficient for monitoring responsiveness. Good practice: create a system in which staff members are in a kind of sandwich, being monitored from below and above.^6 For example, the responsiveness of field staff would be monitored: (i)bottom-up by their clients, women and men farmers with whom they work closely for planning, implementing and monitoring agricultural development activities; and (ii) top-down by management, through performance evaluations that give priority to communication and listening skills, gender responsiveness, innovation and willingness to embrace errors, in addition to technical expertise. Both field workers and top management, for example, would monitor planners. The monitoring must incorporate indicators about short-term activities as well as long-term processes. Thus accountability to responsiveness would permeate the institution, illuminating where the constraints lie and where extraordinary
responsiveness is being achieved.
The sandwich model of staff monitoring touches upon the relationship between farmers and field staff and also the relationship between superiors and subordinates in the institution. Changes in these relationships are at a personal level and can only be facilitated in an atmosphere which reduces the fear of loss of power and where new types of relationships can be negotiated.
At the beginning, staff monitoring may not be enough to motivate agricultural development workers and planners to change entrenched working styles, especially where incentives are fairly low. Good practice: include structural incentives that encourage responsiveness. This includes policy statements, programme objectives, training opportunities and performance-oriented bonuses. It is recommended that a series of bonuses be offered to the planners and field workers who receive high appraisal from their clients.
FOUR INHIBITORS
It is clear that the kinds of pressure commonly experienced by agricultural development planners, e.g. unrealistic time constraints and inflexible budgets, would be seen as archaic by the more progressive business managers of today. More importantly, such practices are often incompatible with both the philosophy and operational implications of PGRAD. To dangle the carrot of participation, while continuing to maintain control over resources, time and procedures, is plainly counterproductive.
Product (only) Focus
Agricultural development programmes (designed using the log frame) include quantifiable targets such as numbers of cattle that will be vaccinated, number of hectares that will be irrigated, and so forth. But these pre-set targets become a tyranny, serving as determinants of the activities to be undertaken and as benchmarks for monitoring progress. They do not leave room for learning along the way or for flexibility to adjust in order to improve responsiveness. In other words, pre-set targets put the focus on "product" rather than "process". Product does matter. Poor and marginalized people usually view processes primarily as a means to secure something that can improve their livelihoods. Indeed, a productless process is an intellectual and theoretical exercise - ill afforded by the poor. But process also matters. Processes that treat people as ends, not merely means, are empowering and are more likely to produce responsive products and services. Process and product interact.
Inflexible Budgets
It is difficult to plan exactly what will be needed in a PGRAD programme in advance. The particular requirements will depend largely on what local women and men identify as important, and how the institution's staff can best respond to their needs. Rigid, pre-set budgets, in which specific amounts are tied to particular activities (to be done within a pre-set time period, which is usually far too short), do not allow for the unplanned requirements of gender and participation issues.
Agricultural development institutions must operate in an environment of progressively decreasing budgets. Naturally, every programme has an overall ceiling figure. But having fixed spending budgets for sub-programmes and activities, and rewarding staff who make big loans, spend fast and achieve high physical targets, only propagates blueprint programmes. They also propagate dependence. Especially in the early years, PGRAD programmes and projects need to spend more on exploration, training, learning, capacity-building and processes of institutional change. Flexible funding is needed to allow more or less to be spent, according to emerging needs and opportunities, and for directions and priorities to change (Chambers, 1997).
Upward (only) Accountability
The lines of accountability in the majority of agricultural development institutions move upwards. The procedure is for reports on monies spent and activities implemented to be passed from field office to the district office to the national office and, finally, to the donors. Upward accountability assumes that people in the higher levels of the hierarchy know best about how much money should be spent, on what, and by when. The further down the line, the fewer people are entrusted with such decisions. The intended beneficiaries find themselves at the end of the line with no say whatsoever.
The challenge in a responsive institution is to make accountability work downwards. When this happens, not only are local people informed of the monies that have been spent in their name (horizontal as opposed to vertical transparency), they are also more likely to have a say about how future monies should be spent. In certain cases, it may be appropriate to extend monies directly to women and men's community-based organizations and let them pay for external services as and when they see fit. Since it is now common in many development programmes for local women and men to be trained in credit management, bookkeeping and other basic financial skills, it is not unrealistic to expect those who hold the scheme's purse strings to be accountable, or at least more transparent, to those in whose name they have obtained funding.
Seeing Ourselves as the (only) Experts
Responsive planning's greatest enemy is attitude. If agricultural development institutions see themselves as having all the expertise required for good development planning - and if they see the farmers as ignorant and backwards - then all is lost.
Experts do not bother with elementary questions anymore - and thus fail to learn about the true sources of bottlenecks, negative impacts and failures. Experts rely much too much on "we've always done it that way". Typically, such experts rarely leave their offices to visit villages and, when they do, they meet only with the male village elders (usually talking more than listening).
But it's the basic fundamental questions that yield good results. And those in the best positions to get the answers are not the district and national officers sitting in their offices, but those who are out listening to both women and men, asking basic questions.
There is no doubt that expertise is needed - technical, financial and managerial. And most staff members in agricultural institutions have a great deal of expertise to offer. But in PGRAD, this expertise is provided as needed, in response to a greater process. We must never assume that we know all there is to know. We must remain deeply inquisitive - always asking elementary questions - committed to seeing reality more and more accurately.
SMALL IS BEAUTIFUL
Changing from the inside out - to institutionalize PGRAD - is not going to happen overnight. Learning comes from doing. Naturally, new approaches and methods meet resistance. Therefore, gradual evolution, establishing and securing small successes, works better than going abruptly to scale. It is only realistic to start small, with a focus on practical actions rather than philosophies, to undertake collaborative field work, and to build larger programmes slowly over time as attitudes and capabilities begin to change. In other words, to follow a process approach.
Big bureaucracies have a tough time thinking small. Because agricultural planning is usually perceived as a big job - covering millions of farmers, several agro-ecological zones and several farming systems - the general pattern has been to produce national or regional plans, generally covering five to ten year periods. But planning exercises producing voluminous long-range plans are less useful than before. Instead, a strategic mind-set, which focuses on learning, skill and capacity-building for responsiveness, is more important than ever. We must break the "think big" mind-set.
The challenge is to view every element of every farm through the lens of each female and male farmer and constantly to redefine every line of an agricultural plan in terms of the farmers' perceptions. This is comparable to nature, where meaningful beginnings are almost always unnoticeable.
There is no such thing as an insignificant improvement. Small, well-focused actions can produce significant, enduring improvements, if they are in the right place. Business systems thinkers refer to this principle as "leverage". Tackling a difficult problem is often a matter of seeing where the high leverage lies-- a change that would lead to lasting, significant improvement with a minimum of effort. The only problem is that high-leverage changes are often invisible to planners, though usually obvious to the farmers.
Thinking small is also a good way to avoid expensive "big project" failures. With small starts it is easy to have small stops, if necessary. But of course, small starts mean endless variation.
A small-starts approach starts with listening, followed by quick response to specific needs in a specific place with specific groups of women and men farmers. It is aimed at shortening the development cycle. A small-starts approach demands that:
* all levels of staff visit the farmers, listening and learning;
* the voices of various groups of women and men farmers are central to the planning process, each in their own right;
* pilot projects, rather than full-scale programmes, are established;
* bureaucracy adapts to allow field staff to operate efficiently;
* sectoral boundaries are softened for fast cross-sectoral response; and
* the process is treated as an experiment, to be continuously improved.
Strategic planning for a world turned upside down and sideways
THE WIDESPREAD AND DEEPENING PROBLEMS of food insecurity and natural resource degradation testify to the need for more effective planning models. Strategic planning is a forward-looking process that allows us to consider where are we now, where we want to be, and the best ways to get there. The process of strategic planning facilitates communication and participation, accommodates divergent interests and values, fosters wise and analytical decision-making, and promotes successful implementation.
Strategic planning offers many advantages for PGRAD. It is conducive to participation and gender issues because it includes intense attention at all levels of stakeholders and their interests, and because it allows planners to work with the realities of diversity and change. Before identifying which issues to focus on, strategic planning requires an identification of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats posed by the institutional environments both external (environmental, economic, political, social) and internal (policies, staffing, procedures). Finally, through intense monitoring (by the stakeholders), strategic planning evolves, adapting as new needs and priorities emerge. Listening and learning are key inputs. As this diagram shows, it is an iterative, rolling process.
The Rolling Process of Strategic Responsiveness Planning
STRATEGIC RESPONSIVENESS CYCLE
The Strategic Responsiveness Cycle is based on the classic principles of strategic planning plus value-adding methods to support a strategic agricultural planning process that is explicitly participatory and gender-responsive. It draws upon a considerable body of practical experience, from major business corporations, from public and private agricultural development institutions, and from women and men who depend on agriculture for their livelihoods. The process is deliberative and participatory. It can be broken down into four steps.
The 4-Step Strategic Responsiveness Cycle
1. Create an enabling environment for strategic responsiveness planning
identify enabling resources
identify and involve stakeholders
compose a Guiding Vision
3. Strategic planning
identify strategic issues
plan responsive options
2. Scan for strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats for PGRAD
scan the internal environment
scan the external environment
4. Responsive implementation andmonitoring
participatory implementation
participatory monitoring
STEP 1: CREATE AN ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR STRATEGIC PLANNING
The first step is preparing to do the planning. Because the process of strategic planning involves new ways of working and thinking, appropriate preparations must be made. These include identification of the resources needed, identification and involvement of the stakeholders, and composition of a guiding vision.
Identify Enabling Resources
There must be agreement among decision-makers about the need for strategic planning. The support and commitment of decision-makers within the agricultural development institution is vital if strategic planning is to succeed. The involvement of decision-makers outside the institution is crucial because implementation will involve multiple parties. It is important that these decision-makers include both women and men, from both government and NGOs, working in all sectors of agricultural development.
The next task is to designate and source the resources required.
Time. Identify when the completed plan is required and estimate how long the strategic planning process will take. But be flexible. If strategic planning is new, estimates may be unrealistic.
Funds. The amount of money available for the planning process is an issue that must be addressed early. It will influence the extent and level of involving stakeholders, information distribution, bringing in outside experts, etc.
Staff Involvement. The number and role of staff to be directly involved in the process must be clarified before the process can begin. What proportion of staff? From what levels? With what roles? Which ones will be involved in consultations with the other stakeholders? Can a staff member act as overall facilitator or is outside expertise required?
Information. A primary purpose of a strategic plan is to convey information. That information must be appropriate to the institution's stakeholders. It is important to understand the official information requirements of the institution, how the plan will be used and with whom it will be shared.
Identify & Involve Stakeholders
The key to responsive agricultural development is satisfaction of the stakeholders. Effective strategic planning in agricultural development institutions requires the participation of high-level planning officials and all levels of stakeholders, including various groups of women and men farmers.
Strategic planning in which policy-makers and planners participate is more likely to be implemented. Strategic planning in which women and men farmers participate is more likely to be effective.
One may also argue that "...performing a stakeholder analysis is an ethical necessity, since only by understanding stakeholder interests and concerns is an organization likely to take truly ethical action" (Bryson, 1995).
Definition of Stakeholder
A stakeholder is any person, group or organization that can place a claim on an institution's attention, resources, or output or is affected by that output.
Many agricultural development planners make the mistake of seeing "the farmer" as their only key stakeholder, particularly if the institution is using a participatory approach. There are two dangers in focusing on farmers: the institution may lose sight of the great heterogeneity among farmers; and there are many other types of stakeholder groups who have a tremendous influence on the effectiveness (or lack thereof) of agricultural development programmes, including marketing boards, credit institutions and political bodies, to name a few.
The key elements to stakeholders' analysis for strategic planning are:
* identify who the institution's stakeholders are;
* identify what their criteria are for judging the institution's performance (what is their stake in the institution or its output?); and
* identify how well the institution performs according to those criteria from the stakeholders' point of view.
Good practice: ensure direct consultation with the stakeholders, as opposed to simply guessing what they want. To identify and involve stakeholder groups in the strategic planning process means that mechanisms of consultation must be identified or created, i.e. stakeholder workshops, PRAs, field visits to listen and learn, and participatory communications via radio or theatre. Ideally all stakeholders are involved in all stages of strategic planning but this is probably unwieldy and unmanageable in most cases. Three stages of the process allow the greatest number of women and men to be involved: scanning (see Step 2 below); providing feedback on a draft plan (see Step 3); and monitoring responsiveness (see Step 4).
The consultation process will generate at least two types of input: information, as the stakeholders air their opinions, needs and expectations; and decision-making, as the stakeholders participate in selecting goals, priorities and the activities to be undertaken.
Compose a Guiding Vision
Yogi Berra, the famous New York Yankees baseball player and manager, once said, "If you don't know where you're heading, you're likely to end up somewhere else."^7 His maxim emphasizes that without a sense of purpose, we are quite literally lost.
A vision is a soaring purpose. To facilitate PGRAD, in a time of constant change and uncertainty, everyone must have a clear understanding about what the agricultural development institution is trying to achieve. We must:
* develop and use an enabling and empowering vision. Effective planning at all levels is marked by a core philosophy or a vision of how the institution wishes to contribute to food security and development.
* ensure that the vision is specific enough to act as a "tie breaker" (e.g. equity is more important than quantity) while general enough to leave room for taking bold initiatives in an ever-changing environment.
Composing a guiding vision starts with looking at the mandate and mission of the institution. An institution's mission provides the social justification for its existence. These are the technical and social needs, related to agriculture, that the institution seeks to fill. Viewed in this light, institutions must always be seen as a means to an end, not as an end in themselves.
Clarifying the mission of an institution eliminates unnecessary conflict. An institution's purpose defines the arenas within which the institution will directly implement or collaborate, and it charts the future course of the institution (at least in a broad outline). Moreover, an important and socially justifiable mission is a source of inspiration to its stakeholders, including staff members.
It is also important to look at the past experience of the institution for lessons learned. But a strategic vision is mostly about the future. It answers the questions:
* What is our preferred future?
* What values and beliefs do we hold as central to the way we operate?
* What role should we perform in the future?
* What outcomes should we aim to achieve?
The best planners are master users of vision, especially in chaotic conditions, almost without exception and at every level. The vision must act as a compass in a wild and stormy sea and, like a compass, it loses its value if it isn't adjusted to take its surroundings into account.
Vision, Values, Mission and Goals
(Adapted from Senge, et al, 1994)
Vision: an image of our desired future
A vision is a picture of the future you seek to create, described in the present tense, as if it were happening now. A statement of "our vision" shows where we want to go, and what we will be like when we get there. The word comes from the Latin videre, "to see". This link to seeing is significant; the more richly detailed and visual the image, the more compelling it will be. Because of its tangible and immediate quality, a vision gives shape and direction to the institution's future.
Values: how we expect to travel to where we want to go The word "value" comes from the French verb valoir, meaning, "to be worth." Gradually it evolved an association with valour and worthiness. Values describe how we intend to operate, on a day-by-day basis, as we pursue our vision. Hitler's Germany, for example, was based on a very clear vision, but its values were monstrous. Values are best expressed in terms of behaviour: how we want to behave with each other, how we expect to regard women, the poor, the low-caste, and the lines that we will and will not cross. It becomes easier to speak honestly and to share information when everyone knows that these are agreed-upon values.
Mission or Purpose: what the organization is here to do"Mission" comes from the Latin word mittere, meaning "to throw, let go or send." Also derived from Latin, the word "purpose" (originally proponere) means, "to declare". Because the word mission has military or religious overtones today, many prefer the word purpose. Whether you call it a mission or purpose, it represents the fundamental reason for the institution's existence. What are we here to do together?
Goals: milestones we expect to reach before too longEvery shared effort needs not just broad vision, but specific, realizable goals. Goals represent what people commit themselves to do, often within a few months. The word may come from the Old English goelan, to hinder. Goals often address barriers and obstacles which we must pass to reach our vision.
STEP 2: SCAN FOR STRENGTHS, WEAKNESSES, OPPORTUNITIES AND THREATS TO PGRAD
The task of scanning is the critical link between an institution's vision of what it seeks to achieve (see step 1, above), and what its most strategic options are (see step 3). Scanning clarifies strengths and opportunities for PGRAD as well as constraints and threats. Scanning makes clear what is and is not feasible. Scanning also provides the opportunity for the opinions and needs of stakeholders to be voiced and incorporated fully.
Because changes in the environment are occurring continuously, scanning needs to become a regular process of collecting and analysing information. Scanning information can be collected in many ways, including consultation with stakeholders, management information systems, programme monitoring and evaluation findings, and research.
Scan the internal environment. The question addressed in this step is: Which aspects of the institution at present help or hinder its implementation of PGRAD? The focus is on internal factors (those within the control of the institution) such as performance, policies, procedures, staffing, budget and structure. This scan focuses more on the present than on the future.
Good practice: identify both internal strengths and weaknesses. For PGRAD, the scan should include the institution's policies concerning gender and participation, its budget allocations to these issues, and whether there are gender-responsive procedures and staffing.
It is important that this scan not be conducted only by management. There is a risk that managers will not be truly objective and may see things as they wish they were, rather than as they are.
Identification of an institution's strengths and weaknesses for PGRAD leads to identification of its distinctive competencies, or in the words of business managers, their "core capabilities". These consist of the institution's strongest abilities and most effective actions and strategies, or the resources on which it can draw routinely to perform well. It also identifies areas that require change or strengthening.
Scan the external environment. The question addressed in this step is, "What are the trends and pressures in the external environment that could affect the institution's ability to implement PGRAD?" External factors are those that are not under the institution's control. The focus of this scan is mostly on the future.
The most common approach for this scan is to use political, economic, social and technical (PEST) analysis, looking at trends. But for PGRAD, it is also important to include environmental issues, to include a scan of gender issues in all categories, and to understand the interrelationships among them.
Unfortunately institutions often focus only on the negative or threatening aspects of external changes and not on the opportunities they present. Good practice: look for both external opportunities and threats to PGRAD.
Planners and managers often find it difficult to be truly objective about the external environment. To avoid problems, it is best to include:
* as much factual information as possible;
* consultation with stakeholders outside the institution;
* consultation with field staff who are closer to the operational environment; and
* the use of a facilitator with wider experience who is willing to ask the tough questions.
Attention to opportunities and threats, along with stakeholder analysis, will lead to identification of an institution's "key success factors". Success factors are the things an institution must do or the criteria it must meet in order to be successful in relating to its external environment.
STEP 3: STRATEGIC PLANNING
The iterative nature of the strategic planning process becomes apparent in this step. Information analysed in earlier steps presents itself again as part of a strategic decision-making process. Strategic planning puts the focus on what is truly important and truly feasible.
Identifying strategic issues. Identifying strategic issues is the most riveting step in strategic planning. Strategic issues are those which affect the institution to such an extent that they have to be considered in making decisions about its future direction. Virtually every strategic issue, by definition, involves conflict of one sort or another. The conflicts may involve ends (what), means (how), vision (why), location (where), timing (when), and people favoured or disadvantaged by different ways of resolving an issue (who).
The first step is to look back at the previous steps. Start with the vision - then look at the information gained from the internal and external scans. Strategic issues should contain three elements:
Positive possibilities. Each issue should be framed as a question that the institution can do something positive to answer. If the institution cannot do anything about the issue, it is best not to have it as a strategic issue. An institution's resources are limited enough without wasting them on issues it cannot address effectively.
Relevant factors. The factors that make the issue a fundamental challenge should be listed. In particular, what (in terms of the institution's mandates, vision, internal strengths and weaknesses, and external opportunities and threats) makes this a strategic issue for the institution? Every effective strategy builds on strengths and takes advantage of opportunities while minimizing or overcoming weaknesses or threats.
Consequences. Prepare a statement of the consequences of failing to address the strategic issue. This will help all the stakeholders decide just how strategic or important various issues are. If no consequences will ensue from failure to address a particular issue, then it is not strategic. At the other extreme, if the institution will be destroyed or will miss a valuable opportunity by failing to address a particular issue, then the issue is clearly very strategic. Thus the step of identifying strategic issues is aimed at focusing attention on what is truly important for the effectiveness and responsiveness of the institution.
Identifying the Strategic Issues
Once the strategic issues are identified, they should be listed in order of priority. This is easier said than done. It is crucial that both external and internal stakeholders, both women and men, have a voice in setting priorities.
Plan Responsive Strategies. A strategy is defined as a pattern of purposes, policies, programmes, actions, decisions or resource allocations that define what an institution is, what it does and why it does it. A strategy therefore is an extension of the institution's vision, forming a bridge between the institution and its environment.
Strategies are developed to deal with the issues identified in the previous step. The focus of this step is on creating consistency across people's rhetoric (what they say), their choices (what they decide on) and their actions (what they do), as well as the impacts of their actions. Effective strategy formulation and implementation processes link all of these into consistent patterns across levels, functions and time. Good practice includes the following five steps.
1) Identify practical alternatives for resolving each strategic issue. Each option should be phrased in imperative action terms, such as "do", "get", "achieve", and so forth, making them more real to the stakeholders.
2) Enumerate the barriers to achieving those alternatives. Focusing on barriers at this point is one way to ensure that the strategies developed deal with implementation difficulties directly rather than haphazardly.
3) Develop proposals for achieving the alternatives either directly or indirectly by overcoming the barriers. Ideas from stakeholders are key here.
4) Identify actions that must be taken over the next two to three years to implement the major proposals identified.
5) Develop a detailed work program for the next six months to a year to implement these actions.
In order to secure the passage of any strategy, it is necessary to continue to pay close attention to the goals, concerns and priorities of the internal and external stakeholders.
STEP 4: RESPONSIVE IMPLEMENTATION & MONITORING
Just creating a strategic plan is not enough. Developing effective PGRAD programmes, projects, action plans, budgets and implementation processes will bring life to the strategies and create real value for the institution and its stakeholders. The implementation and monitoring process must allow for adaptive learning as new information becomes available and circumstances change. Such learning will lead to more effective implementation - and to new rounds of strategizing.
Participatory Implementation. It is time for action. The most important outcome that responsive planners should aim for in this step is increased responsiveness to stakeholders.
The first step is a reasonably smooth and rapid introduction of strategic plans throughout the agricultural development system. This requires that all implementers, including the farmers, are aware of what needs to be done and when, why, and by whom. This is usually written as work plans in programme or project documents, including the following information: objectives; responsibilities of various stakeholders; proposed action steps; tentative schedules; estimated resource requirements and sources; a communication process; a monitoring process; and upward and downward accountability processes.
Inevitably, whenever something new is introduced, something will go wrong. The strategic planning process described above ensures that major difficulties do not arise. But, there will probably be many small problems that will need to be worked out. Planners, as enablers, are responsible for overseeing the problem-solving process.
It is very important that the coalition of stakeholders involved in developing the strategic plans continue to play a role in their implementation. Successful implementation of PGRAD requires power sharing as it also ensures a sharing of resources, responsibilities and learning.
Participatory monitoring. Slavishly following a strategic plan, because of the time and political capital invested in assembling it, is counterproductive. Once the implementation process has been under way for some time, it is important to monitor the strategies as a prelude to a new round of strategic planning. Participatory monitoring is the key to knowing what needs to change and why.
Willingness to be monitored by the different stakeholders is essential. Participatory monitoring must be seen as a way of creating space in which to systematize and learn from experience, to reflect on a programme's activities to see how they might be improved. A learning organization has to be willing to be monitored and evaluated, not only by external expert evaluators and donor representatives as is usually the case, but also by different units and levels inside the institution and by the women and men farmers it serves.
Most institutions have volumes of information on inputs such as salaries, supplies and personnel. Unfortunately very few institutions can say much about their outputs, let alone their impacts. For example, while many agricultural development institutions can report on the number of cattle vaccinated last year and the number of farmers who attended demonstrations, they cannot report on the impacts these activities had for household food security.
A lack of information about impacts presents problems both for PGRAD and for the stakeholders. Stakeholders judge an institution according to criteria they choose, which are not necessarily the same criteria the institution would choose. For external stakeholders in particular, these criteria typically relate to responsiveness to their priorities. If an institution cannot effectively meet its stakeholders' priorities, then regardless of its inherent worth, the stakeholders are likely to withdraw their participation - and the development effort will fail.
The absence of impact information may also create - or deepen - institutional and stakeholder conflicts. Without impact criteria and information, there is no way to evaluate the relative effectiveness of alternative strategies, resource allocations and distributions of power. As a result, conflicts are likely to occur more often than they should, to serve narrow interests and to be resolved in ways that do not further PGRAD.
The best system of monitoring responsiveness and impacts is by listening intently to the farmers and adjusting rapidly. Excessive reverence for work plans can blind us to unplanned and unexpected - yet incredibly useful - sources of information, insight and action.
TAILORING TO MEET SPECIFIC PRIORITIES
The Strategic Responsiveness Cycle outlined here is a general approach. Like any planning and management process it must be carefully tailored to specific situations if it is to be useful. Although the steps are laid out in a linear sequence it must be emphasized that the strategic responsiveness cycle, as its name suggests, is iterative in practice. Stakeholders typically rethink what they have done several times before they reach final decisions. Moreover, the process does not always begin at the beginning. Institutions typically find themselves confronted with a pressing strategic issue (Step 3) or a failing strategy (Step 4), and this leads them to engage in strategic planning.
In addition, implementation usually begins before all of the planning is complete. As soon as useful actions are identified, they are taken, as long as they do not jeopardize future actions that might prove valuable. For example, if the institution's mandate needs to be redrafted, then it should be. If the scans turn up weaknesses or threats that need to be addressed immediately, they should be. If aspects of a strategy can be implemented without awaiting further developments, they should be. And so on. Strategic thinking and acting is important, and all of the thinking does not have to occur before actions are taken. It is this iterative, flexible, responsive nature of strategic planning that makes it so attractive.
references
Barlow, J. 1998. Myths perpetuate the lone manager. The Houston Chronicle, Section C (Business), 5 May 1998.
Ben Boubaker, A. 1997. Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Tunisia. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Bifani, P. 1997. Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Costa Rica. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Blackburn, J. & Holland, J., eds. 1998.Who changes? Institutionalizing participation in development. London, Intermediate Technology Publications.
Bond, R. 1998. Lessons for the large-scale application of process approaches in Sri Lanka. IIED Gatekeeper Series no. 75, London, International Institute for Environment and Development.
Bryson, J.M. 1995. Strategic planning for public and non-profit institutions. A guide to strengthening and sustaining institutional achievement. San Francisco, Ca., USA, Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Chambers, R. 1997. Whose reality counts? Putting the first last. London, Intermediate Technology Publications.
Crawley, H. 1998. Living up to the empowerment claim? The potential of PRA. In I. Guijt & M.K. Shah, eds. The myth of community. Gender issues in participatory development. London, Intermediate Technology Publications.
Eckman, K. 1997. Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Sikkim. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1987. Training for decentralized planning. Lessons from experience, by M. Maetz & M.G. Quieti. Training Materials for Agricultural Planning No. 29. Rome.
FAO. 1988. Linkages between policy analysis, national planning and decentralized planning for rural development, by D.G.R. Belshaw. Training Materials for Agricultural Planning No. 18. Rome.
FAO. 1990a. Toward improved multilevel planning for agricultural and rural development in Asia and the Pacific. FAO Economic and Social Development Paper No. 52. Rome.
FAO. 1990b. Rural area development planning. A review and synthesis of approaches, by A. Bendavid-Val. Training Materials for Agricultural Planning No. 21. Rome.
FAO. 1991.Rural area development planning. Principles, approaches and tools of economic analysis, by A. Bendavid-Val. Training Materials for Agricultural Planning No. 27/1. Rome.
FAO. 1996. Report of the World Food Summit, part one. WFS 96/REP. Rome.
FAO. 1997. Decentralized planning in sub-Saharan Africa. Economic and Social Development Paper No. 140. Rome.
FAO. 1997. FAO's experiences on decentralized rural development. Rome, FAO Rural Development Division.
FAO. 1997. RED-IFO A decentralization model. Rome, FAO Rural Development Division.
FAO. 1998. Strategic thinking and management workshop for the Land and Water Development Division, 19-21 January 1998. Rome.
FAO. 1998. Press Release 98/0.
Frischmuth, C. 1997. Gender is not a sensitive issue: institutionalizing a gender-oriented participatory approach in Siavonga, Zambia. IIED Gatekeeper Series No. 72. London, International Institute for Environment and Development.
Goetz, A.M. 1992. Gender and administration. Ids Bulletin, Vol. 23, no 4.
Goetz, A.M. 1997. Managing organizational change: the "gendered" organization of space and time. Gender and Development, Vol. 5, No. 1.
Guijt, I. & Shah, M.K., eds. 1998. The myth of community. Gender issues in participatory development. London, Intermediate Technology Publications.
Hagmann, J., Chuma, E., Connolly, M. & Murwira, K. 1997. Propelling change from the bottom-up: institutional reform in Zimbabwe. IIED Gatekeeper Series No. 71. London, International Institute for Environment and Development.
Handy, C. 1993. Understanding organizations. London, Penguin Books.
Hill, C. 1997. Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Afghanistan. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Holland, J. & Blackburn, J. 1998. Whose voice? Participatory research and policy change. London, Intermediate Technology Publications.
Howes, M. & Roche, C. 1995. A participatory organizational appraisal of ACORD. PRA Notes, 22: 69-73. London, International Institute for Environment and Development.
Ingles, A.W., Musch, A. & Qwist-Hoffmann, H. 1998. The participatory process for supporting collaborative management of natural resources: An overview. Report prepared for the Community Forestry Unit of FAO. Rome, FAO.
Jahan, R. 1995. The elusive agenda: mainstreaming women in development. London, Zed Books.
Joekes, S. 1997. Retreat or advance? Mainstreaming gender analysis at the Institute of Development Studies. J. Int. Devel., 8(5): 697-727.
Kane, M. (1997). Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Pakistan. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Kievelitz, U. & Reineke, R.D. 1993. Rapid appraisal of organizational cultures: A challenge for field work. RRA Notes, 17: 57-63, London, International Institute for Environment and Development.
Koopman, J. (1997). Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Key issues from ten case studies. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Maxwell, S. 1996. Organizational issues in new forms of multi-sectoral planning. IDS Working Paper No. 46. Brighton; UK, International Development Strategy.
Mhina, E. 1997. Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Tanzania. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Ndiaye, O.K. 1997. Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Senegal. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Nielson, D. & Crowder, L.V. 1998. A Strategic Framework for Agricultural Extension in Uganda. Uganda Agricultural Extension Project II, World Bank Aide Memoire, July.
Percy, R. 1997. Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Ethiopia. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Peters, T. 1987. Thriving on chaos. Handbook for a management revolution. London, Pan Books.
Peters, T. 1994. The Tom Peters Seminar. Crazy times call for crazy organizations. New York, Vintage Books.
Postma, W. 1998. Capacity-building: the making of a curry. Development in Practice, Vol. 8, No. 1, February 1998. Oxfam.
Saiz, M. 1997. Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Honduras. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Senge, P.M. 1994. The fifth discipline. The art and practice of the learning organization. New York, Doubleday.
Senge, P.M. et al. 1994. The fifth discipline fieldbook. Strategies and tools for building a learning organization. New York, Doubleday.
Shepard, A. 1998. Participatory environmental management: contradiction of process, project and bureaucracy in the Himalayan Foothills. In J. Blackburn & J. Holland, eds. Who changes? Institutionalizing participation in development, p. 88-99. London, Intermediate Technology Publications.
Smith, R.J. 1997. Best practices in strategic planning for public-sector organizations. An overview prepared for FAO, Rome, FAO.
Sontheimer, S. 1997. Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Namibia. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Sontheimer, S., Bir Basnyat, B. & Maharjan, K. 1997. Gender and participation in agricultural development planning. Lessons from Nepal. Working document prepared for the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Sontheimer, S. 1998. Workshop report on From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices. Prepared as a result of the Global Workshop, From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices, 8-12 December 1997, sponsored by the Women in Development Service. Rome, FAO.
Sprenger, E. & Groverman, V. 1996. Framework for quick organizational gender scanning. Handout 1, Module IV for Training Workshop on Women, Gender and Development 10-28 Nov. 1996. The Netherlands, Royal Tropical Institute.
Thompson, J. 1998. Participatory approaches in government bureaucracies: facilitating institutional change. In J. Blackburn & J. Holland, eds. Who changes? Institutionalizing participation in development, p. 108-117. London, Intermediate Technology Publications.
Thrupp, L.A., Cabarle, B. & Zazueta, A. 1994. Participatory methods and political processes: linking grassroots actions to policy-making for sustainable development in Latin America. In I. Scoones & J. Thompson, eds. Beyond farmer first: Rural people's knowledge, agricultural research and extension practice. London, Intermediate Technology Publications.
UNDP. 1998.UNDP Gender Mainstreaming Information Pack. New York.
Wilde, V. 1998. SEAGA Field Handbook. Socio-economic and Gender Analysis Programme. Rome, FAO and International Labour Organisation.
endnotes
1. Direct technical support is usually provided by local NGOs who, while often more flexible and innovative, lack the resources to scale up in ways that would significantly improve the lives of farmers on a wide scale over the long-term.
2. For FAO, the Global Workshop From Farmer to Planner and Back: Harvesting Best Practices was an example of this kind of sharing and celebration of what works.
3. Called the "analysis of difference" by Alice Wellbourne (IIED), or the socio-economic and gender analysis approach (SEAGA) by the FAO.
4. Quote cited in Peters (1987)
5. The value and limitations of training was one of the most consistent lessons learned from the 12 countries participating in the From Farmer to Planner and Back workshop.
6. "Sandwich model" adapted from Hagmann, Chuma, Connolly & Murwira (1997).
7. Cited in Bryson (1995).
<section>6</section>
acknowledgements
THE KEY ISSUES
The ten case studies synthesized for this paper result from the work of so many people, over so many years, that it is impossible to acknowledge them all. However, it is worth recalling that the principal actors were the farmers, women and men, who shared information about their constraints and opportunities for equitable and sustainable livelihoods. A second important group of actors was those rural development and extension agents who, together with project staff, were responsible for facilitating the processes described here. A third group of actors were those who analysed, synthesized and wrote about these experiences, those who edited the original case studies, and those who translated them into English, French and Spanish. I thank them all.
Jeanne Koopman · Author
THE RESPONSIVE PLANNER
Friends and colleagues have provided helpful comments and insights. My first debt is to the participants of the From Farmer to Planner and Back workshop. They were the greatest source of inspiration and ideas. I also want to thank Frank Butcher (IFAD), LoyVan Crowder (SDRE), Jeanette Denholm Gurung (ICIMOD), Nancy Hart (Consultant), Tiina Huvio (SDWW), Lieke Koenraadt (SDWW), Maria Grazia Quieti (TCAS) and Sally Sontheimer (SDWW), for reviewing the first draft and pointing out the holes and mistakes. They also gave me a lot of encouragement. The remaining holes and mistakes are my own.
Vicki Wilde · Author
CASE STUDIES
The Women in Development Service would like to thank the authors for their efforts in providing such a wealth of information about the projects. Afghanistan-Catherine Hill; Costa Rica-Patricia Bifani; Ethiopia-Rachel Percy; Honduras-Mabel Saiz; Namibia-Sally Sontheimer; Nepal-Sally Sontheimer; Pakistan-Marilee Kane; Senegal-Oumy Kairy Ndiane; Tunesia-Abderrahmane Ben Boubaker; India-Karlyn Eckman.
THE PUBLICATION
The Women in Development Service would like to thank Nancy Hart for leading the editing team, Roberto Magini for spot illustrations and Maxtudio for the design.
A special acknowledgement goes to the Government of Norway which provided the financial support for the workshop itself, the case studies and this publication.
Other components of the Harvest of from Farmer to Planner and Back
COUNTRY CASE STUDIES
Detailed accounts of the activities of the individual projects that contributed to the Key Issues Paper and were present at the From Farmer to Planner and Back workshop are available in the case studies. Each case study is available in English, French or Spanish. Electronic versions are available through the FAO websites (see below).
WORKSHOP REPORT (BY SALLY SONTHEIMER)
The Workshop Report provides information about the daily workings of the From Farmer to Planner and Back workshop. It also provides a summary of the participants' definitions of development concepts as well as their overall best practices and recommendations for PGRAD planning (English).
TRAINING MATERIALS (BY MARTIN BYRAM)
This work will be of special interest to trainers looking for new ways to build the capacities of staff involved in PGRAD processes. It contains a compilation and analysis of the various training materials and methodologies developed by trainers in the participating projects of the From Farmer to Planner and Back workshop (English).
VIDEO (PRODUCED BY NANCY HART)
The From Farmer to Planner and Back video is a visual introduction to The Responsive Planner. It features the story of one workshop participant, an agricultural worker from Sikkim, India, and documents her experience with gender-responsive participatory planning for small-scale livestock development. The documentary follows her to Rome where she attends the From Farmer to Planner and Back workshop to share her experiences and to learn from others, and then returns with her to Sikkim where she can put her new ideas into practice (English). The video is available in PAL, NTSC or SECAM formats.
FOR MORE INFORMATION ON THESE MATERIALS, CONTACT
Women in Development Service
Women and Population Division
Sustainable Development Department
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel. +39 06 570 53932 / 55102 Fax: + 39 06 570 52004
www.fao.org/gender or www.fao.org/sd
<section>7</section>
abbreviations
AHPIM
animal health and production improvement module
PEST
political, economic, social and technical analysis
CAP
community action plan
PGRAD
participatory, gender-responsive agricultural development
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
PIHAM
Animal Health and Production Improvement Module (Afghanistan)
FSR/E
farming systems research and extension
PRA
participatory rural appraisal
GAD
gender and development
PREVINOBA
North-West Groundnut Basin Village Reforestation Project (Senegal)
GD
Pgross domestic product
RRA
rapid rural appraisal
IMF
International Monetary Fund
SDWW
FAO Women and Population Division, Women in Development Service
IRD
integrated rural development
SEAGA
Socio-Economic and Gender Analysis Programme (FAO)
MARP
méthode accélérée de recherche participative
TCP
Technical Cooperation Programme (FAO)
MOA
Ministry of Agriculture
TOT
training of trainers
NGO
non-governmental organization
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
PADETES
Participatory Demonstration and Training Extension System
WID
women in development
<section>8</section>
FROM FARMER TO PLANNER AND BACK list of participants
NAME
TITLE INSTITUTION COUNTRY
Adelheid M. Awases
Deputy Director,
Rural Development Planning
Ministry of Agriculture, Water & Rural Development
NAMIBIA
Bogalech Alemu
Head, Women Affairs Department
Ministry of Agriculture
ETHIOPIA
Ibou Badji
Chef de Poste
Previnoba
SENEGAL
Abderrahmane Ben Boubaker
Independent Consultant
TCP/TUN/4555
TUNISIA
Pierre Bessuges
SEAGA Consultant
SDWW
FAO
Fatiha Bou-Salah
Household Resource
Management Officer
SDWW
FAO
Martin Byram
Training Materials Consultant
PEER Consultants
BOTSWANA
Haydée de Martinez
Coordinadora Nacional
Proyecto GCP/HON/017/NET
HONDURAS
Maria Fernandez
Gender and Agrobiodiversity
Specialist SDWW
SDWW
FAO
Marilee Kane
Consultant
Inter-Regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development
PAKISTAN
Karlyn Eckman
Adjunct Professor
College of Natural Resources, University of Minnesota, USA
USA
Zoraida Garcia
Programme Officer
SDWW
FAO
Lydda Gaviria
Communication Officer
SDRE
FAO
Tiina Huvio
Gender and Biodiversity Officer
SDWW
FAO
Josef Kienzle
Gender and Participation in Agricultural Engineering Officer
AGSE
FAO
Eva Jordans
Gender and Irrigation Officer
SDWW
FAO
Lieke Koenraadt
Household Resource Management Officer
SDWW
FAO
Fatma Larbi
Chargée de mission et de la coopération internationale
Ministère de l'agriculture (Cabinet)
TUNISIA
Percy Masika
Deputy Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Water & Rural Development
NAMIBIA
Theresia Peter Msaki
Agricultural Economist - Planning
Ministry of Agriculture & Cooperatives
TANZANIA
Tsigedengil Mengist
Agricultural Extension Communication Expert,
MoA, Southern People's Agricultural Bureau
ETHIOPIA
Una Murray
SEAGA Consultant
SDWW
FAO
Rachel Percy
Lecturer
University of Reading
ENGLAND
Elizabeth Chola Phiri
National Project Coordinator
GCP/ZAM/052/BEL
ZAMBIA
Shukra Kumar Pradhan
Chief, Agriculture Development Officer
District Agricultural Dev. Office, His Majesty's Government of Nepal
NEPAL
Helle Qwisthoffman
Community Forestry Officer
Community Forestry Unit
FAO
Mabel Saiz
Economist/FAO Consultant
SDWW
FAO
Saoudiatou Sall Dièye
Maîtresse d'economie familiale (option rurale)
Previnoba
SENEGAL
R. Sobha
Joint Secretary, Finance and Planning Department
Government of Andhra pradesh, Hyderabad
INDIA
Amina Shaaban
National Project Director, GCP/URT/108/NOR
Ministry of Agriculture, Zanzibar
TANZANIA
Monica Soddeman
Agricultural Education Officer
SDRE
FAO
Sally Sontheimer
Consultant
SDWW
FAO
Nolvia Uclès Aguilar
Analista de Politicas
Unidad de Planeamiento y Evaluación de Gestión, Secretaría de Agricultura y Ganadería
HONDURAS
Durga Upreti
Project Liaison & Training Officer (Assistant Project Officer)
Sikkim Rural Development Agency, Government of Sikkim
INDIA
Hazel Vindas Pérez
Socióloga
Oficina de Género y Desarrollo, Consejo Nacional de Producción
COSTA RICA
Judith Viquez Astorga
Sociologa - Coordinadora Programa Mujer y Familia
Instituto de Desarrollo Agrario
COSTA RICA
Vicki Wilde
Consultant
SDWW
FAO
Stella Williams
Senior Lecturer, Dept. Of Agricultural Economics, Obafemi Awolowo University Ife-Ife, Osun State, Nigeria
Programme for Integrated
Development of Artisanal
Fisheries in West Africa (IDAF)
NIGERIA
Prem Bahadur Woli
Assistant Horticulture
Development Officer
Ministry of Agriculture,
Women Farmer Development
Division
NEPAL
<section>9</section>
FROM FARMER TO PLANNER AND BACK list of participants
COUNTRY/PROJECT
FOCUS
ACTOR/LEVEL
AFGHANISTAN " Promotion of Farmers' Participation through the Implementation of Animal Health and Production Improvement Modules (AHPIM) in Afghanistan"
Participatory livestock production
Local/farmer
COSTA RICA: " Apoyo a las Mujeres Productoras del Area Rural en el Marco de un Enfoque de Genero"
Integrate gender in mixed farming sector policy
Local/regional/ national
ETHIOPIA: " Improving Client Oriented Extension Training in Ethiopia"
Re-orientation of agricultural extension
District/Province
HONDURAS: " Apoyo a la Mujer Rural Para su Acceso a Recursos de Producción"
Support to women farmers
Farmers' groups
NAMIBIA: " Improving Information on Women's Contribution to Agricultural Production for Gender Sensitive Planning" and "Training for the Integration of Women in Agriculture and Rural Development"
Gender planning and gender analysis training for agricultural extension staff
District/National
NEPAL: " Improving Information on Women's Contribution to Agricultural Production for Gender Sensitive Planning"
Gender planning at district level
Community/ District
INDIA: " Development of Small-Scale Livestock Activities in Sikkim"
Small livestock development
Community
PAKISTAN: " Participatory Upland Conservation and Development"
Natural resource conservation
Community
SENEGAL: " Reboisement villageois dans le Nord-Ouest du Bassin Arachidier" (Previnoba)
Participatory land development and management plans for environmental conservation
Community
TANZANIA " Improving Information on Women's Contribution to Agricultural Production for Gender Sensitive Planning"
Gender planning
District/National
TUNISIA: " Définition d'une politique et elaboration d'une stratégie et d'un Plan d'action en faveur des femmes rurales
Integration of rural women's issues into development planning
Community/ National
ZAMBIA: " Improving Household Food Security and Nutrition in Luapula Valley"
Nutrition and Food Security
Community
