<title>Stratgy For Action. GENDER AND FOOD SECURITY The role of information</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
As the new millennium dawns, the issues of food security and equal access to economic and social benefits remain as topical as ever. The Strategic Framework for FAO 2000-2015 specifies that the number of chronically undernourished people in developing countries is now estimated to be 791 million for the 1995 to 1997 period .... Unless major efforts are made to improve food supplies and to overcome inequities, in 2015 the incidence of undernourishment may still be as high as 30 percent of the population.
One of the main underlying causes of food insecurity is poverty, which affects rural women in particular. One of FAO's strategic objectives is "contributing to the eradication of food insecurity and rural poverty", while guaranteeing "sustainable livelihoods and more equitable access to resources". Before policies that will achieve this objective can be designed, the necessary decisions must be supported by relevant and updated information. "It is therefore essential to maintain and improve the coverage, quantity, utility, timeliness and accessibility of the information collected and disseminated ...."
The information and communication technology revolution has greatly increased the possibilities for disseminating and sharing knowledge. But disadvantaged segments of society are excluded from information and communication flows, raising the question of how best to exploit technological developments in a way that prevents them from creating and further increasing inequalities. This is a particularly important issue for FAO at a time when rural populations, particularly subsistence farmers, are having to cope with difficulties that are caused by ongoing economic and social changes and that are considerably more serious for rural women.
The Strategy for Action is designed to support the formulation of agricultural and rural development policies and programmes that will address the challenges of food security and gender equality. The Strategy for Action was discussed and examined at the High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information organized by FAO in Rome on 4 to 6 October 1999. Since then its contents have been revised, with the aim of reflecting as faithfully as possible the wealth and diversity of the contributions made by the participants in the debate.
This Strategy for Action does not aim at addressing every aspect of the vast area of gender equality. Information is only one of the elements that are necessary in responses to the issues that arise from such complex and diverse fields as employment, political representation and law.
I am, however, convinced that it is essential to have comparative information on men and women, and statistics disaggregated by sex that highlight the specific problems of each, so that the appropriate action can be taken. I also support the implementation of two-way information flows: for decision-makers at all levels, to enable them to act with the support of all the facts; and for rural women (and the men with whom they work in an inseparable partnership), to give them a better understanding of their own development and the capacity to take responsibility for it. Last, I believe that disseminating information through the media is an avenue that must be explored and better exploited in order to lift the veil that distorts our view of the world, and to acknowledge the differences that demand tailored solutions.
I trust that the implementation of this Strategy for Action will help increase awareness of the importance of accurate, plural and multidimensional information, and enable all stakeholders to play a full part in designing and planning agricultural policies. This would mark a major step forward towards attaining food security and sustainable development, and would provide an objective foundation for future action.
Jacques Diouf
Director-General
An initial version of this Strategy for Action was examined and discussed by delegations at the High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information held in Rome at FAO headquarters on 4 to 6 October 1999.
The opinions and ideas of participants have been analysed and, as far as possible, taken into account in this document.
It should be borne in mind that information is only one of the many components that are relevant to the challenges of achieving food security and gender equality. For this reason, the FAO Conference, at its 30th session in November 1999, recommended that this Strategy for Action be incorporated as an integral part of FAO's next Plan of Action (2001-2006) on gender, food security and sustainable development. This Plan of Action will be submitted for approval to the 31st session of the FAO Conference in November 2001.
High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information
Breaking the chains of underinformation is part of the struggle we must lead with determination, courage and faith to empower rural women. This is a struggle for equal rights, for human dignity and for freedom: in short, a struggle to promote a life of complete self-fulfilment, a life of happiness and harmony.
Elisabeth Diouf, former First Lady of Senegal and President of the International Steering Committee on the Economic Advancement of Rural Women (ISC)
We can [therefore] affirm that there will be no food security without rural women .... Gender-disaggregated information is essential if appropriate policy recommendations are to be made .... A gender-based differentiation of allocation of labour and resources must be taken into account if technologies are to be developed, targeted and transferred appropriately.
Jacques Diouf, Director-General, FAO
Ms E. Diouf and Mr J. Diouf during the opening session of the High-Level Consultation
- FAO/11872D-1
At the opening session, Ms L. Balbo addressing the plenary, and Ms A. King from UN
- FAO/11872B-29A
In many parts of the world today there is an increasing trend towards the "feminization of agriculture", and this takes place under extremely difficult conditions .... Behind this process, the international dimension is a key factor, both because of the growing interdependence of financial, economical and trading practices and of the fact that the main political decisions are made by a very limited number of countries.
Laura Balbo, Minister of Equal Opportunities, Italy
However, unless means are devised to reach out to the many women who are active in the rural economy, many of the failures of the traditional growth model of development will be repeated, and the ranks of the absolute poor, among whom women constitute the majority, will be further swollen. Neglecting the energy and ingenuity of the women whose unpaid work subsidizes all forms of society's wealth is not only short-sighted but also self-defeating.
Message from the Secretary-General of the United Nations, delivered by Ms Angela King, Assistant Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women
Men and women farmers in a wheat field after the harvest in Myanmar
- FAO/19710/G. BIZZARRI
Rural women at a meeting with extension agents in a field in the Potosi area, Bolivia
- FAO/16134
<section>2</section>
Relationship
between food security
and information
For the last two decades, the issues of sustainable development and recognition of women's economic and social roles in society have been attracting increasing attention from civil society, international organizations and governments alike. The interest shown by these bodies is partly linked to a phenomenon that emerged towards the end of the twentieth century: the exponential growth of information and communications technologies. The wide variety and diversity of information and the speed with which it circulates have had an undeniable effect on the mechanisms of social control and regulation.
Recent international conferences, such as the Fourth World Conference on Women (Beijing, 1995) and the World Food Summit (Rome, 1996), have addressed these issues. The relationships among sustainable development, food security, gender equality and information have been analysed, making it possible to identify some of the factors that contribute to increased poverty and exclusion. These factors include:
* limited access for subsistence farmers, particularly women farmers, to all resources;^1
* scarce attention paid to the roles and responsibilities of men and women when formulating agricultural and rural development plans and policies;
* inadequate gender-specific data and information, hindering decision-making aimed at improving gender equality and political, economic and social equity;
* exclusion of a large part of the population, including rural women, from information flows, communication processes and, thus, decision-making.
The conferences provided an opportunity to stress that subsistence farmers are the most vulnerable to impoverishment and the most exposed to food insecurity because of their limited access to resources. The most seriously affected and deprived in this respect are women farmers,^2 despite the paradoxical fact that in developing countries they produce more than half of total food crops.^3
One of the causes of this situation is the globalization of the economy, which often has negative repercussions on small farmers and disadvantaged segments of the population. Small-scale production systems are being thrown off balance by the liberalization of trade, the privatization of resources and services, structural adjustment policies, the marketing and modernization of agriculture, and other socio-economic factors such as HIV/AIDS. Effects include the rural exodus of men in search of paid employment and, hence, the increase in number of female-headed households. These households have to manage on fewer resources, because the men's wages rarely make up for the loss of agricultural income. In developing countries, the feminization of poverty and of agriculture are two of the most visible consequences.
Methods of development policy planning and evaluation were also debated at the international conferences, and two key issues were highlighted:
Since women play a major role in producing food worldwide, and are therefore a vital component of food security, globalization is directly relevant to them; politics must therefore take account of the specific repercussions of globalization on their work, their living conditions and their decision-making opportunities.
Delegate of Costa Rica
The formulation of development policies is frequently based on the misconception that the needs and interests of all the farmers within the same production system are similar. As a consequence, when production systems are being assessed and analysed prior to defining action priorities and resource allocation, the differences and complementarities of the roles and tasks undertaken by men and women are neglected. However, it has been demonstrated that, if the contributions of men and women are taken into account equitably when allocating productive resources, agricultural production can rise.^4
Planning procedures are changing rapidly as a result of reduced finances, increasing decentralization and the growing influence of civil society. The potential of human resources in this new environment must be appraised so that each individual can become fully involved in the development process. Gender-specific information and sex-disaggregated data are therefore crucial, as is the use of participatory approaches.
Sex distribution of the total, agricultural and non-agricultural labour force
Region or group of countries
Women's percentage share in:
Total labour force
Agricultural labour force
Non-agricultural labour force
Developed countries
Developing countries
African developing countries
- of which sub-Saharan Africa
Asian developing countries
Latin American and Caribbean developing countries
Oceanic developing countries
Low-income food-deficit countries
World
Source: FAOSTAT, 1999.
Distribution of women's labour force by agricultural and non-agricultural activities
Region or group of countries
Agricultural activities (%)
No agricultural activities (%)
Developed countries
Developing countries
African developing countries
- of which sub-Saharan Africa
Asian developing countries
Latin American and Caribbean developing countries
Oceanic developing countries
Low-income food-deficit countries
World
Source: FAOSTAT, 1999.
When examining the degree of women's access to communications technologies and the role of media in disseminating information, several international conferences have noted the following:
The exchange, mobilization and outreach capacities offered by information technologies are of little benefit to women, particularly in developing countries. The many reasons for this include: lack of training in the use of these technologies; the low percentage of women working in the media; the physical, social and psychological isolation of women; the lack of infrastructure; and limited financial resources.
The image of women that is portrayed in the media is very often limited to their traditional reproductive role. Such an image is simplistic and often produces negative results, particularly in commercial and advertising messages.
No vocational training or personal self-fulfilment is possible without information. This basic fact, which was valid yesterday, is even more relevant today at a time when communication, information and sensitization lie at the heart of all development projects ....
Elisabeth Diouf, ISC
Technological progress in the information and communications field could make it possible for women to perform activities that foster and strengthen their power, through launching information campaigns, creating interactive communications networks, spreading distance learning opportunities, etc.
In view of this situation, and by using information as a decision-making tool, a means of empowerment and a means of negotiation, a better understanding of the economic and social contributions of men and women, their respective roles and the ways in which they interact becomes both possible and urgent. Current data on these issues are incomplete and do not adequately illustrate the effects that new trends in society have on rural populations' livelihoods. Governments, in close collaboration with the rural population, should be able to collect, analyse and check the validity of information, in order to determine economic and social priorities and to decide on investments and actions to be taken.
^1 These include: productive resources (land, water, inputs, etc.); technological resources (tools, machines, etc.); educational resources (extension, vocational training, teaching, literacy); social resources (health care, social services and allowances); economic resources (capital, credit, jobs, wages, etc.); and political resources (information, decision-making, management, representation etc.).
^2 FAO. 1998. Rural women and food security, current situation and perspectives. Rome.^
3 FAO. 1995. A fairer future for rural women. Rome.
^4 World Bank. 1999. Gender, growth and poverty reduction. Washington, DC. In this report on poverty in sub-Saharan Africa in 1998 it is shown, for example, that production in Burkina Faso could be raised by 10 to 20 percent if the resources in each household were shared between the men's and the women's plots. In Kenya, harvests from women's plots could increase by more than 20 percent if men and women had access to identical quantities of inputs.
Women do the bulk of nursery work in the Syrian Arab Republic
- FAO/20590/M. MARZOT
A class of rice growers with FAO training staff in Viet Nam
- FAO/17931/L. DEMATTEIS
<section>3</section>
Framework of the Strategy
for Action
The Strategy for Action is based on the recommendations of variousinternational conferences, including the Fourth World Conference on Women. It falls within the framework of the follow-up to the World Food Summit and of the Strategic Framework for FAO 2000-2015. It elaborates on one of the elements in the current FAO Plan of Action for Women in Development which was approved in 1995,^5 namely, the availability, accuracy and use of quantitative and qualitative data and information on rural women. It also consolidates the other lines of action in the Plan: development and use of methodologies; enhancement of rural women's skills; and support for the formulation of gender-sensitive policies.
Although there is now a general acceptance and understanding of gender mainstreaming, there is still a gap between awareness and concrete integration of gender aspects in the projects.
Delegate of Finland
The Strategy for Action is based on the assumption that the achievement of gender equality and food security are closely linked to one another. Knowledge of the relationships between the different roles and responsibilities of men and women within the agricultural production process, as well as an understanding of the mechanisms determining access to and control of resources, are both essential elements in this.
The goals of the Strategy for Action are to:
* contribute to the production and dissemination of information and data that highlight gender-specific features which will facilitate the formulation of gender-responsive agricultural and rural development policies;
* support and stimulate communication among all stakeholders in order to strengthen the decision-making and management capacities, as well as the power, of rural populations, especially women.
In one area of the Himalayas in India, on a 1 hectare farm, a man works for 1 212 hours a year, a pair of bulls for 1 064 hours and a woman for 3 485 hours. The woman's average working hours are 640 for breeding, 384 for irrigation, 650 for transporting organic manure, 557 for sowing and 994 for harvesting and threshing.
Delegate of India
The objectives will use participatory approaches at all decision-making levels^6 to:
* provide policy-makers and planners with relevant information regarding the economic and social contributions made by men and women farmers to agricultural outputs and rural development, so that productive resources can be allocated and managed on a more equitable basis;
* identify and meet the information and communication needs of the rural population, in particular those of women, so that strategies that keep up with emerging economic and social trends can be elaborated and implemented;
* strengthen the relations between rural populations, especially women, and policy-makers, so that they can work together to reach solutions that serve the interests and needs of all involved;
* intensify the visibility of rural women's contribution to food security, so that actions that recognize women as full partners can be implemented.
The stakeholders involved in the Strategy for Action include a wide spectrum of actors, from individuals, women's associations and other civil society organizations, to the private sector, development agencies and government institutions. Each of the parties may be involved in the production, dissemination or use of information, or in a combination of the three. Nevertheless, in the policy-making process, regardless of whether or not it is decentralized, main stakeholders can be identified for each function.
The problems of rural women cannot be solved by feminists' groups and women's organizations alone. The involvement of every sector is necessary. Most important, however, is political commitment and support.
Delegate of the Gambia
Production of information
Rural populations, men and women, who provide primary, especially qualitative, data.
Statisticians, researchers and development specialists, who collect, process, analyse and present secondary qualitative and quantitative data.
Dissemination of information
Civil society organizations, which stimulate exchanges of information between the rural population and policy-makers and often act as spokespeople for both.
Media, which convey information to mobilize public opinion and bolster advocacy activities.
Rural women need information. They need to know what information is being disseminated about them, and to influence that information. We must enable these women to speak out, increase the number of fora for them to exchange their views and experiences, and we must promote the leadership of women.
Delegate of Burkina Faso
Use of information
Men and women farmers, who use information to analyse the possibilities for improving their livelihoods and to empower themselves in order to assume responsibility at different levels of the decision-making, management and planning processes.
Currently, the lack of information on the role of rural women in development has a detrimental effect on how social and economic decisions are taken, which in turn exacerbates the spread of poverty and undermines food security.
Delegate of Ireland
Policy-makers, planners and international development agencies, who use information to identify development trends and prospects and to conceive policies.
The Strategy for Action is governed by a number of basic principles , which take a gender-sensitive view of development while reiterating the need to foster peace, social justice and respect for human rights. These principles include the following:
* Right to freedom of speech. Freedom of speech facilitates the formulation of policies that are responsive to the priorities of all the stakeholders involved.
* Right to information. Observance of this principle can, to a certain extent, contribute towards weakening the mechanisms of domination, removing discrimination and reducing exclusion.
* Right to communication. Access to modern and traditional information technologies broadens training and education opportunities and provides great potential for the exchange of knowledge, points of view and experiences that strengthen alliances and extend the benefits of development.
Use of gender analytic tools and participatory approaches would enhance the bottom-up programme planning with community involvement in problem identification and in seeking solutions to the problems ... (and) would help to collect qualitative information for developing gender responsive interventions.
Delegate of Malawi
The Strategy for Action outlines guidelines for action , which aim at giving agricultural producers, both men and women, equal access to resources and provide specific support in the following areas:
* Diversity of information. This will be achieved by a holistic approach that exploits different disciplines and areas of action to highlight the linkages (illustrated by sex-disaggregated quantitative and qualitative data) among the situation of the rural population, food security and development processes.
* Pluralism of information. This will be achieved by using a variety of different sources, contents,
Brazilian farmers meet with an extension agent
- FAO/18194/G. BIZZARRI
media and forms of dissemination, which leads to an understanding of the mechanisms that create gender inequalities and to proposed strategies for overcoming them.
* Innovation in dissemination. This will be achieved by using diverse channels, technologies, information and communication methods to establish accessible networks of information producers and users that reach the public at large and target audiences.
The Strategy for Action applies a number of methodological tools , which facilitate sustainable activities in the following areas:
Partnership for action. This contributes to strengthening women's participation and establishing the type and scope of the information on, for and with rural women.
Socio-economic and gender analysis. This strengthens the capacity for formulating gender-responsive policies for achieving food security.
Strategic planning. This helps in the participatory design of realistic plans of action that are consistent with the expectations and priorities of all partners involved.
^5 FAO. 1995. Plan of Action for Women in Development. Conference document C95/14-Sup. 1-Rev. 1. Rome.^
6 Decisions may be taken by an individual (man or woman), a household, a community, a firm, a government department, a non-governmental organization (either national or international), etc. A decision-maker can therefore be any individual or group of individuals capable of intervening in a decision-making process, the scope of which may be individual, family-based, community-based, national or international, etc. A decision-maker may therefore be one or more women, one or more communities, one or more political leaders, etc.
Processing data on fishing catches in Senegal
- FAO/15541/R. CANNARSA
Ugandan women attending a village meeting to discuss cooperative problems and their solutions
- FAO/17507/R. FAIDUTTI
<section>4</section>
Information as a
decision-making tool
As globalization evolves, concern about the risks it generates is resulting in increasing demands for policies and actions to be focused on human beings and their needs. At the same time, liberalization of the economy continues and the exclusion and impoverishment of particular groups is a growing source of concern. Furthermore, the break-up of political models is leading to a renewed interest in local socio-economic issues.
Faced with these paradoxical situations, the reconciliation of macro- and microeconomic dimensions is worth exploring in the search for solutions that reduce disparities, fulfil society's expectations and satisfy the increasing demand for people's participation (men and women). In order to strike a better balance between these two economic dimensions and to make decisions that are more informed, it is essential, inter alia, to have detailed gender-specific information on human resources and livelihoods.
The right hand must know what the left hand is doing: macroeconomic policies have to be in line with micropolicies and planning ....
Delegate of Finland
It is necessary to carry out research and analysis that can be used to generate gender-specific information regarding the value, importance and nature of the work done -whether remunerated or not - and to develop indicators regarding changes in access to and control of resources. Gender-sensitive information can give a clear demonstration and illustration of the relationships among increased agricultural production and productivity, sustainable natural resource management and equal access to resources.
Such research and analysis can only be achieved if all stakeholders are truly convinced of the usefulness of gender-specific information and if the working methods are thoroughly reviewed. A higher return on investments made in improving agricultural production and productivity, as well as an equal acquisition of the social and economic benefits, both depend on this.
A woman selling radishes and spring
onions at a market in Tajikistan
- FAO/20631/E. YEVES
Decision-makers and information producers, from the grassroots to the highest levels, need to adopt an attitude that is free of gender biases. They also need to acquire the methodological and technical knowledge that will allow them to assess men's and women's contributions to the rural and agricultural economy. Training in gender analysis and participatory approaches is essential.
Furthermore, for optimal availability and use of gender-specific information, the information must be generated within official information production systems (censuses, agricultural surveys and other national statistical instruments). The effectiveness of current methods and tools for gathering, processing and analysing information also needs to be reviewed. This approach will facilitate the revision of production processes and the introduction of innovative methodologies.
Successful production and dissemination of information depend on the combination of a wide range of different economic and social skills and on cooperation between producers (statisticians, researchers, development specialists, etc.) and users (planners, development agents, rural populations, etc.). It will then be possible to identify needs and shortcomings better and to use complementary methods for gathering, analysing, presenting and disseminating information.
The production of information that is relevant to decision-making on sustainable and gender-responsive policies and strategies depends on the following measures.
The costs of collecting data on gender are insignificant compared with our increased understanding of women's roles in agriculture.
Agnes Quisumbing, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI)
THE MISSING WORKERS
Small farmers in Nicaragua plant trees as part of a reforestation and soil protection project
- FAO/20219/L. DEMATTEIS
Two decades ago, when the official statistics were recording a decline in women's participation in the agricultural sector, which was especially sharp for Central America (from 6.3 percent in 1960 to 3.6 percent in 1970), a field survey conducted in the western region of Honduras showed that these statistics grossly undercounted women workers. Counting hired female farm labour in tobacco plantations and coffee farms, there was a sizeable discrepancy with the agricultural census for the region. In one district, the survey counted 11 640 women hired labourers. The census had recorded 642 women working in agriculture; 10 998 women workers were missing.
The reasons included problems with census definitions of principal economic activity, the inclusion of the category of unpaid family labour, the short time frame used for census questions, the concept of work, which excludes informal sector activities, and the perception of both women and census takers that women are not economically productive.
Progress is slow in changing the way work is measured. Two decades later, official statistics still undercount women's productive work in agriculture and off the farm, as is reported in an Inter- American Development Bank/Inter-American Institute for Cooperation in Agriculture (IDB/IICA)-sponsored study that did more than 2 000 interviews with rural women in 18 countries in 1991-1993. While official statistics had recorded an increase in women's presence in the rural labour force, from 13 percent in 1970 to 20 percent in 1990, this study raised the latter percentage to 37 percent - or 16 million women working in the agricultural sector. The 1990 census had missed counting 7 million women workers.
Source: Adapted from Mayra Buvinic. 1999. The missing workers: women in the rural economies in Latin America and the Caribbean. Presentation made at the High-Level Consultation panel discussion on Gender and Equality in Policies and Planning: Nature and Scope.
Immediate measures
Training of both planners and information producers at each requisite level in socio-economic and gender analysis and participatory approaches.
Identifying information requirements of all stakeholders, both for policy-making and for implementing productive activities.
Carrying out a critical assessment of available information (content and format), actors involved in the process of production, dissemination and use of information and target groups.
Identifying the gap between existing and required information.
Setting up multidisciplinary teams of information producers and users in order to:
- analyse the needs of and shortages in existing sex-disaggregated data;
- review the results of agricultural censuses and population surveys in order to extract gender-specific information on farmers;
- define guidelines to bridge the gaps and adjust methodological misconceptions, which are sometimes caused by gender biases;
- establish the most appropriate means of presentation and dissemination of the information obtained and publish it on a regular basis.
Conducting detailed surveys with a gender perspective on the division of productive and reproductive labour, time use, responsibility sharing and access to and control of resources.
Exploiting existing sex-disaggregated data and gender-sensitive information when planning resource allocation at the policy and institutional levels.
FIGURE 1: Women's labour rate in relation to the concept of work
Creating networks of specialists and partners from different backgrounds concerned with gender issues and interested in
improving and disseminating gender-specific information.
FIGURE 2: Women and men in the agricultural workforce in selected countries
Longer-term measures
Revising statistical methods and tools by defining or redefining the concepts and establishing the variables needed for obtaining data disaggregated by sex.
Developing indicators that measure and compare men and women farmers' access to resources and incomes.
Producing analyses, cross-referencing qualitative data (from case studies, surveys and research) with quantitative data (produced by statistical systems), to gain a better understanding of strategies affecting rural women, and their potential for change.
Coordinating the concepts, definitions and methods used in demographic and agricultural censuses and surveys, in order to improve practices and expand fields of study.
Setting up databases on rural women's economic and social status (analysis and trends).
Establishing information management systems and observatories that are easily accessible, especially for women farmers and rural women entrepreneurs, and that provide adequate and updated data (commodity prices, training, rural sector support measures, production incentives, rights, etc.).
Creating a system for monitoring progress in the use of gender-specific information.
Rural women in Peru attending a literacy class
- FAO/17465/A. ODOUL
Integrated pest management training at a farmers' field school in the Lao People's Democratic
- FAO/20896.1/K. PRATT REPUBLIC
<section>5</section>
Information as a means of
empowerment
Successful dialogue, exchange of points of view and establishment of consensus between rural populations and policy-makers all depend on people having similar capacities and access to information. This sharing of information is imperative for constructive communication among stakeholders when development plans are being designed in a collaborative manner.
In a context of degradation and reduction of natural resources and biological diversity, it is indispensable to know and recognize strategies and techniques for conserving the resources used by rural populations, particularly women. Policy-makers must be receptive to indigenous knowledge and agree on priorities for action, in cooperation with rural communities. In this way, men and women can influence the orientation and nature of development programmes, and can become effective stakeholders who exercise decision-making powers. Involving the rural population as partners in the planning process can encourage the emergence of innovative mechanisms (at the level of cooperation, power delegation, management, etc.) and the design of appropriate policies.
Participation and information in agricultural and rural development, in our view, are necessary for a gender-responsive agricultural policy.
Delegate of Nigeria
The two-way flow of information can be facilitated by civil society organizations whose mandate and working methods contribute to improving communications among the stakeholders. These organizations frequently establish broad-ranging networks, using communications media that are accessible to different publics. Knowing that not all stakeholders necessarily use the same language and communication channels, civil society organizations often act as mediators, packaging data and information in order to reach their audiences more effectively.
In addition to the right and opportunity to exchange opinions and communicate with policy-makers, rural women should, more importantly, participate in the management of rural affairs as well as in the rural policy- and decision-making ....
Delegate of China
Rural women are particularly concerned about making their own opinions heard and listened to. To achieve this, they really need means of communication that are geared to their own situation and easily accessible. Positive experiences in this regard^7 include, in particular, rural and community radio, video and traditional means of communication (drama, puppets, etc.). With access to information and communications technologies, women are empowered, their skills are enhanced, their knowledge increased and, thus, their sphere of action is extended.
The information should not only be about rural women; it should be for rural women and for men as well.
Delegate of the Islamic Republic of Iran
In the area of participatory planning based on interactive communication among stakeholders, information as a means of empowering rural populations, particularly women, depends on the following measures.
FIGURE 3: Numbers of radio and television receivers in selected regions and groups of countries
GENERATION AND USE OF INFORMATION ON WOMEN'S LAND RIGHTS
Discussions of land rights typically focus on statutory or legal rights of ownership .... It may thus be necessary to move beyond standard legalistic interpretations of property rights, to recognize a broad spectrum of customary rights and practices, the different bundles of rights that men and women may have to use and manage resources, and how these are negotiated and change over time ....
Accurate and appropriate gender-disaggregated information on women's property rights can be used to design sustainable agriculture projects through the following mechanisms:
* mapping both legal and customary rights, particularly rights of use, will help identify groups which may be affected by proposed interventions, and help them renegotiate rights to resources;
* understanding the distribution of rights may help identify factors other than gender, such as caste, class and ethnicity, which may affect the willingness and ability of people to participate in projects, as well as the distribution of benefits;
* where land rights are linked to rights to water and other natural resources, encouraging policy-makers and planners to assess the indirect effects of attempts to change rights to one resource;
* making women aware of legal reforms designed to protect or strengthen their rights and of how to make sure these are enforced.
Source: Extracted from Agnes Quisumbing. 1999. The generation and use of information on women's land rights in the design of sustainable agriculture projects. Presentation made at the High-Level Consultation panel discussion on Gender and Equality in Policies and Planning: Nature and Scope.
Immediate measures
Identifying national networks that disseminate information on, for and with rural women, and supporting their connection to regional and global networks in order to strengthen South-North and South-South dialogue.
Analysing the information transmitted (content and format) and the mechanisms for its diffusion in order to improve interactive communications strategies.
Creating an environment in which rural women are encouraged to join networks that enable them to make their opinions heard and to voice their priorities in their own terms with their own modes of communication.
Examining the capacity of these networks to package and disseminate information for rural women.
Using both modern and traditional means of communication, particularly radio, to strengthen rural women's participation in decision-making processes.
Creating women-specific information centres that focus on providing documentation, advice and research and emphasize the knowledge and skills of rural women (through exhibitions, debates, films, publications, etc.).
Longer-term measures
Training rural women in information technologies that are tailored to their own environment and their potential.
Organizing meetings and round-table discussions for all stakeholders at which decision-makers can discuss and account for the degree to which the interests and needs of women agricultural producers are considered
in policies.
Supporting the setting up of rural women's networks that are designed to enable them to diversify their productive activities and enter into the dynamics of economic processes.
Internet users worldwide
Country, region or group of countries
Regional population
as a percentage of world population
Internet users
as a percentage of regional population
United States
OECD (excluding United States)
Latin America and the Caribbean
Southeast Asia and the Pacific
East Asia
Eastern Europe and the CIS*
Arab States
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Asia
World
Notes: The Czech Republic, Hungary, Mexico, Poland, the Republic of Korea and Turkey are included in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
* CIS = Commonwealth of Independent States.
Source: UNDP. 1999. Human Development Report, 1999. New York, United Nations Development Programme.
^7 On this subject reference can be made to a document prepared for the High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information: FAO. 1999. Voices for change: rural women and communication. Rome.
<section>6</section>
PANEL
Gender and equality
in policies and planning
Nature and scope
The moderator, Ms M. Winberg, with panel members Ms L. Reinhardt, Ms A. Quisumbing and Ms M. Buvinic
- FAO/11873K-0A
Margareta Winberg, Moderator, Minister for Agriculture and Equal Opportunities, Sweden
The goal must always be to empower women .... Networking is a key word here. By facilitating networking among women and combining this with information and training related to human rights and democracy, as well as literacy and other crucially important knowledge, local women will gain the knowledge they themselves need ...
Maurice Albarka, Communication Adviser, Development Innovations and Networks (IRED), the Niger
Women are liberated not only by texts, but also by the quality of who they are and the power of what they do.
Linda Reinhardt, Chair of the Standing Committee on Women in Agriculture, International Federation of Agricultural Producers (IFAP)
Women's equal participation in developing and implementation of policy is not only a demand for simple justice or democracy but a necessary condition for women's interests to be taken into account.
Agnes Quisumbing, Senior Research Fellow, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI)
Many policy-makers are now convinced that policy and legal reforms to strengthen women's access to land are an essential ingredient for their empowerment. This is where the use and generation of new information on women's land rights will be crucial.
Johan Pottier, Senior Social Anthropologist, School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), University of London, United Kingdom
Three priority areas for research and policy attention (should) be reviewed: women's resourcefulness in agriculture; women's multistranded approach to achieving food security; male impoverishment and women's right to access land and inheritance.
Mayra Buvinic, Chief of the Social Development Division, Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)
The plea for better, more reliable and valid statistics is nothing new but needs to be made once again. It is important to underline that we need statistics that measure both rural women's work and well-being; we need to be able to disaggregate indicators by sex, age and ethnicity; we need to measure family structure and conditions.
Dissemination of
gender-specific information
Methodologies and approaches
The moderator, Ms A. King, with panel members Ms S. Ly and Mr B. Cassen
Angela King, Moderator, Assistant Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women
We need to set up new policies for gender-specific information flows from bottom up and top down. We need to involve rural women in data gathering at the community level and in developing channels for passing the information gathered to planners and decision-makers, thus establishing a link between the two groups.
Govind Kelkar, Coordinator of the Gender and Development Programme, Asian Institute of Technology (AIT), Thailand
The new information and communication technologies are able to recognize the conditions needed for the development of women's autonomy and liberty, to challenge gender stereotypes and undo hierarchy and power between women and men, to achieve basic individual capabilities, to promote democratic processes of homes and local communities and to improve opportunities for skill development, employment and participation in political life.
Sophie Ly, Secretary-General, World Association of Community Broadcasters
If information and knowledge are recognized as a source of wealth today, those of us who are working for the rights of communities must ensure that these can circulate and get through to the very places that are in greatest need of them, using whatever means are appropriate.
Ruth Ojiambo Ochieng, Executive Director, ISIS Women's International Cross-Cultural Exchange (WICCE), Uganda
... recommendations are: 1) integration of available sources of information to enhance accessibility and visibility of information needs of the rural women; 2) coordination of information generated and disseminated by key stakeholders in the agricultural sector; and 3) every development policy should include an information and communication component.
Bernard Cassen, Managing Editor, Le Monde Diplomatique, France
The task of keeping the general public briefed on rural development and food security ... is virtually a "mission impossible" in the international media system .... The media like confrontation. It is our responsibility to find the "right" areas for this engagement, the ones which possess the most didactic virtues, and there are many of them ....
Manuel Calvelo, Communication Professor, University of Tucumán, Argentina
Information, as a basic input for sensitization and for facilitating sound decision-making, is not something static; it is a process .... The processing of information must guarantee: a) timeliness and a certain predictive capacity; b) reliability or an indication of the margin of error; c) intelligibility by the recipients; d) accessibility by the user; and e) usefulness to the receiver.
Filming the reality in the Philippines as a tool in negotiation
- FAO/87106
Interviewing local farmers in Zimbabwe
- FAO/20361
<section>7</section>
Information as a tool
in negotiation
New communications technologies are increasing the quantity of information that is available. Nevertheless, the information on women that is diffused by the media is often sporadic, its content is fragmentary and the message, which is poorly targeted in terms of its audience, is rather superficial. Although specific information about rural women has increased in recent years, it is poorly disseminated and little of it has trickled through to the general public. The media do not give sufficient prominence to the true contribution made by women to economic, social and political life.
This lack of attention to women is partly the result of the information glut, which forces the media to be selective about the subjects they choose to report on. Only information that can be exploited and can attract the attention of the "customer", while sending out a clear rousing message, passes through such screening. Rural women's issues often have "low media appeal" because they are seen as being too humdrum, and development issues no longer attract public attention. In order to shake people's convictions and lead them to ask the right questions, the media should be supplied with information that is packaged in an original and attractive manner without losing its integrity.
Strategic resources for pre-industrial societies were raw materials and financial resources, the strategic resource for post-industrial society is information.
Delegate of Malawi
However, when major occasions, particular anniversaries or outstanding events occur, the media have shown an interest in the societal issues raised by the status of women. Thus, they have helped to alert public opinion and sensitize the authorities to the urgent need to recognize women as fully fledged economic, social and political actors.
The media can affect policy-making by influencing public opinion and creating social pressure. Decision-makers are well aware of the power of the media. The media can be a powerful vehicle for publicizing contributions made by rural women to food security and the economy, emphasizing the constraints placed on them and directing the orientation of social and economic measures.
Yet, as in other areas of society, there is still a long way to go before equality is achieved in the media. Not only do the media speak
about a world in which women are often invisible, but few women hold key positions in the media themselves. The consequences
are considerable, both in terms of information content and with regard to the public. Until gender equality is established in the media, women's ideas will have few possibilities of being put into words and even less chance of being taken into consideration. In addition to redirecting the content of the information, one of the ways of remedying the existing imbalance in the
media is to implement affirmative action policies.
With regard to communication for development, in order for the media to contribute to the recognition of the rural population's, especially women's, contribution to food security, the following measures should be adopted.
INFORMATION GAPS: HOW TO PLUG THEM
In 1993, a workshop on food stress in Northern Province, Zambia, opened with a play by villagers which began with the song "The people for whom I produce get dressed, while I, the one who toils, ends up naked" ("Abo ndimina balafwala ne mwine pamputi tutu"). Set in a local village, with characters whom everyone recognized, the play powerfully exposed the impact of exploitative institutions and individuals, all of which contribute to the suffering of poor farmers.
In Zambia, marketing price data are circulated and disseminated through the local newspaper
- FAO/17821/A. CONTI
Performed at the beginning of a three-day workshop, the play's impact on the ensuing discussions was inspirational. The experience demonstrated that village-level theatre can be a tool for learning about local perceptions on food security. As such perceptions are never static, and often difficult to reach, theatre can be an effective means of approaching them. In this respect, the play clearly outlined the integrated nature of the multiple decisions affecting food security and yielded information on the "home-made" solutions that were being tried out. (The latter are normally kept well hidden from outsiders.) If we can learn more about them, some home-made solutions will undoubtedly be worth strengthening through policy initiatives. Plays also have the advantage that they can be recorded, broadcast and distributed: the Kapatu play was filmed and shown on Zambian television, but other ways of disseminating the material must also be considered.
Extracted from Johan Pottier. 1999. Food security and gender: information gaps and how to plug them. Presentation at the High-Level Conference panel discussion on Gender and Equality in Policies and Planning: Nature and Scope.
Immediate measures
Encouraging information campaigns that convey a positive and true image of rural women's roles, responsibilities and capacity to innovate.
Identifying the media - in the broad sense of the term - that disseminate information about rural women (or that are willing to do so), and giving them opportunities to develop programmes that acknowledge women farmers' contribution to food security and rural development.
Collaborating with the media to analyse the content and presentation of information about rural women, and to identify which dissemination methods are most effective in mobilizing public opinion on issues such as women's rights.
Making greater use of the traditional and modern communications media that are used in the rural environment, particularly radio, to broadcast programmes serving the interests of women.
Encouraging the organization of national debate among media specialists, rural women and agriculture and equal opportunities bodies in order to modify attitudes and mentalities and influence the contents of information.
Organizing special events and celebrating days devoted to rural women which highlight their skills, capacities and potential.
FIGURE 4: Percentage of media posts held by women
Longer-term measures
Encouraging the recruitment of women in the media and in high-level information and communication training institutions in countries where there is an imbalance.
Organizing joint workshops with information and communications institutions on issues related to the contribution made by women farmers to the national economy and food security.
Evaluating the effectiveness and impact of the media by a comparative cost-benefit analysis in order to improve media coverage and the capacity for interaction between decision-makers and the rural population.
Reaching agreements with the media to convey
a steady flow of information on the many, differentiated and complementary roles and responsibilities of men and women farmers.
A local savings and credit women's group in Ethiopia
- FAO/20023/R. JONES
Making the rural population heard in Madagascar
- FAO/17494
<section>8</section>
Implementation of the Strategy
for Action
The implementation of the Strategy for Action began with its review and discussion by the delegations attending the High-Level Consultation on Rural Women and Information (4 to 6 October 1999, Rome). The FAO member countries recognized its usefulness and appropriateness and agreed that it is important to take more account of the gender perspective in planning and programmes. Delegates stressed the need to adopt administrative and legal measures aimed at improving social services and benefits, rural infrastructures and access to basic services and productive resources such as land, the key resource for agricultural production.
Working for society does not always mean working for the benefit of women. But working for women always guarantees that the work is for the benefit of society.
Delegate of Argentina
Policy-makers attained a better awareness of the relationship between gender equality and food security. Participants discussed orientations for meeting information needs that would empower rural women and improve their skills. Furthermore, it was agreed that the diversification of incomes should be supported as a way of raising income levels and strengthening rural women's role as stakeholders in policy-making and planning processes.
Installing information systems dealing with women is only one way of generating equal opportunities between women and men, but not an end in itself. The issue is ultimately to ensure that equality produces equal results ....
Delegate of Costa Rica
The Strategy for Action will be taken into account during the mid-term evaluation of implementation of the Platform of Action from the Fourth World Conference on Women (Beijing + 5). As recommended at the 30th session of the FAO Conference, it will also form an integral part of the next FAO Plan of Action on gender equality, food security and sustainable development.^8
For member countries of FAO, the gradual implementation of the Strategy for Action will depend on their priorities and their specific social, economic, cultural and political conditions. Many countries have already launched activities to improve information about, for and with rural women. The continuation and reinforcement of these activities is of fundamental importance, as is the appropriate use of results already obtained.
FAO, in collaboration with its Member Governments and at their request, will provide advice and guidance, diffuse methodological guidelines and supply technical assistance in the development of strategies, methods and tools for the production of gender-disaggregated information. It will thus perform its appointed normative functions in the knowledge that its role is not to produce, but rather to collect, process and disseminate information on rural women.
In support of this normative function, and provided that it has sufficient funds, FAO will aim at the following measures.
Food security for all, and as soon as possible; less poverty; equity; equality between men and women in both rural and urban areas. These were the objectives of the World Food Summit and the Beijing Conference, and they are the purpose of the work that FAO is doing in assisting its member countries.
Henri Carsalade, Assistant Director-General, Sustainable Development Department, FAO. Closing speech
Immediate measures
Disseminating the High-Level Consultation's proceedings and findings on its Gender and Food Security Web pages (at www.fao.org/gender/) and by publishing the report.
Promoting coordination in the implementation of gender-responsive programmes among the United Nations rural development agencies based in Rome (FAO, the International Fund for Agricultural Development [IFAD] and the World Food Programme [WFP]), on the one hand, and other UN partners, on the other, by using existing international and national networks and mechanisms.
Continuing to draw the international community's attention, through interactive strategies, to problems and issues regarding rural women.
Supporting national initiatives that improve the training and education of rural women; and continuing training in socio-economic and gender analysis and production of information materials.
Developing national strategies of communication and promoting the use of existing information networks to enhance North-South and South-South dialogue on the subject.
Collaborating with the media to improve the targeting and packaging of information on rural women and to elaborate a dissemination strategy geared towards both the general public and more specialized audiences.
Longer-term measures
Establishing an information exchange mechanism to convince decision-makers of the usefulness of information about women's contribution to food security and to heighten public awareness of their contribution to social, economic and political life. Depending on the public in question, this mechanism, which is based on a network of national focal points, can use a variety of means of communication - electronic, printed, audio and visual. It will use FAO's Web site, especially the Gender and Food Security pages, to hold electronic conferences and exchange fora.
Facilitating the establishment of networks of statisticians, including agricultural and social statisticians, and information producers' and users' associations. These networks will generate and disseminate information about the roles and responsibilities of men and women in agricultural production and the rural sector and about their contributions to society and the economy.
Continuing the programme to develop standards (methodologies and tools) for the collection of data and the elaboration of indicators on the status of men and women, and on their respective contributions to agricultural production and rural development. Such information will serve to underpin the formulation of policy-making that meets the challenges of both food security and gender equality. The programme is developed in a progressive and pragmatic manner. After an initial period of testing, adjustment and evaluation in selected pilot countries, proposals will be drawn up for national information systems on human resources in the agricultural and rural sector.
PRESS HEADLINES
Closing press conference of the High-Level Consultation, with (left to right): Ms Sissel Ekaas, Director, Women and Population Division, FAO;
Ms Kay Killingsworth, Assistant Director-General, FAO; Ms Christina Engfeldt, Director, Information Division, FAO;
Ms Hafsatu Thierro Diarra, Chairperson of the Consultation, Mali; Ms Angela King, Assistant Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and the Advancement of Women, UN
- FAO/11872L-25A
28 September 1999
FAO meet on woman's role in agriculture
Hindu Business Line
29 September 1999
Donne rurali "invisibili" nelle statistiche
Globalpress
1 October 1999
Le nutrici invisibili della terra
Dwpress, Il notiziario delle donne
Da madre-natura a nutrice naturale
Dwpress, Il notiziario delle donne
4 October 1999
FAO highlights contribution by rural women
Inter Press Service
Women key to increasing global demand for food
FAO press release
5 October 1999
Rural women not content to be statistics: UN conference underlines the need for more data on rural women, but delegates call for action on other fronts too
FAO press release
FAO seeks support for rural women
The Post, Zambia
6 October 1999
La FAO auspica un maggiore riconoscimento dell'opera delle donne impiegate in agricoltura L'Osservatore Romano
Incontro FAO: agricoltrici invisibili per i governi ANSA
Piú potere alle donne rurali dei PVS
Globalpress
UN says more data on women will help them produce more food
Associated Press
La carenza di dati e statistiche di genere ostacolo al riconoscimento del lavoro delle donne
Dwpress
7 October 1999
Hay que darles una identidad. FAO destaca trabajo de la mujer rural de países en desarrollo
El Peruano
Need for data on rural women focus of Rome ministerial meeting
Global Information Network and Presswire
Little information about the rural women's
economic contribution and needs: Taking it up for the rural women
Hindu Business Line
9 October 1999
Le donne rurali ed il futuro della sicurezza alimentare
Linea
Femmes rurales: les statistiques sont nécessaires mais pas suffisantes
Le Soleil, Senegal
11 October 1999
FAO urges gender-disaggregated data
Hindu Business Line
15 October 1999
En "doble marginalidad", 60 millones de mujeres en AL
Uno mas uno, Mexico
MATERIALS PREPARED FOR THE HIGH-LEVEL CONSULTATION ON RURAL WOMEN AND INFORMATION
Publications
FAO. 1999. Participation and information: the key to gender-responsive agricultural policy. Rome.
FAO. 1999. Voices for change: rural women and communication. Rome.
FAO. 1999. Filling the data gap: gender-sensitive statistics for agricultural development. Rome.
FAO. 1999. Agricultural censuses and gender considerations: concepts and methodology. Rome.
Working document
FAO. 1999. Gender issues in land tenure. SDW-801/3. Rome.
Thematic fact sheets
FAO. 1999. Gender in agricultural and rural development: key issues relating to gender in agricultural and rural development. Rome.
* Women - users, preservers and managers of agrobiodiversity.
* An integrated rural development project in the Niger.
* Gender analysis of production systems.
* Women's role in rice farming.
* Agricultural implements used by women farmers in Africa.
* Gender, socio-economic analysis and training.
* Women's access to financial services.
* Rural women's access to land in Latin America.
* Gender-sensitive agricultural censuses.
Videos
FAO. 1999. The phantom statistic. Rome. 11 minutes.
FAO. 1999. Women feed the world. Rome, URIHI. 56 minutes.
Audio cassettes
FAO. 1999. Gender and food security: women's role in agricultural and rural development. Radio programmes from Barbados, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, India and South Africa.
^8 Thirtieth Session of the FAO Conference, 12-23 November 1999, Rome, agenda item 7: Gender mainstreaming in FAO, C 99/REP.
