<title>Non-Wood News No. 7</title>
<section>1</section>
EDITORIAL
Another year has passed, dense with developments and activities in the field of NWFPs. It is becoming harder for us to keep Non-Wood News to a reasonable size while still trying to report on some of the main developments (events, publications of interest, new projects, emerging research topics) as well as giving our readers an opportunity to see their contributions included and shared - that "networking" role which we consider so important.
This year, Non-Wood News gives ample space to the important and controversial subject of "bioprospecting"' and to the various ethical issues linked to it. The ethical issues related to the marketing of NWFPs are also the focus of an increasing number of organizations which promote fair trade.
Social and ethical issues are also important in the consideration of the role of NWFPs in securing access to food. The need to concentrate efforts on the malnourished and the food vulnerable people is a priority of FAO in all fields, including forestry. NWFPs and food security is one of the special features of this issue.
The information in this issue on the potential of NWFPs as a source of food in Africa results from the collection of quantitative and qualitative information on the exploitation practices and production levels of major NWFPs which we have carried out in collaboration with 52 African and Caribbean countries. Last year, the preliminary results were discussed in five regional workshops in Kenya, Zimbabwe, Gabon, Côte d'Ivoire and Trinidad and Tobago. The feedback regarding the need for and the contents of national data collection on NWFPs is of great relevance and will have important bearings on FAO's work in this field. One aspect which has emerged is the importance of reporting on the service values of the forests in national forest statistics and, therefore, the need to put some fresh efforts into this aspect (in terms of developing a definition and classification of forest services, assessment methods, etc).
Being multidisciplinary by nature, NWFPs will benefit from the joint efforts of different actors. FAO is moving more and more into the establishment of interdepartmental interest groups on various aspects of NWFPs that will draw on the expertise of a wide range of technical staff.
Medicinal plants will be the first group of NWFPs to be the subject of an FAO interdepartmental group.
Thank you all for your support, comments and contributions, which we hope will continue into this millennium.
Non Wood Forest Products consist of goods of biological origin other than wood, derived from forests, other wooded land and trees outside forest.
Non Timber Forest Products (NTFPs) is another term used frequently to cover this vast array of both animal and plant products but in this case includes small wood and fuelwood. However, these two terms are used throughout this bulletin as synonymous. Other terms, such as "minor", "secondary" or "speciality" forest products, are sometimes used to keep original names and/or titles.
[Contents]
<section>2</section>
* FOOD SECURITY ISSUES
* COMMERCIAL USE OF BIODIVERSITY: ETHICAL AND LEGAL ASPECTS
* DEFINITION OF NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS
FOOD SECURITY ISSUES
FAO and food security
The success of the World Food Summit, at which 186 countries (of which 112 were represented at the level of Heads of State or Government) made a solemn commitment to the eradication of hunger, has now been reflected in FAO's Strategic Framework, which provides a long-term perspective to guide its actions until 2015. This now provides the framework for the medium-term plans and the biennial Programmes of Work and Budget.
One of FAO's new programmes is the Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS). The SPFS is now operational in 51 countries and under formulation in 25 others. It has succeeded in mobilizing almost US$50 million from bilateral and multilateral donors and financial institutions, as well as an equivalent amount from the governments of the countries concerned.
Forests, trees and food security: the SPFS perspective
The projects developed within the framework of the Special Programme aim mainly at increasing food production in the participating countries. Recognizing the various contributions of forests and trees to the diversification and sustainability of the farming systems, the SPFS considers the introduction of a forestry/agroforestry component among the project activities as an essential step towards food security.
Introducing tree planting and agroforestry activities is seen to contribute to three major sets of objectives: (a) those contributing to the sustainability of the farming system through reduction of silting and sanding processes and any other soil degradation process that affect fertility and the growth of crops, including the negative effect of winds, especially in intertropical zones; these activities may contribute, after a minimum of five years, to around 20 to 30 percent increase in yield; (b) those contributing to direct production of non-crop items, such as timber, seeds and nuts (e.g. cashew nuts); in such cases tree planting provides fuelwood and charcoal for domestic energy and/or income; timber and poles for income; and (c) those related to environmental improvement. This is very important in all subsumed to arid African countries, where hot winds may affect habitat and comfort of dwelling. This environmental improvement has significant economic consequences since
some other productive activities, such as apiculture, can be promoted.
In many instances, the various roles of trees and forests overlap, and trees planted for conservation works may also produce fodder, edible seeds (seeds of Sisyphus mauritiana; leaves of Cratoeva religiosa in the Senegal river valley, for example), provide forage for bees and increase honey production, and contribute to a number of other local uses and needs.
(Contributed by Mr. El-Hadji Sene, Director, Forest Resources Division, FAO Forestry Department.)
The ACC Network on Rural Development and Food Security brings together main development partners for focused and coordinated action at country level. Established in April 1997 by the United Nations Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC), the ACC Network has been endorsed and supported by the UN Secretary-General and the Heads of 20 UN organizations. It is jointly managed by FAO and IFAD, in close cooperation with WFP.
The ACC Network is a mechanism for World Food Summit follow-up and aims to:
· mobilize support for government efforts to implement the World Food Summit Plan of Action and rural development and food security programmes;
· reinforce ties between UN organizations and other stakeholders;
· foster synergy and avoid duplication of efforts; and
· exchange and disseminate information, experiences and best practices.
www.accnetwork.net/
(More information on another of FAO's Web sites covering food security, namely Gender and Food Security, can be found in this Special Feature.)
FAO's Forestry Department and Food Security
A forthcoming issue of Unasylva, the international journal of the FAO Forestry Department, will focus on forestry and food security. The issue will look at forestry within the larger context of food security, specifically concerning the role that forestry plays in food security. It will explore several aspects of forestry and food security, focusing among other things on policy, globalization, local level multisectoral approaches, privatization and environment. See the Unasylva home page at: www.fao.org/forestry/FODA/UNASYLVA/unasyl-e.stm
The 1989 Forestry Paper (no. 90) on Forestry and Food Security is being revised and updated in order to take into account the important developments in this field and the World Food Summit in 1996.
The Forestry Department's NWFP Programme and Food Security
The NWFP programme will be channelling its efforts in 2000 into developing and maintaining a comprehensive information base and Web site documenting the role of NWFPs in food security.
A series of country profiles on the status of NWFPs are being prepared. The first set, covering English-speaking Africa, is now ready and will be posted shortly on our NWFP home page. Extracts from some of these profiles covering the contribution of NWFPs to food security follow.
(Country profiles covering Latin America and the Near East, as well as French-speaking Africa, are almost completed.)
FORESTS AND FOOD SECURITY IN AFRICA
The contribution of forests and trees to food security in Africa is important, diversified and valuable. It ranges from the direct production of food items to the provision of jobs, income generation, and support to the sustainability of farming systems.
Food from trees and forests is a regular item in the African diet, and the variety and abundance of plant and animal products found in African markets are proof of this. African populations have learnt to exploit all types of vegetation. Looking at the various ways plants are used in medicine and food production, one can assert that almost any tree, shrub or grass species in Africa is used in one place or another for food and nutrition. In villages and small towns, in particular, foods from forests and trees are essential to improve the nutritional status of the people by providing vitamins and other elements, which are not found in food, produced by agriculture. Thus a number of nutritional deficiencies associated with the monotony of the diet in many areas in Africa are avoided thanks to this «hidden harvest» from trees and forests.
In spite of the importance and richness of food from forests in Africa, progress has been very slow in considering measures and programmes to increase the contribution of wild plants and animals to food production and food security. Currently this contribution is hardly sustainable. It can however be more meaningful and more responsive to modern market needs if the natural resources are managed in an appropriate manner and if substantive research and technology are invested in its improvement and development. A combination of initiatives aiming at improved knowledge of local and traditional practices, inventorying and managing resources, and further integrating trees in farming systems can effectively make a difference and have a significant impact on food security in Africa.
(Contributed by Mr El-Hadji Sene, Director, Forest Resources Division, FAO Forestry Department.)
Food from NWFPs in selected countries of English-speaking Africa
Botswana
In Botswana, the majority of animal protein comes from wild animals. Over 50 species of wild animals are hunted for food, providing in some regions 90.7 kg/year/person, equivalent to 40 percent of the human diet. Some animals are sold, thus providing income opportunities for the poorest households.
Ethiopia
Beekeeping is an ancient tradition in Ethiopia. Hive density is estimated to be the highest in Africa. An estimated 4-10 million traditional hives and some 10 000 modern box hives are believed to exist in the country. The main products of the beekeeping industry are honey and wax. Honey is almost exclusively used for local consumption, while a considerable proportion of wax is exported. The annual turnover of the apiculture industry is estimated to vary between US$26 million and 64 million. Honey and beeswax also play a considerable role in the cultural and religious life of the Ethiopians.
The main resource base for beekeeping - forests and woodlands - has become seriously degraded in the course of time. Eucalyptus plantations have been established in some localities and constitute a new and complementary honey resource. In many places the beekeepers themselves have endeavoured to redress the situation by planting good honey plants near their hive colonies, such as Vernonia amygdalina and Salvia spp.
Kenya
In Kenya, vegetables play an important role in food security for the rural population. In the Machakos district, for example, wild leaves represent one-third of all food intake in the rainy season.
Fruit are also consumed seasonally, especially by children. The fruits of Ximenia caffra and Sclerocarya birrea are popular and can be found on farms to a larger extent. In the Kathama area, wild fruits have long been valued as buffer food resources in periods of famine and food shortage. In the semi-arid Pokot region of northern Kenya, Balanites aegyptiaca is highly valued because it produces leaves during the dry season, even in drought years. Wild berries (e.g. gooseberries, raspberries) are not only consumed at the subsistence level, but are also commonly offered for sale and provide some employment for young people.
Most traditional beverages, such as beers and wines, are brewed from fruits of wild or semi-cultivated plants such as Kigelia abyssinica (sausage tree). Wild fruits are also used for other non-alcoholic health beverages and drinks, such as stews and soups.
Wild tubers and roots are locally used as food or for the preparation of health beverages because of their high starch or sugar content.
A wide variety of wildlife products is used for subsistence and commercial purposes in Kenya. Among these are honey and beeswax, bushmeat (small animals, birds) and insects, or feathers claws and skins of birds used as ornamentals and ritual objects.
The beekeeping industry depends heavily on forests for the production of nectar. Honey has multiple uses in traditional and modern lifestyles, in food, drinks, medicines and in trade, and is used by a number of communities in the majority of traditional ceremonies.
Bushmeat is also sold in butcheries as a luxury item. The value of bushmeat is twice that of beef and can be enhanced two or three times by processing it into such luxury products as smoked, dried or sausage products. However, bushmeat markets are not common, since hunting is strictly controlled in Kenya. In 1989, approximately 45 tonnes of bushmeat were produced, while the Kenya Wildlife Service estimates that by 1995 annual demand for bushmeat reached 500 tonnes.
Malawi
Fruit-trees (e.g. Uapaca kirkiana, Tamarindus indica, Strychnos spinosa) are important sources of food supplements. Fruits improve the nutritional content of staple foods and the nutritional status, especially in times of food emergency, and have been used for a long time to supplement dietary needs. They contain vital nutrients and essential vitamins that are especially important for growing children, who often suffer from malnutrition and related diseases. Nutritional studies have shown that Parinari curatellifolia, Strychnos cocculoides and Azanza garkeana contain more than 30 percent fat and about 45 percent crude fibre and total carbohydrates, while Trichilia emetica and Annona senegalensis are important sources of protein. The miombo woodland is an important source of indigenous fruits (Uapaca kirkiana, Parinari curatellifolia, Strychnos cocculoides, Flacourtia indica).
Indigenous fruit-trees of the miombo are also used to generate income (both in cash and barter) through the sale of fruits and fruit products. The same is the case for other fruit, e.g. Uapaca kirkiana that are widely traded and offer a supplementary income-generating activity. Uapaca kirkiana makes a good wine. Most of these fruit-trees are found only in natural stands.
In the Kasungu District, 20 species of fruit-trees have been identified. The Wildlife Society of Malawi (WSM) is implementing a community-based project «Sustainable management of indigenous forests» (SADC/FSTCU-GTZ Project) in east Mwanza. Through this initiative, some local communities are enjoying the benefits derived from the sale to the People Trading Centre (PTC) of juices made from Tamarindus indica and Adansonia digitata fruit. Most of these fruit-trees are found only in natural stands and are threatened by deforestation. Efforts are currently under way to domesticate the most preferred indigenous fruit-tree species.
Mushrooms have always been known to provide supplementary food, especially during the rainy season. The utilization of 60 species of edible mushrooms is documented and these are widely sold along roadsides during the rainy season, particularly by women and children. Most of these wild edible mushrooms grow on dead wood and leaf litter normally found in indigenous woodlands.
A wide range of indigenous vegetables is available in Malawi. Many of these vegetables are rich in vitamins, essential minerals and oils. Young tender leaves of certain trees such as Adansonia digitata and Afzelia quanzensis are cooked and used as relish.
Bushmeat is an important source of food especially in areas close to natural forests. People in northern Malawi, where considerable forest areas exist, do a lot of hunting. However, bushmeat is becoming scarcer as a result of overhunting.
Efforts are under way to try to domesticate wild birds such as guinea fowls. They constitute a good business since a bird can be sold for as much as K 200 (approximately US$4.5-5).
Fourteen species of edible caterpillars are exploited in the Kasungu District. Approximately 170 people participated in the legal harvest of caterpillars during the 1991 season, gathering close to 1 850 kg, which were sold at US$2-7/kg. Each person earned nearly US$50 from the sale of these insects.
Higher termite species (Macrotermes) are a source of useful protein in Malawi. At the onset of the rainy season, alates (locally known as ngumbi or inswa) are trapped in their dispersal flight and are processed and eaten as relish or snacks. However, the quantities consumed or traded are unknown. Termites are obtained from natural forests, plantations and other areas.
Mozambique
Animal products such as bushmeat are the most important NWFPs in Mozambique. Other important NWFPs exploited in the country include honey, beeswax, medicinal plants, and a variety of edible plants and plant products such as mushrooms and edible fruits.
It is estimated that around 80 percent of rural households still depend on wild animal protein as a supplement to their diet - either birds, reptiles, small mammals or amphibians. It is estimated that, together with the inland fish production, wildlife provides up to 30 percent of the protein requirements of the rural population.
Local communities go hunting and sell the bushmeat along the main roads or at the local markets. However, in general, most of the bushmeat is for household consumption, while poachers are market-oriented.
In the hunting concession areas the hunting quota has been increasing drastically. From 1992 to 1994, an increase of 74 percent for residents and 33 percent for non-residents was documented. Although, the legislation states that the permission for hunting requires a licence, in practice this is not the case. There are very few legal hunters. Illegal hunting for meat and trophies and the destruction of wildlife habitats (through grazing and shifting cultivation) has contributed to the extinction of 20-60 percent of the wildlife population.
Edible insects play a significant role in food security in rural areas by providing animal protein. The most common edible insects are caterpillars and termites. Caterpillars feeding on Sclerocarya birrea (Maputo and Gaza provinces), Burkea africana, Erythrophleum africanum (Manica, Sofala and Zambézia) and Colophospermum mopane (Tete provinces) are the most sought-after by rural households. Caterpillars are normally harvested by women and children. They can be dried or cooked fresh.
Termites, dwelling chiefly in the miombo ecosystem, are very common during the rainy season. Since termites are attracted by light, in rural areas the harvesting techniques consist of placing a torch with a container of water in order to capture them; in villages and towns, it is common to see hundreds of children with baskets gathered around the electricity poles to collect the termites during the night. Although every member of the household can gather termites, chiefly during the peak of the termite dispersal, the main harvesting group consists of women and children.
Honey collection from the wild and beekeeping are common practices all over the country. The most important honey trees are from miombo (in the genus Brachystegia) and acacia woodlands. The harvesting process often involves the use of fire. This technique kills many bees and the smoke greatly reduces the quality of honey and beeswax.
The bulk of honey and beeswax is traditionally produced by rural households. The number of traditional beekeepers has been estimated at 20 000 and annual production of honey and beeswax at 360 000 kg and 60 000 kg, respectively. The production from modern beekeepers is estimated at 20 000 and 8 000 kg of honey and beeswax, respectively. In Maputo, the price of honey for domestic consumption has been increasing, from US$3.66-4.16/kg in 1994 to US$5.6/kg in 1999.
At present, there are a growing number of people and organizations involved in beekeeping countrywide. The work carried out by the Programa Nacional de Apicultura from 1978 to 1994 can be referred to as an example of such a growing trend. In addition, there is a woman's beekeeping association in Manica, supported by a local NGO (AMRU), that could also be considered a good example.
Regarding wild foodstuffs, 76 edible wild plant species are used in the rural areas of the coastal plains.
In regulado de Sabranca in southern Mozambique, 41 edible fruit species are recorded. In the north of the country, in a remnant of Miombo in Senhote, 144 tree species with multiple uses are found. Since trees bear fruits in different seasons and even in drought years, such fruits can be considered perhaps the most important wild food from the forest. These fruits can be eaten simple, cooked, roasted (seeds and nuts) or when they are still a flower.
According to the survey carried out by Albano et al. (1998), the most common fruits are Strychnos madagascariensis, S. spinosa, Sclerocarya birrea, Hyphaene coriacea, Phoenix reclinata, Aloe sp., Ficus sycomorus, Ximenia caffra, Boscia albitrunca, Diallium schlecteri, Trichilia emetica, Antidesma venosum, Ziziphus mucronata, Grewia sp., Garcinia livingstonei, Dovyalis longispina, Syzygium cordatum, Mimusops spp., Manilkara discolor, Landolphia kirki, Tabernaemontana elegans, Vangueria infausta, Coffea racemosa.
The preferred fruit species vary according to region. In Maputo the most valuable fruit-trees are Sclerocarya birrea and Strychnos madagascariensis. In the Manica Province, both Uapaca kirkiana and Sclerocarya birrea are known to be of great importance because of their cultural value. The value of Strychnos madagascariensis rests on its by-product called fuma. Fuma can be consumed as it is or with honey as a staple food during the periods when there is a lack of food in the agricultural cycle.
The fruits of Sclerocarya birrea can be used to produce an alcoholic drink called ucanhe or bucanhe. The pulp is said to contain four to eight times as much vitamin C as orange juice. Seventy percent of the people in southern Africa eat these fruits, which are a seasonal staple in local diets. Without this valuable contribution diseases caused by dietary deficiencies would affect many children, who are most vulnerable and the chief consumers.
Edible leaves, mostly of herbaceous plants, contribute significantly to the diet of all rural households in Mozambique. The most common leaves consumed in Mozambique are Adeinia gummifera, Amaranthus sp., Corchorus tridens, Ipomea lapatifolia and Momordica balsamica. These leaves are cooked with peanuts or Sclerocarya birrea nuts and consumed with rice or maize porridge.
Roots and tubers are consumed only on an occasional basis. The most important ones are Commiphora neglecta, Nymphaea capensis, Oxalis semilobata and Scilia hyacinthina.
Mushrooms are one of the most sought-after wild foods in the natural ecosystems, particularly in the miombo ecosystem. The mushroom season starts with the first rains in early November, reaching its peak in January.
Beverages mainly consist of two types of exotic palm wines: sura and utchema. The former is produced from an exotic palm tree (Cocus nucifera), mainly in the Inhambane and Zambézia provinces. The latter is obtained from indigenous palm trees (Hyphaene coriacea and Phoenix reclinata). This is at present the most common and largely produced wine in the country. This activity constitutes a business for the majority of households located along the main roads. Production is continuous throughout the year. In Matutuine, south Mozambique, the peak of production occurs at the beginning of the rainy season with an output of 20 litres of wine per day.
Swaziland
More than 200 species of wild plants are commonly consumed throughout the country. Wild leaves such as those of Grewia sp. are consumed primarily in spring and summer, while fruits are eaten during winter and spring when they are the main source of vitamin C supply. Other forest and bush foods also used seasonally are mushrooms, caterpillars and termite larvae. The top four species of socio-economic significance are: Sclerocarya birrea spp. caffra, Bequaertiodendron megalismontum, Syzgium cordatum and Ximenia caffra. Currently these plant species occur in natural forests and as trees outside forests. Their fruit are picked by children and women for sale on roadsides as a means to generate cash income. In the case of Sclerocarya birrea, a traditional liquor is produced from the ripe fruit, mainly by women, and is sold in rural areas, as well as in towns. The nut, on the other hand, is dried and oil is extracted for domestic consumption.
Tanzania
Honey and beeswax are two of the most important NWFPs in the United Republic of Tanzania. Honey is important as a sweetener and as a source of raw material for alcoholic beverages (honey beer). In addition, it is used in traditional ceremonies. Beeswax is used locally in a wide range of applications.
Honey and beeswax are collected in miombo woodlands, as well as outside the forests in agricultural land in western, central and southern Tanzania. Traditional methods are adopted, without using chemicals and, consequently, negative ecological effects are caused by the utilization of fire and the felling of trees. Most of the honey is consumed locally. Nevertheless, some honey and beeswax are exported and constitute an important source of foreign currency earning. In 1989 and 1991, Tanzania earned US$0.5 and 2.6 million, respectively, from exports with beeswax accounting by far for the larger share. Significant importers of Tanzanian beeswax are Germany, Japan and the United Kingdom. Honey markets are in the Near East and in the United Arab Emirates.
Bushmeat is an important resource at local level.
In some parts of the United Republic of Tanzania cropping of termite colonies of the winged reproductive termites to be sold on local markets as foodstuff is a common practice. Some insects are exported to Uganda.
Uganda
Naluswa (1993) lists 16 vegetables, 17 edible fruits, 7 edible mushrooms and 5 edible grasses that are used in Uganda.
Trade in NWFPs has increased and one example is the sale and export of shea butter obtained from Vitellaria paradoxa. Vitellaria paradoxa is an important multi-purpose tree in northern Uganda. Its nuts are eaten and used for production of food oil (shea butter). Since nuts are collected from wild sources in the "hungry season«, they contribute significantly to the daily nutrient supply. They also represent a source of income for women, who sell shea butter at local markets.
Export of shea butter was started in 1996 by the Shea Project. At the moment, approximately 50 kg of shea butter are exported annually to the United States. Since V. paradoxa seems to be an «underutilized natural resource« in Uganda and yields are higher than those of its West African subspecies, exports are expected to increase. Up to now, no plantations of V. paradoxa have been established because of its slow development (15-20 years before fruiting).
Gender and food security
A new Web site covering the many aspects of gender and food security is now available on FAO's home page. Given equal access to opportunities and resources, both women and men have proved to be efficient, dynamic and indispensable partners in development. Together, on the farm, and at all levels of society, women and men constitute a formidable partnership to achieve food security in the twenty-first century.
www.fao.org/Gender/gender.htm
Abiu - A promising new fruit for the Philippines
Abiu (Pouteria caimito) is a relative of canistel (Pouteria campachiana) and caimito (Chrysophyllum cainito) in the Sapotaceae family. Both canistel and caimito are widespread in the Philippines, whereas Abiu is a new fruit with great economic potential.
Abiu is a native of tropical Brazil and Peru. However, it was introduced in the Philippines as seeds in August 1987 by Dr Roberto R. Coronel, Professor and Project Leader at the Institute of Plant Breeding of the University of Los Baños in the Philippines. The resulting seedling trees started to bear fruits in 1990. Three seedling trees proved to be outstanding in terms of many fruit characteristics and one of these, after three years of evaluation, was submitted for varietal registration, which was approved in July 1995 by the National Seed Industry Council under the variety name «RCF Gold».
Abiu is a small evergreen tree growing up to 8 m tall. Its fruits are large and may weigh up to 500 g, round to oval in shape, with an attractive smooth, bright yellow peel. The flesh is creamy white, smooth, sweet and juicy and encloses, on average, one or two large black oblong seeds. Abiu can be propagated by seed, which germinates in three to four weeks. Trees from seeds can start bearing fruit after about three years. Both inarched and grafted trees can start bearing fruit within two years of planting.
Abiu trees tend to produce several crops a year, but the peak of fruit production occurs during November to January. Fruits are harvested when they are full yellow, at which stage they are slightly soft to the touch. They have a long shelf-life and can be kept in a refrigerator for a month without spoilage.
(Source: Prosea Newsletter, No. 22, April 1999.)
Developing Australian acacia seeds as a human food for the Sahel
A recent article in Unasylva presents research results and methods aimed at developing a potentially important supplemental protein supply. Hunger, famine and malnutrition and their attendant diseases are major public health issues in the West African sub-Saharan semi-arid zone known as the Sahel. With mean rainfall below 600 mm per annum, rural food systems based on rainfed subsistence agriculture are characterized by annual «hungry seasons». This situation is compounded by recurrent droughts, which cause serious failures of the main food crops, millet and sorghum. During such lean times, the rural people have resorted to «famine foods», such as millet chaff and the barks and leaves of non-nutritious trees, but these are insufficient in quantity and quality to prevent malnutrition. However, there are now ongoing efforts to establish another food source, the edible seeds of Australian acacia trees (Acacia coeli), which are likely to be beneficial in supplementing the main
food crops.
At Maradi in Niger, development has reached the point where people can reliably grow this little-known food and safely incorporate it into their diets. A. coeli can easily be obtained locally because of prior introduction of the trees, and the trees themselves exhibit prolific seeding. The research summarized in the article shows how A. coeli can yield about 2 kg seed/tree for at least two to three harvests from age two years onwards, and its seed flour can be safely incorporated into millet- or sorghum-based human diets at rates of up to 25 percent by modifying traditional recipes. This food could be adopted across wide areas of semi-arid Africa and South Asia where climates are suitable for A. coeli and food security is poor. The trees also yield valuable fuelwood and leaf mulch and can provide windbreak protection for food crops.
(Source: Edited and extracted from an article by C. Harwood, T. Rinaudo and S. Adewusi, in Unasylva, 196, Vol. 50, 1999.)
FORESTS FOR FOOD
Women feed their families with food from the forest. In the wooded areas of Thailand, for example, 60 percent of all food comes directly from the forests. Food from trees is sometimes a staple: more frequently, however, it is needed as a supplement for dietary diversity and nutrition.
Leaves are one of the most widely consumed forest foods. Women use them in soups, stews and relishes that add flavour to staples. Some leaves are high in fats; others are high in protein. Most are good sources of vitamins and minerals.
Seeds and nuts are high in calories, edible oils (fats) and protein. Palm nuts _ coconut, oil palm and babassu palm _ are examples. Thousands of millions of coconuts are gathered every year; coconut oil accounts for 7 percent of the world's fat ration. The sago palm is a useful source of starch for the peoples of the southeast Asian archipelago. If eaten with fish or meat and some vegetables, it provides a nourishing meal.
Mushrooms are a high-protein food and a good source of minerals, particularly calcium and iron.
Saps and gums are energy foods. They are cooked for sweets and fermented for wines. Gum is used as a staple by tappers working in the field.
Women help men hunt and trap forest animals for meat. In the Peruvian Amazon, more than 80 percent of animal protein comes from bushmeat.
Insect species are high in vitamins and minerals. Caterpillars have been described as "nature's vitamin pills". Bee larvae contain ten times as much vitamin D as fish liver and twice as much vitamin A as egg yolk. Bee honey, collected from wild hives in forests, is high in calories.
(Source: FAO's Gender and Food Security Web site www.fao.org/Gender/en/foreb2-e.htm)
Fruits for the future
Tropical fruit-trees are important multipurpose species that supplement and improve the quality of diets and provide fodder, fuel, timber and medicine for smallholders. Harvesting these trees enables rural people, particularly women and children, to provide nutrition for a balanced diet, supplement family incomes and strengthen food security.
The major constraints to the effective use of these crops are access to information on use, production and processing and ineffective marketing.
Fruits for the future is a three-year project, funded by the UK Department for International Development, which aims to redress this balance and facilitate technology transfer to farmers through media, by distributing extension manuals emphasizing products, marketing and processing as well as production. Monographs and annotated bibliographies will be produced to collect and summarize existing research, in order to make better use of existing research results and identify possible gaps in the knowledge base for further research.
A group of species has been selected on the basis of their regional or global importance, because there are no comprehensive compilations of information already in existence, and because of their suitability for adaptation, income generation, nutrition and food security, diversification and use in agroforestry system. They are:
· Ziziphus mauritiana (Ber)
· Tamarindus indica (Tamarind)
· Dacryodes edulis (African Pear)
· Adansonia digitata (Baobab)
· Annona species (Cherimoya, sweet and sour sops, custard apples and other species).
For more information, please contact: Ms Angela Hughes, International Centre for Underutilised Crops, Institute of Irrigation and Development Studies, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK.
Fax: +44-1703 677519
E-mail: A.Hughes@soton.ac.uk
www.soton.ac.uk/~icuc/undfruit.htm
Non-wood forest products and food security of Georgian displaced people
As a consequence of the recent conflict, more than 200 000 people were forced to flee from their home villages in Abkhazia and to establish as Internally Displaced People (IDPs) in Georgia. In 1998, an international Spanish NGO Acción Contra el Hambre undertook a food security programme in Samegrelo, the region holding the greatest population of IDPs. Within the framework of this project, an assessment on food security, gender and social changes was carried out, which highlighted the great importance of NWFPs in IDP food security. NWFPs contribute to their staple diet of maize and vegetables and increase their food diversity, household income and protein.
Throughout the year, in the forest patches occurring all over the countryside, the following products/activities are collected/take place:
a) Blackberries, in summer, are sold in the market at a good price at least twice a week.
b) Hunting, in winter, is very popular among IDP families and is a good protein source. Gamebirds (ducks, quails and small birds) are the most pursued, but sometimes wild pigs can be targeted as well.
c) Young people and elders go fishing in the small rivers and ponds.
d) Some wild plants, such as mushrooms and medicinal and aromatic plants, are used for both consumption and sale, especially the most requested medicinal plants, such as Valeriana spp. and Melissa spp.
e) Minor wild fruits, such as figs, chestnuts, walnuts and small berries, are also harvested.
All these activities are performed by either men or women, in a quite clear, well-defined role distribution: women collecting mushrooms, blackberries, wild plants and minor fruits; while men hunt birds, fish and cut wood.
The contribution of NWFPs to the staple food diet of the refugees and displaced people in the Caucasus has been overlooked and poorly assessed by most humanitarian aid agencies. Hence, no programme has been drawn up to address IDP food security by promoting or enhancing these NWFPs and their market. NWFPs should increasingly be taken into account in food security programmes carried out for rural displaced people throughout the world.
(Based on a paper on food security, gender roles and challenges of internally displaced people in Western Georgia, in press.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Jose Luis Vivero Pol, former project manager in Georgia. Acción Contra el Hambre. c/ Caracas 6-1º 28010 Madrid, Spain.
E-mail: jl.viveropol@student.pols.ucl.ac.be
Potential for novel food products from agroforestry trees
The domestication of trees for agroforestry approaches to poverty alleviation and environmental rehabilitation in the tropics depends on the expansion of the market demand for non-timber forest products. This paper (by R.R.B. Leakey) reviews published data on the nutritive values of the flesh, kernels and seed oils of the 17 fruit-tree species identified in four ecoregions of the tropics by subsistence farmers as their top priorities for domestication. In some species, genetic variation in nutritive value has been reported, but in most species there is still inadequate information on which to base programmes for the genetic improvement of these species. Farmers and agroforesters have identified many of the biological constraints relevant to their viewpoint on production, but there is a need for inputs from the food industry into the identification of the desirable traits and characteristics of potentially novel food products. This paper calls for greater collaboration
between agroforesters and the food industry in the effort to promote the domestication and commercialization of underutilized tree products.
(Source: Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 66, R.R.B. Leakey, «Potential for novel food products from agroforestry trees: a review», 1-14, © 1999 with permission from Elsevier Science.)
For more information, please contact: Mr R.R.B. Leakey, Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, Bush Estate, Penicuik, Midlothian, Scotland EH26 0QB, UK.
Fax: +44-(0)131-445-3943
E-mail: r.leakey@ite.ac.uk
COMMERCIAL USE OF BIODIVERSITY: ETHICAL AND LEGAL ASPECTS
Access and benefit sharing in the Convention on Biological Diversity
The Convention on Biological Diversity, an intergovernmental convention ratified by 176 countries and which entered into force on 29 December 1993, has as one of its objectives: «the conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of the genetic resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources and by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources and to technologies, and by appropriate funding". (Article 1 of the Convention).
The third objective of the Convention is the "fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to genetic resources and by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources and to technologies, and by appropriate funding". Article 15 of the Convention provides a framework for the implementation of this objective. Article 8(j) of the Convention contains provision to encourage the equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities embodying traditional lifestyles relevant for conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.
By its decision IV/8, the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity established a regionally balanced panel of experts on access and benefit-sharing appointed by governments, composed of representatives from the private and the public sectors as well as representatives of indigenous and local communities. The panel of experts met in October 1999 in Costa Rica to discuss options for access and benefit-sharing on mutually agreed terms, including access and benefit sharing for scientific and commercial purposes; review of legislative, administrative and policy measures at national and regional levels; review of regulatory procedures and incentive measures; and capacity building.
In its decision IV/16, the Conference of the Parties decided to include access to genetic resources as one of the topics for in-depth discussion at its fifth meeting in Nairobi, Kenya, in May 2000.
(Contributed by Ms Linda Collette, Senior Environmental and Sustainable Development Officer and Ms Electra Kalaugher, Consultant, Environment and Natural Resources Service [SDRN], Sustainable Development Department, FAO.)
BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY FOR FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
The conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity for food and agriculture are important issues for food security, from genetic resources to the wider ecosystem level. The Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity has recognized "the special nature of agricultural biodiversity, its distinctive features and problems needing distinctive solutions". FAO is responsible for various international conventions and agreements of prime importance in the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity for food and agriculture, including the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources, the International Plant Protection Convention, Codex Alimentarius, and the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. FAO works to ensure a harmonious relationship between these agreements and the Convention on Biological Diversity, within the framework of their respective mandates.
Following UNCED, FAO broadened the scope of its intergovernmental Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture to cover all plant, farm animal, forest and fisheries biodiversity. FAO assists in the implementation of the Global Plan of Action on Plant Genetic Resources, adopted by 150 governments in June 1996, the Global Strategy on the Management of Farm Animal Genetic Resources, and contributes to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity for food and agriculture through a wide range of other programmes and activities in the areas of agriculture, forestry and fisheries. An FAO Inter-Departmental Working Group (IDWG) on Biodiversity for Food and Agriculture provides an interdepartmental focus to this cross-cutting issue. Members of the working group contribute actively to the international agenda on biological diversity and provide technical expertise.
(Contributed by: Ms Linda Collette, Senior Environmental and Sustainable Development Officer and Ms Electra Kalaugher, Consultant, Environment and Natural Resources Service [SDRN], Sustainable Development Department, FAO.)
The International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture
The International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources is the first comprehensive agreement dealing with plant genetic resources for food and agriculture. The FAO Conference formally adopted it in 1983 as an instrument to promote international harmony in matters regarding access to plant genetic resources and sharing of benefits arising from their use. The main objective of the Undertaking is to ensure that plant genetic resources of economic and social interest, particularly for agriculture, will be explored, preserved, evaluated and made available for plant breeding and scientific purposes. At present 113 countries have adhered to the Undertaking, which is monitored by the FAO Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (CGRFA), an intergovernmental forum of 160 countries and the European Community. The mandate of the Commission covers all components of agrobiodiversity, including forestry and fisheries genetic resources, which are of relevance to food and
agriculture. It holds a variety of meetings, including biennial regular sessions, and other intersessional meetings to discuss and negotiate these matters. The meetings are organized by the CGRFA secretariat based in FAO headquarters in Rome.
Since its adoption in 1983, the Undertaking has been subject to a series of agreed interpretations through FAO Conference resolutions, for achieving a balance between the products of biotechnology (the commercial varieties and breeders' lines) on the one hand, and farmers' varieties and wild material on the other, and also between the interests of developed and developing countries. The aim has also been to establish a balance between the rights of breeders who represent the class of formal innovators and that of the farmers and their communities who are the informal innovators and traditionally the custodians of germplasm used for agricultural purpose. Indeed, «Farmers Rights,» which are defined as «rights arising from the past, present and future contributions of farmers in conserving, improving, and making available plant genetic resources, particularly those in the centres of origin/diversity» is an integral part of the Undertaking. It also recognizes the sovereign
rights of nations over their genetic resources.
At present, negotiations are under way for the revision of the Undertaking in harmony with the Convention of Biological Diversity (CBD). In 1992, the signatories to the CBD recognized that solutions had to be sought within FAO for two outstanding matters concerning plant genetic resources: access to ex situ collections prior to the Convention, and the realization of Farmers' Rights. In 1995, the Conference of the parties to the CBD also acknowledged that the «special nature of agricultural biodiversity with its distinctive features and problems needed distinctive solutions».
The key elements that are under discussion include the scope, and access to plant genetic resources; sharing of benefits arising from their use, and the realization of Farmers' Rights. Countries have agreed that the Undertaking should include a multilateral system of access and benefit-sharing that meets the specific needs of agriculture. In a multilateral system facilitated access will be provided for a list of genera of relevance to agriculture as well as food security and for which countries are largely interdependent. Some of the agricultural crops that are included in the list of genera for the multilateral system include rice, maize, coconut and oil palm. Negotiations are also under way for a fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use of plant genetic resources, including transfer of technology, capacity building, exchange of information and funding.
The negotiations for the revision of the Undertaking are expected to be completed in 2000. Once completed, it would allow the CGRFA to implement its mandate in other areas of agrobiodiversity including forestry genetic resources. In addition, a successful establishment of a multilateral system for access and benefit-sharing for plant genetic resources for agriculture will ensure their continued availability for food security through sustainable agriculture.
Information and documents of relevance to the Undertaking are available on the CGRFA Web site at www.fao.org/ag/cgrfa/iu.htm
(Contributed by: Dr Kakoli Ghosh, Genetic Resources Officer, Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Fax: +39-06-570-56347.)
The commercial use of biodiversity
The commercial use of biodiversity, a book by Kerry ten Kate and Sarah Laird (published recently by Earthscan and the European Commission), explains the provisions of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), national laws and contracts on access and benefit-sharing and provides an analysis of the scale and nature of markets for products from genetic resources in pharmaceuticals, botanical medicines, crop development, horticulture, crop protection, biotechnology (in fields other than healthcare and agriculture) and personal care and cosmetics.
The cost, time and risk involved in product discovery and development and the benefits arising from collection to ultimate commercialization are described, with illustrative examples and case studies of best practices. The authors describe companies' point of views of the CBD, corporate and institutional policies on access and benefit-sharing, and provide a glossary of technical terms and extensive contact information.
(Source: Kew Scientist, Issue 16, October 1999.)
The challenges of access to genetic resources, benefit sharing and bioprospecting _ Who should benefit?
The history of the utilization of Cinchona spp. is an example of the ethical aspects related to the trade of NWFPs and genetic resources by the food and health industry. Quinine is an alkaloid obtained from the bark of Cinchona spp., indigenous to the mountain forests of South America. It is used in traditional medicine to treat malaria. In the seventeenth century, Jesuits discovered the traditional use of the bark by Peruvian Indians and later initiated its global commercialization (see under Products for more information on Cinchona). After having used and overharvested wild stands of Cinchona spp. for 200 years, several species were brought into cultivation in Asia and Africa. In the early 1940s, quinine was isolated for the first time and has been synthesized since by pharmaceutical companies.
Today, trade in quinine is a profitable business for the pharmaceutical industry, which developed the drugs and synthetic substitutes. But what about the innovators and discoverers of the active compound: the local communities which used and are still using Cinchona bark in their traditional medicine; the Andean states which originally provided the natural resource, or the Jesuits, who observed the traditional utilization? How did they benefit from this successful commercialization, if at all?
Some important plant-based ingredients of medicaments
Ingredient
Plant species Application 
Climate zone
Main product basis
Industrial
Traditional
Aspirin
Salix alba
Pain-killer
Temperate
Synthetic
Atropine
Atropa belladonna, Duboisia myoporoides
Pupil dilatation, bradycardia, Parkinson's disease, asthma, traveller's diarrhoea
Same
Tropical
Synthetic
Digoxin
Digitalis sp.
Heart failure, arrhythmia
Same
Temperate
Synthetic
Ephedrine
Ephedra sinica
Nasal decongestant
Same
Temperate
Synthetic
L-Dopa
Mucuna deeringiana
Treatment of Parkinson's disease
Tropical
Plant source
Picrotoxin
Anamirta cocculus
Nervous system stimulus
Same
Tropical
Plant source
Pilocarpine
Pilocarpus jaborandi
Treatment of glaucoma
Same
Tropical
Plant source
Quininde
Cinchona sp.
Treatment of arrhythmia
Same
Tropical
Plant source
Quinine
Cinchona sp.
Antimalarial
Same
Tropical
Synthetic
Reserpine
Rauwolfia serpentina
Antihypertensive agent
Same
Tropical
Scopolamine
Hyoscyamus niger
Treatment of motion sickness
Same
Tropical
Plant source
Taxol
Taxus brevilifolia
Ovarian cancer
Temperate
Plant source
Vinblastine
Catharanthus roseus
Treatment of Hodgkin's disease
Tropical
Plant source
Vincristine
Catharanthus roseus
Childhood leukaemia
Tropical
Plant source
It is estimated that medicines derived from plants originally used by indigenous peoples have an annual world market of US$43 billion. Although one-third of all plant-derived prescription drugs comes from rainforest species, most of the commercial beneficiaries of the trade in genetic and biochemical resources that are found in developing countries are located in developed countries. Pharmaceutical products based on traditional medicine have probably returned less than 0.001 percent of their profits to the local communities who originally used these resources.
Bioprospecting is the search for commercially valuable biochemical and genetic resources in plants, animals and microorganisms. Currently, some 200 companies around the world are screening organisms for medicines and other purposes. Pharmaceutical companies are currently investing some US$125-231 million in the identification of new drugs.
Bioprospecting is carried out in two ways: (a) random screening of chemicals found in nature: organisms are collected and tested for chemicals that might be effective against specific diseases. Mass screening is carried out by large companies for the majority of samples used. Each sample costs some US$500 for collection, transportation and storage; drug development in total requires investments of some US$300 million and takes from 8 to 15 years; and (b) screening of chemicals based on the traditional knowledge of the medical application of an organism. Some companies only screen organisms if different local communities use the same organism for comparable medicinal purposes. This ethnobotanical screening is mainly carried out by small companies and academic institutions. In both ways, the relevant ethical questions remain the same:
· Will the provider of the organism and/or the traditional knowledge receive adequate property rights?
· Will the share of benefits be equally distributed among all stakeholders, including local communities, national states and private companies?
Probably the best-known example of a bioprospecting agreement was signed in 1991 by the American pharmaceutical company Merck and Costa Rica's National Biodiversity Institute (INBio) (see also Non-Wood News 2). Merck made an up-front payment of US$1.35 million and agreed to share royalties on resulting commercial products, as well as to provide technical assistance and training; INBio, in turn, provides chemical extracts from plants, animals and microorganisms collected from protected areas and pays 10 percent of the up-front payment and 50 percent of any royalties it may receive to Costa Rica's National Park Fund.
In recent years, many other examples of agreements on benefit-sharing and access to genetic resources have been developed (see references and Web sites below for further information).
These agreements are meant to ensure monetary and non-monetary benefits in the short and long term to the source country and communities. Royalties, which arise from the commercialization of new products and drugs, are the most important long-term monetary benefits. Royalty-derived benefits are based on a percentage of earnings from commercial sales paid by the licensing partner. However, because of the long time required for the development of new drugs and the low probability of a commercially significant discovery, royalties often do not match expectations. In addition, the competition among many providers of genetic resources poses the risk of a decline in monetary benefits. Short-term benefits, which are already provided during the research and development («prospection») phase, are more promising and realistic benefits. These so-called «process» benefits include advance payments, access fees provided in the form of lump-sums or milestone payments. Advance payments are
often used to establish trust funds that can provide immediate benefits to stakeholders. Short-term, non-monetary benefits include capacity building, training, technology transfer, equipment, infrastructure and research collaboration.
These types of benefits should be taken into account not only in bioprospecting arrangements, but also in agreements regarding the utilization of already exploited and commercialized products.
While many organizations and institutions emphasize the potential benefits of bioprospecting activities for national states (source-countries), local communities, private companies, scientific institutions, NGOs and the consumer of the new discovered drugs, others brand bioprospecting as «biopiracy»: extracting and exporting raw materials from developing countries without increasing the capacities of the countries to develop and export their own products. Another major risk might be that the benefits of commercial development do not trickle down to local communities.
Controversial discussions and negotiations on the implementation of agreements on access to genetic resources and benefit-sharing in general and bioprospecting in particular are still going on between scientists, politicians, the industry and NGOs. Therefore, this topic will remain on the agenda of international bodies such as the fifth Conference of Parties of the Convention on Biological Diversity, which will be held in Nairobi in May 2000.
International Cooperative Biodiversity Group (ICBG)
The ICBG programme was established in 1992 by three agencies of the United States Government: the National Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation, and the United States Agency for International Development. It was designed to stimulate the field of bioprospecting and to provide models for the development of a sustainable use of biodiversity.
The ICBG Programmes
Country
Academic principal investigator
National partners
Foreign partners
Argentina, Chile, Mexico
University of Arizona
National Institute of Agricultural Technology of Argentina, National University of Patagonia/Argentina, Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, National Autonomous University of Mexico
G.W.L. Hansen's Disease Centre, Wyeth-Ayerst Research Laboratories, American Cyanamid Company
Costa Rica
Cornell University
National Biodiversity Institute (INBio), University of Costa Rica
Bristol- Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute
Mexico
University of Georgia
College of Southern Frontier/Chiapas
Molecular Nature Ltd.
Peru
Washington University
Aguaruna Peoples, Universidad San Marcos, Universidad Peruana, Cayetano-Heredia
Monsanto-Searle Co.
Panama
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute
University of Panama/ Gorgas Memorial Institute of Health Research, Nature Foundation of Panama
G.W. Hansen's Disease Center/Louisiana, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Monsanto Company, Conservation International
Suriname, Madagascar
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Forest People of Suriname, Conservation International Suriname, National Herbarium of Suriname, Bedrijf Geneesmiddelen Voorziening Suriname, National Center for Pharmaceutical Research/Madagascar
Missouri Botanical Garden, Bristol- Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute, DowElanco Agrosciences
Laos, Viet Nam
University of Illinois
National Center for Natural Sciences and Technology/Viet Nam, Cuc-Phuong National Park/Viet Nam, Research Institute for Medicinal Plants/Laos
Glaxo-Wellcome Research and Development
Cameroon, Nigeria
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research
International Centre for Ethnomedicine and Drug Development/ Nigeria, University of Dschang/ Cameroon
Smithsonian Institute, Bioresources Development and Conservation Programme, Pace University New York, University of Utha, University of Minnesota, University of Jos
The ICBG programme requires that both near and long-term benefits flow back to the collaborating communities regardless of whether ethnomedicinal knowledge is utilized in the research process or not. Local individuals (frequently traditional healers or parataxonomists) who collaborate with the project generally receive payment for their services and training in collection and identification techniques. Each of the ICBGs is establishing or is associated with a trust fund for conservation and development benefits. In all cases where collections involve areas that are inhabited the funds are or will be focused on community projects aimed at improving health services and the sustainable use of local resources.
However, a seemingly simple idea such as returning benefits to communities can be extraordinarily complicated in practice. How are communities defined: geographically, ethnically or politically? Who should be the principal beneficiaries: those individuals or groups who actively participate, those who may be related, or everyone in a country?
(Based on J.P. Rosenthal, 1998. The International Cooperative Biodiversity Groups (ICBG) Program. A benefit-sharing case study for the Conference of Parties to Convention on Biological Diversity, updated through information of the John Fogarty International Center at http://www.nih.gov/fic/opportunities/icbg.html)
Bioprospecting in reality: the Suriname ICBG Project
The Suriname Bioprospecting Project is a joint project of five academic, private and non-governmental organizations.
Participants of the Suriname ICBG Project
Institution
Responsibility
Name
Type
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (VPISU)
University/USA
Team leader, project coordination
Conservation International (CI)
International NGO
Ethnobotanical collection, documentation of traditional knowledge, conservation initiatives
Missouri Botanical Garden (MBG),
Botanical Research Institution/USA
Random botanical collection for drug discovery and floristic inventory
Bedriff Geneesmiddelen Voorziening Suriname (BGVS),
Pharmaceutical company/Suriname
Extraction and screening
Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute (B-MS),
Pharmaceutical company/USA
Screening of samples for anti-cancer and anti-infective activities and drug development
These institutions collaborate with the local tribal people, who are known for their extensive knowledge of forest resources, to conduct bioprospecting activities.
Flowering plants are gathered by using ethnobotanical and random collection techniques. The project collaborates with local shamans who identify plants with medicinal uses. This information is put into a conservation database and Geographic Information System by CI. The plant samples are encoded, in order to prevent the pharmaceutical companies from having access to the ethnobotanical information. As a result of this system, no other institution initially receives information regarding the identity, description, locale, and traditional uses, if any, of the plant. This method ensures that no company can look for additional samples elsewhere and that Suriname and its local people are compensated for their contribution.
If B-MS expresses no interest in a given sample, it loses its exclusivity of use over the sample and the extract becomes part of a pool of samples that can be offered to other potential partners.
The main benefits of the ICBG project include the:
· provision of employment, equipment and training: shamans, field collectors and support staff were contracted and knowledge of Suriname's flora was increased;
· establishment of a Forest People's Fund: this trust fund was established in 1994 with a US$50 000 up-front payment of B-MS in order to fund local projects on community development, biodiversity conservation and health-care; and
· implementation of the Shaman's Apprentice Program: this programme places young community members to work with shamans to learn from their ethnobotanical knowledge.
What are the lessons learned from the Suriname ICBG?
1. While the potential profits from drug development are enormous, and initial expectations were high, it has become apparent over the course of this project that the actual chance of a drug being developed is relatively low. Therefore, in order for bioprospecting to be successful, other benefit-sharing mechanisms that provide immediate incentives have become even more important.
2. If bioprospecting is to promote biodiversity conservation, the source-country must be given the opportunity to participate in bioprospecting, including access to the means of adding value to these resources.
3. Smooth relations and communication among all participants have to be ensured. Each party has different needs, a different agenda, and a unique contribution to make. Even when each participant is adequately compensated, successful cooperation requires clear communication, reliability, honesty and trust by all.
4. The time frame for drug production highlights the fact that long-term relationships among the participants are important.
5. The ethical and legal basis for many of the benefit-sharing mechanisms should stem from the Convention on Biological Diversity's recognition of each nation's sovereign right to control access to its resources.
(Source: Guérin-McManus, Famolare, L.M., Bowles, I.A., Malone, S.A.J., Mittermeier, R.A., Rosenfeld, A.B. 1998. Bioprospecting in practice: A case study of the Suriname ICBG Project and Benefits Sharing under the Convention on Biological Diversity. Case study submitted to the Secretariat to the Convention on Biological Diversity.)
Benefit-sharing arrangements - theory and practice: the example of Prunus africana in the Mount Cameroon Region
The afromontane tree Prunus africana (Rosaceae; English: African Cherry, «Red Stinkwood», «Bitter Almond«) is a multiple-use tree species with local and international economic and medicinal value. The bark is the major source of an extract used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia, an increasingly common health problem in older men. The total annual value of the unprocessed dried bark and bark extract sold on the European market is estimated at US$150 million. In 1994, Prunus africana was included in Annex 2 of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) as «vulnerable species requiring monitoring» because of the overexploitation of bark in Cameroon and Madagascar (see Non-Wood News 2 and 3).
In Cameroon the bark is used locally as a traditional medicine against malaria, fever and stomach pains. The commercial exploitation was initiated in the 1970s by a French company called PLANTECAM. Collectors were trained to apply a harvesting technique which intends to debark the tree from opposing quarters in uninterrupted strips from breast height to the first branch of the tree crown. Massive legal and illegal exploitation of Prunus africana in Cameroon started in 1985 because of an attempt by the Ministry of Environment and Forestry (MINEF) to stimulate the national industry and to increase market competition by interrupting the monopoly for harvesting of PLANTECAM. In 1994, in addition to PLANTECAM, three other enterprises received export licences for Prunus bark or bark products. A shortage of Prunus africana bark in the Northwest Province because of bad harvesting practices (felling and total debarking which kills the tree) and overexploitation pushed the contractors
with exploitation permits to move into the Mount Cameroon region to meet their quotas.
Until 1995 the harvesting of Prunus bark was carried out exclusively through workers contracted by PLANTECAM, and no legal benefit remained with the local communities. For a better participation of local people in the management of their natural resources and to reduce illegal harvesting, the Mount Cameroon Project (supported by the Department for International Development [DFID] of the United Kingdom and the German Technical Cooperation [GTZ]), together with MINEF, tried to encourage the village communities to do the harvesting themselves through a legal contract with PLANTECAM. The benefit-sharing agreements began with activities of perception gathering, conflict mapping and identification of common interests. Finally, the «First agreement for sustainable management of the species and production of Prunus at Mapanja Village facilitated by the Mount Cameroon Project and Ministry of Environment and Forests» was signed in July 1997.
The Prunus Harvester Unions could sell the bark directly to PLANTECAM at the agreed market price, which was much higher than that on the black market or the price paid by intermediaries (who bought from collectors and sold to PLANTECAM). The bylaws of the Unions foresaw that part of the generated income was paid to the Village Development Fund and to the Unions Fund. As a result of 2 kg being paid by each bark harvester to the Village Development Fund, the Fund had a sum of about one million CFA Francs (approx. US$1 500 at the 1999 rate of exchange) just five months after it was set up. The village intended to use this money for the realization of a long-awaited water project.
In 1996, the Office national de développement des forêts (ONADEF) carried out a Prunus africana management inventory in the Mount Cameroon Region and established an annual sustainable maximum quota of 300 tonnes of bark. In response to the setting of these quota limits, PLANTECAM annulled the agreements with the two Prunus Harvester Unions, even though the harvesting was carried out applying sustainable harvesting techniques, and illegal exploitation had been greatly reduced (also as a result of the regular joint monitoring carried out by PLANTECAM, Prunus Harvester Unions, MINEF and the Mount Cameroon Project).
Illegal exploitation boomed and more than 800 tonnes were harvested in the Mount Cameroon Region by contractors, local people, and PLANTECAM.
After long negotiations, it was agreed that no licence for Prunus exploitation could be granted without an inventory in the specific region and without the involvement of local communities in the management of Prunus africana. MINEF also agreed to put in place effective control and monitoring systems. With the financial assistance of donors, a national Prunus africana inventory, starting in the Mount Cameroon Region, will be carried out testing a new inventory methodology. The first results are expected in March 2000. The inventory will continue in other regions of Cameroon, where Prunus africana appears in economically interesting amounts, in order to diversify exploitation sites and ensure a continuous supply of raw material to the PLANTECAM factory.
The Mount Cameroon Project and MINEF intend to revitalize the two Prunus Harvester Unions and to agree on certain procedures on revenue sharing between PLANTECAM and the Unions. These agreements include supervision, sanctions for bad harvesting, putting aside means to cover the costs of monthly monitoring trips, regeneration tax, transport costs to the PLANTECAM factory, contributions for the next inventory after a certain period of time, share for the Village Development Fund and others. A working group was set up by MINEF, the Mount Cameroon Project and the Prunus Harvester Unions to explore and implement options, on which basis the Unions could be given their own exploitation quotas.
(Source: Extracted and edited from S.A. Laird and E. Lisinge. 1998. Benefit-sharing case studies: Ancistrocladus korupensis and Prunus africana. UNEP/CBD/COP/4/Inf.25; and from a contribution by J. Linke, 1999. Mount Cameroon Project.)
For further information please contact Dr Jörg Linke, Mount Cameroon Project, Buea, PO Box 60, Buea S.W.P. Cameroon.
E-mail: Joerg_Linke@compuserve.com
The chronology of the «unsuccessful» discovery of Ancistrocladus korupensis
In 1726, the rainforest liana Ancistrocladus korupensis was first collected in Nigeria without identification of the species. In 1990, researchers at the National Cancer Institute (NCI) discovered that extracts from A. korupensis (re-collected in the Korup National Park in Cameroon) inhibit the ability of HIV to kill human cells. The HIV-inhibiting alkaloids michellamine A and B are subsequently isolated. In 1992, NCI expanded its research programme on the assessment of density and distribution of A. korupenis and harvesting trials. The programme is implemented by the Missouri Botanical Garden and the University of Yaounde. In 1993, Cameroon declares A. korupensis a «national treasure», prohibiting the export of live plant material and seeds, conducting research into capabilities within Cameroon for the establishment of research partnerships with NCI, and establishment of three committees with well-articulated objectives (production/exploitation, laboratory research, legal
aspects).
In 1998, because of the toxicity found in michellamine B, NCI stopped conducting R&D on A. korupensis. Cameroon mainly gained non-monetary benefits from the research on A. korupensis.
Main benefits obtained through the identification of michellamine B
Monetary benefits
Non-monetary benefits
Beneficiaries
Short term benefits
Employment in research and development
Training in nursery, agronomic techniques and sustainable sourcing strategies
Local communities
Training, capacity building, infrastructure, equipment and supplies, scientific exchange, supply of research results
National level
Long-term benefits
Potential alternative income generating scheme, Village Development Fund (funded by potential royalties)
Local communities
Potential royalties from commercial product
National level
(Source: Laird., S.A., & Lisinge, E. 1998. Benefit-sharing case studies: Ancistrocladus korupensis and Prunus africana. Submission by the United Nations Environment Programme, UNEP/CBD/COP/4/Inf.25.)
Commercialization and benefit-sharing of NWFP obtained from neem (Azadirachta indica)
In November 1999, the Henry Doubleday Research Association held an e-mail conference on the «Improvement of neem (Azadirachta indica) and its potential benefits to poor farmers». The final session of the workshop dealt with the «Commercialization of neem» and tackled two topics related to benefit sharing: the benefit for the poor from neem commercialization, and the patenting of compounds extracted from neem.
Although only 25-30 percent of neem fruit are collected each year, the utilization of neem has a great impact on both the local and national economy in India. The majority of neem seeds are crushed to extract the oil, of which 95 percent is used for soap production.
Neem seed prices vary across the season. In general, higher prices are paid for neem seed kernels (e.g. US$0.25/kg in Uttar Pradesh, India) compared to whole seeds (e.g. US$0.05-0.12/kg in Andra Pradesh in 1998). However, seed processing (extraction of kernels and oil) is labour intensive and does not compare favourably to the salary paid for unskilled labour. Other factors preventing seed collectors from realizing a higher price are the lack of knowledge on seed collection and seed handling leading to the sale of poor quality seeds, and inadequate or lack of access to marketing facilities.
In 1992, a US patent was granted to W.R. Grace & Co. on a process for the extraction and the stabilization of azadirachtin (aza A), a compound which is used in the production of bio-pesticides. A coalition of NGOs opposed this patent on political and legal grounds (see also Non-Wood News 5). The coalition's underlying arguments were that biological resources are common heritage and should not be patented; that the patent would restrict the availability of living material to local people, whose ancestors have spent centuries developing the material; and that the patent may block economic growth in developing countries. The legal challenge failed on the ground that there was no prior knowledge of the process within United States borders, and the use of traditional extractions of neem would not be prohibited. The United States only recognizes prior `knowledge, use or invention' as blocking a claim to patent when those activities take place within United States borders, or are
evidenced by publications accessible in the United States or, more commonly, by foreign patents.
Other topics dealt with during the e-mail workshop included «Global use of neem: tackling constraints and identifying opportunities», «Opportunities in India and Ghana - needs and prospects», «Improving productivity 1: silviculture» and «Improving productivity 2: genetic improvement».
(Source: Chamberlain, J.R., Childs, F., Harris, P.J.C., Antwi, E., Manu, J., Daniel, J., Naik, S. 1999. Commercialization of neem. Material presented at the electronic workshop «Improvement of neem (Azadirachta indica) and its potential benefits to poor farmers", 1-18 November 1999.)
For more information, please contact: Henry Doulbeday Research Association (HDRA), Ryton, Organic Gardens, Coventry CV8 3LG, UK.
Fax +44-01203 639229
E-mail: neem@hdra.org.uk
www.hdra.org.uk/neem.htm
«No to patenting of life»
At a meeting at the United Nations, Geneva, on 25 July 1999, 87 indigenous peoples' organizations, NGOs and networks signed a statement on the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) of the WTO agreement. The statement called for the WTO Member States to put the amendment of the TRIPS Agreement as a priority item on the agenda of the WTO Ministerial Conference in Seattle and especially article 27.3b of TRIPS. The statement says that this Article should mainly be amended categorically to disallow the patenting of life forms. Thus, the revised Article 27.3b should clearly prohibit the patenting of plants and animals including all their parts, meaning, genes, gene sequences, cells, proteins, seeds, etc. It should also prohibit the patenting of natural processes involving the use of plants, animals and other living organisms and their parts and processes used in producing variations of plants, animals and microorganisms.
(Source: List server BIO-IPR, 19 October 1999.)
For more information, please contact: TEBTEBBA Foundation
Fax: +63-74-4439459
E-mail: tebtebba@skyinet.net or vco@skyinet.net or inef@eGroups.com
«Bioprospecting» or «Biopiracy»?
Drug discovery and biodiversity among the Maya of Mexico
A US$2.5 million five-year project «Drug Discovery and Biodiversity among the Maya of Mexico», which is now in its second year of operation, aims to collect and evaluate thousands of plants and microorganisms used in traditional medicine by Mayan communities. The project is led by the University of Georgia, United States, in cooperation with a Mexican university research centre, El Colegio de la Frontera Sur (ECOSUR), and Molecular Nature Ltd, a biotechnology company based in Wales, United Kingdom. However, this project is being denounced as «biopiracy» by the 11 Mayan organizations of the Council of Traditional Indigenous Midwives and Healers of Chiapas (Consejo estatal de parteras y Médicos Indígenas tradicionales de Chiapas).
(Source: Rural Advancement Foundation International (RAFI), www.rafi.org)
Law to protect native intellectual property
The Peruvian government is drafting a law to protect indigenous rights over their ancestral knowledge. Indigenous communities will be the intellectual owners of genetic resources coming from plant species whose curative or nutritional values form part of their ancestral knowledge, according to the text of the legal bill.
''Peru is one of the countries with greatest biodiversity in the world and must begin utilizing the competitive advantage this implies,'' commented Jorge Caillaux, president of the Peruvian Environmental Law Society, ''but it must protect its natural resources as well as the rights of its population.''
(Source: IPS News Bulletin, 12 January 2000.)
Ethical trade in forest products
The Natural Resources and Ethical Trade Programme (NRET) at the Natural Resources Institute is undertaking a research programme to examine the effects of ethical trade in forest products on forest dependent people. This has included studies on the supply chains of NTFPs such as Brazil nuts and tagua nuts, as well as studies on the benefits to local people in Peru and Ecuador. A later stage of the research programme will develop guidelines to ensure that ethical trading schemes, such as third party certification, benefit forest dependent people.
Details of this research programme can be found by following the Ethical Trade and Forests link on the home page for NRET.
(Contributed by: Ms Anne Tallontire, Social Sciences Department, Natural Resources Institute, University of Greenwich, Chatham Maritime, ME4 4TB, UK.)
Fax: + 44-1634 883706
E-mail: A.M.Tallontire@greenwich.ac.uk
www.nri.org/NRET/nret.htm
FOR FURTHER READING
- Anonymous. 1996. Finding medicines in the forest: can shamans point the view? Frontiers (Newsletter of the National Science Foundation), March:4-6
- Biodiversity Action Network. 1999. Access to genetic resources: An evaluation of the development and implementation of recent regulation and access agreements. Columbia University, School of International and Public Affairs. Environmental Policy Studies, Working Paper No. 4.
- Bryant, P.J. 1997-99. Biodiversity and Conservation. A hypertext book. Irvine www.darwin.bio.uci.edu/~sustain/bio65/Titlpage.htm
- Conservation International. 1999. Bioprospecting. Washington www.conservation.org/web/fieldact/C-C_PROG/Econ/biopros.htm
- Environmental Literacy Council. Value of Biodiversity.. http://www.enviroliteracy.org/value_of_biodiversity.html
- Farnsworth, N.R. 1988. Screening for new medicines. In: E.O. Wilson (ed.). Biodiversity. Washington DC.
- GRAIN. 1999. Bacteria become big business. Seedling, March.
- Macilwain, C. 1998. When rhetoric hits reality in debate on bioprospecting. Nature, Vol. 392.
- Mendelsohn, R.& Balick. M.J. 1995. The value of undiscovered pharmaceuticals in tropical forests. Economic Botany, 49(2).
- Missouri Botanical Garden. 1999. Bioprospecting for new pharmaceuticals. http://gopher.mobot.org/MOBOT/research/applied-research/biopros.html.
- Plän, T. Playing fair in the biotrade. Akzente Focus. GTZ. Eschborn.
- Posey, R. 1990. Intellectual Property Rights: Just compensation for indigenous knowledge. Anthropology Today, August.
- RAFI, 1994. Bioprospecting/Biopiracy and indigenous peoples. RAFI Communiqué Nov/Dec 1994.
- Rainforest Alliance. Medicine: Our stake in the rainforest. New York
- Rosenthal, J.P. 1998. The International Cooperative Biodiversity Groups (ICBG) Program. A benefit-sharing case study for the Conference of Parties to Convention on Biological Diversity.
- Rural Advancement Foundation International. 1997. Biopiracy Update: The inequitable sharing of benefits. RAFI Communiqué, September/October.
- Sheldon, J.W., Balick, M.J., & Laird, S.A. 1997. Medicinal plants: Can utilization and conservation coexist? Advances in Economic Botany, Vol. 12. New York.
- Shyamsundar, P. & Lanier, G.K. 1994. Biodiversity prospecting: an effective conservation tool? Tropical Biodiversity, 2(3): 441-446.
- Srivastava, J., Lambert, J., & Vietmeyer, N. Undated. Medicinal plants: An expanding role in development. World Bank Technical Paper Number 320. Washington.
- Tangley, L. 1998. Rain forests for profit. U.S. News online. World Report 4/20/98.
- World Resource Institute. 1992. Questions and answers about bioprospecting. Washington (www.igc.org/wri/biodiv/bp-facts.html).
- World Resource Institute. 1999. Questions and answers about «bioprospecting». www.igc.org/wri/biodiv/bp-facts.html.
BIOPROSPECTING ON THE WWW
This section presents some selected Web sites related to access to genetic resources, benefit sharing and bioprospecting. It is obvious that this list is not comprehensive.
· www.biodiv.org/chm/techno/gen-res.html
Information on «Access to genetic resources and benefit sharing», compiled by the Clearing-House Mechanism of the Convention of Biological Diversity. The site hosts 18 case studies on Access and Benefit Sharing.
· www.iisd.ca/linkages/biodiv/abs
Information on the Experts' Panel on Access and Benefit Sharing, held in San José, Costa Rica, from 4 to 8 October 1999.
· www.fao.org/WAICENT/FAOINFO/AGRICULT/cgrfa/default.htm
Homepage of the «Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture»
· www.nih.gov/fic/opportunities/icbg.html
Information on the International Cooperative Biodiversity Groups (ICBG), published by the John E. Fogarty International Center.
· www.kew.org.uk/peopleplants/handbook/handbook2/index.html
The focus of the second issue (July 1996) of the People and Plants Handbook is on «Protecting rights - legal and ethical implications of ethnobotany».
· www.rafi.org/communique/
The Rural Advancement Foundation International (RAFI) published various online communiqués (Nov/Dec 1994, Sep/Oct 1995, Dec 1996, Sep/Oct 1997) which deal with bioprospecting. RAFI is an international NGO that conducts research on agricultural biodiversity, biotechnology and intellectual property.
· www.conservation.org/web/fieldact/C-C_PROG/Econ/biopros.htm
Information on the bioprospecting initiatives of Conservation International, a US-based NGO.
· www.bioresources.org/project.htm
Projects of the Bioresources Development & Conservation Programme on Bioprospecting.
· www.grain.org/publications/mar99/mar991.htm
The March newsletter of the Genetic Resources Action International Network includes an article on «Bacteria become big business» and the bioprospecting activities of Diversa Corporation.
· www.inbio.ac.cr
Homepage of the Instituto Nacional de Biodiversidad (INBio).
· www.fao.org/docrep/W7261e/W7261e06.htm
«Between a rock and a hard place: Indigenous peoples, nation states and the multinationals», an article on bioprospecting by G. Dutfield, published by FAO in 1997.
· www.gtz.de/toeb/akzente.html
The GTZ publication akzente focus «People and ecology» includes an articles on bioprospecting («Playing fair in the bio-trade») and the work of INBio.
· www.binas.unido.org/binasd/News/97issue34/4.html
Sitenfeld, A. 1997. Issues and strategies for bioprospecting. BINAS News, Vol.3, Issues 3 and 4.
· www.nature.com
Comprehensive article on «The myths and realities of bioprospecting (Nature, Vol. 392, 9 April 1998).
· www.iocd.unam.mx/biodiver.htm
Information on the «Fund for Biodiversity Exploration and Conservation», initiated by the International Organization for Chemical Science in Development.
· www.alpha.marsci.uga.edu/khp/bio104/Bioprospecting.html
Short article on «Bioprospecting or Biopiracy?», describing the pros and cons of bioprospecting.
· www.nativeweb.org/pages/legal/shiva.html
An article on «Bioethics: A third world issue».
· www.darwin.bio.uci.edu/~sustain/bio65/Titlpage.htm
A hypertext book of Bryant, P.J. (1997-99) on Biodiversity and Conservation. Chapter 7 deals with the «Values of Biodiversity» including information on medicinal plants and foodstuffs.
· www.binas.unido.org/binas/htsearch.html
The «Implementing rules and regulations on the prospecting of biological and genetic resources» in the Philippines.
· www.igc.org/wri/biodiv/bp-facts.html
The World Resource Institute answers questions about «bioprospecting».
· www.wri.org/biodiv/b01-bp.html
A sample of companies active in plant and other natural product collection and screening, compiled by the World Resource Institute.
· www.wri.org/biodiv/bp-home.html
Information on the World Resource Institute publication «Biodiversity prospecting: Using genetic resources for sustainable development», which provides guidelines for establishing effective and equitable schemes for biodiversity prospecting.
DEFINITION OF NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS
How do you define non-wood forest products?
Based on the recommendations of an internal interdepartmental FAO meeting on definitions of Non-Wood Forest Products (NWFP) held in June 1999, the following new FAO working definition of NWFPs has been adopted: Non-Wood Forest Products consist of goods of biological origin other than wood, derived from forests, other wooded land and trees outside forest.
Non-Wood: The term NWFP excludes all woody raw materials. Consequently, timber, chips, charcoal, fuelwood, as well as small woods such as tools, household equipment and carvings, are excluded.
Forest: NWFPs should be derived from forests and similar land uses. FAO has elaborated definitions of «forest» and «other wooded land» in a working paper on terms and definitions for the Forest Resources Assessment 2000. Since plantations are included in the FAO definition of forest, NWFPs that are obtained from plantations, such as gum arabic (Acacia senegal) or rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) are thus also included in the definition. Many NWFPs are derived from both natural forests and plantations. The final definition of «trees outside forests» (including trees originating from forests which are located out of the forest and other wooded land, such as Acacia albida and the Karité tree Vitellaria paradoxa) is still in the process of elaboration.
Products: In the proposed definition, the term product corresponds to goods, which are tangible objects of biological origin such as plants, animals and their products. Forest services (e.g. ecotourism, grazing, bioprospection) and forest benefits (e.g. soil conservation, soil fertility, watershed protection) are excluded. Services and benefits are even more difficult to assess and quantify. A clear definition of forest services and benefits is still lacking.
We in the NWFP Programme would like to receive your comments regarding this new definition. What definition or term do you use and why? Your comments will be published in the next issue of Non-Wood News.
* The Spanish and French versions of this definition are:
Les produits forestiers non-ligneux sont des biens d'origine biologique autres que le bois, dérivés des forêts, des autres terres boisées, et des arbres hors forêts.
Productos forestales no madereros son los bienes de origen biológico distintos de la madera derivados de los bosques, de otras tierras boscosas y de los árboles fuera de los bosques.
Can non-timber forest products [NTFPs] come from a plantation?
Plantations are normally characterized as environmental "bad guys"; they are painted as sterile monocultures replacing biodiverse natural forest, and also as enterprises maintaining purely exploitative social relations with local communities. Research undertaken with forest margin communities in the forest zone of Cameroon looked more closely at the economic relationships between natural forest, oil palm plantations and local livelihoods, as part of efforts to develop participatory community forest management that better match community needs. The fieldwork was carried out under the Mount Cameroon Project in the Southwest Province, and was conducted with communities in three plantation camps. The results show that local people use plantations in the area as a major source of NTFPs for subsistence and commercial use, suggesting that plantations can be a source of livelihood security in surprising ways.
The communities in the plantation camps have access to both plantation and natural forest. The results demonstrated that for the majority of households in these communities the NTFPs collected from the plantations provided a far greater proportion of livelihood products than those collected from the «natural" forest. The results of the surveys in the camps were compared with data concerning the contribution of forest products to household livelihoods in villages traditionally regarded as highly dependent on the forest. It was interesting to find that the financial and subsistence contribution of plantation-derived NTFPs in the research communities was even greater than from "traditional" forest products in the other settlements.
The range of products collected from the plantations on a regular basis was wide. The most significant single product was snails (of various species). Other important bushmeat species included pythons, African civets, palm civets, hawks and other birds of prey and significant quantities of fish from drainage ditches and streams. Also included were herbaceous "forest" vegetables, three species of herbaceous forest spices, and a number of medicinal plants.
Not only was the range and quantity of NTFPs collected from the plantations significant, the more marginal members of the communities profited most from the harvest of products from the plantations. Women and children benefited from easy access into the plantations that fitted in well with their patterns of work and schooling. Those households without access to farmland traded snails as a useful monetary supplement to their plantation wages. Those without ethnic or other customary rights to enter the forest for hunting set traps in the plantations instead.
The economic situation in Cameroon has declined after the boom years of the 1970s and 1980s, so that contemporary financial constraints on state and local business are significant. Consequently, as the plantations are managed by a parastatal concern, more recent maintenance of the plantations may not have been as intensive as it once was, and this may account for the availability of NTFPs.
However, the plantations in this part of Cameroon are not "biological deserts", nor are they necessarily "simple" ecosystems. There is a surprising amount of floral and faunal diversity within the plantations that supplies important forest products to local communities.
For those interested in the nature of forest-dependent livelihoods, and in unravelling ecological and social relationships between forest, plantation and community well-being, the results raise interesting issues. The fact that plantations might deliver NTFPs of a greater financial value to the most disadvantaged while potentially relieving harvesting pressure in the natural forest merits further attention.
The results of the work sponsored by the Mount Cameroon Project (funded by the United Kingdom Government's Department for International Development) and the World Bank's Global Environment Facility, are being developed further with additional field data as part of a Ph.D. thesis with the environmental sociology research group at Wye College (University of London). They have also provided insights into the dynamics of forest-based livelihoods that are being used to guide a separate research project run jointly by Wye College and Imperial College (University of London) in India and Mexico.
(Contributed by: Ms Bianca Ambrose-Oji, University of London, UK.)
For more information, please contact: Ms Bianca Ambrose-Oji, Environment Department, Wye College (University of London), Wye, Ashford, Kent TN25 5AH, UK.
E-mail: penv96ba@wye.ac.uk
www.wye.ac.uk
[Contents]
<section>3</section>
* AGROFORESTRY KNOWLEDGE TOOLKIT FOR WINDOWS (WINAKT)
* ASPIRIN
* BIENTÔT DES MEUBLES EN BAMBOU EUROPÉEN?
* CERTIFICATION OF NWFPS
* DEPENDENCE OF SELECTED INDIGENOUS PEOPLE ON NWFPS AND THEIR SUSTAINABLE PRACTICES
* DIRECTORY OF INFORMATION RESOURCES FOR NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS
* FOREST HARVEST
* FOREST RESOURCE DATABASE ON 31 EUROPEAN COUNTRIES
* GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT OUTLOOK 2000
* HIGHER EDUCATION IN FORESTRY AND GROWING NEEDS REGARDING NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS (NWFPS)
* INTER-DEPARTMENTAL WORKING GROUPS ON BIOTECHNOLOGY, ORGANIC AGRICULTURE AND FOOD FOR THE CITIES
* INTERNATIONAL NETWORK ON ETHNOFORESTRY (INEF)
* INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF MOUNTAINS, 2002
* INVENTORY
* INVOLVING COMMUNITIES IN NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS RESEARCH
* LEUVEN EARTH OBSERVATION CENTER
* MANUEL DE VULGARISATION SUR LA GOMME ARABIQUE
* MEDICINAL PLANTS - ACHIEVEMENTS, STATUS AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
* MEDITERRANEAN AGRONOMIC INSTITUTE OF CHANIA (MAICH) - ACADEMIC YEAR
* MIOMBO WOODLANDS RESEARCH
* NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCT ECONOMY IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON AND MARKET SYSTEMS
* NON-TIMBER FOREST PLANT RESOURCES IN NORTHWEST AMAZONIA
* NWFPS IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC
* PROMOTION OF CORK AND CORK PRODUCTS
* RELATIONS VILLES-FORÊTS
* SHEA PROJECT
* SOME TIMBER AND NWFP RELATIONSHIPS IN CENTRAL AFRICA
* THE CONTRIBUTION OF FOREST PRODUCTS TO FARMERS' CASH INCOMES
* THE TEACHING CASE METHOD
* WEALTH OF THE RAINFOREST _ PHARMACY TO THE WORLD
* WHAT TYPE OF EXTENSION FOR NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS?
* WOMEN AND NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS _ CALL FOR COLLABORATION
AGROFORESTRY KNOWLEDGE TOOLKIT FOR WINDOWS (WINAKT)
The Agroforestry Knowledge Toolkit for Windows (WinAKT) software provides the user with an environment in which to create knowledge bases about a user-selected topic by collating knowledge from a range of sources. It facilitates the synthesis of that knowledge and its valuation, and thereby facilitates its use in planning agroforestry research and extension, thus giving a powerful alternative to existing, less formal approaches to evaluating the current state of knowledge.
The knowledge-based systems approach has been successfully adopted in studies of diverse agroforestry systems in the United Republic of Tanzania, Kenya, Thailand, Sri Lanka and Nepal. Currently, the approach is being used in a study of the smallholder jungle rubber system in Jambi province of Indonesia through collaboration with the ICRAF SE-Regional Programme and participatory maize-breeding in Nepal in collaboration with the Nepal Agriculture Research Council.
For more information, please contact: Mr Laxman Joshi, ICRAF-SE Asia Regional Programme, Situ Gedu, Sindang Barang, PO Box 161, Bogor 16001, Indonesia.
Fax: +62-251-625416
E-mail: L.Joshi@cgiar.org or f.l.sinclair@bangor.ac.uk
www.safs.bangor.ac.uk/afforum/winakt_frames.htm
ASPIRIN
The year 1999 marked the centenary of the synthesis of aspirin. The earliest known uses of the drug can be traced back to the Greek physician Hippocrates in the fifth century B.C. He used powder extracted from the bark of willows to treat pain and reduce fever.
Salicin, the parent of the salicylate drug family, was successfully isolated in 1829 from willow bark. Sodium salicylate, a predecessor to aspirin, was developed along with salicylic acid in 1875 as a pain reliever.
Sodium salicylate was not very popular since it had a habit of irritating the stomach. However, in 1897, a German chemist working for Bayer named Felix Hoffman changed the face of medicine forever. He had been using the common pain reliever of the time, sodium salicylate, to treat his father's arthritis.
The sodium salicylate caused his father the same stomach trouble as it had caused other people, so Hoffman decided to try and concoct a less acidic formula. His work led to the synthesization of acetylsalicylic acid, or ASA, which soon became the painkiller chosen by physicians around the globe. Nowadays, 100 billion tablets of aspirin are taken every day and the drug has new uses in heart and other conditions in thinning the blood.
BIENTÔT DES MEUBLES EN BAMBOU EUROPÉEN?
Une étude européenne, démarrée il y a deux ans, a comme objectif d'explorer les possibilités d'utilisation dans le bâtiment des matières premières issues d'une agriculture de bambou naissante en Europe du sud (depuis 5 ans au Portugal, plus récemment dans les Landes). Les potentialités industrielles pour le bâtiment et l'agencement sont nombreuses.
Le bambou brut et des dérivés (lamellés, lattés) peuvent être travaillés comme du bois: les premiers tests de collage, dureté. vissage, finition ont donné des bons résultats. Le latté de bambou notamment s'avère être un matériau autosuffisant, comme le bois massif, mais beaucoup plus stable et avec des chants hautement décoratifs, même bruts d'usinage.
(Source: CTBA Info N 75.)
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: François Plassat (CTBA)
Fax: +33-1-46-28-13-13
CERTIFICATION OF NWFPS
Forest products certification seeks to link trade in forest products, particularly international trade, to the sustainable management of forest resources by enabling producers and consumers to recognize products coming from sustainably managed forests. Attention so far has been mainly focused on timber and timber products, but this has recently expanded to include pulp and paper, with an emerging interest in the certification of NWFPs. Certifying the ecological, economic, and social aspects of NWFP management is complex and requires prudent application. The social issues surrounding access and utilization of NWFPs and the informal economic systems under which many of these goods are traded, may be poorly addressed by a market-based initiative such as certification.
Internationally, the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) has taken up the question of NWFP. Since its interim policy on NTFPs was put in place in April 1998, the FSC has provided guidance to groups who want to establish standards for NTFPs or to certify products.
The first case of a certified NTFP entering the market occurred with the recent launch of Jungle gum, which uses certified chicle (Manilkara zapota) from Mexico. In fact, the Noh Bec community (ejido), in the state of Quintana Roo, Mexico, is the first forestry operation to be certified for both timber and NWFP (chicle from Manilkara zapota). Noh Bec is certified by Smart Wood and its affiliate Consejo civil mexicano para la silvicultura sostenible, under FSC standards. Noh Bec was also evaluated by Fair Trade, e.V. and is now endorsed as a producer that meets the fair trade social and business practices criteria. Fair Trade, e. V. is also helping to introduce the certified latex into the European market in coordination with the manufacturer (Wild Things) and the Plan piloto chiclero, the producers' organization.
Within the FSC system, the leading initiative in NWFP certification, is the NTFP Marketing and Certification Project of the Rainforest Alliance. The project has developed NFTP certification guidelines. These incorporate all aspects of the FSC-approved Smart Wood Generic Guidelines for Assessing Forest Management so that, if applied, an FSC-approved Smart Wood certification of NWFPs can be given, as in the case of Chicle.
The Rainforest Alliance project has served as focal point for the assessment of the feasibility of NTFP certification. (To obtain a copy of the guidelines, please contact Trish Shanley, e-mail Trishanley@aol.com .) Examples of certification assessment include: Assessment of Açai palm (palm heart from Euterpe oleracea) in Brazil by the Institute of Forestry and Agricultural Management and Certification (IMAFLORA), Assessment of Brazil nuts (Bertholletia excelsa) by Consejo boliviano de certificacion forestal voluntaria (CFV) in Bolivia, and Assessment of chestnuts in Greece and of cork in Spain by the WWF Mediterranean Programme.
Some of the more widely applicable lessons learned from the certification assessment field trials are that: many of the constraints of NWFP certification are linked to the small scale of production of most NWFPs. In this regard, the constraint to certification for NWFP producers are similar to those faced by small timber producers. NWFP certification is useful in a limited number of cases, e.g. where there is an international market; in most other cases, local labels are satisfactory.
Some of the constraints or challenges to NWFP certification are: lack of ecological knowledge for many of the lesser known species (for some important species, such as palmito, chicle, rattan, Brazil nuts, information required is available); inaccessibility of certification for small producers (complexity of management plan, high fixed costs, land tenure not easily accessed); difficulties in implementing Chain of Custody (physical labelling and control of some products is difficult, contamination of certified products during processing). Obstacles to NWFP certification are also associated with market demands and with technical problems such as definitions (in-country definitions of NWFPs, or of indigenous people, for example, may not fit with FSC definitions).
(Sources: A. Pierce, The Challenges of Certifying Nontimber Forest Products. Journal of Forestry, 97(2):34-37. Summary Report of the NTFP Certification and Marketing Workshop 20-22 June 1999, Oaxaca, Mexico.
FSC NTFP Working Group- Final Report to the Board of Directors, draft Sept 1999.)
Is the consumer looking for certified forest products?
An extensive discussion is taking place in various fora on the need for the certification of forest products.
In order to help the various interested parties to have a good, solid basis for determining whether, to what extent, and under what conditions consumers would like to buy certified forest products, a review was carried out to identify and evaluate studies that have been prepared on the subject. The title of the document is A review of studies on consumer attitudes towards forest products marketed with environmental, social and/or sustainability attributes.
The review identifies nearly 200 references on this topic. They are classified into four categories based on their relevance: forest products marketing studies; studies of environmental or "green" issues; studies dealing with certification, sustainability and environmental issues in marketing; and studies that could not be reviewed but are still felt to be of relevance in assessing consumer attitudes. For each major study the applied study methods are analysed and the main findings highlighted. Some recommendations are also made for further research on consumer attitudes.
For more information and for copies of the review, please contact: Mr L. Lintu, Senior Forestry Officer, Forest Products Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 0100 Rome, Italy.
Fax +39-06-57055618
E-mail: Leo.Lintu@fao.org .
Green marketing and fair trade
Green marketing is a niche in marketing (and NWFP marketing in particular) that has grown in recent years. The concern over forest resources and the notion that NWFP can be less harmful to the environment than timber have given unprecedented amounts of free publicity to nature-based products. Some commercial NWFP initiatives have been able to take advantage of this free image advertising. Much green marketing is based on linking the identification and promotion of new products with the market opportunities rising from consumer consciousness of environmental values. Green marketing emphasizes the ecological origin of the products, their sustainability (in terms of conservation and use of forest resources), and equity (involvement of local people and fair share of benefits) in its promotional campaigns. Closely linked to these concepts is the recent development of fair trade organizations for NWFP marketing all around the globe.
The main aim of these organizations is to improve access of NWFP producers to information on markets and prices, guidance on processing and increasing added value, and to create partnerships among producers (mainly in developing countries) and consumers.
The International Federation of Alternative Trade (IFAT) has adopted the following working definition of fair trade: «Fair Trade is an alternative approach to conventional international trade. It is a trading partnership which aims at sustainable development for excluded and disadvantaged producers. It seeks to do this by providing better trading conditions, by awareness raising and by campaigning». (Source: www.ifat.org/ )
UNCTAD launched the BIOTRADE Initiative at the COP3 of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), Buenos Aires, November 1996. The mission of the BIOTRADE Initiative is to stimulate investment and trade in biological resources as a means of furthering the three objectives of the CBD, i.e. to promote: (i) conservation of biodiversity; (ii) the sustainable use of its components; and (iii) a fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of biological resources. The Initiative's objectives will be pursued by enhancing the capability of developing countries for sustainable use of biodiversity to produce new value-added products and services for both international and domestic markets.
The Initiative concentrates on three areas: private sector, local and indigenous communities, and biodiversity conservation. In these areas it pursues:
Private sector:
- encouraging investment and trade in biological resource-based products and services;
- promoting biological resource industries;
- improving the functioning of markets for bioproducts and services; and
- enhancing the capability of developing countries to participate in these markets.
Local and indigenous communities:
- promoting an approach that focuses on both rights and benefits;
- encouraging value-added activities;
- ensuring that value-added activities contribute to social and economic development; and
- supporting fair and equitable sharing of benefits from biological resources.
Biodiversity conservation:
- conservation and sustainable use of biological resources; and
- generation of knowledge about incentives to conserve biodiversity.
To achieve the above goals, the BIOTRADE Initiative promotes active involvement of all stakeholders, including governments and international organizations. It therefore encourages the establishment of partnerships among the private sector, local and indigenous communities and developed and developing countries.
(For more information on BIOTRADE, see: www.biotrade.org/initiative.htm.)
A list of Web sites on fair trade is available at: www.eurosur.org/eng/ftrade.htm
More information on green marketing and fair trade can be found in Durbeck, K. 1999. Green trade organizations: striving for fair benefits from trade in NWFP. Unasylva, 198.
DEPENDENCE OF SELECTED INDIGENOUS PEOPLE ON NWFPS AND THEIR SUSTAINABLE PRACTICES
Since prehistoric times, the forest has provided people with a rich source of food and other basic needs. It not only provided a venue for hunting and food gathering, but also acted as a sanctuary. Today it serves the same purpose for the Filipino indigenous cultural communities (ICCs) as it did centuries ago, but to a lesser extent. Filipino forests have been greatly reduced over the past decades, which has adversely affected the supply of non-wood forest products.
Rattan and other NWFPs have been a part of the life and culture of the Alangan Mangyans of Mindoro Oriental, the Batak-Tagbanuas of Palawan and the Agta-Dumagats of Cagayan Valley for generations. Their traditional utilization of NWFPs continues and, despite modernization, many ICCs still cling to their old beliefs and practices, which are reflected in the use and manufacture of NWFPs into household wares and other indigenous articles.
The dwindling supply of rattan and other NWFPs in recent years has continuously stripped these tribes of potential sources of livelihood necessary to meet their basic needs. Thus, they are left with no other option but to practise proper forest utilization for sustainability of supply.
A case study has been prepared by Dr Aida Baja-Lapis of the Ecosystems Research and Development Bureau in the Philippines, which details such situations based on the actual experiences and conditions of these ICCs.
(Source: Extracted and edited from Dependence of selected indigenous people on non-wood forest products and their sustainable practices: a case study.)
For more information, please contact the author: Dr Aida Baja-Lapis, Supervising Science Research Specialist, Ecosystems Research and Development Bureau, College, Laguna, the Philippines.
E-mail: lapis@uic.net.ph
DIRECTORY OF INFORMATION RESOURCES FOR NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS
Conservation International has prepared a directory of information resources for non-timber forest products (NTFPs). The purpose of this directory is twofold:
· it serves as a starting-point for finding information about NTFPs since it includes many kinds of resources such as book titles, magazines, publishers and mailing lists; and
· it serves as a «how-to» manual for finding more NTFP resources using the Internet.
For more information, please contact: Conservation International, Conservation Enterprise Department, 2501 M Street, NW Suite 200, Washington, DC 20037, USA.
Fax: +1-202-331-9328
www.conservation.org/
FOREST HARVEST
The first issue of Forest Harvest, the newsletter of the WWF MedPO NTFP network, was issued in February 1999. This newsletter not only brings news from the Mediterranean NTFP network but also from other related initiatives throughout the globe. Its aim is to bring the NTFP issue into the Mediterranean conservation spotlight. WWF considers that working with NTFPs is just a tool to preserve a rich natural and cultural heritage that is currently threatened by degradation from recent and uncontrolled changes, the results of which could be disastrous.
For more information, please contact: Mr Yorgos Moussouris, WWF MedPO NTFP Project Coordinator, PO Box 18003, GR 116 10, Athens, Greece.
Fax: +30-(0)1-7241806
E-mail: yormous@eexi.gr
(The WWF report «Forest harvest: an overview of non-timber forest products in the Mediterranean Region» is available on FAO's NWFP home page: www.fao.org/docrep/x5593e/x5593e00.htm.)
FOREST RESOURCE DATABASE ON 31 EUROPEAN COUNTRIES
The European Forest Institute has recently launched the EFISCEN European forest resource (EEFR) database, with detailed information of forest resources from 31 European countries. EFISCEN is a large-scale forest scenario model in use at EFI to produce projections of the European forest resources into the future under different scenarios. In the EEFR database the European forests are divided into 2 689 forest types, distinguished by country, region, owner, structure, site class and tree species. For each forest type, the area, mean volume and current increment by age class are used as input for the model. Such data could be obtained through cooperation with national forest inventory institutes.
The aim of the EEFR database is to make these data available to a wider user community. For most of the European countries, the data are freely accessible; for a small number of countries, access is restricted to EFI and its members. Together with the requested data, the user will receive contact information of the original data provider, links to the responsible national forest institutes' home pages, information on the source of the data and definitions used for the forest inventories.
The database can be found at www.efi.fi/information_services; then follow the link to the EFISCEN European forest resource database.
(Source: NTFP-Biocultural-Digest, Vol. 4, No.1.)
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT OUTLOOK 2000
Postponing action to solve global environmental problems is no longer an option according to a comprehensive United Nations assessment. The Global Environment Outlook 2000 ("GEO-2000") outlines progress in tackling existing problems and points to new dangers. "Despite successes on various fronts, time is running out fast," said Klaus Toepfer, the United Nations Environment Programme Executive Director. Two hundred scientists from 50 countries identified water shortage and global warming as the two most pressing problems for the new millennium. Deforestation at the national and regional levels was also a frequently cited concern. "GEO-2000" calls for environmental integration into other areas of life because surveys suggest that the "environment remains largely outside the mainstream of everyday human consciousness, and is still considered an add-on."
For more information, please visit: www.unep.org/geo2000
(Source: Sustainability Review, Issue 2.)
HIGHER EDUCATION IN FORESTRY AND GROWING NEEDS REGARDING NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS (NWFPS)
During the 27th International Forestry Students Symposium several workshops were held on different themes, one of which was an NWFP-workshop. The participants from Algeria, Australia, Germany, Indonesia, Lithuania, Spain and Switzerland discussed the need to include NWFPs in higher education.
The opportunity to have many forestry students from different countries in one place led to the idea of preparing a questionnaire on this topic to be completed by all the participants. The results showed that NWFPs were regarded as an important (46 percent) or very important (27 percent) part of studies in forestry. Thirty two percent of the students found deficits in their curriculum regarding NWFPs, and 11 percent noticed extremely large deficits.
As to whether NWFPs should be included in forest education, only 32 percent were neutral; 69 percent agreed and 19 percent see an urgent need to increase the importance of NWFPs within their studies.
Game and hunting were the most cited examples of NWFPs that the students mentioned as being covered in their education. The group of bushfood, in general, was the strongest, followed by recreation and protection of nature. NWFPs for primary industry, such as cork from Quercus suber, essential oils and rubber took third place among the most mentioned examples of NWFPs, and mainly appear in subjects such as wildlife science/management, silviculture, forest products and economics. The students wished to have a better education in the following subjects and areas of research: wildlife management, ecological conservation, socio-economy, biodiversity and marketing.
The final conclusion was that forestry students in general see a need to enrich their education with the thematic field of NWFPs. Very often knowledge on this area of research is slight, whereas interest was very high.
NWFPs are regarded as a good opportunity to use forests, thus reducing the danger of destroying the forest ecosystem. A more profound education in NWFP management increases the job opportunities of forestry students - not just as timber managers but also as forest ecosystem managers. A chance to protect forest areas by utilization!
(Contributed by: Gunnar Josting, University of Freiburg, Germany.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Gunnar Josting, Koordinator, IFSS-Team Freiburg, Albert-Ludwigs - University Freiburg, Freiburg D-79106, Germany.
E-mail: josting@mail.uni-freiburg.de
www.ifsa.net/ifss/ifss99/index.htm
INTER-DEPARTMENTAL WORKING GROUPS ON BIOTECHNOLOGY, ORGANIC AGRICULTURE AND FOOD FOR THE CITIES
At its fifteenth Session in January 1999, the Committee on Agriculture recommended the development of organization-wide and coordinated cross-sectoral programmes in biotechnology, organic agriculture and urban and peri-urban agriculture (UPA).
This endorsement requires that FAO, together with its partners:
· assist member countries to optimize their capacity to develop, adapt and utilize biotechnology and its products to suit their needs and environment, while managing risks, and thus enhance global food security and improve living standards for all (Biotechnology);
· provide information, policy advice and institutional support on organic production and trade and also assist developing countries to access international markets through technical information on production requirements, trade information on market opportunities and capacity building. Specific assistance was requested to develop appropriate national legislation, certification capabilities, research and extension and to promote exchange of experiences between countries (organic agriculture);
· provide guidance and assistance to member countries, in active cooperation with existing international networks by focusing its UPA activities on areas of its comparative advantage and interacting in a complementary manner with other UN organizations, local grassroots organizations, NGOs and other organizations. These activities should lead to an improved understanding of the benefits and risks inherent in urban food security and provide a knowledge base on the issues (Urban and Peri-Urban Agriculture).
To ensure continued and effective development and coordination of these activities within the context of the three organization-wide programmes, three separate Inter-Departmental Working Groups have been established: for biotechnology, organic agriculture, and food for the cities, which will address the wider and diverse issues of meeting food needs in developing countries, including UPA.
(Source: FAO.)
INTERNATIONAL NETWORK ON ETHNOFORESTRY (INEF)
The International Network on Ethnoforestry (INEF) now has 101 members from 40 countries. In order to share operational practices on ethnoforestry, INEF, the Indian Institute of Forest Management, and the Asia Forest Network, have planned to bring out a state-of-the-art book on ethnoforestry, which will cover the following:
· indigenous plantation forestry practices
· indigenous protection forestry practices
· indigenous production forestry practices
· indigenous knowledge on integrated watershed management
· indigenous knowledge on NTFP management
· indigenous knowledge on sustainable forest management
· traditional agroforestry systems
· indigenous tropical forest management practices
· traditional knowledge and empowerment
· case studies on use and integration of local knowledge on forest management with formal forestry
· methodology for sharing and integration of indigenous knowledge
For more information, please contact: Prof. Deep N. Pandey, Indian Institute of Forest Management, PO Box 357 Nehru Nagar, Bhopal, India-462 00.
E-mail: dnpandey@vsnl.com or deep@iifm.org
www.education.vsnl.com/deep/index.html
INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF MOUNTAINS, 2002
FAO is the lead agency for the International Year of Mountains, 2002 (IYM). The process was initiated in March 1999, when the Inter-Agency Network on Mountains met in Rome to begin planning for 2002.
FAO is currently developing a "concept paper" which will provide a framework for observance of the year and preparations leading to it. The document will serve to clarify the overall approach, strategy and substance of the programme for the IYM, and is also intended to strengthen fund raising efforts. At the same time a proposal is being prepared to establish a multilateral trust fund to serve a variety of needs, including: the establishment of an IYM Lead Agency Coordination Unit at FAO; the development of awareness raising packages and materials; the creation of a small fund (seed money) to initiate national level observance activities; carrying out studies and producing publications; supporting national mountain programme formulation; and funding key international events (technical meetings, regional workshops, an international conference, etc.).
For more information, please contact: Mr Doug McGuire, Senior Forestry Officer (Conservation), Forest Resources Division, FAO Forestry Department.
E-mail: Douglas.McGuire@fao.org
INVENTORY
Inventory and monitoring of non-timber forest products in the United States
A chapter in the forthcoming Assessment of Non-Timber Forest Products in the United States of America covers inventory and monitoring. The Assessment is scheduled for release in May 2000 and is an outcome of activities by members of the non-wood subcommittee of the North American Forest Commission's forest products study (see Web site www.anthrotech.com/ice/ntfp/). To complete this project, help is needed to collect information on research field designs that have been used to study and sample various non-timber forest products (also called special forest products), such as berries/nuts, mushrooms, edible plants, medicinal plants and others.
For more information, please contact: Mr Leon Liegel, Pacific Northwest Research Station, 3200 SW Jefferson Way, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA
Fax: +1-541-758-7760
E-mail: liegell@fsl.orst.edu
The biometrics of non-timber forest product resource assessment: a review of current methodology
This report was prepared by Dr Jenny Wong with Ms Nell Baker for the Forest Research Programme, funded by the Department for International Development, in May 1999.
The report is based on a review of studies that had assessed in situ NTFPs and were available in English literature. A review of the methods developed for assessing biodiversity and ethnobiology are described with regard to their applicability to NTFP resource assessment. Methods for assessing resources developed by the social sciences are also reviewed with regard to best practice. Quantitative methods for resource assessment are outlined for determining resource abundance, product yield and productivity. The uses of these data for determining sustainable harvesting levels and monitoring are reviewed. The special case of the use of indicators for monitoring compliance with certification standards is also considered.
The role of resource assessment in the development of sustainable NTFP management systems is described and a case presented that these should be biometrically adequate. The current methods used in NTFP assessments are evaluated against three biometric criteria: objectivity in plot allocation (randomness), replication of observations (number of plots) and independence of observations (plot configuration). For half of the 70 quantitative studies reviewed, the protocols were not reported in sufficient detail to permit biometric evaluation of the designs used. In those that could be evaluated, only a quarter of the quantitative studies were found to be biometrically rigorous.
Given the dearth of biometrically adequate methods, a system for assisting with the development of biometric designs for NTFP resource assessment has been developed. This is based on matching appropriate methods to characteristics of the resource populations. Thus optimal sampling designs are best informed by the resource distribution and abundance; optimal plot configurations by the size, life and growth-form of the resources; and enumeration techniques by the type of product being collected. The special requirements for monitoring and growth studies are also noted.
Based on the review, a number of priority issues and opportunities are raised and recommendations made for a programme of research to address them.
(Source: Extracted and edited from the Executive Summary - The biometrics of non-timber forest product resource assessment: a review of current methodology. May 1999.)
For more information, please contact: Dr Jenny Wong, Ynys Uchaf, Mynydd Llandegai, Bangor, Gwynedd LL57 4BZ, UK.
E-mail: 105456.3316@compuserve.com
New FAO inventory manual
The Forest Resources Division of FAO's Forestry Department is working on a new edition of the 1981 FAO Inventory Manual. The new edition will include a section on the inventory of NWFPs.
For more information, please contact: Mr Giovanni Preto, Senior Forestry Officer, Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department, FAO.
E-mail: Giovanni.Preto@fao.org
INVOLVING COMMUNITIES IN NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS RESEARCH
Mushroom harvesting has been a hot issue in the Pacific Northwest area of the United States for several years. What is less widely known is that more and more people are taking up a long-held tradition of harvesting non-timber forest products including edibles, floral greenery and medicinal plants. What NTFPs would people like to see more of? How can the abundance of the forest resources these harvests depend on, be increased? And how can communities and land managers work better together in harvesting these products?
A recently launched research project, "Involving Communities in Non-timber Forest Products Research" will try to answer these questions and more. The project is sponsored by the Pacific Northwest Research Station, the USDA Forest Service and the Pinchot Institute for Conservation. The purpose of this project is to help to understand the many values - from personal use to commercial - that forest-based community members place on non-timber resources, and how these values can be translated into the design and implementation of research projects. These projects in turn may ultimately help to increase the abundance of some non-timber products that can boost the economy of a community.
For more information, please contact: Mr Roger Fight, Research Team Leader, or Ms Sherri Richardson, Pacific Northwest Research Station, USDA Forest Service, 3200 SW Jefferson Way, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.
E-mail: rfight/r6pnw_portland@fs.fed.us or srichardson/r6pnw@fs.fed.us
LEUVEN EARTH OBSERVATION CENTER
The Leuven Earth Observation Center was established at the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium, to develop new application technologies in the field of earth observation in response to the growing needs of industrial and governmental sectors. Its members are experts in the fields of sensor design, satellite steering, communications, terrestrial system modelling, signal and image processing, user interfaces and spatial data analysis. K. K.U.Leuven researchers already apply earth observation technology in the areas of, among others, land-use assessment and planning (including forest ecotourism), plant growth monitoring, coastal and river management, cartography, and erosion and pollution tracking. As new problems and/or applications emerge, a novel interdisciplinary strategy is used to address them and to transfer the resulting product and acquired expertise to the end-user community.
For more information, please contact: Mr Pol Coppin, Head, Department of Land Management, Faculty of Agricultural and Applied Biological Sciences, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Vital Decosterstraat 102, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.
Fax: +32-16-329760
E-mail: Pol.Coppin@agr.kuleuven.ac.be
www.agr.kuleuven.ac.be/leo/leo.htm
MANUEL DE VULGARISATION SUR LA GOMME ARABIQUE
Un manuel destiné à l'usage des vulgarisateurs dans les pays producteurs de gomme arabique est en cours de préparation . Le manuel, dont la publication est prévue avant la fin de l'an 2000, sera le résultat d'une collaboration entre la FAO et Aidgum, une ONG française.
Pour plus d'information, veuillez contacter : M. El Hadji Sène, Directeur de la Division des Ressources Forestières, Département des Forêts de la FAO.
Fax: +39-06-57055978
E-mail: elhadji.sene@fao.org
MEDICINAL PLANTS - ACHIEVEMENTS, STATUS AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
The Indian Agricultural Research Institute has been producing publications on medicinal plant research within a global prospective for over a decade. To date there are six publications in this series. The Institute is now organizing the publication of a five-volume book entitled Medicinal plants - achievements, status and future prospects. This comprehensive treatise on medicinal plants will act as a source for researchers on various aspects of plant drugs. The areas covered in the book include:
· ethnobotany - tribal medicines (survey and documentation of folk medicines);
· pharmacognosy: prime drugs of the Indian system of medicine, including homeopathy;
· experimental cultivation of medicinal plants, including establishment of herb gardens/drug farms and agrotechniques;
· biotechnology applications in medicinal plants;
· breeding and plant production in medicinal plants; medicinal plant diseases;
· export/import of medicinal plants with reference to their commercial value; and
· conservation and protection of plant drugs used in the Indian system of medicine and homeopathy.
For more information, please contact the editor: Dr V.K. Singh, Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine, 61-65 Institutional Area, Janakpuri, New Delhi 110058, India.
MEDITERRANEAN AGRONOMIC INSTITUTE OF CHANIA (MAICH) - ACADEMIC YEAR
The Mediterranean Agronomic Institute of Chania (MAICh) offers post-graduate programmes in Environmental and Renewable Resources (Environmental Management, and Environmental Conservation and Restoration), Economic and Management Sciences, Food Quality Management, Horticultural Sciences and Technology, and Natural Products (Plant biotechnology and applications).
For more information, please contact: Mr Alkinoos Nicolaidis, Director, Mediterranean Agronomic Institute of Chania, International Centre for Advanced Mediterranean Agronomic Studies, PO Box 85, GR-73 100, Chania, Crete, Greece.
Fax: +30-821-81154
E-mail: alkinoos@maich.gr
www.maich.gr
MIOMBO WOODLANDS RESEARCH
A CIFOR-linked research project aimed at helping to preserve Africa's valuable miombo woodlands has begun issuing policy briefs to keep researchers, forest managers, government officials and policy-makers abreast of the findings.
«Management of Miombo Woodlands» is a new four-year collaborative initiative of CIFOR and the European Commission. Scientists from institutions in Malawi, Mozambique, the United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe are participating in the research.
Nearly 40 million people draw on miombo woodlands for food, fuelwood and other daily needs. Research results will provide the kind of information needed to guide sustainable management of the woodlands, in line with goals such as improving productivity and enhancing the welfare of people who depend on them.
Three subprojects are under way: investigating institutional arrangements governing management of the woodlands; the impact of indirect factors, such as macro-economic policies; and environmentally sound harvesting techniques. These specific areas of focus were chosen in response to priorities identified in a forestry research master plan adopted for the Southern African Development Community.
For more information, or to receive research briefs, please contact: Dr Godwin Kowero, Senior Scientist and Coordinator, CIFOR Regional Office, c/o Institute of Environmental Studies, University of Zimbabwe, PO Box MP 167, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Fax: +263-4-334834
E-Mail: g.kowero@cgiar.org
www.cgiar.org/cifor or www.miombo.gecp.virginia.edu/
NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCT ECONOMY IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON AND MARKET SYSTEMS
Although the economic importance of non-timber forest products in the Amazon is widely recognized, many initiatives to promote their trade have failed because of the weaknesses in addressing some specific market problems facing NTFPs.
The rigidity of the supply, the increasing prices and the low competitiveness of most NTFPs make economists consider NTFP extraction as a primitive economic activity that sooner or later will give way to domestication and the cultivation of similar products. Defenders of «extractive» populations also believe that the main problem for commercialization of NTFPs is their low competitiveness against substitutes.
However, the recognized role of NTFPs in poverty alleviation and forest protection has pushed the Brazilian Government to change the present unfavourable market signals of the non-timber economy. How? By subsidizing NTFP extraction and allowing NTFPs to compete with agricultural and synthesized products.
For many years, through its policy of substitution of imported products, Brazil assured markets for NTFPs by adopting trade barriers, such as import taxes, prices and supply control. Extractive NTFPs, such as rubber (Hevea brasiliensis), babassu nuts (Orbignya phalerata) and Brazil nuts (Bertholletia excelsa) were therefore protected from the competition of imported products, such as Asiatic rubber, oil palm and nuts, thus retarding their economic crisis.
Within the present national and international contexts, where Brazil defends the total liberalization of agriculture markets, new strategies have to be defined to promote the NTFPs of the Amazon. These strategies should be based on institutional, market, and technological mechanisms.
A new institutional framework would be entrusted with reducing the prejudice against the management of NTFPs and with changing the entrepreneurial culture, highlighting the economic, ecological and social importance of NTFPs for local development, as well as for the environmental protection of the Amazon.
Markets should be the main mechanism to direct policy and technology developments. A market strategy must explore the «green market» and the «organic market» niches. These are made up of those consumers with ecological and social consciousness, or by companies that use organic materials as inputs, who are willing to pay more for NTFPs managed on a sustainable basis.
In these niches, the capacity of a NTFP to add value is greater than that of a cultivated commodity imported from Asia at low cost (such as rubber and oil palm) and therefore NTFP are more competitive than cultivated or synthesised substitutes.
The new technologies have two major functions. First, in processing products designed to cater for specific demands in terms of quality. Second, in designing and processing products that have a higher added value, responding at the same time to the need for substitutability, supply elasticity, and income elasticity of demand.
An articulated effort as outlined above can rescue the NTFP economy of the Amazon from its lack of progress, contributing at the same time to the multiple use of the Amazon forest, sustainable rural development, and the well-being of the Amazon people.
(Contributed by: Vag-Lan Borges, Brazil.)
For more information, please contact: Vag-Lan Borges, SCLRN 714, Bl. G, Entrada 19, Apto. 301, 70.760-578 - Brasília - DF, Brazil.
E-mail: vaglan@tba.com.br
NON-TIMBER FOREST PLANT RESOURCES IN NORTHWEST AMAZONIA
A joint research effort of institutes from Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Denmark, Finland and the Netherlands, funded by the European Commission, initiated a project in 1997 with the aim of appraising the non-timber forest plant resource availability in Northwest Amazonia. Two different but interrelated approaches were used to study the relationships between potential supply and commercialization of non-timber forest plant products (NTFPPs) in Northwest Amazonia: the first approach, drawing on socio-economics and economic botany, included research on the commercial demand, trade patterns and market value of NTFPP; the second approach, focusing on ethno-botany and forest ecology, aims at improving the quantitative estimates of the potential supply of NTFPPs from pilot areas by applying complementary forest sampling procedures.
The field work has been carried out in three pilot areas in Northwest Amazonia: Yasuni National Park and Waorani Reserve in Ecuador, Ampiyacu River basin in Peru, and Caquetá River area in Colombia. The project is now in its analysis and reporting phase and the results will be used for local, regional or national development initiatives.
In this area, where there is a long tradition of commercial NTFPP extraction, sustainable natural forest use by NTFPP extraction is one of the most promising forest land- use options. The project aims to contribute to a better understanding of how local revenues from NTFPPs may increase and to study ways of measuring the high biodiversity levels of the Northwest Amazonian forest in view of production systems that are compatible with conservation objectives.
The project, which operates at various levels and may benefit different actors simultaneously, will lead to an increased consciousness of the importance of NTFPPs for local communities at the regional and national planning and decision-making level. It will stimulate regional and national planning and development institutions to consider extraction and use of NTFPPs as a viable alternative for Amazonian resources management and protection. It will also contribute to a strengthening of the research capacity of the countries involved.
At national level the project seeks compatibility and complementarity with existing territorial planning programmes of national and regional institutions. Furthermore, it aims to be consistent with the complex social and economic problems of Northwest Amazonia and with current strategies to resolve them.
At local community level, the project will have several benefits. It will produce estimates of the potential use value of forest types in the area as well as quantitative estimates of the abundance of selected useful species. Market surveys will enable this information to be put into a local and regional perspective for commercial extraction potentials. The aim is to present results that can be adopted and used by the communities in more detailed research in the field of sustainable NTFPP extraction and can therefore be seen as an important investment in the scientific communities of each developing country.
(Source: Joost F Duivenvoorden in ETFRN News 27/99.)
NWFPS IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC
Potential benefits of NWFP to local communities
The relatively small areas of natural forests remaining in Tonga and Samoa highlight the need to look seriously at their impacts on the biodiversity and watershed functions. A current FAO project has been providing Tonga and the Cook Islands with technical support and some training/awareness seminars for the past few years.
An area of potential benefit to the local communities is in the possible commercialization of non-timber forest products. Kava (Piper methysticum), now a major export earner in Vanuatu and Fiji but with potential in Tonga and possibly Samoa, is now essentially considered under the agricultural sector. Noni (nonu or kura, Morinda citrifolia) has always been an important traditional medicine in many Pacific Island countries and is becoming an important cash income source for local communities in the Cook Islands, Tonga and Fiji, with early signs of interest in Vanuatu and Samoa. The juice is the main product used, but the leaves are also being exported on a limited scale from Tonga. Planting of this species has started on a modest scale in Fiji, Tonga, the Cook Islands and Vanuatu.
The cultivation of NTFPs would certainly be compatible with the agroforestry systems that have been in use in the countries for many years.
For more information, please contact: Mr Mathias Aru, Forest Resource Management Officer, Sub-Regional Office for the Pacific Islands (SAPA), Private Mail Bag, Apia, Samoa.
Fax: +685-22126
E-mail: FAO-SAPA@field.fao.org or Mr Tang Hon Tat: TangH@spc.org.f
Nuts of Beach almond
Beach almond (Terminalia catappa) is widely distributed in coastal areas of the Indian Ocean, tropical Asia and the Pacific Ocean. On small islands of the South Pacific, T. catappa is mostly cultivated as part of multistorey tree crop systems. The oil-rich kernels make a tasty and nutritious food, while the outer flesh is widely consumed by children. The nuts may be consumed fresh after extraction from the shell or else preserved by smoking and consumed up to one year later.
The species plays a vital role in coastline stabilization, their well developed lateral root systems helping hold together fragile sandy soils.
The timber makes an excellent general purpose hardwood, and is well suited for furniture manufacture and building.
Research needs include an assessment of the productivity and marketing of cultivars with large nuts. In terms of processing, work is needed to determine a technique for defleshing fully mature fruits and better drying procedures.
(Source: SPRIG News, Pacific Islands Forests and Trees, June 1999.)
PROMOTION OF CORK AND CORK PRODUCTS
Restricted to the west part of the Mediterranean basin, cork oak (Quercus suber) is the only species capable of sustained and economical production of cork. While it is produced in a restricted geographical zone of the world, cork products, especially stoppers, have worldwide markets in industrialized countries.
In 1997 the FAO/Silva Mediterranea cork oak network launched the idea of a commercial imprint - a cork trademark - with the aim of promoting products made from cork. The short-term objectives of such an imprint would be: (a) to encourage consumers to prefer cork stoppers and other cork products to similar products made from substitute materials; and (b) to develop a common strategy among cork oak-growing countries and within the commercial cork sector.
Over a longer time frame, the idea is to achieve certification of all cork products, and rigorous quality standards for various cork products, particularly for wine stoppers.
Cork has a number of intrinsic qualities that give it potential advantages in a promotional campaign of this nature: first and foremost, it is a natural product made from renewable resources following an environmentally friendly process that does not even require harvesting of the trees; the clear, demonstrated importance of the cork industry in maintaining the ecological stability of the fragile and threatened Mediterranean ecosystem; and thirdly the importance of the cork industry in terms of providing employment and income - in Portugal, for example, cork is the country's primary export product and probably the leading source of employment.
The decision on the actual design of the cork trademark is now being taken by an international committee
(Extracted and edited from: Varela, M.C. 1999 Cork and the cork oak system.
Unasylva, 50(197): 42-44.)
For more information, please contact: Ms Maria Cristina Varela, National Forest Research Station, Oeiras, Portugal.
Fax: +35-11-441 56 60
E-mail: mcarolina@mail.telepac.pt
RELATIONS VILLES-FORÊTS
Un numéro spécial de APFT-News, le bulletin de l'APFT (Avenir des Peuples des Forêts Tropicales), a été consacré aux aspects des espaces urbains en Afrique et leur impacts sur les forêts. L'importance de ce sujet avait été souligné lors de deux ateliers organisés par l'APFT avec le soutien du Programme L'Homme et la Biosphère de l'UNESCO. Ce n'est pas seulement le besoin vital des populations urbaines (pour des produits tels que le gibier, le bois, d'autres PFNL) mais aussi leur profond attachement culturel qui les poussent à exercer une pression directe sur les ressources naturelles. Cette pression s'intensifie au rythme de l'extension des espaces urbains. Dans ce numéro spécial du bulletin, des sujets très fort liés à l'utilisation durable des PFNL sont traités, par exemple: l'exploitation des rotangs dans la régions de Yaoundé, la filière viande de brousse à Libreville et les menaces sur les forêts sacrées autour de Kinshasa.
(Source: APFT News -- Avril 1999.)
Pour plus d'information sur le volet Ville-Forêt du projet APFT, contacter: M. Théodore Trefon, APFT, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 44 Av. Jeanne - CP 124, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgique.
Fax: +32-2-650 37 98
E-mail: ttrefon@ulb.ac.be
SHEA PROJECT
The Shea Project is an integrated rural-based project that engenders conservation of indigenous woodland through access to improved shea processing technologies, small-scale credit, and the development of new, high-value markets for Ugandan shea butter. The Shea Project works primarily with women's farming groups across northern Uganda and in partnership with development organizations in southern Sudan. The Shea Project is implemented by COVOL Uganda, a US- and Uganda-based non-government organization.
From 26-30 June 2000, COVOL will host a regional conference on the nilotic shea butter tree (Vitellaria paradoxa spp. nilotica) as a resource for environmental conservation through rural-based economic development.
For more information, please contact: Mr Eliot Masters, Coordinator, The Shea Project COVOL Uganda, P.O. Box 833, Lira, Uganda.
E-mail: shea@covol.org
www.covol.org
(Please see under Forthcoming Events for more information on this regional conference.)
SOME TIMBER AND NWFP RELATIONSHIPS IN CENTRAL AFRICA
Commercial, industrial-scale timber exploitation represents the bulk of logging volume in Central Africa. NWFPs, on the other hand, with the exception of a dozen or so medicinal species (such as Pausinystalia johimbe and Prunus africana) harvested for phytomedical or pharmaceutical export markets, tend to be harvested for smallholder subsistence consumption or for sale in local markets. Well-established regional markets for forest spices, medicine, chewsticks, kola nuts and forest foods are also significant and form an intermediate band of resource exploitation.
The most direct connection between timber and NWFPs is when a single species has both timber and non-timber value. For example, Aucoumea klaineana (okoumé), the primary timber species exported from Equatorial Guinea and Gabon, yields a resin which is tapped prior to felling for timber and collected to make torches (which are then wrapped in the bark of Xylopia aethiopica, an NWFP with a range of uses).
Of the top 25 timber species exported from Cameroon in 1997, most have non-wood values. However, for each species the relationship between timber and NWFP values varies according to factors such as variations in species density and distribution, timber value and the level of local demand for NWFPs. For example, species such as Baillonella toxisperma (moabi), Pterocarpus soyauxii (padouk), and Milicia excelsa (iroko), which have high timber values and are found unevenly distributed in low densities, are usually heavily depleted in areas where logging takes place. Meanwhile, their local NWFP values are high, and there are no ready substitutes for some of the more valuable products they yield. As a result, there is a significant conflict between NWFPs and timber values.
Baillonella toxisperma is one of the more valuable timber species in the region, used in furniture and cabinet-making, flooring and for veneer. In 1997, it was the tenth most important commercial timber species exported from Cameroon by volume. This, despite being found in notoriously low densities of less than one tree/hectare. The seed of B. toxisperma also produces a cooking oil so prized, and today so scarce, that it is rarely sold in markets since local communities prefer to keep what they can collect for their own use. The seed oil is also used medicinally, including for skin problems and rheumatism.
Pterocarpus soyauxii (padouk, or camwood) is used to make furniture and in cabinet-making. Locally, it is a preferred wood in some areas for carving canoes, stools, musical instruments and agricultural implements, and the ground stem is also an important cultural and medicinal species. Because of selective logging pressures, it has become scarce in many forest areas. Milicia excelsa is one of the most sacred tree species in Central and West Africa, and is used medicinally. It is heavily depleted because of selective logging pressures, and in some countries, such as the Congo, is endangered.
Other valuable timber species with important non-timber uses include: Nauclea diderrichii (bilinga), a very strong timber, resistant to borers and used for harbour work, mortars and general construction. The bark, root, and wood are all used to make a yellow dye and the bark is also used to treat fevers and stomach problems. Canarium schweinfurthii (aiele) has a range of uses as timber, and also yields popular fruits sold in local markets and a resin which is burned as incense and to start fires (thus the name «bush candle»). Lophira alata (azobé or ironwood) was the sixth most important timber species by volume exported from Cameroon in 1997, and is also used locally as a medicine for back and toothache.
Most of the widely marketed NWFPs in Central Africa, however, including Irvingia gabonensis, Afrostyrax spp., Tetrapleura tetraptera, Ricinodendron heudelottii, Garcinia kola, Gnetum africanum and Monodora myristica are not important timber species.
NWFPs are sourced from a range of habitat types and traditional systems of management for forest resources and make a use of a continuum of vegetation types, including recently cleared lands, farm fallows, secondary forests and forests that have not been cleared for hundreds of years. Timber harvesting operations therefore directly affect only a portion of NWFP species used by local communities. Negative effects are related to damage to the soil surface, including the removal of topsoil, disturbance and soil compaction, direct damage to species in residual stands and to those that make up the understorey and ground cover of forests (many of which are important NWFPs). Silvicultural treatments can reduce species diversity by promoting an increased proportion of commercial species, and removing competing «undesirables», many of which might be NWFPs. Rare and specialized species will generally suffer most from the random damage of logging operations and the shift in species
composition to generalists that often follows immediately upon logging.
Logging roads provide access to once inaccessible populations of wildlife and other NWFPs, as well as to markets. This helps people to capitalize on the market potential for previously inaccessible NWFPs, but can lead to overexploitation of species.
Logging can positively affect NWFP species that prefer disturbed forest areas and roadsides. In Central Africa, these include rattan species, as well as many condiment and medicinal species such as Aframomum spp., Piper guineensis and Piper umbellatum. In southern Cameroon, logging appeared to cause abundant regeneration of the condiment species Ricinodendron heudelotti, and to have limited impact on the size class distribution of Irvingia gabonensis.
The vast majority of timber production in tropical countries comes from unmanaged forests that are usually harvested in excess of the allowable cut, and logging damage can be severe. However, in managed forest areas timber and NWFPs can be harvested in a complementary manner. Timber harvest can be planned in a way that minimizes damage to residual stands and the total area disturbed by roads, landings and skid trails. Timing of logging operations can take into consideration rainy seasons, seedfalls and the reproductive cycles of animals and species of non-wood value. Complementary harvests of NWFPs before and after logging can be planned, including the harvest of rattans, collection of oil-producing seeds and medicinal barks, and tapping essential oils and resins from valuable timber species. The harvesting of NWFPs in conjunction with logging operations is often carried out now on an ad hoc basis, but these activities could be built into management plans, such as those
called for in Cameroon as part of Community Forests, an innovation of the January 1994 Law No. 94/01 concerning Forests, Wildlife and Fisheries.
Unfortunately, quantitative data on the relationship between timber and non-timber uses and management are difficult to obtain, although some studies do exist.
(Extracted and edited from Laird S.A. 1999. The management of forests for timber and non-wood forest products in Central Africa. In T. Sunderland, L. Clark. & P. Vantomme. 1999. Non-Wood Forest Products: Current research issues and prospects for conservation and development. FAO, Rome.)
FAO, jointly with ECE and ILO, is organizing an international seminar on harvesting of NWFPs in Turkey in October 2000 (please see under Events).
THE CONTRIBUTION OF FOREST PRODUCTS TO FARMERS' CASH INCOMES
A study conducted by the Sokoine University of Agriculture in the United Republic of Tanzania aimed at finding out the contribution of forest products to farmers' cash incomes. The results of the study are published in the paper Household livelihood strategies in the Miombo woodlands, emerging trends by G.C. Monela, G.C. Kajembe, A.R.S. Kaoneka and G. Kowero.
The survey included two villages each from the remote Dodoma region, the peri-urban area near Morogoro and the Kilosa District.
Honey, charcoal, fuelwood, and wild fruits contribute an astonishing 58 percent of farmers' cash incomes. Honey alone accounted for one-third of all cash income in these villages. Traditionally, Tanzania's beekeepers make their bee hives from tree bark. Farmers in the peri-urban area, who had greater access to markets, produced more charcoal. On average, charcoal production provided US$445 in cash to each family in that area, which was 38 percent of their total cash income. Women have become more involved in many of these activities, particularly, in the peri-urban area, where two-fifths of the women interviewed participated in commercial forest product extraction.
One reason farmers have taken up selling forest products is that agriculture has become less profitable. At the same time, improvements in the transportation infrastructure have made it easier for them to bring their forest products to the towns.
The results of this study confirm the findings of a previous survey of seven administrative regions that found that two-thirds of all Tanzanian households obtained at least 15 percent of their incomes from forest products. Both studies also show, however, that how important products are to villagers varies a great deal between households and from one region to the next.
For more information and to obtain a copy of the paper, please contact: Faculty of Forestry, Sokoine University of Agriculture, PO Box 3009 Chuo Kikuu, Morogoro, Tanzania.
Fax: +255-56-4648
E-mail: forestry@sua.ac.tz
or
Mr Godwin Kowero, Senior Scientist and Coordinator, CIFOR Regional Office, c/o Institute of Environmental Studies, University of Zimbabwe, PO Box MP 167, Harare, Zimbabwe
E-mail: g.kowero@cgiar.org
THE TEACHING CASE METHOD
The Wageningen Agriculture University and FAO have started a project on «Education for Decision-making in the Global-local World of Agriculture». This project aims to examine the teaching-case method as a potential tool for improving the quality of teaching and learning within the context of strategic and tactical decision-making training.
A teaching case is a written document, describing a real-life situation. It contains all the necessary information, such as tables, charts, figures, etc. to understand fully a given situation. This information will be discussed in the way of tactical decision-making simulation, in which the focus is on an evolving problem that depends on data interpretation and management for a solution. The primary intent is to develop participants' cognitive strategies, decision-making skills and their capacities for data selection, organization, interpretation and management.
The FAO NWFP Programme supports this project through the compilation of a teaching case on the exploitation of medicinal plants in Madagascar. This teaching case will deal with the existing potentials and risks related to the utilization of NWFP - in this case medicinal plants _ that are commercialized on a global level. Within the framework of this case, students will be confronted with complex and complicated issues, such as property rights, conflict management between different groups of interests (local communities, industry, politicians, NGOs), marketing problems, conflicts between conservation and utilization, and the impact of exploiting wild species in comparison with cultivated species. By using a concrete but typical example (case), students will gain new impressions regarding the complexity related to the utilization of NWFPs.
Other teaching cases that will be elaborated within this project cover topics such as cash crops - local nutrition at risk?, household food security: the case of northern Zambia, or the implementation strategy of conservation tillage for sustainable agriculture.
For more information, please contact: Mr. Jacques Jallade, SDRE, Sustainable Development Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: +39-0657055731
E-mail: Jacques.Jallade@fao.org
or
Dr Robert van Haarlem, Wageningen Agriculture University, Central Office for Education and Research, P.O. Box 9101, 6700 HB Wageningen, the Netherlands.
Fax +31 317485123
E-mail: Rob.vanHaarlem@Alg.OOB.WAU.NL
WEALTH OF THE RAINFOREST _ PHARMACY TO THE WORLD
The Raintree companies advocate the preservation of rainforests by promoting the use of, and creating consumer markets for, rainforest products with special emphasis on important medicinal plants. Documentation and information on rainforest medicinal plants can be found on their Web site in an effort to help educate people about these important plants. By creating a market demand and income from sustainably harvested rainforest products, the Raintree companies hope to provide a morally and ecologically balanced relationship that is not only supportive of the rainforest and monetary needs of the indigenous peoples of the rainforest, but can compete financially with other uses of forest resources. Raintree's focus, since its inception, has been on the Amazon rainforest.
For more information, please contact: Raintree Nutrition, Inc., 10609 Metric Blvd, Suite 101, Austin, Texas 78758, USA.
Fax: +1-512-833-5414
E-mail: info@rain-tree.com
www.rain-tree.com/
WHAT TYPE OF EXTENSION FOR NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS?
Although there are many definitions, forestry extension may be defined as a systematic process of exchange of ideas, knowledge, techniques and information leading to mutual changes in attitudes, knowledge, values and practices aimed at improved forest and tree management and rural development. In organizational and operational terms, many extension systems, public and private, are based on some degree of standardization, uniformity and economies of scale. Traditionally extension has often aimed at maximizing or optimizing the production of a single product or limited array of products and services. For example, because of strong demand, large areas may be managed for fuelwood production under certain standardized techniques and practices. Non-wood forest products, on the other hand, are often low value, multiple and diverse, change greatly in time and space, and can fluctuate strongly in response to markets. Certain medicinals may come into a period of strong demand only to
be replaced by alternatives within a relatively short time. NWFPs can occupy overlapping and competing niches. Fruits, bark and leaves of the same species may provide different products and have different uses and only be economical when taken in combination. Optimizing the sustainable production of an array of products may be necessary and greatly complicate extension approaches. Often little formal research has been carried out on NWFPs and they are best known by local people - necessitating the integration of local knowledge. The harvesting of one product, such as bark, may preclude the use of other products. Extension for NWFPs therefore can be seen as something of a paradox - systematic and standardized approaches to products and services characterized by their diversity and multiplicity.
The FAO Forestry Department is interested in exploring this topic in greater depth. We would like to gather documented experiences on successful and not so successful extension for NWFPs, including case studies, analytical and conceptual studies (including lessons learned) as well as reviews, bibliographies and other resources.
For more information, please contact: Forest Extension Officer, Forest Resources Division, FAO Forestry Department, or the NWFP Programme at the address on the first page.
WOMEN AND NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS _ CALL FOR COLLABORATION
The International Development Research Centre (IDRC) is carrying out a project on "Women and Non Timber Forest products", within which regional workshops are being held.
The workshops will bring together local researchers, representatives of women workers and entrepreneurs involved in these subsectors, and NGOs who work with them. The objective is to identify the most important products in terms of employment/income for women and to explore where the major constraints and lost opportunities for economic advancement occur. These workshops will be followed by a series of in-depth research studies to go more deeply into selected production/consumption chains related to specific products.
IDRC is looking for names of local researchers and NGOs who work with women's rural groups (Africa, Latin America and South Asia) on any NTFP and agroprocessing.
For more information, please contact: Ms Amira Baabaa, International Development Research Centre, 250 Albert St, Ottawa, ONK1P 6M1, Canada.
E-mail: abaabaa@idrc.ca
[Contents]
<section>4</section>
* BAMBOO AND RATTAN
* BENECOL - A MOST UNUSUAL NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCT
* BLACK BUCKTHORN
* CINCHONA AND ITS PRODUCT - QUININE
* GINGER
* MUSHROOMS
* QUEBRACHO
BAMBOO AND RATTAN
RATTAN
· Rattan is a thorny climbing palm.
· There are 600 known species of rattan.
· Rattan grows from sea level to 3 000 m altitude.
· Rattan is used for a wide range of products.
· Some rattan species are edible.
· The local usage of rattan is worth US$2.5 billion.
· The external trade of rattan generates US$4 billion.
· 700 million people worldwide use rattan.
BAMBOO
· Bamboo is a tree-like woody plant.
· There are 1 250 known species of bamboo.
· Some bamboos live over 100 years.
· There are over 1 500 possible uses.
· The local usage of bamboo is worth US$2.7 billion.
· Trade in bamboo generates US$4.5 billion.
· 2.5 billion people worldwide use bamboo.
· One billion people live in bamboo houses.
For more information, please contact: International Network for Bamboo and Rattan (INBAR), Branch Box 155, PO Box 9799, Beijing, China 100101.
Fax: +86-10-64956962/83
www.inbar.org.cn
(Source: INBAR's Agenda for the 21st century, booklet.)
Bamboos in agroforestry
Many of the most useful bamboo species can occupy much the same ecological niche as trees and are well suited for agroforestry. Bamboo has many advantages over trees; it requires a relatively short time from planting to harvest, it has the ability to provide sustainable building materials and edible products for many years or even decades, and it has a versatility of use which outmatches most tree species. For its ecological adaptability, and wide range of uses, bamboo can be an essential component of many agroforestry systems.
Bamboo belongs to the grass family (Gramineae), subfamily Bambusoideae. There are over 1 500 bamboo species recorded, ranging in height from a few centimetres to over 30 m, with stem (culm) diameters of 3 mm to over 25 cm. Bamboos are found in a wide range of habitats, from tropical to temperate, arid to humid and coastal to montane.
Together with the palm family (Palmae), members of the bamboo family are some of the most useful and versatile plants on earth. Because of bamboo's desirable properties, materials harvested from bamboo lend themselves to low-technology processing for use as farm or community resources. Likewise, industrial manufacturing techniques can produce a wide range of long-lasting, strong and inexpensive goods from bamboo. The many products of various bamboo species include: durable materials for structural building, flooring, trim, and plybamboo (similar to plywood); light and strong materials for crafts, handicrafts and furniture; fiber for woven goods, such as panelling and baskets; pulp for paper and other fibre products; raw materials for agricultural uses, such as fencing, tools, rafts, trellises, water pipes, etc.; fodder for domestic animals, such as cattle, sheep and goats; edible shoots for food; medicine; and ornaments in the landscape or as cut foliage.
Examples of integrated agroforestry systems using bamboo include: erosion control; stream and pond bank stabilization; hedge, screens and windbreaks; wastewater treatment; livestock fodder systems; and wildlife habitat.
There are two main categories of bamboo: clumping (sympodal) and running or open (monpodal). The clumping type of bamboos spreads slowly at a rate of 0.5-1 m/year, and is easy to control. The running types can spread up to 30 m in a single year, and readily spread into areas where they are unwanted. For most agricultural uses, especially in tropical systems, clumping types of bamboo are recommended and rarely, if ever, should spreading types be planted because of severe rampancy problems and extreme difficulty of removal.
Although the status of bamboo has been elevated to a luxury building and ornamental material in many countries (such as the United States and Australia), bamboo has received an undeservedly negative reputation as "the poor man's wood" in so-called developing countries. As the many superior properties of bamboo are rediscovered and agroforestry systems are developed, there is no doubt of bamboo's potential value to people and healthy ecosystems.
References
The book of bamboo by David Farrelly. 1995. An introduction to the biology, history and myriad use of bamboo.
Bamboos by Christine Recht et al. 1992. A technical guide to growing bamboo, including descriptions of many tropical and temperate species.
Building With bamboo _ a handbook by Jules J.A. Janssen, et al. 1995. A rare resource for techniques of building with bamboo.
Bamboo rediscovered by Victor Cusack. 1998. Practical advice for selecting and using bamboo species on the small farm.
(Source: The Overstory No.30.)
The anatomy of bamboo culms
In terms of diversity, distribution and uses, bamboo is the unrivalled leader in the world of plants.About 1 250 species in 75 genera of this plant of prehistoric origin thrive in habitats that range from the steamy rainforests of the tropics to the chilly mountains of the temperate zone. There are over 1 500 documented uses for bamboo, and more are being discovered by modern science and technology. Given all this, it must be a paradox that more is unknown than known about the botany of bamboo and that its taxonomy is far from satisfactory.
In recent decades there have been several attempts to correct this situation. Bamboo anatomy especially has started receiving close attention from botanists.
The anatomy of bamboo culms (INBAR Technical Report No. 18) is the first attempt to synthesize information from various studies that date from 1874 and ties up the theoretical aspects to the practical side. About 125 black and white plates and illustrations and colour plates support the text. The anatomy of bamboo culms is appealing to both bamboo enthusiasts and bamboo scientists: to the former, it provides an exciting journey into the enigmatic realm of bamboo's ultrastructure; and to the latter, it is a valuable reference tool that captures the essence of bamboo culm anatomy.
For more information, please contact the publishers: International Network for Bamboo and Rattan (INBAR), Branch Box 155, PO Box 9799, Beijing 100101, People's Republic of China.
Fax: +86-10-64956983
E-mail: info@inbar.org.cn
www.inbar.org.cn
(See Liese, W. in Publications of Interest.)
Bamboo Association of Fiji
The Bamboo Association of Fiji was formed in 1998 to encourage the use of bamboo in Fiji. While in Asia, South America and other regions it finds myriad applications (as much or more than wood), it is underappreciated in Fiji and the Association seeks to promote its extraordinary versatility besides that of timber.
The first workshop and conference on bamboo was held in Suva in September 1998 and was a great success. Initially 25 people were expected to participate, but over 60 attended and it was necessary to extend the workshop by two days. The workshop, which was held at the Fiji Institute of Technology, was organized by the Association and supported by the UNDP Small Enterprise Development Programme.
(Source: SPRIG, Pacific Islands Forests and Trees, June 1999.)
Rattans in Africa
Rattans are climbing plants found in lowland tropical forests, the flexible stems of which are used in the manufacture of baskets, furniture and other woven products. Although the majority of international trade is concentrated in Southeast Asia, the rattans of Africa are also an important forest resource and play an important role in indigenous subsistence strategies as well as contributing to a thriving cottage industry.
Until recently, very little was known about the rattans of Africa. Despite this, and with the growing focus on such high-value non-timber forest products, rattans have recently been identified by many government and bilateral development agencies as a high priority resource with the potential to contribute to the conservation of the forests of West and Central Africa through sustainable development.
However, this proposed development has been thwarted by the lack of even basic knowledge of the taxonomy, ecology and utilization of these species. Recent attempts by a number of workers across Africa to address this basic shortfall in information has resulted in the initial background information surrounding the biological and social aspects of the rattan sector in Africa now being available. More recently, attempts to unify these research initiatives have led to the formation of an informal network comprised of those institutions interested in rattan research in Africa.
(Source: Brochure on the International Expert Meeting on the Conservation and Development of Rattans of Africa: The rattans of Africa.)
For more information, please also see the Web site of the African Rattan Research Programme: www.africanrattanresearch_fsnet_co_uk.html
(Please see under Forthcoming Events for more information.)
Research grant on the many uses of bamboo
In Southeast Asia, bamboo grows widely, both naturally as well as in plantation forests. There are some 61 different species in Viet Nam alone, belonging to the genera Arundinaria, Oxytenanthera, Babus, Dendrocalamus, Neohouzeanua, Lignania and Phyllostachys. The versatility of bamboo, not only as a material for furniture and household ornaments, but also for construction, is carefully documented in a booklet produced by Ms Pham Minh Thoa as part of her research project sponsored by the International Foundation for Science (IFS).
In her application for an IFS-research grant, Ms Pham recalled the severe damage caused to forests in Viet Nam during two consecutive wars. The 14 million ha of forest that once existed have been reduced to 6 million ha. She sees good potential in bamboo cultivation as part of a larger strategy to protect endangered tree species. Bamboo can be grown anywhere in Viet Nam, in practically all types of soil, and has a short initial harvesting cycle and long productive life span. It needs little care and fertilization, and has a root structure that promotes soil retention.
IFS has continued to grant support to this research project in order to adapt the results on bamboo to help promote the well being of ethnic people living in the mountain regions of Viet Nam.
(Source: International Foundation for Science News, Issue 6, September 1999.)
Biomass production of bamboo plantations
The Department of Botany at Bharathiar University is carrying out research in biomass production of bamboo plantations.
For more information, please contact: Dr P. Shanmughavel, Department of Botany, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore 641046, India.
E-mail: shanvel_99@yahoo.com
The Internet is a rich source of information on bamboo species and their uses.
· American Bamboo Society
Contains general information and links on bamboo, bamboo organizations and species.
www.bamboo.org/abs/index.shtml
· Integrated Rural Bamboo Project
Includes a set of articles on the use of bamboo for farm and economic development in rural communities
www.nri.org/irb/irb1x.html
· Découverte du bambou--Bamboo Discovery
A very interesting and useful database including processing and uses of bamboo.
www.afrojazz.com/hosting/permaculture/bamboo/index.htm
(Source: The Overstory No.30.)
(See Web sites for more information on The Overstory.)
BENECOL - A MOST UNUSUAL NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCT
Benecol products have been introduced on the Finnish and UK markets by the company Raisio: in Finland as normal and low fat spread; in the UK as vegetable fat based Benecol fresh cheese. New markets are targeted for this year.
As early as the 1950s, the cholesterol lowering effect of plant sterols was known. At the end of the 1970s, research showed that plant stanols were the most effective and safe of the plant sterols in reducing serum cholesterol. Since then more than 30 scientific publications have been published specifically on the effects of plant stanol ester on serum cholesterol levels. It has been proved that the fat soluble plant stanol ester in Benecol products effectively restricts the absorption of cholesterol from the digestive tract and thus reduces serum total and LDL cholesterol.
Sterols are found in low concentration in every plant. Raisio obtains sterols from two main sources, the vegetable oil industry and the wood processing industry. The latter is believed to be the main supplier of raw sterols in the future. Much emphasis has been put on securing raw materials. Sterol extraction facilities are being built in France and Chile and there is a letter of interest for one in the United States.
(Source: Extract from an article by Sten von Hellens in EFI News Vol. 7, No. 1, June 1999.)
BLACK BUCKTHORN
Ramnus alpinus spp. alpinus is an interesting shrub that colonizes dry and stony slopes. It is found in southern Europe, from the Pyrenees to the Balcanic peninsula and the Caucasus, as well as in northern Africa. It is a species with potential for use in enrichment plantings to increase biodiversity in forest ecosystems aimed at improving food availability for wildlife. In Italy, for example, its fruits are the preferred food of bears. It is a pioneer species that can be used to colonize difficult areas (slopes at an altitude of over 800-1 000 m) where few other plant species would survive. The bark, besides containing tannins, has important pharmacological properties. Fresh bark and dried bark extracts are currently used in therapies against various digestive complaints. Excellent charcoal is produced from its wood.
(Source: Moraldi, M. 1999. Il ramo alpino. In Sherwood N. 45.)
CINCHONA AND ITS PRODUCT - QUININE
The bark of cinchona produces several alkaloids. The most important alkaloid, quinine, has certain febrifuge properties. Quinine has been used in the battle against malaria since the 1630s. Of the 38 species of cinchona, four have economic value for the production of quinine: C. calisaya, C. legeriana, C. officinalis and C. succirubra.
Cinchona, of the family Rubiaceae, is native to the South American Andes. It thrives best on steep mountain slopes in rich volcanic soils and an annual rainfall of 1 500 mm. The bark of wild species may yield a quinine content of as high as 7 percent, whereas cultivated crops yield contents up to 15 percent.
It is not certain who discovered the febrifuge properties of the bark. The Indians knew of it as a cure for fevers. Jesuits also have a claim on discovering the bark. Their method of finding new medicines was by chewing barks. The bark of cinchona is bitter and, therefore, labelled as a medicine. Father John de Lugo took an interest in the bark and undertook the propagation of its use. Yet the most famous story behind the discovery involves the wife of a Viceroy of Peru, Countess Ana of Chinchon. In 1638 the Countess contracted malaria while in Peru. She was given a powder that cured her of the fevers. Impressed by this new cure she collected the bark and gave it to others who needed it.
Acceptance of the cinchona bark was not as immediate as would be expected for an otherwise incurable malady, because of past failures with other claims to "cures". Nevertheless the importance of the bark was realized and intense harvesting in Loxa, the main source, left a large number of trees dead.
Alarmed at the scarcity of the cinchonas and the contamination of exports, expeditions were sent out to find cinchonas in other parts. In the mid-1800s, collection of young plants and seeds for crops began. Early attempts to grow cinchonas in India and Java failed because of difficulties with transporting young trees, low quinine yield and/or crop failure.
In 1860, trees and seeds of C. succirubra were collected and successfully transported to India. The red cinchonas thrived the best. By 1867 plantations in India covered 480 ha. In 1865 plantations in Java also started successfully and Java quickly became the largest producer accounting for 95 percent of the world's commercial supply.
Today other antimalarial drugs exist. In addition to its medicinal use, however, quinine is used as a tonic, an antiseptic, and in lotions against the sun and insects.
Cultivation, management and harvest
Cinchona may be propagated by seeds, cuttings or grafting. Young plants are thinned and kept shaded and protected from wind. In the tenth year, when the quinine content is highest, the trees are harvested. Trees may be partially stripped and bound with moss for protection. The moss also facilitates the growth of new bark. The replacement bark normally gives a higher yield of quinine.
Barks from trunks, roots and branches are all used. Removing the bark is done by beating the trees with sticks to loosen it. It is then stripped away with a knife and rolled. The barks from the roots, trunk and branches are separated and rapidly dried. The roots contain the highest quinine content with the trunk second.
Bark from pruned branches is also used. Extensive cutting back on the older tree promotes growth of new branches, which helps increase the yield of each tree.
(Source: extracted and edited from Motley, C. in www.siu.edu/~ebl/leaflets/quinine.htm)
GINGER
Ginger is an important export crop of India, which produces nearly half of the 30 000 tonnes traded on the world market each year. The spice does well in an area of about 56 000 ha in India. Kerala State supplies the largest share of India's exportable ginger, mainly Zingiber officinale, which is superior in quality and popular on global markets. Estimates indicate that the country will need to increase production by 12 percent annually to meet the growing internal and export demands.
Traditionally, ginger has been grown as a monocrop in open fields on large-scale commercial plantations. Because of population growth, however, per caput availability of land is shrinking, and there is less land available on which to grow monocrops. But researchers and farmers are finding that coconut (Cocos nucifera) gardens can provide a healthy and profitable place to grown ginger.
Ginger is a common feature in most of the Kerala home gardens, where smallholder farmers grow the crop mainly for home consumption. In a detailed case study of a typical coconut-based home garden in south Kerala, researchers found that farmers treat ginger as a cash, spice and medicinal crop. Furthermore, a study by India's Central Plantation Crops Research Institute found that the coconut-ginger system under rainfed conditions gave attractive returns and created additional employment of 500 person days/ha/year.
The economic advantages of such a coconut-based farming system have already been established in research stations and on farmers' fields. With the shade-loving nature of ginger confirmed, it would be a good idea to suggest to the farmers the possibility of using the coconut ecoclimate to increase ginger production. This would go a long way towards increasing farm productivity and profitability, as well as meeting the increasing demand for ginger.
(Source: Extracted from «Under the coconut tree», Agroforestry Today, July-September 1998.)
MUSHROOMS
Commercial harvesting of wild mushrooms in Scottish forests - is it sustainable?
The wild mushroom industry in Scotland has grown rapidly over the last decade as species such as the chanterelle (Cantharellus cibarius), cep (Boletus edulis) and hedgehog mushroom (Hydnum repandum) have become fashionable foodstuffs. The commercialization of this resource has been accompanied by increasing concern about its ecological impact, particularly as fungal declines have been recorded elsewhere in Europe. To examine the sustainability of wild mushroom harvesting in Scotland, information from participants in the industry was ascertained by questionnaires and structured interviews, and involved landowners, mushroom pickers and buyers. Results indicated that the total mushroom harvest in Scotland is worth some UK£406 000/year. A total of 20 jobs are directly attributable to the harvest and approximately 350 pickers benefit from casual earnings (averaging £28.70/week). The mushrooms are collected from both natural and plantation forests, principally in highland areas.
There are conflicts, especially between landowners and pickers with respect to ownership of and access to the resource. Consideration is given to how such conflicts may be resolved and how the industry may be developed in a sustainable manner in the future.
(Source: Scottish Forestry, Vol. 53, No. 2, 1999.)
For more information, please contact: A.J. Dyke and A.C. Newton, Institute of Ecology and Resource Management, University of Edinburg, King's Building, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JU, Scotland, UK.
E-mail: alisondyke@hotmail.com or a.newton@ed.ac.uk
Special report of AMBIO
The September 1999 issue of the journal AMBIO is devoted to the biological, socio-economic and managerial aspects of chanterelle mushroom harvesting on the Olympic peninsula, Washington State, United States.
For more information, please contact: AMBIO, Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, Box 50005, SE-104 05 Stockholm, Sweden.
Fax: +46-8-16 62 51
E-mail: elisabet@ambio.kva
www.ambio.kva.se
QUEBRACHO
Quebracho (Aspidosperma quebracho blanco) is an evergreen tree that grows naturally in Chile, Argentina, Bolivia and southern Brazil and sometimes rises to 30 m, and has an erect stem and wide-spreading crown. The wood of all the species of this genus is valuable, and owes its name to its hardness, being derived from two Spanish words, quebrar and hacha, meaning "the axe breaks". It is used for tanning.
The bark was not introduced into Europe until 1878, although it had been used in South America for a long time as a febrifuge. Commercially, it is found in large, thick pieces covered on the outside with a very thick and rough, corky layer of a greyish-brown colour, and deeply divided by furrows and excavations. The inner bark is greyish or yellowish, smooth or somewhat fibrous, and often with small, black spots. The taste is very bitter, but there is scarcely any odour.
Two other plants are known as quebracho: Schinopsis lorenzii, the wood of which is sold in commerce as "quebracho wood", and Lodina rhombifolia, "quebracho flojo", the wood and bark of which are sometimes substituted for the "quebracho colorado".
The bark of quebracho contains six alkaloids: aspidospermine, aspidospermatine, aspidosamine, quebrachine, hypoquebrachine and quebrachamine. All agree that quebrachine is the most active. Two new sugars, quebrachite and laevogyrate inosite, tannin and starch have also been extracted.
In medicine it is used as a tonic, febrifuge and anti-asthmatic. Quebracho colorado, or S. lorenzii, has been used as a substitute, but is essentially different, being probably a simple and gastrointestinal stimulant, although it has been said to be a much weaker form of quebracho blanco.
(Source: Extracted from the Internet and contributed by Mr Chris Brown, Forest Resources Division, FAO.)
[Contents]
<section>5</section>
· ALBANIA · ARGENTINA · AUSTRALIA · BELIZE · BURKINA FASO · CAMEROON · CHILE
· COSTA RICA · CUBA · ELSALVADOR · GHANA · GUATEMALA · GUYANA · HONDURAS
· HUNGARY · INDIA · INDONESIA · ITALY · KENYA · LAO PDR · MALAYSIA · MALI
· MOZAMBIQUE · NEPAL · NICARAGUA · PHILIPPINES · RUSSIAN FEDERATION · SENEGAL
· TANZANIA · TCHAD · THAILAND · VIET NAM · UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
ALBANIA
Until the early 1990s, Albania had a large, well-developed set of state enterprises based on several NTFPs. These enterprises were geared solely for export: for medicinal plants especially, Albania was the largest exporter in Europe. Primary production areas and processing facilities stretched across the country and involved a large segment of the population. Each district had its own collection depots and processing enterprises. Raw materials and processed goods were all sent to Tirana for export. The structure of the sector as a whole was like a pyramid. The main enterprises included: medicinal, aromatic and spice plants (raw materials and essential oils); willows, hay and other grasses (raw materials and processed articles such as baskets and furniture); nuts (chestnuts and hazelnuts for export, acorns and walnuts for domestic use); tannins; pine resin; wildlife products (frogs, snails, skins, meat, and sport hunting); and honey (produced in artificial hives placed in
forest areas).
Raw material production for each category came from a mix of cultivated and wild sources, depending on the category. For example, willow stems and nuts were wild-harvested and cultivated in plantations; tannins and resins all came from wild sources. For medicinal, aromatic and spice plants, only rosemary, thyme, fennel, coriander, basil, lavender and laurel were cultivated in some quantity, in addition to growing wild. All others (approximately 130 different species) were collected solely from the wild. Of these, sage (Salvia officinalis) and juniper (Juniperus communis and J. oxycedrus) were harvested in the largest volumes.
With the political reforms that started in Albania in 1990-91, many people involved in this sector became private entrepreneurs. As such, the level of technical background and the extent of internal linkages that exist today are quite high. The main industries are still export-oriented, and include: medicinal and spice plants (raw materials); essential oils; and a small amount of wicker goods.
The number and type of enterprises have dropped dramatically. There is still localized production of chestnuts (domestic), frogs and snails (domestic and export) and honey (domestic), but nothing like the scale that existed previously. Mushroom harvesting, on the other hand, is a new enterprise. There is no tradition of collecting or eating mushrooms in Albania, and only one person is involved as an exporter.
In terms of having the greatest impact on rural economies and forest resources, medicinal and spice plants (for export and essential oil production) are the most important. The volume of raw materials harvested from the wild is still quite high (thousands of tonnes/year), some value-added processing (essential oils) is already taking place and the number of people involved, especially small farmer-harvester-primary processors, is large. Of these, the vast majority are women.
The NTFP sector in Albania has a long and highly developed history. This situation is very different from most non-industrialized countries seeking to improve their NTFP sector, where historically the industry operated along informal and unorganized lines. The primary need in Albania is to revitalize the sector by (in order of importance):
1. increasing market linkages both internally and externally through better access to market information, buyers, etc;
2. improving environmental sustainability through greater public awareness and effective social institutions (especially at the local level) to protect wild stocks and manage the harvest;
3. updating skills and processing technology at all levels; and
4. exploring the potential for import substitution and value addition (e.g. teas, soaps, etc.)
In terms of expanding the industry, the main bottlenecks at this point are:
· developing a credible reputation and a recognizable business identity in the international marketplace;
· improving consistency with respect to quality, quantity and timing (of delivery); and
· breaking the industry monopoly created by one firm engaged in botanical exports (raw materials and essential oils).
However, the current weaknesses and limited size of this sector offer an excellent opportunity to help restructure it with a solid, sustainable foundation _ before volume demands increase, more people get involved, and more plants become endangered or extinct. (Several species, however, such as Betula sp. and Gentiana lutea are already in serious decline.) There are virtually no reliable statistical data including inventories and customs information, and trader reports are the only source of information.
USAID's Albania Private Forestry Development Project (APFDP) is facilitating the return of forest and meadowland to their former owners and traditional community control. It provides policy advice and demonstration management projects that will inculcate sustainable forest management practices at the local and national level. Through an inter-agency agreement with the Peace Corps, APFDP promotes private, on_farm agroforestry development through the Peace Corps' Private Farm Forestry Project, complementing a broader World Bank effort to develop a formal agricultural extension system. In addition, APFDP has held workshops to assess possible improvements to the restitution process.
(Edited from a contribution by Ms Maureen DeCoursey, APFDP, Albania.)
For more information, please contact: APFDP, Elbasen Street, Villa 13, PO Box 2417, Tirana, Albania.
E-mail: apfdp@icc.al.eu.org
ARGENTINA
La Base de datos sobre productos forestales no madereros de especie nativas, fue realizada en 1999 por la Dirección de Recursos Forestales Nativos, que depende de la Secretaría de Recursos Naturales y Desarrollo Sustentable.
Para más información, dirigirse a:
Ing. Cristina Résico o Lic. Inés Kasulin,
San Martín 459, Oficina 243
1004 Buenos Aires, Argentina
Fax: (+54 11) 43488486
correo electrónico: nomad@sernah.gov.ar
Un estudio sobre los recursos alimenticios derivados de la caza, pesca y recolección de los Wichi (cazadores-recolectores) del Río Pilcomayo (provincia de Salta, noroeste de Argentina), fue realizado en noviembre de 1998. Los recursos alimenticios tradicionales de los Wichi fueron inventariados mediante prospección en el terreno, técnicas de observación participativa y entrevistas semiestructuradas. El estudio identificó las especies vegetales y animales más utilizadas, y formuló propuestas para reglamentar la caza de subsistencia y asignar derecho de uso a los pobladores locales.
Para más información, dirigirse a:
Sr. Francisco Ramón Barbarán,
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Universidad Nacional de Salta,
Buenos Aires 177
4400 Salta, Argentina
Fax: (+54 387) 4395956
correo electrónico: barbaran@ciunsa.edu.ar
AUSTRALIA
A Western Australian company has embarked on a new venture that will put the State to the fore as the leading supplier of a native oil - sandalwood. Mt. Romance Australia Pty Ltd and the Department of Conservation and Land Management (CALM) have signed a contract for the supply of up to 1 000 tonnes of sandalwood a year; the value of the contract is conservatively valued at $40 million over ten years. Mt. Romance was selected from a highly competitive range of proposals. The company has an active research and development programme that is continually identifying and creating new sandalwood-based products.
Although the main focus is on the cosmetic and therapeutic uses of sandalwood, the company's long-term aim is to become a major supplier of sandalwood oil to the international perfume and pharmaceutical industries. The contract also opens the way for the development of a stronger domestic market for sandalwood oil and products, not only in western Australia, but also in Australia as a whole. Essentially, this will be a new «market» for sandalwood products.
The contract represents the realization of a policy of value adding to WA sandalwood wherever possible and would also complement the State's traditional markets in Asia. In addition, the contract is expected to provide an additional incentive for farmers to incorporate sandalwood into their tree crops programme.
CALM has developed new techniques that make it possible to grow sandalwood as a tree crop. It is now one of the major supplementary species the Department is offering to farmers who are establishing maritime pines under the State Salinity Action Plan.
Apart from its economic value, sandalwood planting contributes to restoring the biodiversity of the Wheatbelt, since it occurred there naturally before the area was cleared for agriculture. It is expected that a further 50 ha of sandalwood will be established this year on cleared farmland as part of CALM's maritime pines project.
(Source: Landscope, Winter 1999.)
For more information, please contact: Department of Conservation and Land Management (CALM), Locked Bag 29, Bentley Delivery Centre, Western Australia 6983, Australia. www.calm.wa.gov.au/index.html
BELIZE
Traditional Healers' Foundation of Belize
The Traditional Healers' Foundation of Belize (THF) was founded in 1997 and is made up of bushdoctors, midwives, snake doctors, granny healers, village healers, massage therapists and spiritual healers. With the assistance of Ix Chel Tropical Research Foundation, THF produces a quarterly newsletter, Tree of Life, which provides a forum for traditional healers in Belize.The most pressing problems of the traditional healers, as outlined at the first general meeting of THF, were the preservation of traditional healing knowledge, conservation of medicinal plants and their habitats, identification of potential apprentices for healers, and cooperation with research scientists in their quest for plants with possible applications in modern medicine.
The goal of THF is to address the issue of intellectual property rights for all healers, to provide for a «Basic Need Fund» for traditional healers, and to develop programmes that further awareness of traditional healing in the public and private sector.
The THF operates solely on donations and subscriptions to Tree of Life.
For more information, please contact: Traditional Healers Foundation, c/o Ix Chel Farm, General Delivery, San Ignacio, Cayo District, Belize, Central America.
E-mail: ixchel@btl.net
Biodiversity in Belize
Belize is a small country, but its diverse ethnicity combined with varied ecosystems, gives rise to a rich culture with respect to medicinal plants. The diverse ethnic groups have a rich culture of medicinal plant use and, in many cases (especially for the Maya and Garinagu), the use of these plants is spiritual and linked to myths, rituals and religion. The preservation of medicinal plant diversity has also been fostered by the maintenance of over 70 percent of the country under forest cover and the establishment of protected areas that cover 36 percent of the land mass. Knowledge of medicinal plants in Belize is as rich and diverse as the biotic resources that are used.
Various studies, surveys and plant collection expeditions have been conducted in Belize, the earliest and most extensive collection being that of Morton E. Peck in 1905-1907. From these studies, a total of 3 409 plant species have been recorded. However, only a few of the 52 vegetation types have been studied in sufficient detail and apart from species listings, there are very little quantitative data available. In addition, the distribution of plants shows a clear bias towards sites where collection efforts have been concentrated. The northwest and extreme northeast of Belize, and the highest peaks of the Maya Mountains, remain poorly inventoried. It is believed that the country has about 4 000 plant species, including 25-30 endemic ones.
Medicinal plant diversity is a valuable resource to both traditional healers and the pharmaceutical industry. The monetary value of medicinal plants that can be harvested from one hectare of forest in Belize was assessed in 1992 to be US$726-3 327. More important is the relatively untapped pharmaceutical value of tropical plants in treating both known and unknown diseases.
The task of conserving medicinal plant diversity is being guided by Belize's National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan, a comprehensive plan prepared by the Government of Belize with assistance from the United Nations Development Programme.
(Source: Extracted from an article «Biodiversity in Belize» by Hugh O'Brien in Tree of Life, Vol. 1, issue 3, November 1998)
PFNM en Belice
En Belice hay una gran variedad de productos forestales no madereros (PFNM) provenientes de las diferentes áreas boscosas. A continuación se presenta una descripción de los usos, métodos de aprovechamiento, valor económico y aspectos legales relacionados con los más importantes productos no maderables del bosque.
El producto forestal no maderero más importante es la producción de chicle proveniente del látex (savia) del árbol de chicle o sapodilla (Manilkara zapota). Esta industria tuvo un auge considerable hace unas décadas, luego decayó y parece que recientemente se está de nuevo recuperando. El chicle se cosecha durante la época de lluvias, generalmente desde julio hasta enero o febrero. El producto obtenido del látex se exporta para la producción de goma de mascar, aunque se está tratando de que se procese y utilice a nivel local en la fabricación artesanal de chicle para el mercado del ecoturismo.
CHICLE EXPORTADO POR BELICE: CANTIDADES Y PRECIOS
AÑO
CANTIDAD (KG)
$ EE.UU.
n.d.
(Fuente: Estadísticas del Ministerio de Desarrollo Económico - 1998)
En Belice, como en muchos otros países, los bosques siguen siendo fuente de materiales de construcción. Las palmas Sabal mexicana y Sabal mauritiiformis (botán o bayleaf) se cosechan ampliamente en todo el país para hacer el techo de casas y ranchos. Las hojas de botán tienen un precio superior al de las otras especies por ser más durables y manejables; también el tallo de esta especie se utiliza como pilar de muelles y embarcaderos debido a su resistencia a los organismos marinos y al agua salada, y para fabricación de barreras de protección en los ríos. El precio aproximado de cada tronco es de 35 dólares EE.UU. El meristemo apical de la planta se consume como «palmito».
Entre las diferentes expresiones artesanales de Belice se destaca el trabajo que realizan los artesanos sobre temas de la naturaleza, siendo una de las actividades más importantes la talla de madera caída. El árbol de zericote (Cordia dodecandra) está protegido, por lo que no se puede utilizar como madera, pero sí para la producción de artesanías, en cuya forma parece tener un importante mercado. También se producen esculturas y platos con la madera de rosewood (Dalbergia stevensonii), caoba (Swietenia macrophylla) y santamaría (Calophyllum brasiliense).
Otros artículos artesanales son los canastos de jippy-joppy (Carludovica palmata), hechos por grupos organizados de mujeres que reciben apoyo de distintas organizaciones no gubernamentales y del Ministerio de la Mujer. También se encuentran esculturas y joyería hecha con semillas de cohune, lo mismo que una variedad de aretes confeccionados con semillas de árboles del bosque.
Entre las plantas medicinales más populares se encuentran la corteza de bálsamo (Balsamina peruviana), billy webb (Swietenia panamensis), colpachí (Crotton guatemalensis), contribo (Aristolochia trilobata), jackass bitters (Neurolaena lobata), sorosí (Momordica charantia), periwinkle (Catharantus roseus), gumbolimbo (Bursera simaruba), china root (Smilax spp.) y palo de hombre (Quassia amara).
El 85 por ciento de los jefes de familia utilizan plantas medicinales, y de ellos el 64 por ciento colecta sus propias plantas. Un 56 por ciento de las plantas provienen de bosques o áreas de cultivo abandonadas desde hace tiempo (bosques secundarios).
El 93 por ciento de los hogares colecta y consume frutas y plantas silvestres (el 31 por ciento proveniente de los bosques), estimándose que frutas y plantas representan el tercio de una comida. La carne silvestre es también importante en la alimentación, y se estima que aproximadamente un 66 por ciento de los animales cazados proviene del bosque, siendo de 8,67 dólares EE.UU. el precio promedio de un kilogramo de carne.
(Fuente: Robles Valle, G. R., Oliveira Barbosa, K. y Villalobos Soto, R. 1999. Evaluación de los productos forestales no madereros en América Central. FAO y Centro Agronómico Tropical de Investigación y Enseñanza (CATIE), Turrialba, Costa Rica. [en prensa].)
BURKINA FASO
Une étude sur l'importance des produits forestiers non ligneux comme sources de revenus pour les femmes dans le milieu rural a été conduite par l'Institut National de l'Environnement et de la Recherche Agricole (INERA) avec une contribution financière de la Fondation Internationale pour la Science (IFS).
La zone d'étude est la partie ouest du Burkina Faso, où les formations végétales sont du type savanes arborées, boisées à forêts claires. Le paysage champêtre est caractérisé par un système de parcs arborés, dominé par des espèces ligneuses à produits comestibles telles que: le Karité (Vitellaria paradoxa), le Néré (Parkia biglobosa), le Tamarinier (Tamarindus indica), le Rônier (Borassus aethiopum), etc. L'étude visait en particulier à clarifier certains enjeux des activités liées aux PFNL qui pourraient avoir des implications sur les ressources forestières et la vie dans les ménages. A travers des enquêtes effectuées auprès de femmes vendeuses sur les marchés villageois, l'étude a recueilli des informations sur les prix, les revenus de vente et les utilisations des principaux PFNL. L'influence des sources d'acquisition des produits sur la formation des prix de vente des mêmes produits a été analysée, de même que les gains monétaires par jour de vente et l'utilisation de
ces revenus par les ménages.
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: Niéyidouba Lamien, INERA/GRN-SP Nord-ouest, BP: 49 Tougan, Burkina Faso.
CAMEROON
Sustainable harvesting and regeneration of the medical plant Prunus africana (Wotangu)
FAAFNET (Forestry, Agriculture, Animal and Fishery Network) is currently identifying groups interested in planting Prunus africana. The entire Prunus africana tree has uses for the local people through direct traditional uses and as a source of income. Traditionally, Prunus africana is used for the treatment of stomach ache and as a purgative; it is also used for chest pains, malaria and even madness. Farmers have also seen that the fallen leaves of Prunus africana serve as a soil improvement agent and that firewood from the dead branches produces nice "charcoal». In addition, a local company, PLANTECAM, processes the bark into an extract that is used internationally as a medicine for prostate gland disorders. In fact, Prunus africana has become so important that it is mobilizing a good number of people and resources in the Mount Cameroon region and beyond.
FAAFNET encourages the initiative of local communities to establish village organizations who are concerned with harvesting the existing Prunus africana and which will: (a) establish control mechanisms on how to harvest it sustainably; and (b) be involved in decisions on what to do with the money received from the harvest. Technical advice is given to groups and communities who establish nurseries or who plant Prunus africana as a means of regeneration.
After the recent Mount Cameroon eruption, which destroyed a large number of Prunus africana plants, coupled with the actual problem of overexploitation, FAAFNET intends to assist willing groups to plant about 10 000 trees by the year 2001. FAAFNET is inviting interested parties to assist them in this sustainability and regeneration struggle for Prunus africana, which is presently one of the most valuable NTFPs in the Mount Cameroon area.
For more information, please contact: Messrs Lyonga William Mumbe and Ndumbe Ekema Sephen, FAAFNET, Long Street Soppo, PO Box 494, BUEA, South West Province, Cameroon.
(Please see under Special Features for more information on Prunus africana.)
La Dynamique de la Filiere du Gnetum au Sud-Cameroun
Le rotin, Prunus, Irvingia, Garcinia, Cola, Paussinystalia et Gnetum sont actuellement les produits forestiers non ligneux (PFNL) les plus sollicités au Cameroun. Commencée il y a près de six années, la commercialisation poussée des feuilles de Gnetum africanum (utilisées comme légumes) au Sud-Cameroun a progressivement pris de l'ampleur au point d'atteindre aujourd'hui des dimensions forts impressionnantes. Parallèlement à cette évolution au niveau de la taille, la filière a connu des mutations significatives.
La première mutation qu'on peut relever est l'extension géographique du réseau de cueillette et de commercialisation. Vers 1994, les sites d'approvisionnement se limitaient à quelques villages très accessibles du Fako, de la Méme, de la Sanaga Maritime et de la Lékié. Depuis lors, de nouveaux sites de ravitaillement ont émergé, même dans les localités situées en retrait par rapport aux grands axes de circulation, notamment dans la Lékié, la Méfou et Afamba, le Nyong et Kellé et le Mbam et Kim. Cette extension s'est accompagnée dans les localités concernées par le renforcement des restrictions d'accès à la ressource dans les « forêts privées » et l'accélération de la compétition entre les cueilleurs dans les massifs forestiers collectivement exploités. A l'autre bout de la chaîne, on a assisté à l'apparition (ou à la confirmation) de nouveaux marchés comme Bamenda, Tiko, Buea, Mutengene, Libreville, Paris, Londres qui se sont ajoutés aux vieux centres comme Idenau, Limbé,
Douala, Yaoundé, etc.
La deuxième mutation importante concerne les acteurs. La multiplication des acteurs ci-dessus évoquée s'est faite sur le plan quantitatif et qualitatif dans les villages, la cueillette ne concernait que quelques femmes. Au fil des années, beaucoup de femmes, d'enfants et même d'hommes se sont impliqués (de façon isolée ou en équipe) dans cette activité.
En aval, le nombre de collecteurs-revendeurs s'est aussi accru de façon notable et de nouvelles catégories d'intervenants sont arrivées dans la filière. Il s'agit de petits intermédiaires villageois, d'une foule de femmes revendeuses qui achètent et découpent le « eru »(Gnetum ), d'agents de remodelage des paquets, de chargeurs, de correspondants commerciaux et surtout de gros collecteurs nationaux (cette tâche revenait jadis aux Nigérians) qui alimentent le principal point d'exportation qu'est Idenau. Enfin, il y a lieu de relever la professionnalisation de certains acteurs qui jusque là n'intervenaient que de façon temporaire.
Le troisième point saillant de la dynamique de la filière qu'on peut relever porte sur les prix et les quantités. Les prix ont augmenté de façon très sensible au cours de la période d'observation. Ainsi par exemple, de 1993 à 1999, on est passé d'un prix moyen de 65 Fcfa par paquet (800 à 1000 gr. environ) à 175 Fcfa au Mfoundi et de 265 Fcfa à 325 Fcfa à Idenau. Pour ce qui est des quantités de Gnetum commercialisées, l'augmentation a été aussi fulgurante. Par exemple, Limbé reçoit en 1999 en moyenne près de 5 000 paquets par semaine contre 200 environ en 1994; l'offre physique hebdomadaire à Idenau a été multiplié par 7,5 environ en quatre années.
Le dernier élément important de la dynamique qu'il importe de mentionner a trait au schéma d'approvisionnement et de distribution. Peu avant 1995/1996, ce schéma n'était pas aussi organisé et étendu qu'il l'est aujourd'hui. Les circuits se sont étoffés et bien rodés en un laps de temps relativement court. Ils font même appel à quelques pratiques modernes de distribution.
Ces mutations sont imputables aux principaux facteurs ci-après : la crise des cultures de rente traditionnelles, l'accentuation de la récession économique, les opportunités intéressantes de revenus qu'offre Gnetum, la spéculation, l'augmentation de la demande, l'augmentation des charges liées à la commercialisation et la volonté des revendeurs de réaliser des bénéfices toujours plus substantiels.
Comme on le constate, ces mutations ont été assez profondes. Le défi qui interpelle les acteurs de développement concernés par les PFNL est celui de savoir maîtriser et orienter cette dynamique afin de l'utiliser efficacement dans la réalisation de l'objectif hautement prioritaire qu'est la gestion durable de ces ressources.
Contribution de: Louis Defo, Programme Avenir des Peuples des Forêts Tropicales, Université de Yaoundé I (Cameroun) et Mounchigan Mama, Université de Yaoundé II (Cameroun), B. P. 8297 Yaoundé, Cameroun.
Fax. +237-22-94-21
E-mail: ldefo@uycdc.uninet.cm and apft@sdncmr.undp.org
Korup Forest Dynamics Plot
The first enumeration of the Korup Forest Dynamics Plot (KFDP) was completed in July 1999. Botanical identification will continue for the next two years, as plot staff collect fertile samples from trees within the plot.
The KFDP staff have initiated a number of complementary projects within the plot that will continue after its first census. One project involves measuring canopy height every 5 m along the plot grid in the hope of relating light gaps to the distribution, growth and mortality of saplings and understorey plants. Nine of the most common species in the plot are also being studied, six of which are canopy species and three understorey species. Two of the species have medicinal uses, and three others have other local uses.
KFDP researchers are also mapping all individuals of Afromoum sp., a perennial understorey plant with high medicinal value, in order to determine its distribution pattern and habitat preference. A botany student from the University of Douala is working in the plot to study the seedling demography of Garcinia caonrauna (Clusiaceae), an important medicinal species and the most common monoecieous canopy species. He will concentrate his analysis on the relationship between seedling survivorship and seedling density, distance from mother tree, and other microsite habitat effects. Another student (from the University of Florida) is conducting a year-long socio-economic study in the Korup area. His research concentrates on how shocks, such as drought, earthquakes, or robbery, affect the extent to which people collect forest products. The results from this research will help forest mangers create more appropriate forest management plans.
(Source: Inside CTFS, Summer 1999.)
Multiple use of the rain forests in Cameroon
A recent study in the tropical rain forests of southern Cameroon revealed that local communities rely heavily on the use of forest products for their subsistence. More than 500 plant species and 280 animal species are used. About 20 non-timber forest products make it to the local market and contribute considerably to the income of the rural people. A few rare but important NTFP-producing trees also yield valuable timber, but otherwise logging has little impact on the availability of NTFPs derived from plants.
These are some of the conclusions that can be found in the first publication in the Tropenbos-Cameroon Series: Non-timber forest products in the Bipindi-Akom II Region, Cameroon. A socio-economic and ecological assessment. The study was carried out by Johanna van Dijk, a biologist at Wageningen University in the Netherlands, who specifically looked at how NTFPs can contribute to multiple-use forest management. Actual forestry practices in tropical rainforests focus mainly on the exploitation of timber, since this generates high income in the short term. However, policymakers and forest managers must not underestimate the value of NTFPs for local communities. In sustainable forest management, the interests of local people, and the role of other forest products, must be taken into account.
The plant species collected by the local people are used for some 1 100 different purposes, including medicinal use. The animal species are used almost exclusively for food. Secondary forests and cocoa plantations are more important as collection areas for NTFPs than primary forests.
The study, which started in 1996, was executed within the framework of the Tropenbos-Cameroon Programme (TCP). Tropenbos works closely with Wageningen University and other Dutch and Cameroonian universities and research institutes. The TCP's main objective is to develop methods and strategies for sustainable management of natural forest. The perspectives of local people and indigenous communities are important aspects of the programme. Land use in the research area is mainly timber exploitation, shifting cultivation, and hunting/gathering by local people.
(Source: Press Release, Tropenbos, Wageningen, 2 December 1999.)
For further information and to receive a copy of the publication, please contact: The Tropenbos Foundation, PO Box 232, 6700 AE Wageningen, the Netherlands.
Fax: +31-317-423024
E-mail: tropenbos@iac.agro.nl
www.tropenbos.nl
Conservation of plant diversity in western Cameroon
A three-year Darwin Initiative project entitled «Conservation of Plant Diversity in Western Cameroon» began on 1 November 1999. Involving the National Herbarium of Cameroon and Kew, and funded by the Earthwatch Institute, the project will conduct botanical inventories in the area to provide data for conservation management. The focus is on three protected areas managed by NGOs.
(Source: Kew Scientist, Issue 16, October 1999.)
CHILE
Importancia socioeconómica de los productos forestales no madereros
Ha sido de gran importancia, y lo sigue siendo en el país, el uso de los productos forestales no madereros (PFNM), especialmente entre los estratos sociales con menores ingresos. En Chile, al igual que en muchos otros países del mundo, los PFNM tienen un gran significado socioeconómico, sobre todo porque requieren de una fuerte incorporación de mano de obra no calificada para su recolección y procesamiento, cuando es necesario. Adicionalmente, la mayor colecta y utilización de PFNM se realiza a nivel de comunidades rurales, a nivel de comunidades campesinas y de personas de bajos ingresos.
Además, desde el punto de vista social, proporciona fuentes de trabajo a ancianos, mujeres y niños, en determinados períodos del año, especialmente en aquellas épocas en las que la demanda de trabajos de temporada está deprimida.
A pesar del generalizado uso de la medicina formal, que cubre a la población mediante los sistemas nacionales de salud pública, un porcentaje que se estima en no menos de un 50 por ciento, emplea plantas medicinales como principal medio de atención primaria para la salud. Esto conlleva su comercialización a nivel nacional, por lo general en estado deshidratado, a precios accesibles para el grueso de la población. En estos últimos años, este «herbolario nacional» se ha visto enriquecido con la importación de PFNM para uso medicinal procedentes del Perú y Bolivia, especialmente uña de gato, bálsamo del Perú y otros.
La gama de PFNM en Chile es bastante variada. Es posible que haya menos cantidad de especies que en las zonas tropicales, debido a la gran biodiversidad que existe en éstas, sin embargo las que existen son de gran valor, sea por el alto grado de endemismo existente que por la gran variabilidad de condiciones climatológicas existentes; una variabilidad que depende de la extensa geografía chilena que cubre varios grados de latitud y extremas condiciones de clima y altura.
En el país existe casi toda la gama de PFNM enumeradas en cualquiera clasificación, y abarca alimentos, flores, plantas medicinales y comestibles, aromas, esencias, fibras y productos de origen animal.
(Fuente: Productos forestales no madereros en Chile. 1998. Serie Forestal N° 10, RLC/FAO.)
COSTA RICA
Mapping and monitoring Costa Rica's biodiversity: the ECOMAPAS Project.
In September 1998, the Costa Rican ECOMAPAS Project officially entered its implementation phase, starting the mapping and subsequent monitoring of Costa Rica's biodiversity, and in particular its ecosystems. This Netherlands-funded Project is a joint effort of Costa Rica's National Biodiversity Institute (INBio) and the National Conservation Areas System (SINAC) of the Ministry of Environment and Energy (MINAE). In accordance with INBio and SINAC's mission of saving, knowing and sustainably using tropical biodiversity, and as a follow-up to the 1998 approved national Biodiversity Law, the ECOMAPAS Project will contribute in an advanced and innovative manner to the development of knowledge and wise use of Costa Rica's biodiversity.
For more information, please contact: Maarten Kappelle, Proyecto ECOMAPAS, INBio, Apartado Postal 22-3100, Santo Domingo de Heredia, Costa Rica.
Fax: +506-2442816
E-mail: mkappell@inbio.ac.cr
www.inbio.ac.cr/es/mi/ecomapas.html
CUBA
En Cuba los bosques representan el 21 por ciento del territorio del país y ocupan una superficie de 2 402 900 hectáreas, de las cuales 1 954 400 hectáreas corresponden a bosques naturales y 448 500 hectáreas a plantaciones forestales. En los últimos cuatro decenios, la política forestal nacional ha estado orientada a la protección de los bosques naturales existentes, así como a incrementar las áreas cubiertas de bosques mediante programas de forestación y reforestación. Esta política se está reformulando en el marco del Programa de Desarrollo Forestal hasta 2015, aprobado en 1997, con el objetivo de garantizar el manejo sostenible de los bosques del país y el establecimiento de plantaciones como primera opción para la obtención de maderas.
Hasta el pasado reciente, gran parte de los bosques pertenecían a entidades estatales y, en pequeña escala, al sector cooperativo y al privado. Sin embargo, en los últimos años ha tenido lugar un proceso de transformación de la tenencia de la tierra. Hoy en día, el sector privado es usufructuario de alrededor del 10 por ciento de las tierras forestales. Este proceso conlleva consecuencias importantes, tales como el incremento de los poseedores de tierras con bosques, la diversificación de los usos y de las funciones de los mismos, el aumento de la presión sobre los recursos y los ecosistemas, y la ampliación del numero de participantes en las actividades forestales.
En el contexto de los cambios en las funciones de los organismos de la Administración Central del Estado y en aras del fortalecimiento institucional del sector forestal, en 1995 el Ministerio de Agricultura creó la Dirección Forestal, cuya misión esencial es aplicar y supervisar la política forestal nacional en vista del desarrollo sostenible de los bosques del país. Con este cambio institucional, las funciones de la autoridad estatal se han separado de la actividad económica empresarial.
Como consecuencia del proceso señalado, también se hizo inminente la necesidad de reformar el régimen legislativo forestal. En julio de 1998, se promulgó una nueva Ley Forestal, en cuya preparación la FAO brindó apoyo técnico a través del proyecto TCP/CUB/5612, y que derogó la precedente normativa, es decir, el Decreto-Ley de marzo de 1993 sobre el Patrimonio Forestal y la Fauna Silvestre. Asimismo, en julio de 1997, la nueva Ley del Medio Ambiente sustituyó la Ley de enero de 1981 de Protección del Medio Ambiente y del Uso Racional de los Recursos Naturales.
Para el efectivo cumplimiento de la Ley Forestal, hace falta un conjunto de disposiciones reglamentarias complementarias que el Gobierno ha preparado últimamente (el Reglamento de la Ley Forestal, el Decreto de Contravenciones a las Regulaciones Forestales y el Reglamento del Registro Forestal), que deberían ser completadas y aprobadas por las autoridades competentes durante el presente año. Para el estudio, evaluación y revisión de las mencionadas disposiciones reglamentarias, el Gobierno solicitó asistencia de la FAO, que la ha brindado a través del proyecto TCP/CUB/8925.
El Reglamento de la Ley Forestal incluye capítulos sobre el aprovechamiento de productos forestales no madereros, por ejemplo, los productos de las palmaceas.
(Fuente: Documentos de la FAO.)
Para más información, dirigirse a:
Sr. M. Paveri,
Jefe de laSubdirección de Políticas e Instituciones Forestales, Departamento de Montes de la FAO
correo electrónico: manuel.paveri@fao.orgo
al Dr. A. Mekouar, Oficial jurídico superior,
Oficina Jurídica de la FAO
correo electrónico: ali.mekouar@fao.org
EL SALVADOR
En El Salvador se identificaron 476 especies de plantas utilizadas como medicamentos de origen botánico, pertenecientes a 134 familias. Del total de especies, 345 plantas son nativas y 131 exóticas (naturalizadas, no naturalizadas e importadas), y se usan para tratar un total de 224 enfermedades. De las 40 especies más utilizadas y aceptadas por su eficacia terapéutica, al menos 21 son nativas.
En el país hay por lo menos ocho empresas que transforman productos vegetales para producir aceites esenciales o extractos para la fabricación de medicinas, a partir de materia prima cultivada. Una de ellas ha reportado la producción de 2 500 libras de extracto de bálsamo en un período de seis meses.
La Estrategia Nacional de Biodiversidad de El Salvador (1999, sin publicar) identifica 109 especies de plantas nativas, de 44 familias botánicas, que producen frutos o poseen partes que son aprovechadas como alimento. De estas, unas 19 plantas son cultivadas, mientras que el resto provienen de áreas silvestres y bosques.
El bálsamo (Myroxylon balsamum (L.) Harms) pertenece a la familia Fabaceae. Es una leguminosa arbórea, con un fuste de más de 30 metros de alto, de cuya corteza se obtiene una oleorresina que constituye una materia prima producida casi exclusivamente en El Salvador.
La oleorresina se utiliza en forma industrial para elaborar perfumes, jabones y barnices, así como para la preparación de los óleos sacramentales que usa la Iglesia Católica. También se utiliza como base para la fabricación de cremas acondicionadoras del cabello y como fijador en distintos compuestos químicos. La semilla macerada se usa en la industria farmacéutica para la producción de medicinas que sirven para la expulsión de cálculos renales, antihistéricos y astringentes, así como para la eliminación de manchas y suavizante de arrugas en el rostro. La madera tiene varios usos por sus buenas cualidades y dureza. El bálsamo se comercializa a nivel nacional e internacional.
Las semillas de varias especies del bosque se utilizan con diferentes fines. La semilla de copinol (Himenea courbaril), se utiliza en la fabricación de artesanías; la de aceituno negro (Simaruba glauca), sirve para fabricar un tipo de jabón suave, utilizado en las zonas rurales; la de nacascolo (Caesalpinia coriaria), se utiliza en la curtiembre de pieles.
Además, se fabrican artesanías y muebles de mimbre (nombre que se le da a la fibra proveniente de las raíces aéreas de varias especies de la familia Araceae: Heteropsis spp., Philodendron spp., Monstera spp.), que actualmente se importa de Guatemala y Honduras, debido a la desaparición casi total de los bosques salvadoreños y de estas plantas que crecen sobre los árboles del bosque.
Además de existir una arraigada tradición de cacería entre la población salvadoreña, la pobreza obliga a una alta proporción de la población al uso de la vida silvestre animal como complemento de proteína.
(Fuente: Robles Valle, G. R., Oliveira Barbosa, K. y Villalobos Soto, R. 1999. Evaluación de los productos forestales no madereros en América Central. FAO y Centro Agronómico Tropical de Investigación y Enseñanza (CATIE), Turrialba, Costa Rica. [en prensa].)
GHANA
In August 1999, the Ghana Ministry of Lands and Forestry (MLF), with funds from the World Bank GEF/PDF-B programme, held a Medicinal Plants Conservation, Management and Sustainable Utilization in the Northern Savanna Region of Ghana workshop at Tamale, Northern Region. It brought together 42 traditional healers from the three regions, NGOs and government representatives. The healers unanimously endorsed 18 recommendations that form the basis of a government project concept proposal to be considered under the Natural Resources Management Programme. The healers, meeting in three regional-based discussion groups, identified the 15 most commonly treated human (11) and livestock (4) diseases and the medicinal plants used in their treatment. Approximately 40 percent of the medicinal plants recorded at the workshop were classified by the healers as currently locally threatened. The healers collectively expressed their willingness to collaborate with research scientists and NGOs to
identify ways and means of identifying medicinal plants, and accessing and maintaining future supplies through cultivation and sustained harvesting practices of wild sources.
Medicinal plants are not seen as the only important resource of the savannah woodlands. However, because of their importance to health and the biodiversity of the savannahs they are seen as the linchpin whereby communities would see the benefits of investing time and energy to conserve and manage such resources more effectively. Annual burning, inappropriate farming practices, and livestock grazing pressure are community practices that threaten the northern savannah woodland zone. The Government of Ghana is committed to pursuing a participatory approach to the development of improved savannah resource management. As traditional healers are recognized as leaders within their communities they have shown firm commitment to work with their chiefs to play a more active role in the management process. In addition, the MLF will work with the Ministry of Health, and other organizations in the country to facilitate greater collaboration, especially in the provision of quality
medicinal plant raw materials used by traditional healers, birth attendants and mothers in the home for healthcare needs.
A medicinal plant database will be established at the Savannah Resources Management Centre at Tamale as part of the Savannah Management Information System (SMIS). The SMIS will provide a means to manage medicinal plants and other non-timber forest products. Database development will include activities to enhance the participation of regional Traditional Healer's Associations (THAs), traditional healers, and communities in the development of sustainable resource management practices. Depositories of data and information on flora and fauna, especially on medicinal plants in the country will be linked to the Savannah Resources Management Centre to augment the Centre's database.
(Source: John Lambert, The World Bank, Washington DC, USA.)
For more information, please contact: Mr. John Lambert, Medicinal Plant Specialist, AFTR2, The World Bank, Washington, DC, USA.
E-mail: Jlambert@worldbank.org
GUATEMALA
En Guatemala hay una gran variedad de productos forestales no madereros (PFNM) provenientes de las áreas boscosas compuestas principalmente por bosque latifoliado, muy extenso y rico de especies. Los principales productos se agrupan en las categorías de ornamentales, resinas, especias y medicinales.
El xate es el nombre común de tres especies de palma de porte pequeño (Chamadorea elegans, xate hembra; Chamadorea oblongata, xate macho; y Chamadorea erumpens, cambray), que crecen en condiciones de sombra bajo el bosque latifoliado. Sus hojas se recolectan y exportan a Estados Unidos, Holanda y Alemania, donde se utilizan en la industria ornamental para la confección de arreglos florales. La principal zona de extracción la constituyen las áreas de uso múltiple de la Reserva de la Biosfera Maya.
A pesar de la disminución en la producción, las exportaciones de xate generan un ingreso que se mantiene entre 300 000 y los 500 000 dólares EE.UU. por año. En 1997, el valor de las exportaciones alcanzó a 1 490 057 dólares.
El pinabete (Abies guatemalensis) es un árbol de porte pequeño, endémico del altiplano de Guatemala, donde se encuentran los bosques de coníferas del país. Por ser una especie endémica en peligro de extinción, está incluida en el Apéndice I de la Convención sobre el comercio internacional de especies amenazadas de fauna y flora silvestres (CITES). El pinabete se utiliza para la confección de árboles navideños, ya que tiene una fragancia mejor, se mantiene verde por un período más prolongado y la forma de su copa es más piramidal que la de otras coníferas usadas como árboles navideños, por ejemplo, el ciprés (Cupressus spp.). Las ramas del pinabete son cortadas en los bosques del altiplano y traídas a la capital (Ciudad de Guatemala), donde se confeccionan los árboles de navidad, fijando las ramas a un tallo central de madera.
El chicle que proviene del látex (savia) de los árboles de chicozapote (Manilkara zapota), que crece en el bosque latifoliado de América Tropical. En Guatemala, la especie se encuentra principalmente en el Petén, y se exporta a Estados Unidos y el Japón, donde se emplea en la industria de goma de mascar y pegamentos industriales.
Entre 1940 y 1970, la producción promedio anual de chicle superó las 1 000 toneladas por año. En la actualidad, se mantiene en alrededor de 500 toneladas; y la reducción se debe principalmente al agotamiento del recurso y a la existencia de sustitutos sintéticos. En cuanto al precio, en los últimos años se ha mantenido estable, entre 3,90 y 4,35 dólares EE.UU. por kg. Con base en este precio y en la producción promedio anual, se estima que el ingreso bruto generado por las exportaciones de chicle en Guatemala supera los 2 000 000 de dólares por año.
La pimienta gorda, también conocida como allspice, es la semilla del árbol de pimienta (Pimienta dioica), nativa de los bosques tropicales latifoliados. En Guatemala, la pimienta se recolecta en su totalidad en la región noroeste del departamento del Petén. Se estima que el potencial de producción de pimienta gorda en Guatemala está alrededor de 500 000 kg por año. En total, se estima que el mercado de la pimienta gorda genera un ingreso bruto de alrededor de 365 000 dólares por año.
Las plantas medicinales más importantes de Guatemala, por su volumen comercializado y valor económico, son la zarzaparrilla (Smilax spp.) y la calahuala (Polypodium leucotomus). También importantes, pero en menor escala, son la apacia o zorrillo (Petiveria alliacea), la yerba de toro (Tridax procumbens) y el tepescohuite (Mimosa tenuiflora).
(Fuente: Robles Valle, G. R., Oliveira Barbosa, K. y Villalobos Soto, R. 1999. Evaluación de los productos forestales no madereros en América Central. FAO y Centro Agronómico Tropical de Investigación y Enseñanza (CATIE), Turrialba, Costa Rica. [en prensa].)
GUYANA
Mangrove bark
Mangrove bark is used in the leather craft industry for leather tanning. Mangrove bark production was 35 762 kg for 1998; there was no declared production in 1997. In the fourth quarter of 1998 mangrove amounted to 21 534 kg, representing a 99 percent increase over the previous quarter. The increase of declared mangrove bark production was the result of an increased extraction of mangrove bark from state forest in response to greater demand from the leather industry. Mangrove bark is also produced outside State forests boundaries.
(Source: Forestry in Guyana, Quarterly Market Report _ 4th Quarter 1998, April 1999.)
Palm heart harvesting in Guyana's northwest district
Palm heart from Euterpe oleracea supplies a canning industry worth US$2 million annually in export value and is the most important NTFP of Guyana's northwest district. The multistemmed palm species occurs in large quantities in brackish swamps along the coast. To assess the sustainability of current palm heart extraction by the French-Guyanese company Amazon Caribbean Limited (AMCAR), a four-month pilot study was carried out. Vegetation structure, regeneration and mortality were compared between areas with high and low harvest intensity. A previously undisturbed area was taken as a control. In Euterpe populations that had been harvested for several years, stems were significantly smaller in size and diameter than in areas harvested only once or twice.
Maintaining a minimum diameter for palm heart appeared to be a powerful method to prevent extraction of immature stems, which has led to severe overharvesting in Brazil. A detailed management plan is needed to ensure the future supply of palm hearts, since sustainable harvest of this resource is of vital importance to the country's well-being. A large-scale rotation system that allows vulnerable areas to regenerate, while intensifying extraction in undisturbed palm stands, will be used by the company in the near future.
The abundance and rapid growth of Euterpe oleracea offers good opportunities for sustainable extraction. Since the potential for other land uses (commercial agriculture, mining or logging) is minimal, extraction of NTFP seems to be the most viable form of land use in the coastal northwest district of Guyana.
(Source: Extracted from the abstract of a report by T.R. van Andel, P.E. Huyskens and K.C.A. Bröker, ETFRN News, 27/99.)
For more information or to receive a copy of this report, please contact: Mr Tinde van Andel, Herbariium, Utrecht University, PO Box 80102, 3508 TC Utrecht, the Netherlands.
E-mail: tinde@xs4all.nl
Euterpe oleracea is processed, thinned and largely exported as a delicacy to markets in Europe. A very small percentage of the end products is sold on the local market. In 1998, there was a record high for manicole palm production (6 936 983 stems). In the fourth quarter of 1998, however, a 3 percent decline was noted relative to 1997 production. The decline was mainly a result of slower export markets associated with recessions in many countries and the producer, AMCAR, has had to cut back on production levels in light of market changes. Export prices for the end product remained stable at US$18.50 for 24 small cans or 12 large cans, FOB Georgetown.
(Source: Forestry in Guyana, Quarterly Market Report _ 4th Quarter 1998, April 1999.)
HONDURAS
En Honduras la resinación se practica desde los años 40 en las zonas central y oriental del país, con diferentes especies de pino (Pinus spp.) y de liquidambar (Liquidambar styraciflua). Esta actividad es muy importante para millares de familias en el contexto del sistema social forestal.
En Honduras se aprovechan cerca de 700 plantas medicinales. Pero las plantas medicinales provenientes de los bosques están amenazadas por la destrucción de su hábitat. Plantas como el hombre grande (Quassia amara) y chichimora (Fevillea cordifolia), solamente se encuentran dentro del bosque tropical y cada día son más escasas; la zarzaparrilla (Smilax spp.), ha sido explotada por más de 150 años y hoy en día es bastante escasa. Otras plantas muy utilizadas y en peligro son la escalera de mico (Bahuinia guieensis), taray (Eysenhardtia adenostylis), cuculmeca (Smilax spinosa), y sangre de drago (Machaerium cirrhiferum y M. isadelphum).
Productos como plantas, nueces, gomas comestibles, tubérculos, semillas o frutas complementan el abastecimiento de alimento y mejoran la seguridad alimentaria de la población.
Una de las tradiciones de Honduras es el trabajo artesanal con productos de bambú, coco, calabaza, caña, y el entretejido de haces de hebras vegetales con las que se forman estrellas, espirales, calados y cordones utilizados en la confección de sombreros de excelente calidad, canastos para pan, abanicos y hasta tejidos de mimbre utilizados en la confección de muebles.
Muchas especies se utilizan en la construcción de casas. Por ejemplo, las hojas de capuca (Calyptrogyne ghiesbreghtiana) y de algunas especies de Geonoma en la costa norte. El corozo (Orbingya cohune), suyate (Brahea dulcis), tique (Acoelorrhaphe wrightii) y manaca (Scheelea macrocarpa), se emplean para la construcción de techos.
Otra actividad comercial importante está relacionada con las semillas, ya que se comercializan semillas seleccionadas de varias especies de pino (Pinus caribaea, P. maximinoi y P. tecunumanii). El promedio anual recolectado de semillas de pino es de 1 800 kg, de los cuales el 55 por ciento se destina a la exportación.
En Honduras, es común comer animales silvestres como fuente de proteína animal.
(Fuente: Robles Valle, G. R., Oliveira Barbosa, K. y Villalobos Soto, R. 1999. Evaluación de los productos forestales no madereros en América Central. FAO y Centro Agronómico Tropical de Investigación y Enseñanza (CATIE), Turrialba, Costa Rica. [en prensa].)
HUNGARY
Economic importance of non-wood forest products in Hungary
Before 1990, the management of NWFPs in Hungary was carried out by specialized government companies, as in other central-eastern European countries. After political changes, the state companies were taken out of this economic area and their responsibilities were taken over by small private companies. This was the beginning of the complete liberalization of NWFP management, which opened economic markets and resulted in new dynamic privately owned companies, as well as the decentralization of decision-making in forestry management.
At present, the most important products in state-owned forestry management are charcoal, Christmas trees and ornamental foliage. However, the income from these products is as little as 1 percent of the total state forestry activities, with the remaining 99 percent coming from wood lumbering and other activities. In spite of this, state enterprises do deal with these three NWFPs.
Besides charcoal, which is the most important product in state-owned forests, medicinal plants are important. In fact, in Hungary there are currently about 400 companies interested in medicinal plant management. These companies are primarily privately owned. The revival of this industry, through increased export activity, has resulted in the creation of several jobs.
For NWFPs to continue to grow, additional emphasis needs to be placed on information network systems, the implementation of special strategies and policies, and increased cooperation between the private and public sector.
Previously, little research was conducted on NWFPs in Hungary. In a report by the University of Sopron, several new trends were examined with respect to the economics of forestry. Significant quantities of data were collected and the resulting trends were critically reviewed.
For more information, please contact: Attila Hegedus and Zoltan Szentesi, University of Sopron, Department of Forestry Policy and Forestry Economics, 5 Ady, 9400 Sopron, Hungary.
Fax: (36)/99-329-911
E-mail: hegi1999@yahoo.com or zszentes@larix.efe.hu
INDIA
Developing a model participatory management programme for conservation of biodiversity and sustainable use of non-wood forest products in Kerala
This study is the second phase of the completed project on NWFPs and its sustainable use, in the Kerala part of Western Ghats. At present a number of institutions and people, including the State Forest Department and tribals (interest groups), are involved in the management of NWFPs in Kerala. The first phase of the study indicated that decisions regarding various aspects are taken from above and thrust upon the various parties at local level. The tribal people and societies, who have to implement various management decisions at the grassroots level, have no say in NWFP management and, consequently, show little interest in protecting biodiversity. This finding necessitated the adoption of a better and alternative system of NWFP management, giving more emphasis to the transfer of power to groups at the grassroots level.
The main purpose of this project is to develop a model participatory management system for conservation of biodiversity and sustainable use of NWFPs. In addition, an attempt will be made to examine the impacts of participatory management on biodiversity, vegetation structure and dynamics and collection and marketing of NWFPs. Project work consists of two main parts: (a) to facilitate the interest groups to implement participatory management in the study area; and (b) to carry out research on biodiversity and the impact of participatory management on biodiversity and sustainable use of NWFPs. As a facilitator, it is proposed to help various interest groups to constitute resource management committees, prepare micro plans, organize training programmes, and evaluate the progress of the participatory management of NWFPs. As part of the research work, an attempt will be made to undertake a detailed resource survey with the help of gatherers of NWFPs for preparing micro plans.
Attempts will also be made to address ecological issues, such as ecologically optimal rates of use for given NWFPs, and to ascertain the economic and ecological difference in the given management practice.
Assessing the impact of participatory management on the socio-economic conditions of the gatherers, and developing planting stock for enrichment planting, are some of the other activities of the project. From the ecological and economic standpoint, one of the most essential ingredients required to achieve a sustainable level of resource use is information. The study will generate information on changes of biodiversity and sustainable use of NWFPs that have occurred as a result of the implementation of participatory management.
(Contributed by: Dr P.K. Muraleedharan, Kerala Forest Research Institute, India.)
For more information, please contact: Dr. P.K. Muraleedharan, Forest Economist, Kerala Forest Research Institute, Peechi, Trichur -680 653, Kerala, India.
Fax: +91-487-782249
Email: libkfri@md2.vsnl.net.in
Silver Jubilee of Tata Energy Research Institute
For the Tata Energy Research Institute (TERI), the new millennium brings added significance as it celebrates its Silver Jubilee in February 2000. A series of conferences will be held from 19 to 21 February 2000 in New Delhi on Global Sustainable Development in the twenty-first century: Directions for Innovation and Change. Conference themes embody local, regional and global perspectives:
· Financial resources for sustainable development
· Science and technology for sustainable development
· Corporate responsibility in the twenty-first century
· Scenarios of where we are going: India and the world
· Reforming institutions and governance structures in the twenty-first century
· Environmental security, stable social order, and culture
· What we have learnt: vision for the twenty-first century
The President of India, Shri K R Narayanan, will inaugurate the conferences. The conferences will feature deliberations by four former Prime Ministers, two Nobel laureates, chairpersons of international companies such as Royal Dutch/Shell and Unocal, and heads of UN agencies.
This series of conferences will help in developing a common global agenda for the twenty-first century that embodies the economic and social interests of people around the world, while at the same time ensuring the sustainability of natural resources and protection of the environment.
For more information, please contact: Silver Jubilee Conference Secretariat or Mr Parijat Sinha, Tata Energy Research Institute, Darbari Seth Block, Habitat Place, Lodhi Road, New Delhi 110003, India.
Fax: +91-11-462-1770/463-2609
E-mail: psinha@teri.res.in
or program@teri.res.in
www.teriin.org/25years
Museum on non-timber forest produce
The Minor Forest Produce Division in Siliguri, Darjeeling, West Bengal, has plans to open a small museum on non-timber forest produce in the Sukna District of Darjeeling, in order to increase people's awareness on the various roles and uses of NTFPs. The museum will also house a small library.
For more information, please contact: Mr P.K. Pandit, Divisional Forest Officer, Minor Forest Produce Division, Hakimpara (Near Children Part), PO Siliguri, Dist. Darjeeling 734401, West Bengal, India.
INDONESIA
Zingiberaceae medicinal plants in the teak wood forest of Java
Several kinds of medicinal plants from the Zingiberaceae family can be found in the teak wood forest of Java, especially mid-Java and on the border of east Java. These plants grow wild under the shade of teak wood trees. The villagers who live near the forest use these plants by collecting the tubers and using them as raw materials for traditional herbal medicines.
Tubers are collected when the plants are withering _ at the beginning of the dry season or at the end of May/early June. These tubers are dug, washed, sliced and dried in the sun and then sold to the Herbal Medicines Factory. Villagers do not cultivate these plants; they only collect them, something that they have been doing since 1910.
One of the few threats faced by these plants is if the teak wood trees disappear (through wild cutting by the villagers), then the plants that grow under the shade of these trees will also cease to exist. Another danger is if the villagers do not leave the side tubers (entik) behind (which can sometimes happen for economic reasons), there will be no tubers left to collect in the coming years.
For these reasons, Perum Perhutani (the Indonesian State-owned Forest Enterprise) has tried to protect the existence of these plants by educating the villagers around the forest and by cultivating these plants under the shade of the teak wood trees.
Below is a list of some of the plants that are used in traditional herbal medicines:
1. Kunir Curcuma domestica Val. Turmeric
2. Temulawak Hitam Curcuma xanthorrhixa Roxb. Javanisch curcuma
3. Temu Hitam Curcuma aeruginosa Roxb. Black turmeric
4. Temu Giring Curcuma heyneana Val. & V.Zyp a native turmeric in Java
5. Bengle Zingiber purpureum Roxb. a native ginger in Java
6. Lempuyang Zingiber aromatic Val. a native ginger in Java
7. Kunci Boesenbergia pandaruta Val. a native kencur in Java
Contributed by: A.S. Purwono and B. Maruto, PT. Air Mancur, Solo, Indonesia.
E-mail: researchdev@airmancur.co.id or dwi-putr@indo.net.id
www.airmancur.co.id/
ITALY
In Europe today «multifunctionality» is the key concept in any sustainable practice applied to mountain forest resources. Easy to say and hard to implement, this concept is gaining importance within other practices, namely agriculture. Multifunctionality means balancing all values. Another commonly used expression is "patrimonial value", which in a way stresses the heritage character of forests and has a look at the historical and cultural roots of the past.
The following two examples from Italy provide useful examples.
NWFPs from Val di Taro, Parma
The local communities of Val di Taro have a long tradition in the collection of mushrooms (mainly Boletus sp., flap mushrooms, but also many others) and other edible fruits from their mountain forests that have a limited commercial value for wood.
Formerly, collection was carried out by families for their own use or for sale in markets as far away as Genova, on a free-right legal basis within the communities of the valley. Methods of drying the products have been developed and mushrooms have created opportunities for celebrations and solidarity amongst the people of different villages.
In the 1980s, the mayor of the main village proposed to give official recognition to the boletus from the Val di Taro and obtained a national label for the dry mushrooms, which have a commercial value of ten times that of fresh products. An important added value pushed families to organize the collection, preparation and trade, on a small enterprise basis. This trade, under an internationally recognized label, reaches New York, Edinburgh and Paris with companies and restaurants giving good employment opportunities to people from the valley. The average revenue per family, in the local collection and transformation, is estimated to be US$2 000/year. Celebrations and solidarity exist on a global scale and the members of the Associations of the Inhabitants of Val di Taro worldwide meet regularly.
(Contact: Mr Pier Luigi Ferrari, Federforeste, Via Cesare Battisti, I-43043 Borgotaro (Parma), Italy
Fax: +39-0525-90 507 or +39-0525-96-218.)
Non-wood forest products from `Il bosco di Orgia', Siena
In the area of the "Montagnola senese", forests have been for centuries sources of food, small trade and spiritual values in the shade of an agricultural métayage system (a system by which farmers pay rent in kind). This system is known as an agricultural-based land use, but a joint initiative between a local community and the Anthropology Chair of the University of Siena showed that the main identity and livelihood source has always been the forest. Forest products, tangible and non-tangible ones, contributed largely to the identity of local people under an apparent agricultural system, which only provided products and inputs to large landowners and to outside economic actors. The system was actually a forest socio-economic fabric in which biodiversity, solidarity, sacred and symbolic forces and cultural values were interacting.
A small local laboratory-museum was set up ten years ago, and the many oral testimonies available give evidence of a forest community. Schools, families, researchers are all participating to the success of the initiative which each year brings a significant number of visitors and helps the sustainability of local activities.
The proceedings of a IUFRO Workshop on Forest History, held in Florence in 1998, contain information about this initiative.
(Contact: Mr M. Agnoletti, University of Florence, Faculty of Forestry, Via San Bonaventura, Quaracchi, 50100 Florence, Italy.)
Conclusion
In some of the available examples of multifunctional local forest systems in mountain areas (many of them have unfortunately disappeared), there is no evidence of major conflicts within the communities in balancing economic and other values.
Recently, the head of forest and rural development at the European Commission declared that "during centuries forests and local communities have been living in a symbiosis". We are living today the inevitable crisis of a lost symbiosis with the forests.
(Source: Mountain Forum e-mail conference mtn-forum@mtnforum.org )
For more information, please contact: Pier Carlo Zingari, Observatoire Européen de la Forêt de Montagne - OEFM, European Observatory of Mountain Forest - EOMF, Les Thermes, F 73230 Saint-Jean d'Arvey, France.
Fax ++33.4-79-28-40-58
KENYA
Black wattle (Acacia mearnsii) was introduced into the Kenyan farming system long before contemporary notions of social forestry were in vogue. During the period from 1915 to 1919, 4 000 ha of plantations were established on «European» farms and later also on African ones, after encouragement from the government aiming to reduce the pressure on indigenous trees. Partly as an impact of planting campaigns, the total area under wattle increased. In a single year (1935) the area nearly doubled from the previous year, from 18 000 to 40 000 ha. The reason why planting of wattle was widely adopted by farmers, after initial resistance, was first and foremost its income-generating potential (linked to the bark trade), and the fact that African farmers were excluded from most other opportunities for growing cash crops.
High in tannins, the bark of black wattle was used in the tanning extract industry from 1915, although the capacity to process the bark in the development of the industry was scarce. The most part was exported, but as tanning extract factories were opened in the early 1930s and an increased access to bark markets took place, the popularity of the bark as a smallholder crop increased.
Wattle planting had also implications for land tenure. Within the context of a precarious land tenure situation, and emerging wage labour markets, planting wattle represented a means for African farmers to retain customary land-use rights asserted through cultivation of wattle, and consequently extensive areas of high potential agricultural land were planted with wattle. Until land reform and independence in the early 1960s, wattle was the only cash crop which Africans were encouraged to cultivate. Following the land reform, and as new land-use opportunities became possible after independence, many wattle areas were cleared and more lucrative cash crops, such as coffee and tea, were planted. Rather than disappearing altogether, markets for products from wattle became more diverse, including charcoal and building timber.
The exploitation of these markets involved different tree management approaches. Strategies for bark production and for charcoal differ widely. Best tannins are processed from trees that are at least seven years old, whereas charcoal can be produced from relatively small (younger) trees. While the production of high quality wattle bark depends on a relatively low density of older trees in a woodlot, returns to charcoal production can be maximized by the management of very dense stands of trees on a short rotation. Since bark prices fell (by 50 percent between 1955 and 1962) and prices for charcoal increased, farmers tended to shorten their rotation and this resulted in a reduction of bark production.
In the 1990s, wattle was planted on some woodlots and covered around 6 000 ha of good quality farmland in Murangà, compared with 10 000 ha under tea and 40 000 ha under coffee. By 1990, a hectare of mature wattle when harvested after eight years, could produce around KSh 3 870 for its bark and KSh 28 810 for charcoal sold on the roadside (a total of around US$1 100 at prevailing 1990 exchange rates).
At present, wattle is extensively managed with few labour or capital inputs and is regarded as a productive way of maintaining land fallow until other cropping possibilities and sources of capital and labour would encourage households to alter their land-use practices.
(Extracted and edited from Dewees, Peter A. and Saxena, N.C. Black wattle woodlots in Kenya. In J.E. Michael Arnold & Peter Dewees (ed.). Farms, trees and farmers, 1997.)
New NTFP forest users association started in Kenya
The Kenya Association of Forest Users (KAFU) is a newly founded association, whose mission is to unlock trade opportunities for NTFPs, conservation and organic products. KAFU aims at putting in place a Kenyan movement for certification and marketing of these products. One of KAFU's main objectives is to facilitate linkages among relevant local, national and international institutions and systems dealing with production, certification and marketing of NTFPs, conservation and organic products. KAFU is currently focusing on certification of NTFPs, an area which so far has been little addressed in the country.
For more information, please contact: Ms Lucy Kirimi, Programme Officer, Kenya Association of Forest Users (KAFU), c/o Forest Action Network, PO Box 21428, Nairobi, Kenya.
Fax: +254-2-714406
E-mail: lkirimi@fanworld.org
LAO PDR
NTFP Project - Supporting the sustainable use of non-timber forest products
In Lao People's Democratic Republic, the most important use of NTFPs is for subsistence. Ninety percent of the Lao population live in rural areas and rely heavily on forest products for food, shelter and as a source of income. Local people consider edible bamboo shoots, fish, vegetables and wildlife as the most important products derived from forests. NTFPs also contribute to the national economy through export.
The NTFP Project aims to identify the present use of NTFPs in Lao People's Democratic Republic and to promote the sustainable use of NTFPs for rural development and forest conservation. Executed by IUCN and the Department of Forestry of Lao People's Democratic Republic, with support from the Netherlands, the project started in 1995 and will run through 2000. It is an integrated conservation and development project (ICDP).
Within the framework of the project, a discussion paper entitled «Guiding the development of the NTFP subsector in Lao People's Democratic Republic: towards a long-term strategy» was prepared. The paper provides a brief description of the nature of the NTFP subsector in the country. This is followed by a review of the key issues involved in guiding and supporting the subsector. The Government's current NTFP programmes are reviewed and assessed against the key issues.
(Source: Ingles, A.W, Foppes, J. & Ketphanh S. 1998. Guiding the development of the NTFP subsector in Lao People's Democratic Republic: towards a long-term strategy. Project discussion paper 1/98.)
For more information, please contact: NTFP Project (DoF/IUCN), PO Box 4340, Vientiane, Lao People's Democratic Republic.
Fax: +856 21 222861
Rattans in Lao People's Democratic Republic
Rattans in Lao People's Democratic Republic are utilized, as elsewhere in the region, for furniture and local handicrafts but, uniquely in Lao People's Democratic Republic and neighbouring northeast Thailand, they are also cultivated for their edible shoots. Little is known about Lao rattans; only three species were recorded in old colonial floras but at least 30 were collected recently by the Lao Forest Department. Sorting out their taxonomy is important so that rattan technology can be correctly applied in Lao People's Democratic Republic.
In a Darwin Initiative project, Tom Evans is researching Lao rattans under the supervision of Drs John Dransfield and Nick Brown of Oxford Forestry Institute, in order to provide a firm basis for sustainable development. Three officers of the Forest Research Centre in Vientiane are also studying rattan taxonomy at Kew (UK) so as to name the recently collected rattans.
For more information, please contact: Mr John Dransfield, Herbarium, Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 3AE, UK.
Fax: + 44 181 332 5278
MALAYSIA
Development of medicinal plant industries in Malaysia
Speaking at the opening of the seminar on medicinal plants organized by the Forest Research Institute of Malaysia (FRIM) on 22-23 June 1999, the Secretary General of the Ministry of Primary Industries said that the Government was formulating an action plan that would establish Malaysia in the world as an important producer of herbal products by optimizing the utilization of herbal plant resources in the country.
Research and development must focus on plants that have specific biological potential. To meet the raw material requirements of local herbal industries, domestication and cultivation of medicinal plants of economic value on a plantation scale is needed. He stressed the need for local herbal products industries to comply with the good manufacturing practice criteria set by the government, so as to ensure product quality. Currently, some 100 companies engaged in traditional medicine have achieved this. In addition to the issues of continuous and sustainable raw material supply and product quality, the representative of the Ministry underlined the importance of addressing issues such as intellectual property rights and ownership of herbal plants.
FRIM's research on medicinal plants is focusing on species with a high potential for manufacturing products with a commercial value. FRIM is approaching this research in an integrated way, drawing on various disciplines, including ethnobotany, agronomy, genetics, phytochemistry, pharmacology, processing, quality control and marketing.
In June 1999, Malaysia's First Herbal Monograph was published. The monograph was prepared by a committee comprising representatives from the Health Ministry, research institutions, universities and the industries.
(Source: Malaysian Timber Bulletin, Vol. 5 No. 4/1999.)
For more information, please contact: Forest Research Institute Malaysia (FRIM), 52109 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Fax: +603 6365687/6367753
E-mail: mas@frim.gov.my
www.frim.gov.my
(Please see under Events for more information.)
MALI
La Société Malienne de Phytothérapie (SMP), la section malienne de la Société Africaine de Phytothérapie, crée en 1998, a pour objectifs principaux:
· d'aider à promouvoir ed développer l'utilisation rationnelle des plantes médicinales et des produits qui en sont dérivés;
· d'aider à protéger l'environnement par une exploitation rationnelle des plantes médicinales et des écosystèmes qui les portent;
· de contribuer au maintien de la diversité phytogénétique par la protection et la conservation des populations d'espèces de plantes médicinales;
· d'encourager et de promouvoir au Mali et en Afrique les échanges d'expériences ainsi que la formation en matière de phytothérapie;
· de donner, en cas de besoin et sur demande, des conseils à toute autorité, association ou société agissant dans le même but et ce, au niveau africain et international; et
· de contribuer à la collaboration entre médecine moderne et médecine traditionnelle.
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: Prof. Mamadou Koumare, Président, Société Malienne de Phytothérapie, Hippodrome, rue 237, porte 137. BP E 1950, Bamako, Mali.
Fax: +223-21-77-47
MOZAMBIQUE
A wide range of NTFPs are produced and marketed by rural communities in Mozambique. These include: (i) fuelwood and charcoal; (ii) medicinal products; (iii) bamboo; (iv) grass and reed mats; (v) veldt foods such as wild fruit, roots and tubers; (v) non-timber construction material; and (vi) "little wood" products and handicrafts.
The Direccáo nacional de florestas e fauna bravia (DNFFB)/FAO project GCP/MOZ/056/NET "Support for Community Forestry and Wildlife Management" was launched in 1997 to implement the component of the Agriculture Development Programme (PROAGRI) related to Community Based Natural Resources Management. The project development objectives are: (i) to improve the standard of living of rural communities through increased access to forest and wildlife products for household needs and marketing, as well as generation of income from employment, small industries and hunting fees; and (ii) to ensure that the resource base of forests, wildlife and agriculture is managed and utilized in a rational way by local communities.
The project is operating in three main pilot areas: Goba (Maputo Province), Sanhóte and Niviria (Nampula Province).
In the project area, in years of favourable climatic conditions, households manage to draw from their agricultural land enough products to satisfy their annual food requirements and sometimes a surplus that is sold to satisfy other primary necessities. However, in years of limited rainfall, households lack food for about four to five months/year. During this period of food shortage, the families of these three communities principally resort to charcoal and firewood production activities in order to obtain the necessary cash to buy food. The continuous exploitation of the forest for these purposes is leading to the rapid degradation of the natural resource base with serious consequences for the environment and the welfare of the community inhabitants.
Project GCP/MOZ/056/NET has launched various initiatives in an effort to counteract this negative development trend. Examples of this effort include: the creation of apiculture, horticulture, carpentry and clothes-maker groups; the formation of forest "supervisors" to monitor the exploitation of trees growing on community land; and the organization of courses on sustainable timber extraction, control of forest fires, and more efficient charcoal-burning techniques.
The study on NTFP of Goba, Sanhóte and Niviria, which aims to identify NTFPs that can be produced and marketed for the benefit of these communities, represents an additional input in this process of encouraging community members to start income-generating activities that do not impact negatively on the natural resource base.
The specific objectives of the study include:
1. Identify the NWFPs existing in the areas of Goba, Sanhote and Niviria.
2. Identify those NWFPs that are already traded by community members; detail the current use, harvesting and processing techniques, as well as trading aspects of these products, with a view to improving their production process and identifying alternative markets where they can be sold.
3. Select new NWFPs that are currently not traded by communities, but have potential to be marketed for the benefit of the communities.
4. Give recommendations on how to promote the commercialization of selected products.
The methodology is structured in three phases:
a.) The first phase (linked to objectives 1 and 2) is an exploratory phase that aims to identify existing NTFPs in community areas, with a special focus on NTFPs already involved in some form of trade. The two main activities of this phase include: (i) interviews of NTFP producers; and (ii) qualitative assessment (high, moderate, low) of the availability of NTFP species in community areas.
b.) The second phase (linked to objective 3) concentrates on gathering detailed information on market, technological, social/institutional and ecological aspects of products identified in the first phase, in order to choose a selected number of NTFPs that have potential to be marketed at the local, national or international level. The main activities of this stage include: (i) market research for community products at the community, district, provincial national and international level; and (ii) integration of local knowledge on use of NTFP with information obtained through literature review and contacts with related organizations (e.g. "Impacto", IUCN, "Miombo Forum", "Aid to Artisans") and private companies (e.g. Medimoc, Casa Ada).
c.) The third phase (linked to objective 4) involves designing a strategy for the promotion and commercialization of products selected in the second phase.
Where appropriate, the study follows the guidelines contained in the Market Analysis and Development (MA&D) Manual on Planning Sustainable Tree and Forest Product Enterprises developed by the Community Forestry Group of the Forestry Department of FAO, Rome. A number of the methods included in the manual (with related activities, suggestions and checklists) have been adopted to guide the study on NTFPs of the pilot areas of the DNFFB/FAO project.
The commercialization strategy gives indications for advertising, for the setting up of "sales points" and identifies likely consumers. Details of a brochure describing community NTFPs are given, to be distributed at key points in Maputo and Nampula. Information on radio advertising with costs is set out and suggestions for informative labelling of products, and free sampling at appropriate times, is also provided.
The importance of pinpointing likely consumers, and also the places where community products can be purchased, is emphasized. The setting up of "sales points" in the cities for marketing a collection of these products is made, and the necessity of further investigation of their outlets, such as shops, supermarkets and fairs, is underlined.
(Source: NTFPs, a source of alternative income generation for forest based communities. Report prepared by A. Baldascini, for project GCP/MOZ/056/NET «Support to community forestry and wildlife management», November 1999.)
For more information, please contact: Mr E. Mansur, CTA, FAO GCP/MOZ/056/NET, P.O. Box 1928, Maputo, Mozambique.
Fax: +258-1-460060
E-mail: emansur@dnffb.imoz.com
NEPAL
An assessment of the current problems and opportunities in the management of natural resources in Nepal
Users of NTFPs have potential at the local level to form a foundation for potential income- generating activities contributing to the goal of community development. This potential is largely underdeveloped to date. The major obstacles are the lack of market information and linkages between collectors, processors and buyers, which has resulted in a heavily biased market. Consequently, the Nepal Agroforestry Foundation (NAF) is assisting in the establishment of a cooperative, linking various forest user groups (FUGs), for the development of marketing, collecting and processing skills for NTFPs. Members of the FUG network will be trained in the necessary technical and organizational skills that may help to address the current problems and encourage the further development of NTFPs. The District Forest Office and NAF staff have jointly facilitated the revision of operational plans for each FUG in such a way that each FUG is also legally represented within the network. The
establishment and strengthening of this local network will contribute towards sustainable forest management.
The empowerment of women through group formation and initiatives in agroforestry development is one of the more tangible benefits evident from the various foreign-funded programmes in natural resource management within the hill forests of Nepal. However, there is a risk that male members of target communities may become increasingly excluded from future development initiatives as the natural resource sector becomes perceived as a women's issue. While the emphasis on women's empowerment is certainly appropriate and, indeed, effective in the present context, measures should be taken to include men in the development process, especially those who show a constructive interest in natural resource management. In addition, the training of women in resource management and income-generating skills has not affected the balance of other household duties. The additional duties of nursery management, attending training and group meetings, etc. will increase women's workload in the short
term. There is, therefore, a need to include men in future women's empowerment initiatives in such a way that the issue of work distribution is addressed in a holistic way.
(Source: Mountain Forum e-mail conference (mtn-forum@mtnforum.org).)
For more information, please contact: B.N. Regmi (Director), Ben Vickers (Project Advisor)
Nepal Agroforestry Foundation, PO Box 9594, Kathmandu, Nepal.
E-mail: naf@vishnu.ccsl.com.np
NICARAGUA
Los productos forestales no madereros (PFNM) que se extraen actualmente en Nicaragua provienen en su gran mayoría del bosque latifoliado, principalmente del área del río San Juan, de la región oriental (litoral del Atlántico), y de la región centro-norte. Estos productos se agrupan en dos grandes categorías: artesanías elaboradas a base de diversas fibras y plantas medicinales. A diferencia de Guatemala, en Nicaragua no se extraen plantas ornamentales ni resinas o látex para la exportación.
Actualmente el mercado de PFNM se limita al consumo interno. Los únicos productos exportados son ciertos tipos de artesanías y muebles de mimbre, pero a muy baja escala y hacia pocos destinos.
Precios y volúmenes comercializados de ocho de las principales plantas medicinales de Nicaragua
Nombre común
Nombre científico
Volumen (kg/año)
Precio ($EE.UU./kg)
Valor total ($EE.UU./año)
Cuculmeca
Smilax sp.
Guapinol
Hymenaea courbaril
Jinocuabo
Bursera simaruba
Bálsamo
Myroxylon balsamum
Cola de caballo
Equisetum arvense
Hombre grande
Quassia amara
Zorrillo
Petiveria alliacea
Total
En general la población de Nicaragua consume plantas comestibles, muchas de las cuales provienen de actividades extractivas en los bosques, como la pacaya (Chamaedorea spp.) de la cual se come el palmito, y el pejibaye (Bactris gasipaes) del cual se come el fruto. Existe la iniciativa de sembrar pejibaye en forma comercial para vender en el mercado local y para la exportación.
El fruto del icaco (Chrysophyllum icaco), un arbusto que crece en el litoral del Atlántico y en menor grado en el del Pacífico, ya que requiere de condiciones salinas para crecer, también es muy apetecido por los nicaragüenses. Se vende en supermercados y restaurantes como postre en forma de conserva.
(Fuente: Robles Valle, G. R., Oliveira Barbosa, K. y Villalobos Soto, R. 1999. Evaluación de los productos forestales no madereros en América Central. FAO y Centro Agronómico Tropical de Investigación y Enseñanza (CATIE), Turrialba, Costa Rica. [en prensa].)
PHILIPPINES
In the Philippines, 18 million forest-dwelling people depend on NWFPs for their livelihood. In 1989, when logging was banned in the country, emphasis was put on management of the forests by these people and especially on NWFPs and their potential regarding subsistence use and commercialization.
The International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) project "Utilization, Collection and Trade of Tropical Non-Wood Forest Products in the Philippines" carried out by the Forest Products Research and Development Institute of the Philippines (FPRDI), aims to promote and develop NWFPs by improving information availability. Four field sites in the following regions are involved: Aurora province, Western Samar, Surigao, and Palawan.
In the Puntabaha community in the Palawan region, information on NWFPs comes from the native people, with assistance from FPRDI, as well as from the local association of indigenous people NATRIPAL. Resin from the Almaciga tree (Agathis philippinensis) is one of the most important products and primarily, in order to enable its extraction, 15 000 ha of former forest concessions were granted to the community. When harvesting takes place between January and April, as many as 75 percent of the community are involved. The tapping cycle is nine weeks and each collector is responsible for 30 trees. The sacks of resin (45 kg/each) are sold to local exporters in Manila or Cebu at a price of 10 pesos/kg, of which the community receives 5 pesos (US$0.12). The resin is exported abroad where, in most cases, it is processed into paints and varnishes.
Rattan is another important NWFP and there are seven different species such as kalapi (Calamus ornatus Blume var. philippensis) palasan (Calamus merrillii) and Tamberangan (Calamus sp.). Bundles of rattan are transported and sold at a price of 25 pesos, of which the community receives half.
Bamboo is used by the women to make "sawali" mats, which are either used domestically (25 percent) for walls, doors and flooring, or sold in the markets (75 percent). A sawali mat of standard size (8 x 2.5m) is sold for 300 pesos (US$7.50). Another product used locally is the leaf of the forest palm Anibong (Caryota cumingii). These leaves are utilized for roofing, flooring, housing posts as well as for tool handles.
Honey is equally important economically. The best honey comes from the pukyutan bees (Apis cinerea and A. mellifera) that build their hives in maggis trees (Koompassia excelsa). The hives are lowered at night and up to four different nests can be found on the same tree. One nest yields around four litres of honey and 20 litres are sold for around 250 pesos (US$6.25).
(Source: Prebble, C., Ella, A., & Subansenee, W. ITTO: Making the most of NWFP. Tropical Forest Update, Vol. 9, No. 1, 1999.)
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Local forest use in Siberia and the Russian far east
People living in the taiga of Siberia and the far east of Russia have a long tradition of using their rich natural resources in a non-destructive manner. For centuries they have collected various NTFPs for domestic consumption or trade. However, for most, the situation has changed dramatically during the last decade. While collecting for home consumption has persisted or even increased in times of crisis, selling produce locally has become substantially more difficult.
These difficulties coincided with the collapse of the NTFP trade structure during the Soviet era. This development led to hardships in many remote villages. Simultaneously, forests that until recently were unspoilt became threatened by large-scale logging operations, often involving foreign investment.
Over the years it became clear that action had to be taken. Strategies that aim at combining forest conservation with the enhancement of the well-being of local communities are currently either under discussion or being implemented in several regions. These strategies, while focusing on a broad range of NTFPs, revert to old practices while incorporating these practices into newly established structures. The structures work at combining local expertise in relation to the extraction of NTFPs, with finding markets, product development and state of the art processing.
One of the more mature initiatives in this field is the Far Eastern Association for the Use of NTFPs, which operates in both Primorsky and Khabarovsk krai, and particularly in the Ussuri taiga along the Sikhote-Alin mountain range, an area extremely rich in terms of biodiversity. The primary aims of the Association are to ensure sustainable development in the region. It supports the economies of remote forest villages through the promotion of sustainable NTFP extraction and trade. Among the Association's partners are several indigenous communities, whose lives totally revolve around hunting, fishing and NTFP extraction. Major products of the region include: mushrooms, ferns, pine nuts, birch juice, Siberian ginseng and berries, among which limonik (Schizandra chinensis). Various leaves are collected as ingredients for health teas and a high quality honey is produced.
(Source: Jenne de Beer in Taiga-news, Issue 28, August 1999.)
SENEGAL
Une étude réalisée en 1999 pour la FAO par l'Université Cheikh A. Diop de Dakar a étudié l'importance des produits forestiers non ligneux dans la sécurité alimentaire au Sénégal.
Pour les communautés rurales la forêt constitue une source où cueillir ou ramasser les feuilles, fruits, écorces, racines et gommes en vue des multiples usages domestiques mais aussi et surtout pour s'assurer de revenus liés à la vente de ces produits. Ces produits de la forêts sont disponibles, à tout moment de l'année ou bien suivant les saisons et en particulier pendant les périodes de soudure, les populations en tirent une part assez importante de leur subsistance. Mais en de nombreuses zones du Sénégal, les peuplements naturels forestiers sont en constante dégradation et les produits qui assuraient aux populations une sécurité alimentaire ont pratiquement disparu. Les espèces comestibles les plus largement utilisées et les plus demandées par les populations sont de plus en plus rares. Il est donc important de recenser tous les produits issus de la forêt, d'en dégager l'importance aussi bien économique qu'au niveau de l'équilibre alimentaire, de voir les zones
essentielles de production, de commercialisation et de consommation.
L'étude décrit les principales espèces ligneuses nourricières au Sénégal (leur contribution à l'alimentation, valeur nutritive, prix, quantités), les ecorces, racines, feuilles et autres couramment utilisées dans la pharmacopée, l'organisation de la gestion des PFNL (les différentes catégories de personnes impliquées dans la collecte, les circuits de commercialisation des produits).
(Source: document de travail préparé par Mme Dr Yaye Ken Gassama, Maître de Conférence à l'Université Cheikh A. Diop de Dakar, pour le Bureau Régional de la FAO pour l'Afrique.)
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: M. Pape Koné, Forestier Principal, Bureau régional pour l'Afrique (RAF), PO Box 1628, Accra, Ghana.
Fax : +233-21-668427
E-Mail : Pape.Kone@fao.org
TANZANIA
A case study of the East Usambara protected natural forests
Forest-adjacent communities in East Usambara depend on protected forests as sources of NTFP and this dependence gives a chance for collaborative management strategies that will improve forest management in the area.
The Government of Tanzania is intensifying efforts to conserve the biodiversity-rich and ecologically sensitive forests of the East Usambara, in the Muheza district of the Tanga region in the northeast of the country. The strategy applied by the Government involves control by the use of regulatory policy instruments. However, this strategy does not adequately recognize the use of NTFPs by the forest-adjacent local communities and their dependence on the protected forests as the major sources of NTFPs. Also, given the country's economic problems, such an approach to forest management can prove difficult to sustain in the long term, and may just end up favouring conflicts between the local users and the formal forest managers.
This problem has recently been research and involved collecting socio-economic and biophysical data on the gathering and use of NTFPs within four villages surrounding a block of three protected forests in East Usambara. The purpose of the research was to assess the use of NTFPs from the protected forests by the local people living around these forests and to assess their dependence on the forests as sources of NTFPs. These findings were used to see if the use of NTFPs and dependence on protected forests could play any role in improving forest management in the area.
A participatory data collection approach mainly using RRA techniques, such as semi-structured interviews, was applied to elicit information especially on socio-economic aspects.
GIS was used to process the spatial data into maps showing utilization points.
This study found that, despite government efforts to strengthen protection and conservation of natural forests in the East Usambara through regulatory policy instruments, local people still enter the forests illegally and use them in search of NTFPs for their livelihoods and for cultural services. Local people identified 378 species/types of NTFPs, more than 54 percent of which were obtained from the protected forests. The NTFPs mentioned were classified in seven categories according to purpose: medicines, foods, construction materials, fuelwood, water, seasonal indicators, and worshipping sites. Variations in village dependence resulted from availability of sources and resources, and factors such as income, which can enable people to afford alternative resources.
The positive attitudes of the local people towards the protected forests as sources of NTFP indicate the importance of the forests to them. The study found a high level of conflict between local people and forest guards.
The use of CIFOR criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management to evaluate the situation in the study area showed that the key policy instruments used for the management of the forests at the ground level were weak in addressing socio-economic issues, specifically users of the NTFPs.
The study recommended a revision of the forest policy, especially Part V, Section 15, which gives directives on protection of forests and forest products. A collaborative management approach that involves the local people in the planning, implementation, control and monitoring activities of forests that are adjacent to them, was advised.
Further studies are recommended on the assessment of the forests' capacity to supply various NTFPs at a sustained level and the need to set NTFP extraction levels. Similar studies are also recommended in the study area in the future to monitor whether the established utilization levels within the studied villages and forests are stable or dynamic.
(Source: Abstract of M.Sc. research: «Dependence of local communities on protected forests as sources of non-timber forest products and its role in forest management» contributed by: M.I.L Katigula, Tanzania.)
For more information, please contact: Mr M.I.L Katigula, Forestry office, P.O Box 1449, Tanga, Tanzania.
Fax: +255 53 43820
E-mail: usambara@twiga.com
Prioritization of medicinal trees for domestication in Shinyanga
In the United Republic of Tanzania, trees are still the main source of medicines for traditional healers and 80 percent of rural people. Despite immense progress in modern medicine with clinics in rural areas, traditional medicine continues to flourish in the Shinyanga region of Tanzania. The traditional healer is still the medical practitioner within the reach of most people in the region. Unfortunately, local health traditions are being lost because they are communicated orally and are largely undocumented. The trees that are the main source of medicines are still considered solely as products of the wild. Deforestation and the booming local trade in traditional herbs are diminishing their supplies in the wild.
The International Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF) Tanzania station initiated a research programme in 1997 to document the wealth of knowledge on medicinal trees and to evaluate ways of integrating them into existing farming systems. As an initial step, ethnobotanical surveys were conducted to document indigenous knowledge on medicinal trees and to prioritize the tree species. The study also assessed the availability of these trees in the region.
Over 300 tree species were registered as medicinal plants. Analysis of the respondent preferences revealed the following ten priority species: Securidaca longipedunculata, Zanha africana, Cassia abbreviata, Entada abyssinica, Turraea fischeri, Albizia anthelmintica, Entandrophragma bussei, Combretum zeyheri, Zanthoxylum chalybeum, and Terminalia sericea. More than 100 human diseases, including AIDS, were reported to be treated effectively with the registered medicinal trees. These trees also have numerous other non-wood products and services.
Local people have shared their knowledge and experience in the hope that scientists and other partners will provide the resources and skills to assist them to grow and produce quality medicinal products from these trees. There is an urgent need to get the priority medicinal trees on to farms because the option to harvest them from the wild is diminishing daily. The direct participation of traditional healers and farmers is a vital prescription for successful domestication of these trees.
(Contributed by: Mr Bruno B. Dery, ICRAF, Tanzania.)
For more information, please contact Mr. Bruno B. Dery, Tree Domestication Unit, ICRAF-Tanzania, P. O. 797, Shinyanga, Tanzania.
Fax: +255-68-763164
Email: icraf.tz@intafrica.com
TCHAD
Les gommeraies constituent l'une des principales ressources naturelles du Tchad. La gomme arabique est la troisième source de devise du pays après le coton et les produits d'élevage. Cependant, les sécheresses successives de ces dernières années ont sérieusement affecté la survie des peuplements gommiers. les saignées abusives, les émondages et abattages répétés pour la récolte de la gomme arabique, le fourrage aérien et le bois de chauffe contribuent également à la dégradation des gommeraies. Or, les acacias gommiers, du fait de leurs faibles exigences écologiques et de leur multiples usages, présentent des atouts non négligeables pour les populations rurales et l'environnement des zones sahéliennes.
(Source: extrait de Rahma Saleh, A.H. & N'Zala, D. 1999. Stratégies pour une gestion durable des ressources gommières au Tchad. Le Flamboyant, 51:8-10.)
Pour plus d'information, contacter les auteurs: Abdul-Hamid Rahma Saleh, BP 242 Ndjamena, Tchad, et Donatien N'Zala, Université Marien Ngouabi, Institut de Développement Rural, BP 13647 Brazzaville, Congo.
THAILAND
The International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) "Promotion of Tropical Non-Wood Forest Products in Thailand" pre-project focus is on the use of these products by local communities. The work carried out by the Royal Forest Department of Thailand involves four field sites: Chiang Mai, Surathani, Srisaket and Kanchanaburi, all with different forest types.
The main objective is to draw up unified plans for each region as well as for the country concerning sustainable forest management implementation, based upon the sustainable economic management of NWFPs. In order to identify potential processing pathways and novel marketing opportunities, information regarding current NWFP utilization practices are gathered through interviews with community members.
In 1996, the total export value of NWFPs amounted to around 653 million Bath (US$18 million), which indicates a downward trend compared to 837 million Bath (US$23 million) in 1994. The NWFPs included are bamboo, rattan, gums and resins, medicinal plants, spices, industrial insects, agarwood, etc. The long-term sustainability of some of the NWFPs is under threat because of overexploitation, lack of proper management and illegal activities. Supply shortages also result from the conversion of forest areas to protected areas that restrict harvesting.
Bamboo and rattan, used for construction, building, furniture, weaving, handicrafts and for sustenance, are important NWFPs in all four field sites. Some species of bamboo as well as of rattan are under depletion. Rattan (Calamus caesius) even has to be imported to meet the industrial demand. On the other hand, some bamboo species are not yet promoted, such as Thyrostychus siamensis, Bambusa blumeana and Cephalostrachys pergracile. In the north edible rattan has a potential to be managed if promoted since it can be harvested for this purpose after one and a half years; after five or six years the rattan can be used for basket-making. There are even plans to develop edible rattan as an agricultural crop and the establishment of a small-scale enterprise for canning rattan shoots, which could also be used to preserve bamboo shoots, neem flowers (Azadirachta indica) and mushrooms.
Agarwood (Aquilaria sp.), an expensive aromatic wood valued for its oil, and raintrees (Samania saman), used in lac production, are other threatened NWFP resources. Agarwood trees grow alongside lac trees, especially in the Maemae forest area.
The fruit of the Sugar palm (Arenga pimata) are worth 1 000 Baht/each (US$28), but since the fruiting occurs only twice in the palm's lifetime, the palms are usually subsequently cut down. The communities are encouraged to keep the seeds of the fruit to allow future cultivation. The fruit also have potential for canning in syrup.
In the Samakae community in western Thailand, NWFPs such as edible leaves (Melientha suavis) and medicinal plants are also of great importance. Melientha suavis is profitable and thus has high priority. Sweet sedge, honey and dipterocarp leaves and spices are other products deriving from the forest. Cardamom trees (Eletteria cardamomum), productive after three years and with the possibility to be harvested for a further five years, provide a spice for which there is a high demand and which is sold at 200 Baht/kg (US$55).
(Source: Prebble, C., Ella, A., & Subansenee, W. ITTO: Making the most of NWFPs. Tropical Forest Update, Vol. 9, No. 1, 1999.)
VIET NAM
The Non-Timber Forest Products Research Centre (NTFPRC) is a unit under the Forestry Science Institute of Viet Nam. The Centre:
· conducts research on various subjects relating to techniques of cultivation, agroforestry, harvesting and processing of NTFPs, as well as marketing and policy, with the aim to promote their production and sustainable utilization;
· transfers the results of the studies to the farmers, local extension workers and NTFP enterprises; and
· participates in the elaboration and implementation of afforestation and integrated rural development programs funded by the Vietnamese government and different international organizations.
The Centre is currently implementing the project «Sustainable Utilization of Non-Timber Forest Products», which is funded by the Netherlands and technically supported by the International Union of Nature Conservation (1998-2001). The project's goal is biodiversity and forest conservation through the promotion of ecologically sustainable and economically viable use of NTFPs.
For more information, please contact: Dr Le Thanh Chien, Director, Non-Timber Forest Products Research Centre, Forest Science Institute of Viet Nam, Hanoi, Viet Nam.
Fax: +84-4-932-09-96
E-mail: ntfp.project@hn.vnn.vn
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Opportunities and challenges in the use of NTFPs
The Pacific Northwest Research Station in Corvallis, Oregon, the NE Research Station in Burlington, Vermont, and the Midwest Research Institute (MRI) in Kansas City, Missouri, are collaborating in a publication that will highlight opportunities and challenges in the use of NTFP for sustainable rural economic development in the United States. The new publication is expected to be completed in Spring 2001. An earlier publication (the 1992 USDA income opportunities in special forest products) was a guidebook on 16 categories of NTFPs and is still available through MRI's Web site (www.mriresearch.org).
The publication will attempt to present regional perspectives on the environmental, economic and social issues of NTFPs. For each region, four to five case studies will be used to integrate the "themes" of environment, economic, and social considerations.
The authors still require potential case studies of rural entrepreneurs or small businesses in each of the following five categories: (i) floral and decorative products (including cut greens and products used in arts and crafts); (ii) horticultural products (sold for transplants and landscaping); (iii) medicinal, herbal and aromatic products; (iv) other edible products (primarily seeds, nuts, berries, and mushrooms); and (v) other products (may include multiproduct enterprises, small wood products, industrial resins and derived products, honey and bees, recreation and educational products, or spiritual products, for example).
For more information, please contact: Ms Margaret Thomas, Midwest Research Institute, 425 Volker Boulevard, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.Fax: +1-816-753-0271)
E-mail: mthomas@mriresearch.org
[Contents]
<section>6</section>
* "CARTONS 4 TREES" COMPETITION
* ECOTAX ON TOURISM
* ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF TOURISM AND RECREATION IN FORESTS
* MESOAMERICAN TRAIL PROJECT: A REGIONAL TRAIL DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVE UNDER WAY IN CENTRAL AMERICA
"CARTONS 4 TREES" COMPETITION
With its «Cartons 4 Trees», Planet Ark aimed to plant 250 000 native trees with the help of Australia's schoolchildren. With the assistance of the Australian carton industry, Planet Ark and Trees for Life have committed to plant one tree for every ten carton tops collected. Letters have been sent to every primary school in Australia inviting them to join this campaign.
(Source: Planet Ark Web site: www.planetark.org/cartons4treeshome.cfm)
ECOTAX ON TOURISM
Ecotourism is a high growth area within tourism and a new platform for enhancing the competitive strength of regions as international destinations. Because of its implied reliance on good quality environments, ecotourism has even been considered by worldwide organizations as the industry that will lead the world into sustainable development. A value-added tax (VAT) on the consumption of nature-based business goods and services, exempting those consumer items and activities most sought by low-income populations, could be used to finance the transition of a region's neediest to a better quality of life and in turn a more amenable setting to further enhance economic development in the region. By imposing a targeted, value-added tax used exclusively to build infrastructure and finance other community development actions that improve the lives of disproportionately impacted populations, a closed loop is created between the market economy, the importance of good quality
environmental resources, and low-income populations, thereby creating the nexus of sustainable development and equity.Examples of this taxing idea exist in Spain and the United States.(Source: Sustainability Review, issue 2, September 1999.)
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF TOURISM AND RECREATION IN FORESTS
Tourism and recreation are the second largest user of forest resources in Europe (after timber production) and are usually considered as an element of sustainable management of forests to compromise between conservation of the forest biodiversity and economic outputs. The quiet enjoyment of the countryside, and woodlands and forests as part of it, has been long promoted within European countries, although this has been mostly limited to designated conservation areas. Yet forests producing timber but also other products are at present being targeted for improved management of their resources, and the forestry industry is increasingly being pressurized to meet certain environmental management standards. Tourism and recreation are one possible way in which forests can raise revenues to pay for the higher costs of sustainable forest management; yet the management of tourism and recreation will have environmental impacts of its own that will need managing.
The European Commission has funded a three-year project to develop a new award to promote well-managed tourism and recreation in forests, based on the implementation of an environmental management system (EMS). This project has developed an easy-to-implement EMS for forest managers that want to introduce tourism and recreation as part of multifunctional forest management. This EMS has been proposed as the backbone of a new European award to recognize good environmental practice in visitor management.
The development of the award and EMS has been carried out in consultation and partnership with individuals and organizations from the forestry, environment and tourism sectors. The EMS has been piloted in the United Kingdom, Finland and Portugal and sites include Swinley Forest, which is part of the Crown Estate at Windsor (UK); the Forest of Mercia, a community forest (UK); and Tapada nacional de Mafra, a nature park (Portugal). Recreation is important to these sites financially and as a policy commitment. Proactive management with long-term direction is needed to reduce conflict between other aspects of a multiuse forest and to sustain the environment for conservation and future enjoyment. The project is now developing partnerships to take the award proposals and expand them into a fully coordinated European scheme.
(Contributed by: Ms Karen Yale and Mr Xavier Font, Buckinghamshire University College, UK.)
For more information, please contact: Ms Karen Yale, Tourfor Research Assistant, Buckinghamshire University College, Wellesbourne Campus, Kingshill Road, High Wycombe, HP13 5BB, UK.Fax: +44-01494 465432
www.tourfor.com
NEW BOOKS ON ECOTOURISM
Environmental management of rural tourism and recreation
The last three decades have seen a dramatic growth of participation in outdoor recreation and tourism activities. This growth has resulted in a large increase in the volume of people demanding access to the countryside, and has placed considerable pressure on the environment. The authors of this unique book believe that there is a strong relationship between tourism, recreation and the countryside environment, and they believe that proper management of this relationship is important. This book is practitioner-friendly, full of case studies from the United Kingdom, Finland and Portugal and includes a comprehensive reading list in the subject.
(Source: Tribe, J., Font, X., Griffiths, N., Vickery, R. & Yale, K. 2000. Environmental management of rural tourism and recreation, London, Cassell. 160 pp.)
Forest tourism and recreation: case studies in environmental management
The demand for ecotourism and outdoor recreation is increasing, and the pressures on land use are becoming more obvious. A large part of the experience of ecotourism and recreational landscape depends on the maintenance of forested land. Effective management of tourism and recreation in forests can provide extra income to help offset the costs of sustainable timber production and encourage biodiversity conservation. This multi-author book considers the compatibility between tourism forestry and conservation, the management of natural resources and the involvement of stakeholders and the community. Issues are presented through case studies from a range of countries and topics covered include National Parks, peri-urban forestry and wilderness management, as well as practitioner-oriented contributions
(Source: Font, X., & Tribe, J. [eds] 2000. Forest tourism and recreation: case studies in environmental management, Wallingford, CAB International. 304 pp.)
Globalization, tourism and indigenous peoples: what you should know about the world's largest industry
This new publication from the Rethinking Tourism Project (RTP) was published in November 1999 and distributed in Seattle at the WTO meetings. An electronic version is available at the following address:
www2.planeta.com/mader/ecotravel/resources/rtp/globalization.html
MESOAMERICAN TRAIL PROJECT: A REGIONAL TRAIL DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVE UNDER WAY IN CENTRAL AMERICA
The Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) has begun a new project to design a regional trail network linking the protected areas of Central America, with support from the Government of the Netherlands and the World Bank. Through participatory workshops in each of the seven Central American nations, input will be sought from governments, NGOs, tour operators, and outdoor enthusiasts on priorities for improving existing trails and linking trail networks within and between countries, from Guatemala to Panama. The first phase of the project will conclude in February 2000 with production of an action strategy for consolidating the region's trail network, and submission of proposals to international funding agencies for support of its implementation.
The eventual aim is to develop several long distance international hiking trails from north to south, and Pacific to Atlantic, across the breadth and width of the Central American isthmus. Biking trails and water routes for kayak and canoe travel will also be identified. The multi-modal trail system will enhance access and visitor facilities for Central American protected areas and cultural monuments. Many of the region's parks and reserves lack even basic infrastructure needed to attract local and international tourists, to promote scientific research, and to serve as living laboratories for environmental education efforts. The trail system will also increase revenue for park management authorities, and will help generate employment and enhance income for impoverished communities in remote areas near parks. Emulating the strategies used to develop long distance trails in North America, the intent will be to build and maintain the trail system one segment at a time. This
will entail relying on local grassroots organizations, volunteer networks and park management authorities to improve trail infrastructure within existing protected areas and later to link trails across the landscape. The Mesoamerican Trail Project is designed to contribute to the consolidation of the Mesoamerican Biological Corridor (MBC), an ambitious effort to unite Central American natural areas into a seven-nation network and to unite conservation and sustainable use objectives. MBC objectives include taking into account conservation and development interests, bolstering protected area and buffer zone management and, through improved stewardship of private and tribal lands which link parks and reserves, the establishment of greenways and corridors across the landscape. The Mesoamerican Trail Project would further the objectives of this important regional initiative.
For more information, please contact: Mr Jim Barborak, Mesoamerican and Caribbean Program.
The Wildlife Conservation Society, 4424 NW 13th St., Suite A-2, Gainesville, FL 32605, USA.
Fax: +1-352-373-6443
E-mail: wcsfl@afn.org
www.afn.org/~wcsfl/
World Bank Web page covering this project: click here
Proyecto Senderos Mesoamericanos: www.mesosenderos.org
We should all bear in mind that the greatest glory of living lies not in never failing, but in rising every time you fall.
Nelson Mandela
[Contents]
<section>7</section>
* FAO (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF UNITED NATION)
* CENTRE FOR INTERNATIONAL FORESTRY RESEARCH (CIFOR)
* FORAFRI
* INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR ARID LAND CROPS (IPALAC)
* INTERNATIONAL TROPICAL TIMBER ORGANIZATION (ITTO)
* TROPENBOS FOUNDATION
* WILDLIFE CONSERVATION SOCIETY (WCS)
FAO (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF UNITED NATION)
FOREST PRODUCTS DIVISION
NWFP home page
The NWFP home page has been revamped and updated and is now available in French, English and Spanish. In addition:
1. all 12 of the publications in our NWFP series are now available electronically, as are many from the regions;
2. all published issues of Non-Wood News are also online (the 1999 issue will be available shortly);
3. a comprehensive bibliography of NWFP publications has been included; and
4. in the section "Other sites", we have added a link to the FAO Forestry Department link database, which includes links to various NWFP sites.
We are giving high priority to disseminating NWFP information through our home page, and it will be updated on a regular basis.
Work is currently under way to:
· increase the quantity of online information on a country basis ("Country Info"); and
· revamp/update our database.
We welcome any suggestions or comments you may have. Please contact us at the address on the first page, or by e-mail (non-wood-news@fao.org ).
www.fao.org/forestry/FOP/FOPW/NWFP/nwfp-e.stm
Travel of NWFP officers
Mr Paul Vantomme was invited by CIFOR to participate in and contribute to the "FLORES Model Design Workshop", which was held in Indonesia from 23 January to 3 February 1999. The Workshop, which was organized by CIFOR in collaboration with CIRAD and the University of Edinburgh, was attended by 50 participants.The purpose of the workshop was to design, implement and test-run a first working version of the 'Forest Land Oriented Resource Envisioning System' (FLORES) model. FLORES is a software package for modelling purposes and intended to help explore the consequences at the landscape scale, of policies and other initiatives intended to influence land use. A preliminary version (first full working version of the complete model) of FLORES was constructed during this workshop while further development continues by CIFOR and at the University of Edinburgh.
(More information on FLORES can be found at: www.cgiar.org/cifor/research/flores.)
Ms Laura Russo and Mr Sven valter travelled to Lebanon to support the organization of, and participate in, the workshop «Development and Coordination of Regional Activities on Non-Wood Forest Products in the Near East Countries». The workshop, held from 10 to 12 May 1999, was jointly organized by FAO's Regional Office for the Near East (RNE), the Ministry of Agriculture of Lebanon, and FAO's Wood and Non-Wood Products Utilization Branch (FOPW). The workshop was a follow-up to a regional meeting on Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants held in Cairo in May 1997, also jointly organized by RNE and FOPW.
The travellers believe that the workshop was a success and represented a good opportunity for increasing the awareness among the participants of NWFPs, their increasing importance and recognition at the regional and international level, and for identifying priorities for cooperation for the promotion of NWFPs in the Near East.
(Please see under Events for more information on this workshop.)
Mr Vantomme visited India in November 1999 to review the progress and planned activities of the UNDP-funded project IND/97/966 «NWFP for Sustainable Forest Development, Rural Income Generation and Biodiversity Conservation», with the national project coordinator and project staff.
Trade and NWFPs
The NWFP Programme, together with the Forest Products Trade Programme, has commissioned a study entitled «Echanges de certains PFNL entre l'Afrique subsaharienne et certains pays européens». The study, which is being carried out by Honoré Tabuna, received funds from the FAO Regional Office for Africa and from the Central African Regional Programme for the Environment (CARPE).
For more information, please contact: Jim Bourke, Senior Forestry Officer (Trade Analysis), Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch, Forestry Department, FAO.
Fax: +39-06-57055618
E-mail: jim.bourke@fao.org
or
Mr Honoré Tabuna, 11, rue Faubourg de Bourgogne, Orléans Cedex 45000, France
Fax: +33-238-499541/811576
E-mail: htabuna@iname.com
FORESTRY POLICY AND PLANNING DIVISION
After the completion of the Forestry Outlook Study for Asia and the Pacific, the FAO Forestry Department has embarked upon a similar exercise for Africa (Forestry Outlook Study for Africa [FOSA]), with funding support from the European Commission and the African Development Bank.
A series of thematic papers will provide an overview of the situation, trends and future prospects (to the year 2020) of key areas related to forest conservation and development in Africa. They will provide a regional analysis, but should also indicate differences within the region and, where applicable, present the information by subregion.
These papers will draw upon the information made available in the two FOSA baseline studies: (a) population and income/economic features; and (b) land cover and land use in Africa. The thematic papers will use the demographic, economic and land cover/land use datasets provided in the baseline documents in calculations involving these variables.
One of the thematic papers will cover NWFPs and will be an analysis of the current situation in the production and consumption of NWFPs: who are the main collectors/users, what are the main products in various parts of Africa, what are the sources (degree of domestication vs. collection from the wild), what is the level of commercialization and what are the marketing issues, degree of international trade, bioprospecting and intellectual property rights, and what are the future prospects for NWFP development.
For more information, please contact: Ms Susan Braatz, Forest Sector Analyst, Forestry Planning and Statistics Branch, Forestry Department, FAO.
E-mail: Susan.Braatz@fao.org
FOREST RESOURCES DIVISION
FAO is currently preparing a set of guidelines for the management of tropical forests for the provision of non-wood goods and services.
These Guidelines aim to provide practical advice on how to assess, manage and enhance tropical forest resources for the provision of non-wood goods and services (NWGS) in a sustainable manner. The Guidelines are limited to the humid tropics and emphasis is on production forests and/or special resource areas such as buffer zones, in which managed resource extraction is permitted.
For more information, please contact: Ms Mette L. Wilkie, Forestry Officer (Forest Management), Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department, FAO.
Fax: +39-06-5705-5137
E-mail: Mette.LoycheWilkie@fao.org
The Near East and Mediterranean region has one of the highest deforestation rates in the world. The region, as other parts of the world, is also encountering a number of challenges to sustainable forest management such as globalization, privatization, decentralization, liberalization and increased pressure for public participation. These challenges are changing the way forestry is conceived and implemented. Therefore the government's role in supporting and promoting local forest management is evolving.
In response to this situation, FAO organized a regional workshop in Sana'a (Yemen) in July 1997 on «Communication and Extension for Sustainable Forestry» with participants from seven countries in the region. The workshop created a great deal of interest and documented that some positive experience exists in the region that should be widely shared and disseminated. In addition some methodologies have been developed which show promise for the region and need to be discussed and adapted as appropriate. The workshop concluded with a series of recommendations including the proposal of a follow-up workshop that would be more focused. Several priority issues were raised: What type of institutional arrangements and roles are best suited to supporting local natural resource management (NRM)? How are local capacity and partnerships built? What is the role of different groups and how is equity assured? What type of communication processes and systems are needed to support and
facilitate local NRM? How can local NRM generate benefits for local communities and be sustainable? How are benefits shared? How are support systems financed?
A follow-up workshop, «Supporting local natural resource management: institutional, communication and economic options», was held in Fethiye (Turkey) from 1 to 5 November 1999. Its objectives were to:
· promote effective, efficient and equitable support systems for local NRM especially in the economic, communication and institutional aspects;
· enhance the sharing of information and experience;
· promote the establishment of sustainable networks to continue to exchange information and develop support materials on local NRM;
· validate a number of specific tools and techniques for promoting sustainable NRM; and
· make a series of recommendations on supporting NRM in the Region.
For more information, please contact: Forestry Extension Officer, Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department, FAO.
PLANT PRODUCTION AND PROTECTION DIVISION
Overview of GPPIS and Plantinfo databases
FAO has collaboratively established a global, shared knowledge resource for information on plants and pests. The Global Plant and Pest Information System (GPPIS) is Internet-based and its design allows for implementation in a variety of cross-platform environments, including an equivalent CD-ROM system that runs on both Windows and Macintosh.
Procedures are being developed to enable individuals to submit interest profiles that would filter data and information according to specific needs. Plantinfo aims at developing and maintaining a platform for access to reliable information on plants and crop management within different ecologies and production systems.
Individuals are invited to participate in the GPPIS community by "adopting" a species, a discrete "layer" (topic) of information about plants, or simply by serving as public referees. Each record has a primary editor who receives a password to edit or add data by a set of protocols. The information in GPPIS is in the public domain and under the name and logo of the contributing author or institution, resulting in a public, transparent assumption of responsibility and ensuring appropriate recognition. This dynamic framework for continuous knowledge processing and sharing within the community is possible as the Internet allows the distribution of tasks to create a global resource, while concentrating and multiplying the benefits of collaboration. You are invited to comment on and join this community by contributing information _ no matter how modest.
Under "Resources" in the top left menu of the home page you will find over 490 000 entries under Bibliographic references, over 27 000 terms in the Glossary, over 3 000 pictures in the Databank, 70 methodologies and 37 GPPIS-related methodologies.
If your "favourite" plant species does not have an editor assigned, perhaps you would like to participate?
(Source: Plantinfo: a Component of FAO's Global Plant and Pest Information System. Abstract from a paper presented at Oregon State University, United States. August 1999.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Peter Griffee, Senior Officer, Industrial Crops, Crop and Grassland Service, Plant Production and Protection Division, FAO, Rome, Italy.|
E-mail: Plantinfo@fao.org
www.pppis.fao.org
FAO IN THE FIELD
FAO and the European Commission (EC)
In addition to the ongoing FAO/EC Partnership Programme "Information and Analysis for Sustainable Forest Management: Linking National and International Efforts in ACP countries", the following project documents have been recently signed by FAO and the EC:
· "Sustainable Forest Management Programme in African ACP countries."
The NWFP component of this project aims to produce practical guidelines to assess important NWFP in the region.
· "Information and Analysis for Sustainable Forest Management: Linking national and international efforts in 13 tropical countries in Central and South America."
This project is a complementary activity to the Latin America Forestry Outlook Study.
· "Information and Analysis for Sustainable Forest Management: Linking national and international efforts in South Asia and Southeast Asia."
Mauritanie
Dans le cadre du Programme de Coopération technique (PCT) de la FAO, le projet d'Appui au programme de nutrition communautaire (TCP/MAU/8892)
visant à assister le Secrétariat d'Etat à la Condition Féminine de la Mauritanie comporte un volet de valorisation des ressources naturelles, végétales et animales, pour la sécurité alimentaire et la nutrition.
Dans le cadre de ce projet, un diagnostic des ressources alimentaires locales (végétales et animales, cultivées ou sauvages) et leurs modalités d'utilisation (techniques de préparation, fréquence d'utilisation, caractère saisonnier, commercialisation) sera effectué et l'analyse des informations recueillies permettra de dégager des propositions et recommandations pour une stratégie intégrée à tous les stades de la chaîne alimentaire (recherche, production, stockage, transformation, commercialisation, préparation, consommation) contribuant à la sécurité alimentaire des ménages.
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: Mme Florence Egal, Fonctionnaire de Nutrition (Sécurité Alimentaire des Ménages), Service des programmes nutritionnels, Division de l'alimentation et de la nutrition, FAO.
E-mail : Florence.Egal@fao.org
TCP/SUD/7821 «Development of gum arabic production and marketing»
FAO, through its Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP), is providing support to the production and marketing of gum arabic in the Sudan. The project will be finalized by mid-2000.
For more information, please contact: Mr A. Al-Fares, Regional Forestry Officer, Regional Office for the Near East (RNE), PO Box 2223, Cairo, Egypt.
Fax: +20-2- 7495981
E-mail: Adnan.Alfares@fao.org
CPR/96/110 «Poverty alleviation through community forestry in Western Hubei (Hefeng Community Forestry)»
This is a three-year US$820 000 project, funded by UNDP (US$720 000) and the Government of China, Hefeng County (US$100 000). The China International Center for Economic and Technical Exchanges (CICETE) is the executing agency, and the Hefeng Forest Bureau (through the Hubei Provincial Forest Department and the State Forest Administration) is the implementing agency. FAO is providing technical support under an agreement with UNDP.
The project began implementation activities in March 1998 and is expected to continue until the end of 2000. The overall goal of the project is the «alleviation of poverty and the promotion and demonstration of diversified and sustainable rural production through the application of community forestry.» The project aims to:
· enhance institutional capacity of the County Government to develop, manage, and implement programmes for poverty alleviation and rural development using participatory methods;
· enhance the capacity of low-income households to increase their income to average regional levels through diversified rural production; and
· strengthen the government extension service to provide the information, demonstrations, and technical support necessary to meet the identified needs of the poor households.
The project is developing and strengthening a system of village coordinators and farmer technicians to demonstrate and extend new or improved technologies and planting materials to poor farmers in selected villages. Poor households are the primary focus of support, with efforts aimed at raising annual household incomes to more than RMB1 000. Crop diversification is a major strategy of the project, with emphasis placed on developing multi-tiered agroforestry systems suitable for the steep mountainous environment. The project is giving substantial attention to training in order to build capacity for managing the newly introduced crops. Strong emphasis is given to involving women in all project activities.
In addition to the crops traditionally grown by farmers in the area (e.g., maize, yams, tea, rice, vegetables), the project is introducing or improving farmers' management of «new» crops such as rivier giant arum (taro) and broadleaved vetch, both of which grow well under partial shade. Gingko, chestnut and Eucommia are being favoured as overstory trees because of their potential to provide economic returns to farmers, while helping to shield the fragile slopes from erosion.
For more information, please contact: Mr. Patrick B. Durst, FAO Regional Forestry Officer for Asia and the Pacific, 39 Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: +66-2-2800445
E-mail: Patrick.Durst@fao.org
CENTRE FOR INTERNATIONAL FORESTRY RESEARCH (CIFOR)
CIFOR's activities in the field of NWFP are mainly carried out under the research project «Forest Products and People». In 1998, CIFOR started a global research study designed to provide insight into NWFPs and their relation to land use and local livelihood strategies.
Research in Indonesia includes a comparative study of damar agroforests in Sumatra and the collection of gaharu in East Kalimantan, a research on the potential of small-scale rattan cultivation, and the collection and marketing of benzoin.
In Bolivia, research has analysed the shift in the distribution of benefits from NTFP collection following the collapse of the Brazil rubber market in the 1980s. Today, Brazil nut collection and processing has become the most important source of income for many rural households.
In Zimbabwe, CIFOR is participating in a study of the ecological and economic impacts of a booming woodcarving industry that offers income to thousands of rural people. Other research work is being carried out in Brazil (Western Amazonia), and in the Humid Forest Zone of Cameroon.
In 1998, CIFOR published «Incomes from the Forest: Methods for the Development and Conservation of Forest Products for Local Communities». Based on case studies from a number of organizations, it presents methods that have been used to assess the conservation and development of forest products in different contexts. The book includes a conceptual framework that illustrates the complex nature of NTFP development and conservation, with issues that must be addressed at various levels: in households, markets, local institutions and the surrounding forest. (Please see under Publications of Interest.)
For more information, please contact: CIFOR, P.O. Box 6596 JKPWB, Jakarta 10065, Indonesia.
Fax: + 62-251-622100
http://www.cgiar.org/cifor/info/research.html
FORAFRI
Le projet « Capitalisation et Transfert des Recherches sur les Ecosystèmes Forestiers d'Afrique Humide », ou projet FORAFRI, (1996-1999) a été mené conjointement par le CIRAD-Forêt (France) et le CIFOR. Son objectif stratégique était la mise dans une perspective régionale des recherches forestières menées sur le biome forêt dense guinéo-congolaise, à travers trois volets principaux :
(i) Capitalisation et synthèse des connaissances sur les écosystèmes forestiers en zone humide africaine et l'étude de l'effet des traitements sylvicoles sur la dynamique des peuplements.
(ii) Valorisation et transfert des résultats de la recherche aux utilisateurs potentiels tel que les services forestiers, les exploitants, les communautés rurales gestionnaires de la forêt.
(iii) Régionalisation de la recherche sur la gestion durable des forêts africaines.
La phase de capitalisation et de synthèse s'est concretisée par la rédaction de différents ouvrages, synthèse et publications, dont la validation a été assurée par un comité scientifique et technique (avec représentants du CIRAD, CIFOR, FAO, IUCN, ATIBT, et des institutions de recherche africaines).
Une seconde phase de FORAFRI est en préparation par le CIRAD en coopération avec les pays africains concernés.
Une des synthèse produites par le Projet FORAFRI est l'étude sur les produits forestiers autres que le bois d'oeuvre (PFAB) et leur rôle dans l'aménagement durable des forêts du Bassin du Congo.
Cette étude qui a également reçu le soutien du CARPE (Central African Regional Program for the Environment) de l'USAID, concerne l'Afrique Centrale « humide » qui comprend les pays arrosés par le Congo et ses affluents, et aussi ceux arrosés par l'Ogooué, la Sanaga et leurs affluents, soit six pays : Cameroun, Centrafrique (RCA), Congo Brazzaville, Congo Démocratique (RDC), Gabon, Guinée Equatoriale.
L'étude présente une synthèse des connaissances actuelles sur les PFAB : rôles socio-économiques, modes d'utilisation, durables ou non durables, et permet d'identifier les problèmes spécifiques liés à leur utilisation et d'esquisser des propositions en vue d'une meilleure gestion, à la fois plus rationnelle sur le plan économique et plus respectueuse de l'environnement.
Le premier point qui ressort de l'étude est l'extrême diversité des PFAB, liée à la richesse biologique qui caractérise les forêts tropicales humides du Bassin du Congo. Cette diversité s'organise selon des relations complexes qui structurent l'écosystème forestier.
Les populations locales montrent une connaissance approfondie des PFAB, étant utilisatrices depuis souvent fort longtemps. Le mode d'accès à la ressource généralement défini par les droits coutumiers se trouve souvent en contradiction avec la législation des Etats. Ce phénomène est général à l'échelle de la sous région, et l'on retrouve des exemples de telles incompatibilités entre le légal et le légitime dans chacun des pays. Par ailleurs, la situation est aggravée par le fait que l'Etat est rarement en mesure d'assurer la bonne application des lois. Il en découle une situation d'accès libre de fait et des pratiques illégales à la fois nombreuses et destructrices.
L'étude propose des solutions qui s'efforcent de prendre à la fois en compte les intérêts des différents acteurs, en particulier des populations locales, et les impératifs de conservation de l'écosystème, le but étant d'arriver à des recommandations réalistes.
Un premier point d'importance est la prise en compte effective des PFAB dans l'aménagement forestier. Ceci passe par une meilleure connaissance de la ressource, que l'on peut approcher grâce à des études spécifiques et à une adaptation des protocoles d'inventaires, et la définition d'objectifs considérant les différentes ressources du massif forestier.
Selon les objectifs afférents aux différentes séries d'un massif forestier, la gestion des PFAB devra être protectionniste ou interventionniste, c'est à dire cherchant à améliorer la ressource en PFAB..
Les pratiques liées à l'exploitation doivent viser à en minimiser les impacts. Des inventaires d'exploitation doivent permettent de connaître la nature et la localisation de la ressource, afin d'optimiser les tracés des pistes. Autant que possible, les techniques d'Exploitation à Faible Impact (EFI) seront utilisées. Globalement, les opérations sylvicoles seront légères, car moins « traumatisantes ».
Les impacts indirects liés à l'exploitation, braconnage en particulier, devront être régulés. Enfin, il est nécessaire de concilier les pratiques des exploitants et celles des populations locales afin d'éviter d'arriver à des situations de conflit préjudiciables pour tous.
Pour plus d'information, veuillez contacter: Mathurin Tchatat, Chargé de recherche, Institut de la Recherche Agronomique pour le Développement (IRAD), B.P. 2067 Yaoundé, Cameroun ou Dr Jean-Guy Bertault, Chef du Programme Forêts Naturelles, CIRAD-Forêt, Campus international de Baillarguet, Montferrier-sur-Lez, BP 5035, 34032 Montpellier Cedex 1, France.
Fax: +33 467593733
INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR ARID LAND CROPS (IPALAC)
IPALAC is an outgrowth of an approach used by research scientists of Ben-Gurion University in the development of Israel's Negev desert. Since 1956 they have introduced thousands of plant species from dry and from saline environments and evaluated their potential for filling a niche in the Israeli context - either as a crop or as elements of environmental enhancement activities (landscaping and afforestation). Some years ago it was concluded that the approach used so successfully in the Negev could be applied in the global battle against desertification.
The main objective of IPALAC is the improvement of the economic, environmental and social conditions of people living in the arid and semi-arid regions of the world by enhancing agricultural productivity. The tools for achieving this objective is the improvement and/or transfer of crops and associated technologies between the world's arid lands, and a complementary program of research and development, training and dissemination.
With funding from UNESCO, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Finland, and MASHAV (Israel's Center for International Development Cooperation), IPALAC recently organized a conference on «Combating Desertification with Plants». Various papers presented at the conference covered the contribution of NWFP to sustainability of arid lands, and included:
· L'Arganier comme espece de reboisement des zones arides en semi-arides au Maroc, by J.E. Bouachrine
· Honey production in dry lands, by D. Eisikowitch
· Potential of non-wood forest products of the semi-arid regions of Uganda by J.P. Elokaokich
· Ethnobotany and importance of three open-forest, savannah traditional parkland, wooded-grassland and steppes species used by the local population in northern Cameroon by J.M. Fondoun et al
· Jatropha curcas Oil for fuel and other uses: the Mali experience by R. Henning.
· Medicinal plants for development in semi-arid Morocco by M. Hmamouchi
· Terfezias, a family of mycorrhizal edible mushrooms for arid zones by V. Kagan-Tsur
· The role of non-wood forest products for rural women in west Africa by N. Lamien
· Domestication of indigenous fruit trees of the Miombo woodlands in Malawi by L. Mwabumba
· Acacia Mearnsii for income generation and environmental protection in Kenya by N.M. Onchere
· Australian Acacias for human food in Niger by T. Rinaudo
· Wild silk industry by F.W. Taylor
· Adverse experience concerning the extraction of non-wood forest products in semi-arid areas by F.W. Taylor
· Biodiversity prospecting, drug discovery, conservation and sustainable development by B.N. Timmermann
For more information, please contact: Mr Arnie Schlissel, Administrative Coordinator, International Programme for Arid Land Crops, c/o Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, PO 653, Beer Sheva, Israel 84105.
Fax: +972-7-647-2984
E-mail: ipalac@bgumail.bgu.ac.il
(See Non-Wood News No. 5 for more information on IPALAC.)
INTERNATIONAL TROPICAL TIMBER ORGANIZATION (ITTO)
ITTO facilitates discussion, consultation and international cooperation on issues relating to the international trade and utilization of tropical timber and the sustainable management of its resource base.
As a result of the complementarity between the sustainable management of timber and that of NWFP, ITTO is today involved in various projects related to NWFP (in Brazil, Panama, Philippines and Thailand).
For more information, please contact: ITTO, International Organizations Center, 5th Floor, Pacifico-Yokohama, 1-1-1, Minato-Mirai, Nishi-ku, Yokohama, 220-0012 Japan.
Fax: +81-45-223-1111
E-mail:itto@mail.itto-unet.ocn.ne.jp
www.itto.or.jp/Index.html
(Please see under Country Compass (Philippines and Thailand) for more information on ITTO projects.)
TROPENBOS FOUNDATION
The Tropenbos Foundation was established in July 1988 in order to continue and expand the International Tropenbos Programme, which was set up by the Netherlands Government in 1986.
The main objectives of the Foundation are to:
· contribute effectively to the conservation and wise use of tropical rain forests, by generating relevant knowledge, deepening insights and developing and testing methods for forest policy and management; and
· involve local research institutions and strengthen research capacity in tropical forest countries.
Based on the needs of policy makers and forest users, the Tropenbos Foundation formulates, coordinates and finances objective oriented research programmes. In close cooperation with research institutions and governments in a number of tropical countries, several major research sites have been set up to produce results which have significance for application on a local as well as on a broader scale. Extension and training are important elements in the international and national Tropenbos programmes.
In addition to its programme at the sites, Tropenbos develops policy- and management-oriented research strategies on specific themes, such as biodiversity, NTFP and criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management.
The Tropenbos research strategy for NTFP aims to identify under what conditions commercial NTFP extraction can serve as a strategy for conservation and wise forest use. Ongoing NTFP studies at the Tropenbos sites contribute to this strategy by providing insight into various key conditions for successful and sustainable NTFP extraction. These conditions include the availability of natural resources, sustainable harvest levels, access to markets and participatory planning.
The Tropenbos projects dealing with NTFPs can be subdivided into three categories. The first group of projects deals with NTFPs as part of a more comprehensive project on indigenous forest use and management A second group of projects specifically study the potential of NTFPs. These projects are taking place in Colombia, Guyana, Cameroon and Indonesia (East Kalimantan). Finally, some studies deal with specific products and focus on aspects of their sustainable use, like bushmeat, commercial fishing and Brazil nut exploitation.
In 1997, an inventory was made of the methodologies used to provide insight into one or more of these key conditions. The overview (published as Tropenbos Document 14 early in 1998) shows that methodological choices depend on each study's specific objectives and context. Rather than providing a methodological `blueprint', the Tropenbos strategy paper for NTFP research functions as a background document, providing a general framework for the selection of research questions and the integration of site-specific studies.
NTFP publications of the Tropenbos Foundation are available at: www.tropenbos.nl/tropenbos/thementfp.html
For more information, please contact: Jelle Maas, Network/Programme Officer, The Tropenbos Foundation, P.O. Box 232, 6700 AE Wageningen, the Netherlands.
Fax: +31-317-423024
E-mail: j.b.maas@iac.agro.nl
or tropenbos@iac.agro.nl
www.tropenbos.nl
(Please see under Country Compass for more information on the Cameroon project and also under events and publications of interest for more information on Tropenbos.)
WILDLIFE CONSERVATION SOCIETY (WCS)
WCS, founded in 1895 as the New York Zoological Society, works to save wildlife throughout the world. With 60 staff scientists and more than 100 research fellows, WCS has the largest professional field staff of any US-based international conservation organization. WCS currently conducts more than 250 field projects in some 50 countries throughout Africa, Asia, Latin America, and North America.
WCS's strategy is to conduct comprehensive field studies to gather information on wildlife needs, train local conservation professionals to protect and manage wildlife and wild areas for the future, and advise on protected area creation, expansion, and management. Because WCS scientists are familiar with local conditions, they can effectively translate field data into conservation action and policies, and develop locally sustainable solutions to conflicts between humans and wildlife. An acknowledged leader in the field, WCS forges productive relationships with governments, international agencies, and local organizations.
For more information, please contact: Wildlife Conservation Society, 2300 Southern Blvd., Bronx, NY 10460, USA.
www.wcs.org/
[Contents]
<section>8</section>
* FLORES MODEL DESIGN WORKSHOP JAKARTA, INDONESIA 23 JANUARY TO 3 FEBRUARY 1999
* RESEARCH ON NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS IN THE TROPENBOS PROGRAMME: RESULTS AND PERSPECTIVES
* WAGENINGEN, THE NETHERLANDS, 28 JANUARY 1999
* INTERNATIONAL TRAINING WORKSHOP ON BAMBOO AND RATTAN BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION, UTILIZATION AND TECHNOLOGY EXCHANGE
* BEIJING, CHINA 11-23 APRIL 1999
* WORKSHOP ON THE SPECIAL PROGRAMME FOR SUSTAINABLE UPLAND DEVELOPMENT IN ASIA - REALITY CHECK CONSULTATION
* BANGKOK, THAILAND 19-21 APRIL 1999
* INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON COMMUNITY FORESTRY IN AFRICA - PARTICIPATORY FOREST MANAGEMENT: A STRATEGY FOR SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT IN AFRICA BANJUL, THE GAMBIA 26-30 APRIL 1999
* DEVELOPMENT AND COORDINATION OF REGIONAL ACTIVITIES ON NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS IN THE NEAR EAST COUNTRIES BEIRUT, LEBANON 10-12 MAY 1999
* BELÉM FORUM: RESEARCH CHALLENGES FOR AMAZONIAN FORESTS BELÉM, BRAZIL. 15 JUNE 1999
* CERTIFICATION AND MARKETING OF NTFPS AND AGROFORESTRY PRODUCTS OAXACA, MEXICO 20-22 JUNE 1999
* SEMINAR ON MEDICINAL PLANTS KUALA LUMPUR, MALAYSIA 22-23 JUNE 1999
* PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT: CAN THEY BE RECONCILED? HARARE, ZIMBABWE 12-15 JULY 1999
* OFF-FOREST TREE RESOURCES OF AFRICA WORKSHOP ARUSHA, TANZANIA 12-16 JULY 1999
* TECHNICAL CONSULTATION: GENDER ROLES, BIODIVERSITY MANAGEMENT AND FOOD SECURITY BANGKOK, THAILAND 3-6 AUGUST 1999
* ASSESSMENT METHODS OF FOREST ECOSYSTEM STATUS AND SUSTAINABILITY KRASNOYARSK, RUSSIA 8-12 AUGUST 1999
* MEDICINAL PLANTS CONSERVATION, MANAGEMENT AND SUSTAINABLE UTILIZATION IN THE NORTHERN SAVANNAH REGION OF GHANA 9-12 AUGUST 1999
* GROWING FOREST PRODUCTS IN YOUR COMMUNITY VIRGINIA, USA 12-13 AUGUST 1999
* THE WORLD'S NATURAL FORESTS AND THEIR ROLE IN GLOBAL PROCESSES KHABAROVSK, RUSSIA 15-20 AUGUST 1999
* AFRICA NODE MOUNTAIN FORUM NAIROBI, KENYA 24-26 AUGUST 1999
* INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON SEABUCKTHORN BEIJING, CHINA AUGUST-2 SEPTEMBER 1999
* SCIENTIFIC SEMINAR ON THE FULL VALUE OF FORESTS TO SOCIETY THURGAO, SWITZERLAND 5 SEPTEMBER 1999
* NEW APPROACHES TO INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY FORESTS FOR THE 21ST CENTURY BELÉM, BRAZIL SEPTEMBER 1999
* 27TH INTERNATIONAL FORESTRY STUDENTS SYMPOSIUM GERMANY (DIFFERENT CITIES) 9 TO 23 SEPTEMBER 1999
* FOOD AND FORESTRY: GLOBAL CHANGE AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES.READING, UNITED KINGDOM 20-23 SEPTEMBER 1999
* CONSERVATION AND SUSTAINABLE USE OF PLANT BIODIVERSITY CHANIA, GREECE 27 SEPTEMBER-9 OCTOBER 1999
* FOREST COMMUNITIES IN THE THIRD MILLENNIUM: SUPPORTING NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCT ENTREPRENEURS WITH FOREST INVENTORY SCIENCE - FIRST INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS IN COLD TEMPERATE AND BOREAL FORESTS. KENORA, ONTARIO, CANADA 1-4 OCTOBER 1999
* THE HIGH-LEVEL CONSULTATION ON RURAL WOMEN AND INFORMATION ROME, ITALY 4-6 OCTOBER 1999
* SPECIAL NEEDS AND REQUIREMENTS OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES WITH LOW FOREST COVER AND UNIQUE TYPES OF FORESTS TEHRAN, IRAN 4-8 OCTOBER 1999
* CONGRESO DE ORDENACIÓN Y GESTIÓN SOSTENIBLE DE MONTES - GESTIONAR PARA EL FUTURO SANTIAGO DE COMPOSTELA, ESPAÑA 4-9 DE OCTUBRE DE 1999
* USAID SUSTAINABLE TREE CROP DEVELOPMENT WORKSHOP «STRENGTHENING AFRICA'S COMPETITIVE POSITION IN GLOBAL MARKETS» WASHINGTON, DC, USA 19-21 OCTOBER 1999
* THE GROWING ECONOMY OF MUSHROOMS NANAIMO, BC. CANADA 23-24 OCTOBER 1999
* COMBATING DESERTIFICATION WITH PLANTS BEER SHEVA, ISRAEL 1-5 NOVEMBER 1999
* SUPPORTING LOCAL NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT: INSTITUTIONAL, COMMUNICATION AND ECONOMIC OPTIONS - A REGIONAL WORKSHOP FOR THE NEAR EAST/MEDITERRANEAN FETHIYE, TURKEY 1-5 NOVEMBER 1999
* INTERNATIONAL MEETING: «INFORMATION NETWORKING ON MEDICINAL PLANTS, TOWARDS A GLOBAL STRATEGY» NEW DELHI, INDIA 17 TO 19 NOVEMBER 1999
* WORKSHOP ON NATIONAL LEVEL CRITERIA AND INDICATORS FOR SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT OF DRY FORESTS IN SOUTH ASIA BHOPAL, INDIA NOVEMBER-2 DECEMBER 1999
* INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON PROMOTING COOPERATION FOR BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION AND SUSTAINABLE RURAL DEVELOPMENT IN MOUNTAIN ECOSYSTEMS: THE CASE OF ANDES AND THE HIMALAYAS KATHMANDU, NEPAL 29 NOVEMBER - 2 DECEMBER 1999
* ATELIER RÉGIONAL SUR LES FEMMES ET LES FORÊTS DENSES ET HUMIDES D'AFRIQUE CENTRALE MBALMAYO, CAMEROUN NOVEMBRE-2 DÉCEMBRE 1999
* SÉMINAIRE INTERNATIONAL SÉCHAGE/VALORISATION KARITÉ/AIELÉ YAOUNDE, CAMEROUN 1-3 DECEMBRE 1999
* INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN SEMI-ARID REGIONS - WORLD SEMI-ARID '99 PARAIBA, BRAZIL 6-9 DECEMBER, 1999
* 1ÈRE RÉUNION SUR LES ESPÈCES LIGNEUSES MÉDICINALES AFRICAINES COTONOU, BÉNIN DÉCEMBRE 1999
* IUFRO - CAIRNS 2000. DEVELOPING POLICIES TO ENCOURAGE SMALL-SCALE FORESTRY CAIRNS, AUSTRALIA 9-13 JANUARY 2000
* TOURFOR PRESENTATION LONDON, ENGLAND 20 JANUARY 2000
* THE RATTANS OF AFRICA LIMBE BOTANIC GARDEN, CAMEROON 1-3 FEBRUARY 2000
* SEMINAR ON "THE GUADUA (BAMBOO) IN RECONSTRUCTION" ARMENIA, QUINDIO, COLOMBIA 10-12 FEBRUARY 2000
* 17er COLLOQUE INTERNATIONAL «SANTE, ENVIRONNEMENT ET SUBSTANCES NATURELLES» METZ, FRANCE 17-20 FÉVRIER 2000
* DESIGNING MULTIPURPOSE RESOURCE INVENTORIES TURRIALBA, COSTA RICA 21-25 FEBRUARY 2000
* PROTECTING KNOWLEDGE - TRADITIONAL RESOURCE RIGHTS IN THE NEW MILLENNIUM VANCOUVER, BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA 24-26 FEBRUARY 2000
FLORES MODEL DESIGN WORKSHOP
JAKARTA, INDONESIA
23 JANUARY TO 3 FEBRUARY 1999
For more information, please contact: Mr. Jerry Vanclay, Centre for International Forestry Research, PO Box 6596, JKPWB, Jakarta, Indonesia.
Fax: +62-251-622100
E-mail: flores@cgnet.com
(Please see under International Action for more information on FLORES.)
RESEARCH ON NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS IN THE TROPENBOS PROGRAMME: RESULTS AND PERSPECTIVES
WAGENINGEN, THE NETHERLANDS,
28 JANUARY 1999
The seminar was organized by the Tropenbos Foundation in order to present and reflect the results of research carried out by the Tropenbos NTFP programme between 1994 and 1999 and to discuss directions for future research. Some 100 participants, mainly representing Dutch universities, research institutions and donor organizations, attended the seminar.
For more information, please contact: Dr. Mirjam A.F. Ros-Tonen, NTFP Officer, The Tropenbos Foundation, PO Box 232, 6700 AE Wageningen, the Netherlands.
Fax: +31-317-423024
E-mail:M.A.F.Ros@iac.agro.nl ortropenbos@iac.agro.nl
www.tropenbos.nl/tropenbos/tbntfpsem.html
(Please see under International Action for more information on Tropenbos.)
INTERNATIONAL TRAINING WORKSHOP ON BAMBOO AND RATTAN BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION, UTILIZATION AND TECHNOLOGY EXCHANGE
BEIJING, CHINA
11-23 APRIL 1999
This workshop was organized by the International Network for Bamboo and Rattan (INBAR), This network of bamboo and rattan producing countries has its Secretariat in Beijing and is funded by the People's Republic of China, Canada and the Netherlands, among others.
A Strategy Workshop formed the first part of this workshop. It was jointly organized by the Chinese Academy of Forestry, the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology, and INBAR. Mrs Jiang Zehui, Co-Chairperson of INBAR and spouse of the Chinese Prime Minister, and the Chinese Minister of Science and Technology opened the meeting. Twenty-nine participants from INBAR's member countries and three participants from non-member countries attended the workshop, and representatives from FAO, ITTO, CIFOR and IPGRI attended as observers. Dr Wulf Killmann, Director, Forest Products Division, represented FAO in the discussions, gave a presentation on FAO's NWFP Programme, chaired a session and participated in the Panel discussion.
For more information, please contact: International Network for Bamboo and Rattan (INBAR), Branch Box 155, P.O. Box 9799, Beijing, China 100101.
Fax: +86-10-64956962/83
www.inbar.org.cn
WORKSHOP ON THE SPECIAL PROGRAMME FOR SUSTAINABLE UPLAND DEVELOPMENT IN ASIA - REALITY CHECK CONSULTATION
BANGKOK, THAILAND
19-21 APRIL 1999
This workshop was organized by IFAD, FAO and IUCN. IFAD, with FAO support, is preparing a special programme for Asia (SPA) designed to counter the negative impact of the region's economic crisis on the poorest people in rural areas. The programme plans to include 12 countries with an average of three «pilot» projects/country, with a 10-year duration. Total budget for the programme is approx. US$650 million.
The SPA has chosen to concentrate on «indigenous and marginal upland people» (IMPs) as the group most vulnerable to the negative impacts of the crisis. The programme goal is to achieve a situation in which «indigenous inhabitants and other marginal upland people have improved and increasingly resilient livelihoods through secure and sufficient access to and control over their natural resources, and these resources are managed in a sustainable way».
As a consequence of choosing to concentrate on IMPs in upland areas, a significant part of the programme approach is concerned with local forestry and natural resource management. FAO's Community Forestry Unit is therefore providing backstopping during the current conceptual design phase of the programme and expects to continue its involvement during further design and implementation phases.
For more information, please contact: Mr D. Shallon, Community Forestry Unit, Forestry Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme de Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: +39-06-57055514
E-mail: Daniel.Shallon@fao.org
INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON COMMUNITY FORESTRY IN AFRICA - PARTICIPATORY FOREST MANAGEMENT: A STRATEGY FOR SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT IN AFRICA
BANJUL, THE GAMBIA
26-30 APRIL 1999
The focus of the Workshop was on both the institutional framework (policy and legislation) and implementation approaches needed to enable the development of participatory forestry for sustainable use of forest resources in Africa.
For more information, please contact: Dr Katherine Warner, Community Forestry Unit, Forestry Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: +39-06-57055514
E-mail: Katherine.Warner@fao.org
DEVELOPMENT AND COORDINATION OF REGIONAL ACTIVITIES ON NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS IN THE NEAR EAST COUNTRIES
BEIRUT, LEBANON
10-12 MAY 1999
The workshop was jointly organized by FAO's Regional Office for the Near East (RNE), the Ministry of Agriculture of Lebanon, and FAO's Wood and Non-Wood Products Utilization Branch (FOPW) and was a follow-up to a regional meeting on medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants held in Cairo in May 1997.
The main objectives of the workshop, which was attended by 25 participants from 9 countries including representatives of international organizations, were:
· to exchange information on new developments and activities on NWFPs in the Near East region among the various actors involved;
· to review the status of implementation of the recommendations of the Cairo meeting and, in particular, to improve the availability of country data on NWFP use; and
· to present a draft framework for regional cooperation on NWFPs and seek consensus from the participants.
The programme of the workshop consisted of: (i) keynote presentations on important topics as identified during the Cairo meeting in 1997; (ii) country presentations on NWFP activities and national data; (iii) presentations from invited organizations on their activities related to NWFPs; and (d) discussion of a draft framework for regional cooperation in the Near East on NWFPs.
The representatives of the countries participating at the meeting (Iran, Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Cyprus, Syria, Jordan, Turkey and Sudan) made presentations on the status of NWFP in their countries. Presentations covered ongoing activities and available data on NWFP use. Invited international organizations (WWF Mediterranean Programme, UN/SRDC and IPGRI) also made presentations on their activities.
For more information, please contact: Mr A. Al-Fares, Forestry Officer, Regional Office for the Near East (RNE), P.O. Box 2223, Cairo, Egypt.
Fax: + 20-2- 7495981
E-mail: FAO-RNE@fao.org
(Please see under International Action for more information on this workshop.)
BELÉM FORUM: RESEARCH CHALLENGES FOR AMAZONIAN FORESTS
BELÉM, BRAZIL.
15 JUNE 1999
This one day forum, organized by Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuária (EMBRAPA) and the Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR), aimed to learn about the problems facing Amazonian forests and identify areas of research that could have the greatest impact in conserving the region's forests and improving the well-being of its people. Among the topics discussed, one of direct relevance to NWFPs was introduced by a presentation on: «Alternative scenarios for the extractive economy, the case of the Alto Juruá Extractive Reserve, Acre», made by Prof. Mauro Almeida, University of Campinas.
(Source: CIFOR News, No. 23, September 1999.)
For more information, please contact: Mr David Kaimowitz, CIFOR, P.O. Box 6596, JKPWB, Jakarta 10065, Indonesia.
E-mail: d.kaimowitz@cgiar.org
CERTIFICATION AND MARKETING OF NTFPS AND AGROFORESTRY PRODUCTS
OAXACA, MEXICO
20-22 JUNE 1999
The workshop brought together 45 individuals representing certification and accreditation bodies, environment organizations and producer groups. It was the second such workshop organized by the Falls Brook Centre as part of their Certification and Marketing Program and built on the work being undertaken by a number of organizations to develop viable systems of certification for NTFPs and agroforestry products and to increase collaboration between certification programs. The aim of this workshop was to identify tools and activities to make certification more accessible to producer groups and to renew participants' commitments to implement these solutions.
For more information, please contact: Pat Mallet, Program Coordinator, Certification and Marketing Program, Falls Brook Centre, 802-207 West Hastings, Vancouver, B.C. V6B 1H7, Canada.
Fax: +1-604-709-8586
E-mail: pmallet@web.net
(Please see under News and Notes [certification] for more information.)
SEMINAR ON MEDICINAL PLANTS
KUALA LUMPUR, MALAYSIA
22-23 JUNE 1999
The seminar was organized with the objective to transfer research output for industrial application through integrated research between herbal industries and research institutions and to promote conservation and sustainable utilization of medicinal plants. Thirty-five papers were presented to the 105 participants who attended the two-day seminar, organized as part of the FRIM Conference on Forestry and Forests Products Research 1999 Series.
(Source: Malaysian Timber Bulletin, Vol. 5 No. 4.)
For more information, please contact: Forest Research Institute Malaysia (FRIM), 52109 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Fax: +603 636 5687/6367753
E-mail:mas@frim.gov.my
www.frim.gov.my
PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT: CAN THEY BE RECONCILED?
HARARE, ZIMBABWE
12-15 JULY 1999
FAO organized an International Technical Consultation, which reviewed the pressures and problems that currently confront protected areas and protected area managers, especially in developing countries.
For more information, please contact: Mr D. Williamson, Forest Conservation Research and Education Service, Forestry Department, Via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: +3906-57052151
E-mail: Douglas.Williamson@fao.org
OFF-FOREST TREE RESOURCES OF AFRICA WORKSHOP
ARUSHA, TANZANIA
12-16 JULY 1999
For more information, please contact: Prof. Roger Malimbwi, Faculty of Forestry, Sokoine University of Agriculture, PO Box 3009 Chuo Kikuu, Morogoro, Tanzania.
Fax: +255-56-4648
E-mail: forestry@sua.ac.tz
TECHNICAL CONSULTATION: GENDER ROLES, BIODIVERSITY MANAGEMENT AND FOOD SECURITY
BANGKOK, THAILAND
3-6 AUGUST 1999
For more information, please contact: Mr Prem Nath, Assistant Director-General/Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific, RAP, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: +66-2-2800445
E-mail: FAO-RAP@fao.org
ASSESSMENT METHODS OF FOREST ECOSYSTEM STATUS AND SUSTAINABILITY
KRASNOYARSK, RUSSIA
8-12 AUGUST 1999
For more information, please contact: Dr Elena Muratova, V.N. Sukachev Institute of Forest, Russian Academy of Sciences, Siberian Branch, Academgorodok, Krasnoyarsk, Russia 660036.
Fax: +7-39-12-43-36-86
E-mail: ecos@ifor.krasnoyarsk.su
MEDICINAL PLANTS CONSERVATION, MANAGEMENT AND SUSTAINABLE UTILIZATION IN THE NORTHERN SAVANNAH REGION OF GHANA
TAMALE, GHANA
9-12 AUGUST 1999
This workshop was organized by the Ghana Ministry of Lands and Forestry (MLF) with funds from the World Bank GEF/PDF-B programme.
For more information, please contact: Mr John Lambert, Medicinal Plant Specialist, AFTR2, The World Bank, Washington, DC, USA.
E-mail: Jlambert@worldbank.org
(Please see under Country Compass (Ghana) for more information on this workshop.)
GROWING FOREST PRODUCTS IN YOUR COMMUNITY
VIRGINIA, USA
12-13 AUGUST 1999
This course was designed to assist communities in increasing forest products industry recruitment and offered an opportunity to gain information on industry resources, meet key industry contacts and learn economic development strategies for business development. Among the topics covered was Special Forest Products: what they are, how they relate to Southwest Virginia and how they can help economic development in rural areas.
For more information, please visitwww.conted.vt.edu/forestry/community.htm
THE WORLD'S NATURAL FORESTS AND THEIR ROLE IN GLOBAL PROCESSES
KHABAROVSK, RUSSIA
15-20 AUGUST 1999
For more information, please contact: Dr Victor Grek.
Fax: +7-4212-216798
E-mail:sergey@niilkh.khabarovsk.su
AFRICA NODE MOUNTAIN FORUM
NAIROBI, KENYA
24-26 AUGUST 1999
The meeting was organized within the framework of Agenda 21, Chapter 13 «Sustainable Mountain Development» and as a follow-up to the recommendations of the Mountain Forum Facilitating Committee. It was supported by the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), and was sponsored by FAO, UNEP, ILRI and ICRAF. The meeting was attended by 27 participants, including a number of national, regional and international institutions. Among the subjects discussed, and decided, was the setting up of an African Network on Mountains. This network will constitute the African node of the Mountain Forum, to which it will be affiliated.
For more information, please contact: Mr El Hadji M. Sene, Director, Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme de Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy
Fax: +39-06-57055137
E-mail: elhadji.sene@fao.org
INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON SEABUCKTHORN
BEIJING, CHINA
30 AUGUST - 2 SEPTEMBER 1999
This workshop was sponsored by the International Centre for Research and Training on Seabuckthorn (ICRTS), together with the Chinese Ministry of Water Resources and the United Nations Development Programme.
For more information, please contact: Ms Meng Xiaotang, ICRTS, Jia 11, Yuetanbeixiaojie, Beijing 100037, China.
Fax: +86-10-63204032/63204167
E-mail: icrts@public.east.cn.net
SCIENTIFIC SEMINAR ON THE FULL VALUE OF FORESTS TO SOCIETY
THURGAO, SWITZERLAND
5 SEPTEMBER 1999
This seminar was organized by the European Forest Institute (EFI) and aimed to present and open a discussion on its ongoing research, as well as that of its member organizations. The topics included the issues of societal, economic and environmental values of forests to society and the implementation through policies to facilitate gaining the full value.
For more information, please contact: European Forest Institute, Torikatu 34, FIN- 80100 Joensuu, Finland.
Fax. +358-13-124-393
Email:efisec@efi.fi
www.efi.fi/
NEW APPROACHES TO INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY FORESTS FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
BELEM, BRAZIL
SEPTEMBER 1999
For more information, please contact: Mr Natalino Silva, Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation, CP 48, CEP 66240, Belem, Para, Brazil.
Fax: +55-91-226-9845
E-mail: natalino@cpatu.embrapa.br
27TH INTERNATIONAL FORESTRY STUDENTS SYMPOSIUM
GERMANY (DIFFERENT CITIES)
9 TO 23 SEPTEMBER 1999
For more information, please contact: Mr Gunnar Josting, Koordinator, IFSS-Team Freiburg, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg D-79106, Germany.
E-mail:josting@mail.uni-freiburg.de
www.ifsa.net/ifss/ifss99/index.htm
(Please see under News and Notes for more information.)
FOOD AND FORESTRY: GLOBAL CHANGE AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES.
READING, UNITED KINGDOM
20-23 SEPTEMBER 1999
For more information, please contact: Mr John Ingram, NERC Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, GCTE Focus 3 Office, Crowmarsh Gifford, Wallingford, Oxon OX10 3BB, UK.
Fax: +44-1491-692313.
E-mail: j.ingram@ioh.ac.uk .
www.elsevier.nl:80/homepage/sag/gcte99/
CONSERVATION AND SUSTAINABLE USE OF PLANT BIODIVERSITY
CHANIA, GREECE
27 SEPTEMBER-9 OCTOBER 1999
For more information, please contact: Mr Melpo Skoula, Mediterranean Agronomic Institute of Chania, PO Box 85, GR-73 100 Chania, Greece.
Fax: +30-821-81154
E-mail: melpo@maich.gr
www.maich.gr
FOREST COMMUNITIES IN THE THIRD MILLENNIUM: SUPPORTING NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCT ENTREPRENEURS WITH FOREST INVENTORY SCIENCE - FIRST INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS IN COLD TEMPERATE AND BOREAL FORESTS.
KENORA, ONTARIO, CANADA
1-4 OCTOBER 1999
The Conference was organized and led by a steering committee composed of representatives from the: Natural Resources Canada (Canadian Forest Service), USDA Forest Service, University of Victoria, Manitoba Model Forest, National Aboriginal Forestry Association and the Taiga Institute for Land, Culture and Economy. Main conference sponsors were the Government of Canada, Industry Canada, the USDA Forest Service and the Lake of the Wood business association. The Conference was attended by 154 participants (mainly from Canada, USA and Mexico, but also from Russia and China) and included senior government officials, researchers, technical experts, representatives of NGOs, indigenous peoples and the private sector.
The main objectives of the Conference were to:
· assess NTFPs as new economic development options for aboriginal and other forest communities;
· exchange information between entrepreneurs, government officials and scientists;
· explore the use of local knowledge and forest inventory science for sustainable NTFP harvesting and conservation monitoring;
· examine sustainable harvesting methods; and
· assess NTFPs as an economic development option.
The Conference aimed at facilitating the growth of a sustainable NWFP sector by integrating current market trends in the natural products industry with recent advances in forest inventory science and knowledge of local NWFP entrepreneurs and harvesters. Options were further explored for an environmentally sustainable, socially equitable and economically profitable development of the NWFP sector in North America. Key NWFPs reviewed were mushrooms, medicinal plants, berries, handicrafts and floral greens, essential oils, resins, maple and birch syrups, nuts, forest vegetables, wild rice and wildlife for hunting and furs.
Mr Paul Vantomme, Forestry Officer (NWFP), represented FAO and was the opening keynote speaker. Conference participants were very interested in learning from successful experiences on NWFP management and utilization from developing countries and looked to FAO as a neutral forum and centre of excellence for information sharing and for exploring ways of collaboration and mutual support.
For more information, please contact: Mr Iain Davidson-Hunt, Taiga Institute for Land, Culture and Economy. 300-120 Second St. S., Kenora, ON, Canada P9N 1E9.
Fax +1-807-468-4893
E-mail: taiga-institute@voyageur.ca
THE HIGH-LEVEL CONSULTATION ON RURAL WOMEN AND INFORMATION
ROME, ITALY
4-6 OCTOBER 1999
Organized by FAO at its Rome Headquarters with the aim to discuss ways of better informing decision-makers, media and the public at large on the essential role of rural women in agricultural development and their contribution to food security.
For more information, please contact: Women and Population, Sustainable Development Dimensions, Sustainable Development Department (SD), FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
www.fao.org/Gender/highlcon/default.htm
SPECIAL NEEDS AND REQUIREMENTS OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES WITH LOW FOREST COVER AND UNIQUE TYPES OF FORESTS
TEHRAN, IRAN
4-8 OCTOBER 1999
A paper on NWFPs in low forest cover countries was prepared by FAO and discussed at the meeting.
For more information, please contact: Mr J. Ball, Coordinator, Forest Programmes Coordination and Information Unit, Forestry Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
E-mail: james.ball@fao.org
or Mr Gamal Mohamed Ahmed, FAO Representative, PO Box 15875-4557, Teheran, Iran.
E-mail: FAO-IRN@field.fao.org
CONGRESO DE ORDENACIÓN Y GESTIÓN SOSTENIBLE DE MONTES - GESTIONAR PARA EL FUTURO
SANTIAGO DE COMPOSTELA, ESPAÑA
4-9 DE OCTUBRE DE 1999
Para más información, dirigirse a:
Secretaria del Congreso
Galeras Nº 13, Oficina 4
15705 Santiago de Compostela, España.
Fax: (+34 981) 582133
correo electrónico:congreso_ordenacion@tragsatec.es
http://www.xunta.es/conselle/ma
USAID SUSTAINABLE TREE CROP DEVELOPMENT WORKSHOP «STRENGTHENING AFRICA'S COMPETITIVE POSITION IN GLOBAL MARKETS»
WASHINGTON, DC, USA
19-21 OCTOBER 1999
The meeting was aimed at reviewing and revising an operational framework to guide future efforts and shape a common agenda for the development of sustainable cocoa, coffee and cashew systems in Africa. The meeting was attended by 120 people from the United States, Europe and 10 African countries from a broad range of stakeholders including industry, farmer organizations, research institutions, trade organizations, commodity groups, governments, NGOs and international development agencies.
At the meeting, a paper by R. Leakey analysed the domestication of NWFPs and the role of agroforestry systems in meeting people's needs for food security and income generation. The paper was entitled «Win:Win landuse strategies for Africa: matching economic development with environmental benefits through tree crops».
For more information, please contact: Mr Jeff Hill, USAID.
jhill@afr-sd.org
THE GROWING ECONOMY OF MUSHROOMS
NANAIMO, BC. CANADA
23-24 OCTOBER 1999
Conference topics included:
· From the wild: BC native species of culinary and medicinal mushrooms;
· Mushroom cultivation - focusing on speciality and organic production;
· Managing forest lands for multiple value;
· Products and services for mushroom lovers;
· New products and research in pharmaceutical and nutraceutical fungi;
· Selling your mushroom product - a marketing panel;
· Doing business with first nations;
· Mushrooms: a walk on the wild side - introduction to gathering and identification;
· Cultivating mushrooms on wood, wood waste and other media;
· Managing forest land and woodlots for multiple values including mushroom production;
· Innovation and marketing of mushroom products and services; and
· The science and technology of pharmaceutical and nutraceutical fungi.
For more information, please contact: Ms Marilyn Hutchinson
E-mail:info@mistic.island.net
www.mistic.island.net
COMBATING DESERTIFICATION WITH PLANTS
BEER SHEVA, ISRAEL
1-5 NOVEMBER 1999
This Conference was organized by IPALAC and sponsored by UNESCO's Division of Ecological Sciences, Finland's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Israel's Center for International Development Cooperation (MASHAV).
For more information, please contact: Mr Arnie Schlissel, Administrative Coordinator, IPALAC - International Programme for Arid Land Crops, c/o Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva, Israel 84105.
Fax: 972 7 647 2984
email: ipalac@bgumail.bgu.ac.il
(Please see under International Action for more information on IPALAC.)
SUPPORTING LOCAL NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT: INSTITUTIONAL, COMMUNICATION AND ECONOMIC OPTIONS - A REGIONAL WORKSHOP FOR THE NEAR EAST/MEDITERRANEAN
FETHIYE, TURKEY
1-5 NOVEMBER 1999
For more information, please contact: Forestry Extension Officer, Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
or
Suade Arancli, Ministry of Forestry, Ataturk Bulvar_ 06100 No:153, Bakanl_klar-Ankara, Turkey.
E-mail: sarancli@yahoo.com
(See International Action for more information on this workshop.)
INTERNATIONAL MEETING: «INFORMATION NETWORKING ON MEDICINAL PLANTS, TOWARDS A GLOBAL STRATEGY»
NEW DELHI, INDIA
17 TO 19 NOVEMBER 1999
Organized by the International Development Research Centre (IDRC), Canada, the purpose of this international meeting was to advise on the development of a framework for better and more effective information networking systems for multi-stakeholders working on medicinal plants. The meeting brought together an international group of medicinal plant experts from diverse disciplines to focus global attention on medicinal plants and to promote regional and international collaboration networks that will influence policies and promote strategic actions on medicinal plants. The meeting resulted in the elaboration and review of a set of guidelines for the conception, design, mission and implementation procedures of a global medicinal plants conservation network "Medplanet", for which start-up funding will be provided by IDRC. Mr Paul Vantomme, Forestry Officer (NWFP) represented FAO.
For more information, please contact: Mr Joachim Voss, Senior Research Manager, Programs Branch, IDRC, 250 Albert Street, PO Box 8500, Ottawa, Canada K1G 3HP.
Fax: +1-613-567-7749
E-mail:jvoss@idrc.ca
www.bellanet.org/medplants
WORKSHOP ON NATIONAL LEVEL CRITERIA AND INDICATORS FOR SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT OF DRY FORESTS IN SOUTH ASIA
BHOPAL, INDIA
29 NOVEMBER-2 DECEMBER 1999
For more information, please contact: Dr Ram Prasad, Director, Indian Institute of Forest Management, PO Box 357, Nehru Nagar, Bhopal, India-462 003
Fax: +91-755-772878
E-mail: ramprasad@iifm.org
or
Mr P. Durst, Regional Forestry Officer, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (RAP), Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: +66-2-280-0445
E-mail: patrick.durst@fao.org
INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON PROMOTING COOPERATION FOR BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION AND SUSTAINABLE RURAL DEVELOPMENT IN MOUNTAIN ECOSYSTEMS: THE CASE OF ANDES AND THE HIMALAYAS
KATHMANDU, NEPAL
29 NOVEMBER - 2 DECEMBER 1999
For more information, please contact: Mr Alejandro Camino D.C., HimalAndes Initiative, Independencia 461, Miraflores, Lima 18, Peru.
Fax: +511-444-3396
E-mails: acamino@mail.cosapidata.com.pe or acamino@apu.cbc.org.pe .
www2.mtnforum.org/mtnforum/archives/reportspubs/library/himal99a.htm
ATELIER RÉGIONAL SUR LES FEMMES ET LES FORÊTS DENSES ET HUMIDES D'AFRIQUE CENTRALE
MBALMAYO, CAMEROUN
30 NOVEMBRE-2 DÉCEMBRE 1999
Cet atelier, organisé par le Réseau Femmes Africaines pour le Développement Durable (REFADD), une ONG camerounaise a regroupé une quarantaine de participants: représentants de l'ONADEF (Office National pour le Développement des Forêts), de la coopération canadienne, du bureau régional de l'UNESCO, des syndicats forestiers, des organisations internationales, (UICN et CIFOR), des initiatives sous-régionales REPOFBAC (Réseau des experts en politiques forestières dans le Bassin du Congo).
A l'atelier, un papier sur les nécessités de l'éducation environnementale des femmes et de leur intégration dans la gestion des ressources naturelles a été présenté. Le papier, intitulé «Gestion des produits forestiers non-ligneux en zone de forêt humide du Cameroun» avait été préparé par Danielle Lema Ngono, Ousseynou Ndoye et Antoine Eyebe du CIFOR.
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: Mme. Jeanne Marie Mindja, Coordinatrice - communication du reseau REPOFBAC/REFADD, Présidente Groupe des Amis de l'UNESCO et de l'Environnement "GRAMUE", BP 12909, Yaoundé, Cameroun
Fax: +237-23.73.59
E-mail: jmindja@africom-net.com
SÉMINAIRE INTERNATIONAL SÉCHAGE/VALORISATION KARITÉ/AIELÉ
YAOUNDE, CAMEROUN
1-3 DECEMBRE 1999
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: M. Pape Koné, Forestier Principal, Bureau régional pour l'Afrique (RAF), PO Box 1628, Accra, Ghana
Fax : +233-21-668427
E-Mail : Pape.Kone@fao.org
INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN SEMI-ARID REGIONS - WORLD SEMI-ARID '99
PARAIBA, BRAZIL
6-9 DECEMBER, 1999
For more information, please contact: Prof. Dorival C. Bruni, President, Brazilian Society for the Environment (BIOSFERA), P.O. Box 2432, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, CEP: 20001-970, Brazil.
Fax: +55-21-221-0155/ 2217626
E-mail:biosfera@biosfera.com.br
http://www.biosfera.com.br
1ÈRE RÉUNION SUR LES ESPÈCES LIGNEUSES MÉDICINALES AFRICAINES
COTONOU, BÉNIN
15-17 DÉCEMBRE 1999
Cette réunion, organisée dans le cadre du Programme des Ressources Génétiques Forestières en Afrique au Sud du Sahara (SAFORGEN) de l'IPGRI, avait pour objectif la définition des priorités pour la sélection des espèces ligneuses médicinales africaines pour l'établissement d'un réseau.
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: E. Adjanohoun, Directeur du CENPREBAF (Centre Pilote Régional de la Biodiversite Africaine), Campus Universitaire d'Abomey-Calavi (UNB), 07 B.P. 0168 Cotonou 07, Benin
Fax: +229-32-18-62
IUFRO - CAIRNS 2000. DEVELOPING POLICIES TO ENCOURAGE SMALL-SCALE FORESTRY
CAIRNS, AUSTRALIA
9-13 JANUARY 2000
For more information, please contact: Dr John Herbohn
E-mail: john.herbohn@jcu.edu.au
TOURFOR PRESENTATION
LONDON, ENGLAND
20 JANUARY 2000
Buckinghamshire Chilterns University College organized a one-day event at the Millennium Dome, London, to present the proposals for a new environmental award for tourism and recreation in forests. This is the concluding event for the Tourfor (Tourism in Forests) project, a three-year European Community Life project funded by the Directorate General XI (environment) seeking to encourage environmentally sensitive tourism and recreation to support sustainable forest management.
For more information, please contact: Buckinghamshire University College, Wellesbourne Campus, Kingshill Road, High Wycombe, HP13 5BB, UK.
Fax: +44-01494 465432
www.tourfor.com/
THE RATTANS OF AFRICA
LIMBE BOTANIC GARDEN, CAMEROON
1-3 FEBRUARY 2000
This International Expert Meeting brought together for the first time the experts concerned with rattan research and development in Africa and presented the current «state of the knowledge» of the rattan sector in key areas of the continent. The meeting also made recommendations and drew up an appropriate strategy by which rattans can meaningfully contribute to the sustainable development of the forests of western and central Africa.
For more information, please contact: Mr Terry Sunderland, African Rattan Research Programme, Herbarium, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 3AB, UK.
Fax: +44(0)181-332-5278
E-mail:afrirattan@aol.com
or
Mr Jean-Pierre Profizi, PAFT Gabon, BP 199, Libreville, Gabon.
E-mail: paftgabon@internetgabon.com
www.africanrattanresearch_fsnet_co_uk.html
(Please see under Products and Markets for more information on rattans.)
SEMINAR ON "THE GUADUA (BAMBOO) IN RECONSTRUCTION"
ARMENIA, QUINDIO, COLOMBIA
10-12 FEBRUARY 2000
This workshop, partially sponsored by the Zeri Institute and the Handicrafts Association of Colombia, in cooperation with the Bamboo Society of Colombia, aimed to provide a way to increase synergy between government planning departments and innovative architecture under a program entitled «Grow your own house».
In the majority of the cities and fields of the municipalities that were affected by the earthquake of 25 January 1999, there has been a long tradition of utilizing the guadua in construction. Many individual houses, districts and complete towns were constructed utilizing the guadua bamboo as the central building element, which has over time resulted in the accumulation of a rich experience in the handling this bamboo material.
The objectives of the workshop were to: (i) offer the possibility to exchange research, methodologies and experiences in guadua from several points of view: environmental, cultivation, with special emphasis on housing and construction, and to open channels of marketing; and (ii) contribute to the process of reconstruction of the Cafetero Axis; utilizing the experiences found valid for bamboo constructions in zones of high earthquake risk.
For more information, please contact: Dr Ximena Londoño, President, Colombian Bamboo Society, A.A. 661 Armenia, Quindio, Colombia.
Fax +57-2-6683498 or +57-67-524005
E-mail: ximelon@armenia.multi.net.co
www.zeri.org/projects/growyourownhouse.htm
17er COLLOQUE INTERNATIONAL «SANTE, ENVIRONNEMENT ET SUBSTANCES NATURELLES»
METZ, FRANCE
17-20 FÉVRIER 2000
Le programme scientifique inclut :
· politique environnementale et conventions internationales concernant la protection de la nature et des plantes médicinales; et
· le rôle des plantes dans l'équilibre des écosystèmes et les accidents d'intoxications;
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: Laboratoire d'Ethnobotanique et de Pharmacologie, B.P. 4102, 57040 Metz Cedex 01, France.
Fax: +33-3-87364198
E-mail: soulimani@zeus.univ-metz.fr
DESIGNING MULTIPURPOSE RESOURCE INVENTORIES
TURRIALBA, COSTA RICA
21-25 FEBRUARY 2000
This international short course, sponsored by CATIE and IUFRO, provided grass-root and hands-on experience in designing multipurpose resource inventories (MRI). The aim was to train participants in the design of MRIs for use in their own countries.
For more information, please contact: Dr Miguel Caballero Deloya, Jefe. Area de Economía y Sociología de la Producción y la Conservación, Programa de Investigación, CATIE 7170. Turrialba, Costa Rica.
Fax: +506-556 8514.
E-mail: caballer@catie.ac.cr
PROTECTING KNOWLEDGE - TRADITIONAL RESOURCE RIGHTS IN THE NEW MILLENNIUM
VANCOUVER, BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA
24-26 FEBRUARY 2000
The Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs (UBCIC) hosted a three-day legal conference to explore traditional resource rights, or cultural and intellectual property rights issues, affecting all Indigenous Peoples. The target audience was British Columbia first nation community members and workers, representatives from indigenous peoples from around the world, as well as the traditional resource rights and academic communities.
For more information, please contact: Mr Donald Bain, Conference Coordinator, Protecting Knowledge, 5th Floor 342, Water Street, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Fax: +1-604-684-5726
E-mail: research@ubcic.bc.ca
www.ubcic.bc.ca/protect.htm
[Contents]
<section>9</section>
* CRITERIA AND INDICATORS FOR SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT AT THE FOREST MANAGEMENT UNIT LEVELNANCY, FRANCE21-25 MARCH 2000
* 37rd REGIONAL SEANN WORKSHOP ON COMMUNITY BASED NTFPS KATHMANDU, NEPAL 8-9 APRIL 2000
* LEARNING FROM RESOURCE USERS - A PARADIGM SHIFT IN TROPICAL FORESTRY, VIENNA, AUSTRIA 28-29 APRIL 2000
* MEDICINAL PLANTS, TRADITIONAL MEDICINES AND LOCAL COMMUNITIES IN AFRICA: CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES OF THE NEXT MILLENNIUM NAIROBI, KENYA 16-19 MAY, 2000
* SMALL-SCALE TREE AND FOREST PRODUCT ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC 24 MAY-8 JUNE 2000
* INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FOR MANAGING PLANT GENETIC DIVERSITY IN THE 21ST CENTURY KUALA LUMPUR, MALAYSIA 12-16 JUNE 2000
* MULTIPURPOSE MANAGEMENT OF MOUNTAIN FORESTS: CONCEPTS, METHODS, TECHNIQUES PRALOGNAN-LA-VANOISE, FRANCE 25-30 JUNE 2000
* REGIONAL CONFERENCE ON THE SHEA BUTTER TREE LIRA, UGANDA, 26-30 JUNE 2000
* CULTIVATING (IN) TROPICAL FORESTS: THE EVOLUTION AND SUSTAINABILITY OF INTERMEDIATE SYSTEMS BETWEEN EXTRACTIVISM AND PLANTATIONS KRAEMMERVIKA, BALLSTAD, NORWAY 28 JUNE-1 JULY 2000
* 2000 INTERNATIONAL ACADEMIC CONFERENCE ON TIBETAN MEDICINE LHASA, TIBET 15-17 JULY 2000
* XXI IUFRO WORLD CONGRESS KUALA LUMPUR, MALAYSIA 7-12 AUGUST 2000
* JOINT FAO/ECE/ILO SEMINAR ON HARVESTING OF NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS IZMIR, TURKEY 2-8 OCTOBER 2000
* 7th INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF ETHNOBIOLOGY - ETHNOBIOLOGY, BIOCULTURAL DIVERSITY, AND BENEFITS SHARING ATHENS, GEORGIA, USA 23-27 OCTOBER 2000
* THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON DACRYODES EDULIS AND OTHER NON-CONVENTIONAL OIL CROPS YAOUNDÉ, CAMEROON 29 NOVEMBER-1 DECEMBER 2000
* INTERNATIONAL TRAINING PROGRAMME ON SUSTAINABLE NTFP MANAGEMENT FOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT BHOPAL, INDIA 20 NOVEMBER-8 DECEMBER 2000
CRITERIA AND INDICATORS FOR SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT AT THE FOREST MANAGEMENT UNIT LEVELNANCY, FRANCE21-25 MARCH 2000
This International Conference, which is being organized by the IUFRO Task Force on Sustainable Forest Management, Ecosystèmes Forestiers (ECOFOR) and the European Forest Institute (EFI), is the third in a row of conferences. The first one took place in Melbourne, Australia, in August 1998, and the second in Costa Rica in November 1999.
For more information, please contact: Mr Olivier Laroussinie, GIP ECOFOR, 19 Avenue du Maine, 75372 Paris Cedex 15, France.
Fax: +33-1-45498839
E-mail:laroussinie@engref.fr
www.efi.fi/events/
37rd REGIONAL SEANN WORKSHOP ON COMMUNITY BASED NTFPS KATHMANDU, NEPAL 8-9 APRIL 2000
The 3rd Regional Workshop of the South East Asian Network on NTFP Management (SEANN) is being organized by the Institute of Forestry, Pokhara, Nepal, in collaboration with various institutions involved in NTFP management in Nepal and India.
For more information, please contact: Abhoy Kumar Das, Dean, Institute of Forestry, Pokhara, Nepal.
Fax: +977-1-279298
E-mail: iofdean@mos.com.np
LEARNING FROM RESOURCE USERS - A PARADIGM SHIFT IN TROPICAL FORESTRY? VIENNA, AUSTRIA 28-29 APRIL 2000
This workshop, which is being organized by the Austrian National Node of the European Tropical Forest Research Network, is looking for answers to the following questions:
· Why should we learn from local people?
· What can we learn from local people? What do they know? What are the limitations?
· How can we learn from local people? What are the opportunities, risks and needs?
A diverse pool of natural resource management expertise will share and collaboratively draw on experiences, explore commonalties and divergences of scientific and indigenous knowledge, particularly on timber as a resource. Ways forward, potentials, and conflicts will be equally discussed.
For more information, please contact: Ms Julia Roetzer, Austrian National Node of the European Tropical Forest Research Network, Institute of Forest Ecology, Universitaet fuer Bodenkultur, Peter Jordan Strasse 82, A-1190 Vienna, Austria.
Fax: +43-1-4797896
E-mail: jroetzer@woek.boku.ac.at
www.nuf.boku.ac.at/tf.htm
www.nuf.boku.ac.at/workshop42000/ws42000info_e.htm
MEDICINAL PLANTS, TRADITIONAL MEDICINES AND LOCAL COMMUNITIES IN AFRICA: CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES OF THE NEXT MILLENNIUM NAIROBI, KENYA 16-19 MAY, 2000
The Environment Liaison Centre International (ELCI) and the Global Initiative For Traditional Systems of Health (GIFTS of HEALTH), University of Oxford, United Kingdom, in collaboration with other organizations, are organizing this four-day international conference on the promotion and development of medicinal plants and traditional medicine in Africa. The conference, which will be composed of a combination of presentations and workshops, will be held parallel to the Fifth Meeting of the Conference of the Parties (COP-5) of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) to be convened in Nairobi, Kenya, 15-26 May 2000.
The conference will focus on issues relating to medicinal plants for traditional human and veterinary medicine, plant-derived pesticides and on aromatic and cosmetic plants. It is expected that the conference will be attended by government and donor representatives, scientists, researchers, policy-makers, conservationists, NGOs, health professionals, herbalists and traditional practitioners, etc.
Participants from other continents are also invited to attend the conference and share their experiences or learn about the new developments of the sector in Africa.
The conference objectives are to:
· assess the current situation of the sector and to disseminate information on the current activities, experiences and research initiatives and findings relating to medicinal plants and traditional medicine in Africa ;
· identify the key challenges and opportunities and perspectives involved in promoting medicinal plants and traditional medicine in Africa, and the practical lessons that can be learnt from the recent history of R&D in the sector;
· contribute to the knowledge base of medicinal plants, traditional medicine and traditional healing systems; and
· provide interested parties with updated information and action-oriented recommendations for the development of a medicinal plant-based cooperation in Africa and sustainable growth of the sub-sector.
For more information, please contact: Mr Ernest Rukangira, Environment Liaison Centre International P.O. Box 72461, Nairobi , Kenya.
Fax +2542-562175
E-mail: erukangira@iconnect.co.ke
or
Dr Gerard Bodeker, GIFTS of Health, Green College, University of Oxford, Oxford OX2 6HG, United Kingdom.
Fax: +44-01865-274796
E-mail: gerry.bodeker@green.oxford.ac.uk
www.nuffic.nl/ciran/announce/2000_05.html
SMALL-SCALE TREE AND FOREST PRODUCT ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC 24 MAY-8 JUNE 2000
This international training course is being organized by the Regional Community Forestry Training Center (RECOFTC) in collaboration with the Forest Department of Lao People's Democratic Republic. The course contents are primarily based on market analysis and development methodology (MA&D), which is designed specifically to assist tree and forest product entrepreneurs in taking advantage of these new marketing opportunities. This course provides middle management professionals with the skills necessary to facilitate the planning and development of small-scale forest enterprises.
For more information, please contact: Dr Somsak Sukwong, Director, Regional Community Forestry Training Center (RECOFTC), Kasetsart University, PO Box 1111, Bangkok 10903, Thailand.
Fax: +662-561-4880
E-mail: ftcsss@nontri.ku.ac.th
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FOR MANAGING PLANT GENETIC DIVERSITY IN THE 21ST CENTURY KUALA LUMPUR, MALAYSIA 12-16 JUNE 2000
This conference will critically review the state of the science concerning the conservation and sustainable management of plant genetic resources. The conference goal is to develop a global vision for the next century.
For more information, please contact: Ms Patti Sands, Assistant to the Deputy Director General (Programmes), IPGRI, Via delle Sette Chiese 142, 00145 Rome, Italy.
Fax: +39-065750309
E-mail: p.sands@cgiar.org
MULTIPURPOSE MANAGEMENT OF MOUNTAIN FORESTS: CONCEPTS, METHODS, TECHNIQUES PRALOGNAN-LA-VANOISE, FRANCE 25-30 JUNE 2000
For more information, please contact: Mr Martin Price, 11 Bevington Rd., Oxford OX2 6NB, UK.
Fax: +44-186-528-4691
E-mail: martin.price@ecu.ox.ac.uk
REGIONAL CONFERENCE ON THE SHEA BUTTER TREE LIRA, UGANDA, 26-30 JUNE 2000
The theme of the First Regional Conference for Eastern and Central Africa on the shea butter tree, Vitellaria paradoxa ssp. nilotica will be «The future of the nilotic shea butter tree: rural livelihoods, environment and fair trade». The Conference will be hosted by COVOL Uganda and the Shea Project for Local Conservation and Development (the Shea Project). The conference will bring together stakeholders from Uganda, Southern Sudan, and Ethiopia, with participants in attendance from several West African countries.
The purpose of the conference is to share knowledge and experience across the range of the shea parkland savannah. Participants will explore the cultural, nutritional, ethnobotanical, ecological, technical and economic dimensions of the shea butter tree and its non-wood products. Presentations and field visits will focus on practical and appropriate rural-based solutions to the economic development of this important woodland resource.
For more information, please contact: Mr Eliot Masters, Coordinator, the Shea Project COVOL Uganda, P.O. Box 833, Lira, Uganda.
E-mail:shea@covol.org
http://www.covol.org
CULTIVATING (IN) TROPICAL FORESTS: THE EVOLUTION AND SUSTAINABILITY OF INTERMEDIATE SYSTEMS BETWEEN EXTRACTIVISM AND PLANTATIONS KRAEMMERVIKA, BALLSTAD, NORWAY 28 JUNE-1 JULY 2000
An important dichotomy exists in the forest management debate between extraction and intensive management. This is usually reflected in the distinction between «natural forest management», which refers to basic resource collection in natural ecosystems, and «plantation forestry» of specialized, intensively managed stands of trees.
The reality of forest production is much more varied, with a continuum of production systems between these two extremes. Various intermediate systems have been described, both contemporary and historically, that involve management of existing forest resources, «enrichment planting» and fostering valuable species in natural forests, or incorporation of forest species into agricultural production systems. Technical models developed by indigenous forest managers range from integrated management of a particular resource in the native ecosystem to the total replacement of the original forest by artificial forest-like structures (forest-gardens, agroforests). In practice, many of these intermediate management models are used by smallholder farmers, outside natural forests, in complex tree gardens within predominantly agricultural areas.
Some question the economic and/or ecological sustainability or profitability of these kinds of systems, arguing that they are just stages of "primitive horticulture" in a transitional process that leads to modern agriculture or silviculture. This perception leads to a lack of adequate official acknowledgement and inadequate technical support for these indigenous systems.
Others argue that such intermediate systems are able to meet economic, ecological and social objectives much better than either extractive systems or specialized, intensive systems. In particular, they provide a good compromise between biodiversity and productivity considerations. Proponents argue that such systems are more than just transitional stages, but may be quite stable over long periods of time. If so, there is a strong rationale for investment and policy interventions to protect existing intermediate systems and to promote the expansion of the model.
This symposium, organized by the FORESASIA project and the Centre for International Forestry Research (CIFOR), acknowledges that intermediate systems can play an important role, and may indeed have potential for wider application.
For more information, please contact: Geneviève Michon, ENGREF, BP 5093, 34033 Montpellier Cedex 03, France.
Fax 33-4-67-07-71-01
E-mail: michon@engref.fr
2000 INTERNATIONAL ACADEMIC CONFERENCE ON TIBETAN MEDICINE LHASA, TIBET 15-17 JULY 2000
Tibetan medicine is an important integral part of Chinese traditional medicine. In the past 1 000 years, it has made a great contribution to the prosperity of the areas inhabited by those of Tibetan nationality in China. In addition, is also used as a health resource in modern Chinese society and has been developed continuously. Among the world's Tibetan researches, the academic status of Tibetan medicine is increasing daily. China has always paid great attention to the development of traditional medicine. Tibetan medicine has achieved remarkable success in the fields of clinical practice, research, personnel training, medicines and pharmaceutical manufacture, especially in the last 20 years.
Approved by the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology and the State Administration of Chinese Medicine and Pharmacy, the China Medical Association of Minorities, the Health Department of Tibet Autonomous Region and Tibet College of Tibetan Medicine will jointly sponsor this international conference.
For more information, please contact: Mr Zhu Guo Ben, President, China Medical Association of Minorities, No.11, Bei San Huan Dong Lu, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100029, China.
Fax: +86-010-64287404
E-mail:2000@CmAm.org.cn
www.cmam.org
XXI IUFRO WORLD CONGRESS KUALA LUMPUR, MALAYSIA 7-12 AUGUST 2000
The International Union of Forestry Research Organisations (IUFRO), a renowned international body in forestry research, has entrusted Malaysia to host the prestigious XXI IUFRO World Congress. This Congress will see the convergence of 3 000 foreign and local participants, making it the largest scientific congress on forestry to be held in Malaysia, the first developing country ever to host the Congress in the 100 years history of IUFRO.
The theme of the Congress, "Forests and society: the role of research", was chosen to reflect the increasing importance of research and development in sustainable forest management. The Congress, with the support of the Malaysian Government, will be organized by the Organizing Committee headed by Forest Research Institute Malaysia (FRIM).
The Congress will cover pertinent issues such as sustainable management of natural resources, forest and society needs, changes in environment and society, cultural diversity in forest management and the global vision of forest and society. A renowned speaker will address each of these topics at the Congress during the keynote addresses.
Apart from keynote addresses, there will be numerous scientific sessions comprising technical paper and poster presentations based on the above theme and issues.
There will be a one-day in-congress tour to the Klang Valley, which will be related to forestry activities to highlight Malaysia's commitment towards achieving sustainable forest management.
The promotional activities have brought encouraging response from scientists, forest managers, planners and decision-makers worldwide. By June 1999, over 1 700 participants from 104 countries had expressed interest in participating. Similarly, the Congress Scientific Committee has received more than 2000 abstracts. Out of the total, about 500 papers and 1 000 posters will be selected for presentation.
For more information and to receive a registration package, please contact: Chairman, Congress Organising Committee, XXI IUFRO World Congress, Forest Research Institute Malaysia (FRIM), 52109 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Fax: +603 636 5687/6367753
E-mail:iufroxxi@frim.gov.my
http://frim.gov.my/iufro.html
http://iufro.boku.ac.at/iufro/congress/
JOINT FAO/ECE/ILO SEMINAR ON HARVESTING OF NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS IZMIR, TURKEY 2-8 OCTOBER 2000
The seminar is being organized under the auspices of the Joint FAO/ECE/ILO Committee on Forest Technology, Management and Training with the participation of the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations and in cooperation with the Turkish Government.
The seminar will offer the opportunity to exchange experience and share state-of-the-art knowledge on recent developments in forest harvesting, trade and marketing practices for NWFPs, as well as their potential importance for socio-economic development.
It will, in particular, discuss issues on sustainable forest operations and improved utilization of NWFPs, as well as the reduction of environmental impacts and wastes in the forests and processing facilities. The seminar will also cover financial, organizational and administrative support measures being taken by governments, the private sector, and NGOs to promote the sustainable utilization of NWFPs, and their importance for development, employment and income generation, particularly for local populations.
It is expected that the seminar will offer an overview of trends on environmentally friendly forest operations and processing of NWFPs, their importance within the forestry sector, changes needed and guidelines for their implementation.
The seminar shall also provide an overview of existing training, education and extension facilities and needs to enhance the promotion of the efficient and reduced impact utilization of NWFPs.
For more information, please contact: Mr Joachim Lorbach, Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch, Forestry Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: +39-06-57055618
E-mail:joachim.lorbach@fao.org
or Dr Erkan Ispirli, Department Chief of Foreign Relations and EC Department, Orman Bakantigi, Atatürk Bulvari, 153, 06199 Bakanliklar/Ankara, Turkey.
Fax: +90-312-4179160
E-mailobdi-f@tr.net-net.tr
7th INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF ETHNOBIOLOGY - ETHNOBIOLOGY, BIOCULTURAL DIVERSITY, AND BENEFITS SHARING ATHENS, GEORGIA, USA 23-27 OCTOBER 2000
The International Society of Ethnobiology (ISE) will hold its 7th International Congress in Georgia, United States. The theme of the Congress, symbolized by the turtle, is earth in the next century-specifically ethnobiology's role in maintaining biocultural diversity and ensuring equitable benefits-sharing and open dialogue with traditional and indigenous research collaborators.
Since its founding in 1988 in Belém, Brazil, the ISE has met every two years. Subsequent congresses have been held in Kunming, China (1990), Mexico City (1992), Lucknow, India (1994), Nairobi, Kenya (1996), and Whakatane, New Zealand (1998).
The ISE 7th Congress Planning Committee is calling for symposia and/or papers on:
· ethnobiology of human health;
· intellectual property rights and ethnobiological research;
· conservation of biological and cultural diversity;
· sustainable development of plant resources;
· collaborative research protocols; and
· benefits-sharing and drug discovery initiatives by indigenous, traditional, and local communities, and scientists to conserve biological diversity;
Following its traditional format, the 7th Congress will be preceded by a number of pre-congress training workshops, which focus on topics relevant to particular geographical areas or specialized interests.
For more information, please contact: 7th International Congress of Ethnobiology, c/o John R. Stepp, Department of Anthropology, The University of Georgia, 250 Baldwin Hall, Athens, GA 30602-1619, USA.
E-mail:rstepp@uga.edu
www.guallart.dac.uga.edu/ISE
THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON DACRYODES EDULIS AND OTHER NON-CONVENTIONAL OIL CROPS YAOUNDÉ, CAMEROON 29 NOVEMBER-1 DECEMBER 2000
For more information, please contact: Dr Joseph Kengue, Executive Secretary, African Safou Network (ASANET), PO Box 2067, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
Fax: +237-237571
E-mail:irad@camnet.cm
INTERNATIONAL TRAINING PROGRAMME ON SUSTAINABLE NTFP MANAGEMENT FOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT BHOPAL, INDIA 20 NOVEMBER-8 DECEMBER 2000
For more information, please contact: Dr Ram Prasad, Director, Indian Institute of Forest Management, PO Box 357, Nehru Nagar, Bhopal, India-462 003.
Fax: +91-755-772878
E-mail:ramprasad@iifm.org
[Contents]
<title>Non-Wood News No. 7</title>
Alvarez Torres, M. 1999. Sistema tradicional de alimentación de patos y gallinas en una comunidad negra del Pacífico colombiano. Programa Bosque Húmedo. Medellín, Colombia, Fundación Espavé, 55.
Anderson, J., Warner, K., Russo, L. & Qwist-Hoffmann, H. 1999. The challenges of extension for non-wood forest products. Unasylva, 50(198):54-57.
Arnold, J.E.M. 1998. The role of non-timber forest products in conservation and development. In E. Wollenberg & A. Ingles (eds). Incomes from the forest: methods for the development and conservation of forest products for local communities. Bogor, Indonesia, CIFOR, p.17-41.
Arnold, M.J.E, & Bird, P. 1999. Forests and the poverty-environment nexus. Paper prepared for the UNDP/EC Expert workshop on Poverty and Environment, Brussels, Belgium.
Arnold, M.J.E. & Dewees, P. 1997. Farms, trees & farmers: responses to agricultural intensification. London. Earthscan Publications Ltd. Earthscan Publications Ltd., 120 Pentonville Road, London N1 9JN Fax: +44-0171-278-1142. E-mail: earthinfo@earthscan.co.uk
http://www.earthcan.co.uk
Assies, W. 1999. Amazon nuts, forests and sustainability in Bolivia and Brazil. In M. Ros-Tonen (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation, p.95-106.
Bahuchet, S. 1998. Viande sauvage et restauration de rue au Cameroun: le cas de Yaoundé. APFT Briefing n.8. Bruxelles, Avenir des Peuples des Forêts Tropicales.
APFT - Conseil Scientifique. Dr S. Bahuchet, Lacito-CNRS, rue l'Amiral Mouchez, 75014 Paris, France. Fax: +33-1-45 80 59 83. E-mail: bahuchet@msh-paris.fr
Bahuchet, S. 1998. Le cacao et l'antilope, ou: pourquoi il ne faut pas laisser faire du chocolat à l'huile végétale...(le cas du Cameroun). APFT Briefing n.9. Avenir des Peuples des Forêts Tropicales, Bruxelles.
APFT - Conseil Scientifique. Dr. S. Bahuchet, Lacito-CNRS, rue l'Amiral Mouchez, 75014 Paris, France. Fax: +33-1-45 80 59 83. E-mail: bahuchet@msh-paris.fr
UNASYLVA
Special issue on nwfp
Barham, B.L., Coomes, O.T. & Takasaki, Y. 1999. Rain forest livelihoods: income generation, household wealth and forest use. Unasylva, 50(198): 34-42.
Belcher, B. 1998. A production-to-consumption system approach: lessons from the bamboo and rattan sectors in Asia. In E. Wollenberg & A. Ingles (eds). Incomes from the forest: methods for the development and conservation of forest products for local communities. Bogor, Indonesia, CIFOR.
Binot, A. 1999. La filière viande à Libreville. APFT news N. 7. Avenir des Peuples des Forêts Tropicales, Bruxelles, p.13-15.
For copies, please contact: Theodore Trefon, APFT, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 44 Av, Jeanne - CP 124, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgique. Fax: +32-2-650 37 98. E-mail: ttrefon@ulb.ac.be
Bishop, J.T. 1998. The Economics of Non-Timber Forest Benefits: An Overview. Gatekeeper 98-01. London, IIED. 17 pp.
Boffa, J.-M. 1999. Agroforestry parklands in Sub-Saharan Africa. Conservation Guide. Rome, FAO. In press.
Boyd, C., Blench, R., Bourn, D., Drake, L. & Stevenson, P. 1999. Reconciling interests among wildlife, livestock and people in Eastern Africa: a sustainable livelihoods approach. ODI Natural Resource Perspectives, N. 45, June 1999.
Bruce, J. W. 1999. Legal bases for the management of forest resources as common property. Community Forestry Note 14. Rome, FAO.
Buitrón, X. 1999. Ecuador: uso y comercio de plantas medicinales, situación actual y aspectos importantes para su conservación. TRAFFIC. Para más información, dirigirse a: Ximena Buitrón, TRAFFIC's South America Project Office, Av. Atahualpa Nº 955 y República, Quito, Ecuador, (+593 2) 466622/ 23; correo electrónico: ximena@uicnsur.satnet.net; Maija Sirola, TRAFFIC International en el Reino Unido, (+44 1) 223 277 427; correo electrónico: maija.sirola@trafficint.org.
Bulte, E.H. & van Kooten, G.C. 1999. Economic efficiency, resource conservation and the ivory trade ban. Ecological economics 28(2): 171.
Byron, N. & Arnold, M.J.E. 1999. What future for the people of the tropical forests? World Development, 27(5).
Caspary, H-U. 1999. When the monkey `goes butcher' : hunting, trading and consumption of bushmeat in the region of the Taï National Park. Southwest Côte d'Ivoire. In M. Ros-Tonen (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation, p.123-130.
Chang, Y.K., Silva, M. R., Gutkoski, L.C., Sebio, L., Da Silva, M.A.A.P. 1998. Development of extruded snacks using jatobá (Hymenaea stigonocarpa) flour and cassava starch blends. Journal of Science of Food and Agriculture, 78(1): 59-66.
Chuen, W.W., Derek Eaton & Dan Y. M. 1998. Estimation of petai consumption in the Klang Valley in Peninsular Malaysia. In S.S. Lee, Y.M. Dan, I. Gauld & J. Bishop. Conservation, management and development of forest resources. Proceedings of the Malaysia-United Kingdom Programme Workshop 21-24 October 1996. Forest Research Institute Malaysia, p.212-226.
Coomes, O. T. 1999. Tropical forests and shifting cultivation: secondary forest fallow dynamics among traditional farmers of the Peruvian amazon. Ecological Economics, 32(1): 109-124.
Da Silveira, R. & Thorbjarnarson, J.B. 1999. Conservation implications of commercial hunting of black and spectacled caiman in the Mamiraua Sustainable Development Reserve, Brazil. Biological conservation, 88(1): 103
Dantas de Araujo, F., Prendergast, H. & Mayo, S. (eds) 1999. Plantas do Nordeste. Anais do I Workshop Geral.
It includes papers on the floristics of the upland brejo regions of NE Brazil, the xeropthytic caatinga and carrasco communities, forage and medicinal plants, and the Living Pharmacy Project.
For copies, please contact: Dr. Hew Prendergast, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey, TW9 3AE, UK.
Fax: + 44 181 332 5278
de Beer, J. 1999. Applied NTFP research for local forest resource management. In Ros-Tonen, M. (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. The Tropenbos Foundation, Wageningen, the Netherlands, p.167-168.
de Jong, W. 1999. Taking non-timber forest products out of the forest: management, production and biodiversity conservation. In M. Ros-Tonen (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation, p.145-158.
de Jong, W., Melnyk, M., Lozano, L.A., Rosales M., & García, M. 1999. Uña de gato: fate and future of a Peruvian forest resource. CIFOR Occasional Paper N. 22. 15 pp.
To order, please contact: CIFOR, P.O. Box 6596 JKPWB, Jakarta 10065, Indonesia. Fax: +62 (251) 622 100. E-mail: cifor@cgiar.org
http://cgiar.org/cifor
de Jong, W. & Utama, R. 1998. Turning ideas into action: planning for non-timber forest products development and conservation. In E. Wollenberg &,A. Ingles (eds). Incomes from the forest: methods for the development and conservation of forest products for local communities. Bogor, CIFOR, p.43-55
Defo, L. 1999. Des lianes très solicitées: les rotangs dans la proche campagne de Yaoundé. APFT news N. 7. Avenir des Peuples des Forêts Tropicales, Bruxelles, p. 9-12.
For copies, please contact: Theodore Trefon, APFT, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 44 Av, Jeanne - CP 124, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgique. Fax: +32-2-650 37 98. E-mail: ttrefon@ulb.ac.be
Dijk, J.F.W. van. 1999. Non-Timber Forest Products in the Bipindi-Akom II Region, Cameroon. A socio-economic and ecological assessment. Kribi, Cameroon, the Tropenbos-Cameroon programme, p.97.
Dijk, van, H. & Wiersum, F. 1999. NTFP resource management as an option for multiple-use forest management in South Cameroon. In M. Ros-Tonen (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation, p.115-122.
Dijkman, W., Boot, R.G.A. & Zuidema, P.A. 1999. Dynamics and sustainability of non-timber forest products extraction. In M. Ros-Tonen (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation, p.169-174.
Dijkman, W., Stoian, D., Henkesmans, A.B., Assies, W. & Boot, R.G.A.. 1998. Temporal and spatial dynamics in the extraction of non-timber forest products in the Northern Bolivia Amazon. In E. Wollenberg & A. Ingles (eds). Incomes from the forest: methods for the development and conservation of forest products for local communities. Bogor, Indonesia, CIFOR.
Duivenvoorden, J.F., Baslev, H., Cavalier, J., Grández, C., Toumisto, H. & Valencia R. 1999. Non-timber forest plant resource assessment in NW Amazonia. In M Ros-Tonen (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation, p.81-94.
Dürbeck, K. 1999. Green trade organizations: striving for fair benefits from trade in non-wood forest products. Unasylva, 50(198): 9-11.
Ehlers, D., Kirchhoff, J. & Quirin, K.W. 1998. High-performance liquid chromatography analysis of nutmeg and mace oils produced by supercritical CO2 extraction - comparison with steam-distilled oils - comparison of East Indian, West Indian and Paupaun oils. International journal of food science and technology, 33(3).
FAO. 1999. Urban and peri-urban forestry: case studies in developing countries. 1999. Rome. 194 pp.
For copies, please contact: Michelle Gauthier, Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department, FAO.
Fax: +39-06-57055137
E-mail: michelle.gauthier@fao.org
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific. 1999. Bamboo Research and Development. Project findings and recommendations. Terminal Report (FO:DP/PHI/85/008). Bangkok, United Nations Development Programme and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
For copies, please contact: FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, 39 Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand. Fax: +66-2-2800445
Font, X., & Tribe, J. (eds).2000. Forest tourism and recreation: case studies in environmental management. Wallingford, United Kingdom, CAB International. 304 pp.
Forte, J. 1999. Emerging local and global discourses on NTFP use and study: a view from Guyana. In M. Ros-Tonen (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation, p.33-42.
NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS OF CENTRAL AFRICA: CURRENT RESEARCH ISSUES AND PROSPECTS FOR CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT
This publication has been prepared by the Wood and Non-Wood Products Utilization Branch of the Forest Products Division, in close collaboration with CARPE and USAID, and funded by the USDA-Forest Service (Office International Programs). It is available electronically on the NWFP home page and will soon also be available in French.
Click here
Galetti, M., Fernandez, J.C. 1998. Palm heart harvesting in the Brazilian Atlantic forest: changes in industry and structure and the illegal trade. Journal of Applied Ecology, 35(2): 294-301
Gillingham,S.& Lee, Phyllis C. 1999. The impact of wildlife-related benefits on the conservation attitudes of local people around the Selous Game Reserve, Tanzania. Environmental conservation, 26(3): 218.
Gould, K., Howard A.F. & Rodriguéz G. 1998. Sustainable production of non-timber forest products: Natural dye extraction from El Cruce Dos Aguadas, Peten, Guatemala. Forest Ecology and Management, 11: 69-82.
Hammett, A.L. 1999. Special forest products: identifying opportunities for sustainable forest-based development (part 1). Virginia Forest Landowner Update, 13(1).
Hammett, A.L. 1999. Special forest products: identifying opportunities for sustainable forest-based development (part 2). Virginia Forest Landowner Update, 13(2).
Hegedus, A. & Szentesi, Z. 1999. Economic Importance of Non-Wood Forest Products in Hungary. Study-report. University of Sopron, Hungary, Department of Forestry Policy and Economics.
Heinen, J.T. & Mehta, J.N. 1999. Conceptual and legal issues in the designation and management of conservation areas in Nepal. Environmental Conservation, 26(1): 21.
Hmamouchi, M. 1999. Les plantes médicinales et aromatiques marocaines. 450 pp.
Contact: BP 6388 Rabat-Instituts. Rabat. Maroc. Fax: +212-76 02 591. E-mail: Hmamouchim@hotmail.com
Hutchings, A., Scott, A.H., Lewis, G. & Cunningham, A.B. 1996. Zulu medicinal plants: an inventory. P.B. X01, Scottsville, 3209, South Africa, University of Natal Press.
Fax: +027 331 26 05 801. E-mail: _ HYPERLINK mailto:books@press.unp.ac.za _books@press.unp.ac.za_
Inamdar, A., Brown, D. & Cobb, S. 1999. What's special about wildlife management in forests? Concepts and models of rights-based management with recent evidence from West-Central Africa. ODI Natural Resource Perspectives, No. 44, June 1999.
Ingles, A. W., Musch, A. & Qwist-Hoffmann, H. 1999. The participatory process for supporting collaborative management of natural resources: an overview. Forests, Trees and People Programme. Rome, FAO.
Kaimowitz, D. y Bojanic, A. 1998. Riberalta: extractivistas bajo una elite tradicional. En: Pacheco, P. y Kaimowitz, D. (eds). 1998. Municipios y gestion forestal en el tropico boliviano. Serie Bosques y Sociedad, Nº 3. La Paz, Bolivia, Centre for International Forestry Research, Centro de Estudio para el Desarrollo Laboral y Agrario, Taller de Iniciativas en Estudios Rurales y Reforma Agraria, Sustainable Forest Management Project, págs. 137-178.
Kanta, K., Dan, Y.M. & Tuan Marina. 1998. Economic significance of medicinal plants in Peninsular Malaysia. Forestry Department Peninsular Malaysia. 87 pp.
Kate, K. & Laird, S. A. 1999. The commercial use of biodiversity: access to genetic resources and benefit-sharing. London, Earthscan Publications Ltd.
Katz, E. 1998. L'exploitation du benjoin dans les hautes terres Batak: situation actuelle. In C. Guillaut (ed.). Histoire de barus: le site de Lobu Tua. Etudes et documents, I, Cahier d'Archipel no. 30. Paris, Association Archipel, p.243-264.
Keong, G.B. & Weinland, G. 1998. Multiple-use forest management and non-timber forest produce. In S. S. Lee, Y. M. Dan, I. Gauld, & J. Bishop. Conservation, management and development of forest resources. Proceedings of the Malaysia-United Kingdom Programme Workshop 21-24 October 1996. Forest Research Institute of Malaysia, p.178-194.
Kiyulu N'Yanga-Nzo. 1999. Menaces sur les forêts sacrées autour de Kinshasa. APFT news N. 7. Avenir des Peuples des Forêts Tropicales. Bruxelles, p.16-18.
For copies, please contact: Theodore Trefon, APFT, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 44 Av, Jeanne - CP 124, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgique. Fax: +32-2-650 37 98. E-mail: _ HYPERLINK mailto:ttrefon@ulb.ac.be _ttrefon@ulb.ac.be_
Kumar, A. & Sastry, C.B. 1999. The International Network for Bamboo and Rattan. Unasylva, 50(198): 48-53.
Kumari, K., Dan, Y.M., Ibrahim, T.M.T & Shafie, I. 1998. Economic significance of medicinal plants in Peninsular Malaysia. In S.S. Lee, Y.M. Dan, I. Gauld, & J. Bishop. Conservation, management and development of forest resources. Proceedings of the Malaysia-United Kingdom Programme Workshop, 21-24 October 1996. Forest Research Institute of Malaysia, p.227-278.
Leakey, R.B. 1999. Agroforestry for biodiversity in farming systems. In W.W. Collins & C.O. Qualset (eds) 1999. Biodiversity in Agroecosystems. Florida, CRC Press, Boca Raton.
Li, W.& Wang, H. Wildlife trade in Yunnan Province, China, at the border with Vietnam. TRAFFIC Bulletin, 18(1): 21-30.
Liese, W. 1998. The anatomy of bamboo culms. Technical report 18. Beijing, INBAR,
p.204.
Mayers, J. & Bass, S. 1999. Policy that works for forests and people. Series Overview. London, IIED.
Mills, J., Robbins, C.S. & Lee, S.K.H. 1999. Conservation Measures and International Trade Controls for Wild and Cultivated Ginseng. Paper presented to the International Ginseng Conference '99, Hong Kong 9-11 July 1999.
For more information, please contact: TRAFFIC International, 219c Huntingdon Road, Cambridge, CB3 0DL, UK. Fax: (44) 1223 277237. E-mail: traffic@trafficint.org
Nadeem M., Palni, L.M.S., Purohit A.N., Pandey, H. & Nandi, S.K. 1999. Propagation and conservation of Podophyllum hexandrum Royle: an important medicinal herb. Biological Conservation, 92(1): 121-129.
Ng, L.T. & Mohd, A.M.I. 1997. Trade in medicinal and aromatic plants in Malaysia (1986-1996). FRIM Reports. Forest Research Institute of Malaysia.
Niskanen, A. & Demidova, N. (eds) 1999. Research approaches to support non-wood forest products sector development: case of Arkhangelsk region, Russia. EFI Proceedings 29. 130 pp.
To order, please contact: European Forestry Institute, Torikatu 34, 80100 Joensuu, Finland
Fax: +358 13 124 393. E-mail: office@efi.fi
http://www.efi.fi
Nickerson, D.J. 1999. Trade-offs of mangrove area development in the Philippines. Ecological Economics, 28 (2): 279.
Olmos, S. 1999. Non-wood forest products: utilization and income generation in the Czech Republic, Finland and Lithuania. Unasylva, 50(198): 27-33
Overman, H. & Demmer, J. 1999. The effects of wealth on the use of forest resources: the case of the Tawahka Amerindians, Honduras. In M. Ros-Tonen (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation, p.107-114.
Pareek, O.P., Suneel Sharma, Arora, R.K. 1999. Underutilized edible fruits and nuts: an inventory of genetic resources in their regions of diversity. New Delhi IPGRI.
Pastore, F. 1999. Non-wood forest products in the Brazilian Amazon. 1999. Tropical Forest Update , 9(1): 9
Pierce, A.R. 1999. The challenges of NTFP certification. Journal of Forestry 97(2):34-37. USA, Society of American Foresters.
Pilz, D., Smith, J., Amaranthus M.P., Alexander, S., Molina, R. & Luoma, D. 1999. Mushrooms and timber: managing commercial harvesting in the Oregon Cascades. Journal of Forestry, 97(3): 4-11.
E-mail: dpilz/r6pnw_corvallis@fs.fed.us
Pineda, P. Marmillod, D. y Ferreira, P. 1998. Diseño y aplicación de un inventario forestal diversificado (productos maderables y no maderables) en Petén, Guatemala. En: BOLFOR, CIFOR, IUFRO. 1998. Memorias del Simposio internacional sobre posibilidad de manejo forestal sostenible en América Tropical. Santa Cruz, Bolivia, Proyecto de Manejo Forestal Sostenible, págs. 264-269.
Prasad, R. 1999. Joint forest management in India and the impact of state control over non-wood forest products. Unasylva, 50(198): 58-62.
Prasad, R. das, S. & Sinha, S. 1999. Value addition options for NTFP at primary collector's level. The International Forestry Review, 1(1): 17-21.
Prebble, C., Ella, A. & Subansenee, W. 1999. ITTO: making the most of NWFP. Tropical Forest Update, 9(1): 4-8.
Puri,S., Williams, A.J. (eds) 1999. Health Care and Development of Medicinal Plants. Proceedings, National Conference on Health Care and Development of Herbal Medicines, August 29-30, 1997. 1st ed. Raipur, India, Indira Gandhi Agricultural University. 472 pp.
Putz, F.E. 1999. Economics of home grown forestry. Ecological Economics, 32(1): 9-14.
Radomiljac, A.M., Ananthapadmanabho, H.S., Welbourn, R.M. & Satyanarayana Rao, K. 1998. Sandal and its products. Canberra, Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research.
Rahma Saleh, A.H. & N'Zala, D. 1999. Stratégies pour une gestion durable des ressources gommières au Tchad. Le Flamboyant, 51: 8-10.
Ricker, M. 1999. Enriching the rainforest with native fruit trees: an ecological and economic analysis in Los Tuxtlas (Veracruz, Mexico). Ecological Economics, 31(3): 439-448.
Rikhari, H.C., Palni, L.M.S. & Nandi, S.K. 1998. Himalayan yew: stand structure, canopy damage, regeneration and conservation strategy. Environmental Conservation, 25(4): 334
Rodriguez, C. A. & van der Hammen. M.C. 1999. Non-timber forest products and indigenous management of the forest in the Middle Caquetá river: complementarity and new options. In M. Ros-Tonen (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation, p.63-80.
Ros-Tonen, M. (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, The Tropenbos Foundation. 203 pp.
Ruiz Pérez, M. & Byron, N. 1999. A Methodology to Analyse Divergent Case Studies of Non-Timber Forest Products and their Development Potential. Forest Science, 45(1): 1-14
Ruiz-Perez, M., Ndoye, O. and Eyebe, A. 1999. Marketing of non-wood forest products in the humid forest zone of Cameroon. Unasylva, 50(198): 12-19
Salick J., Biun A., Martin G., Apin L.& Beaman R. 1999. Whence useful plants? A direct relationship among the Dusun of Mt. Kinabalu.
Biodiversity and Conservation , 8(6): 797-818.
Saastamoinen, O. 1999. Forest policies, access rights and non-wood forest products in northern Europe. Unasylva, 50(198): 20-26
Sandison, M., Muñoz, M., de Konig, J. & Sajeva, M. 1999. CITES: A user's guide.
This guide covers the aims, mechanisms, organization and enforcement of CITES and main plant groups subject to controls. It is available in English, French and Spanish.
Contact: Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey, TW9 3AE, UK.
Fax: + 44 181 332 5278
Sierra, R. 1999. Traditional resource-use system and tropical deforestation in a multi-ethnic region in North-west Ecuador. Environmental Conservation, 26(2): 136.
Smith, P.M. 1999. A review of studies on consumer attitudes towards forest products marketed with environmental, social and/or sustainability attributes. Rome, FAO.
For copies of this publication, please contact: Mr. L. Lintu, Senior Forestry Officer, Forest Products Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 0100 Rome, Italy.
Fax +39-06-57055618
E-mail: Leo.Lintu@fao.org .
Sodeinde, O.A. & Soewu, D.A. 1999. Pilot study of the traditional medicine trade in Nigeria. Traffic Bulletin, 18(1): 35-40.
Swanson, T. 1999. Property rights issues involving plant genetic resources: implications of ownership for economic efficiency. Ecological Economics, 32(1): 75-92.
Tabuna, H. 1999. Le marché des produits forestiers non-ligneux de l'Afrique Centrale en France et en Belgique: produits, acteurs, circuits de distribution et débouchés actuels. CIFOR Occasional paper 19.
E-mail: cifor@cgiar.org
http://cgiar.org/cifor
Taylor, D. 1999. Requisites for thriving rural non-wood forest products enterprises. Unasylva, 50(198): 3-8.
Tchatat, M. 1999. Produits forerstiers autres que le bois d'oeuvre (PFAB): place dans l'aménagement durable des forêts denses humides d'Afrique Centrale. Projet FORAFRI. CIRAD, CIFOR, CARPE, IRAD. Yaoundé, Cameroun.
Tewari, D.D. 1999. Income and employment generation opportunities and potential of non-timber forest products (NTFPs): a case study of Gujarat, India. Journal of Sustainable Forestry, 8(2): 55-76.
Tewari, D.D. 1999 Economics and management of non-timber forest products. A case study from Gujarat, India. New Delhi, Oxford and IBH Publishing Co. Pvt.Ltd. 164 pp.
The book is available from 66, Janpath, Oxford and IBH, New Delhi, India.
Tribe, J, Font, X., Griffiths, N., Vickery, R. & Yale, K. 2000. Environmental management of rural tourism and recreation. London, Cassell. 160 pp.
Valkenburg van, J. 1999. The potential for commercial NTFP extraction in East Kalimantan. In M. Ros-Tonen (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation, p.31-144.
NTFP RESEARCH IN THE TROPENBOS PROGRAMME: RESEARCH AND PERSPECTIVES
Seminar Proceedings, 28 January 1999
This publication has been prepared by the Tropenbos Foundation, with support from the Wood and Non-Wood Products Utilization Branch of FAO's Forest Products Division.
Van Andel, T. & Reinders, M. 1999. Non-timber forest products in Guyana Northwest district: potential and pitfalls. In M. Ros-Tonen (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation, p.47-62.
Van Damme, P. & Scheldeman, X. 1999. Promoting cultivation of cherimoya in Latin America. Unasylva, 50(198): 43-47.
Vandeergeest, P. 1999. Reply: Protected areas and property rights in Thailand. Environmental Conservation, 26(1): 7.
Varela, M.C. 1999. Cork and cork oak system. Unasylva, 50(197): 42-44.
Velasquez Runk, J. 1999. Not just timber. Tropical Forest Update, 9(1): 10-11.
Wa, L.S., Ibrahim, I. & Hone, A. 1998. Report on market study of Malaysian rattan and bamboo products. In S.S. Lee, Y.M. Dan, I. Gauld, & J. Bishop. Conservation, management and development of forest resources. Proceedings of the Malaysia-United Kingdom Programme Workshop, 21-24 October 1996. Malaysia, Forest Research Institute Malaysia, p.279-289.
Wieren, van, S. 1999. Towards the sustainable use of wildlife in tropical forests. In M. Ros-Tonen (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation, p.175-178.
Wiersum, F. 1999. Understanding diversity in NTFP management: a neglected issue in NTFP research. In M. Ros-Tonen (ed). 1999. Seminar proceedings: NTFP research in the Tropenbos Programme: results and perspectives, 28 January 1999. Wageningen, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation, p.161-167.
Wilkie, D. & Carpenter, J.F. 1999. Bushmeat hunting in the Congo Basin: an assessment of impacts and options for mitigation. Biodiversity and Conservation, 8(7): 927-955.
PRODUCTOS FORESTALES NO MADEREROS EN CHILE.
1998. Serie Forestal N° 10, RLC/FAO.
Los «productos forestales no madereros» (PFNM), cumplen un papel crucial en la vida diaria y en el bienestar de las comunidades locales, como una fuente de importantes insumos, tales corno alimentos, forraje, fertilizante, energía, fibra, medicinas, aceite, resina, goma y material de construcción, entre muchos otros. Constituyen también materia prima para innumerables industrias que procesan o producen, por ejemplo, muebles, aceites y artesanías. Favorecen así oportunidades de empleo y generan ingresos para las comunidades. También contribuyen a la conservación de la biodiversidad y a otros objetivos ambientales.
El presente documento, que ha sido preparado con los valiosos aportes de varios autores, bajo la coordinación de la Corporación de Investigaciones Tecnológicas (INTEC-CHILE), y reúne información sobre aspectos relevantes de los PFNM en Chile, que tienen un gran potencial de desarrollo en el país.
Para más información, dirigirse a:
Sr. T. Frisk, Oficial forestal superior
Oficina Regional para América Latina y el Caribe
Casilla 10095, Santiago, Chile.
Fax: +56-2-3372101/2/3
correo electrónico: Torsten.Frisk@field.fao.org
Wills, R.M, and Lipsey, R.G. 1999. An economic strategy to develop non-timber forest products and services in British Columbia. Forest Renewal BC Project No. PA97538-ORE. 115 pp. The document can be downloaded from http://fbminet.ca/bc
Wollenberg, E. and Ingles, A. 1998 . Incomes from the forest. Methods for the development and conservation of forest products and local communities. Bogor, Indonesia, CIFOR.
CIFOR, P.O. Box 6596 JKPWB, Jakarta 10065, Indonesia. Fax: +62 (251) 622 100
E-mail: cifor@cgiar.org
http://cgiar.org/cifor
Woon, W.C. and Poh, L.Y. 1998. The economic value of Parkia speciosa (petai) in Peninsular Malaysia. Forestry Department, Peninsular Malaysia and Forest Research Institute, Malaysia. 78 pp.
Wunder, S. 1999. Promoting forest conservation through ecotourism income? A case study from the Ecuadorian Amazon region. CIFOR Occasional Paper 21.
CIFOR, P.O. Box 6596 JKPWB, Jakarta 10065, Indonesia. Fax: +62 (251) 622 100
E-mail: cifor@cgiar.org
http://cgiar.org/cifor
[Contents]
<title>Non-Wood News No. 7</title>
<section>1</section>
Send your comments to: non-wood-News@fao.org
Not available in this issue
[Contents]
<section>2</section>
African Rattan Research Programme
www.africanrattanresearch_fsnet_co_uk.html
Ambio
www.ambiio.kva.se
A Modern Herbal
The hypertext version of A Modern Herbal, first published in 1931, by Mrs. M. Grieve; it contains medicinal, culinary, cosmetic and economic properties, cultivation and folklore of herbs.
www.botanical.com/botanical/mgmh/mgmh.html
Bamboo internet resources
www.esi.athenstn.com/wwt/Bamboo_Links.html
Free Searchable Non Timber Forest Product Bibliography Online
The web based international bibliographic database on NTFPs is a free, non-profit venture and is now online with over 1 300 entries. The database editorial committee is actively seeking authors to write critical reviews and abstracts for records. Details are on the Web site. Additionally, the editorial committee would like to know of any published materials on NTFPs not currently in the database.
The majority of records are currently in English because start-up funds originated from the U.S. National Assessment on Non-Timber Forest Products. However, the database reflects the fact that the majority of written material on NTFPs has occurred internationally. Options for expanding the database to include non-English publications pertaining to NTFPs are currently being explored. One challenge is to establish a multi-lingual oversight committee. www.ifcae.org/cgibin/ntfp/db/dbsql/db.cgi?db=bib&uid=default
Biodiversity Conservation Network
The Biodiversity Conservation Network (BCN), a component of the Biodiversity Support Program (BSP), is an innovative USAID-funded program working in the Asia/Pacific Region to provide grants for community-based enterprises that directly depend on biodiversity.
www.bcnet.org/about.htm
Community Based Natural Resource Management (CBNRM)
The general objective of this programme is to contribute to the sustainable enhancement of rural livelihoods in southern Africa by promoting a broader and deeper understanding of how natural resources can be used and managed sustainably through group based institutions and decision making.
www.cbnrm.uwc.ac.za/
The Ecotourism Society
www.ecotourism.org/
Exploring Urban Non-Timber Forest Products
The hidden nutritional, economic, cultural, and educational resources of the urban environment.
www.communityresources.org/ntfp.htm
Forêts & Dérivés
www.dplanet.ch/users/agabus
Greek Biotope Wetland Centre (EKBY)
www.ekby.gr/
Fantastic Forest by National Geographic.
www.nationalgeographic.com/forest/
Forest Trends
The mission of Forest Trends is to maintain and restore forest ecosystems by promoting incentives that diversify trade in the forest sector, moving beyond exclusive focus on lumber and fiber to a broader range of products and services.
www.forest-trends.org/
INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE
Below is a selection of Web sites dealing with indigenous knowledge (IK):
Ethnoforestry
This page of the Indian Institute of Forest Management's Web site provides a number of useful links on indigenous knowledge in forestry. It also carries a section of links on environmental ethics that points to information on ecological attitudes within different local communities and systems of thinking.
www.iifm.org/databank/ef/ethnoforestry.html
Indigenous Knowledge (IK)
This site was created and is maintained by the Centre for International Research and Advisory Networks (CIRAN) and aims to facilitate and improve the exchange of information within the International IK Network. CIRAN also provides the IK network with a journal and newsletter, the Indigenous Knowledge and Development Monitor, which is also available online
www.nuffic.nl/ik-pages/index.html
Indigenous Knowledge and Development Monitor
This newsletter focuses on the exchange of information on indigenous knowledge as it contributes to sustainable development. The monitor is published three times year and each issue contains three to six articles on the latest developments in various disciplines of IK research and practice.
www.nuffic.nl/ciran/ikdm/
Best Practices on Indigenous Knowledge
Nuffic-CIRAN and UNESCO have just finished the publication 'Best practices on indigenous knowledge'. This co-product is a contribution to all those efforts to show how indigenous knowledge can be put to good use in development practice.
The full text is available at: www.unesco.org/most/bpikpub.htm
The complete descriptions of the selected best practices can be found at: www.unesco.org/most/bpikreg.htm
MekongInfo.org
A regional information system on participatory natural resource management. The system is designed to provide a truly interactive platform to exchange and retrieve information and codified knowledge.
www.MekongInfo.org
M.P. State Minor Forest Produce (Trading and Development) Cooperative Federation, India
www.mfpfederation.com
PLANTS
Below are some of the several on-line databases dealing with plant names:
· The Global Plant Checklist Project
www.bgbm.fu-berlin.de/IOPI/GPC/default.htm
· Grey Card index
www.herbaria.harvard.edu/Data/Gray/
· Flora Europea
www.rbge.org.uk/forms/fe
· Palm and Palm-Related Links
www.plantapalm.com/vpe/vpe_links.htm
· The Plant Names Project
www.pnp.huh.harvard.edu/
Planet Ark
Provides access to information sources such as Reuters Daily Environmental News and Reuters Environmental News Picture, ABC World Environmental News, and educational software about the environment.
www.planetark.org
ProFound - Advisers in Development
www.thisisprofound.com/
Special Forest Products Web site
This Web site is a cooperative effort by the Center for Forest Products Marketing and Management, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, and the Southern Research Station, USDA Forest Service, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA.
www.sfp.forprod.vt.edu/
Tourfor (environmental management of tourism in forests) European Commission project
www.tourfor.com/
World Rainforest Movement - Movimiento Mundial Por Los Bosques
www.wrm.org.uy
NEWSLETTERS AND E-MAIL GROUPS
CTFS E-mail Group
The Center for Tropical Forest Science (CTFS) has created an e-mail discussion group to facilitate conversations within the network concerning research and other activities related to Forest Dynamics Plots (FDPs).
To join the discussion group, send an e-mail containing your full name and e-mail address to shallinb@stride.si.edu
Rethinking Tourism Project (RTP)-rethinking-tourism eGroup
To receive the RTP newsletters and communications and subscribe to this listserve, send an e-mail to <rethinking-tourism-subscribe@eGroups.com > or visit their homepage at: www.egroups.com/group/rethinking-tourism/
The Essential Oils Newsletter
Practical information and tips for using the healing, life-giving qualities of essential oils to create and maintain personal health and wellness.
For more information, please contact: Janet Steelman at: steelmans@earthlink.net
The Overstory
This free non-commercial e-mail newsletter serves people and organizations working with tropical agroforestry, forestry and sustainable development. Each issue presents a key concept for designing sustainable, tree-based agricultural systems, and resources to help put the concept into practice.
overstory@agroforester.com
BULLETINS
"Voices from the Forest"
Bulletin of the NTFP Exchange Programme in Southeast Asia. The exchange programme, and the bulletin more in particular, aims to provide a platform for sharing forest community-based NTFP ideas and concerns, mainly through practical information and cases.
www.NTFP.org
Learn from the mistakes of others.
You can't live long enough to make them all yourself.
[Contents]
