<title>Common carp, part 1: Mass production of eggs and early fry</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
This is the first part of an illustrated manual on the large-scale propagation of Cyprinus carpio, the common carp. It provides details about the advanced technology which has recently been developed in Hungary for the mass production of carp eggs and early fry through artificial reproduction in a modern hatchery.
The second part of this manual on the common carp covers Mass production of advanced fry and fingerlings in ponds and appears as Volume 9 in the same FAO Training Series.
The text of this book was prepared in Hungary at the Warm-water Fish Hatchery (TEHAG) located at Százhalombatta, in collaboration with the FAO Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service of the Fishery Resources and Environment Division. The authors are Dr. L. Horváth and Dr.G. Tamás, biologists responsible for hatchery production management at Százhalombatta and Dr. A.G. Coche, Senior Fishery Resources Officer (Aquaculture), Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome.
The illustrations are reproductions of the original water-colors by L. Horváth, father of the senior author. Layout and design are by A. Wolstad.
Intended as a teaching aid, a filmstrip is available separately, consisting of the colour transparencies of the original watercolours.
<section>2</section>
Introduction
1. COMMON CARP, PART 1- MASS PRODUCTION OF EGGS AND EARLY FRY
This is the first part of an illustrated manual on the large-scale propagation of Cyprinus carpio, the common carp. It particularly provides details about the advanced technology which has recently been developed in Hungary for the mass production of sharp eggs and early fry through artificial reproduction in a modern hatchery. Selected data on the reproductive biology of the common carp and on its artificial propagation are summarized in Tables 1 and 2.
2. The common carp reproduces in accordance with the biology of its reproductive system.
This manual explains the process and shows how carp may be propagated. The basic principles which are important to understand how and why it reproduces are first presented.
3. Carp may be propagated in natural, semi-artificial or artificial ways, depending on the degree to which the natural environmental factors are modified by the fish culturist. A number of the techniques used in carpiculture are described.
4. The success of the artificial propagation of carp in a large scale hatchery depends much on its efficient organization.
Well-trained staff and adequate support services are essential elements. Up-to-date technology should also be applied.
5. The selection and management of broodstock are among the most important aspects of a large-scale hatchery production system. How to select good broodstock, how to determine when the breeders have reached maturity, how to differentiate between males and females, which management system to apply, are all questions which are examined in this manual.
6. The artificial propagation technique is described in detail. Separate sections are devoted successively to the hormonal treatment and stripping of the spawners, to the artificial fertilization and hardening of the eggs, to their incubation and hatching, and to the initial rearing of carp larvae and production of early fry.
<section>3</section>
Biology of reproduction
7. BIOLOGY OF REPRODUCTION
Fish culture practices are based on the biology of the species under cultivation. Reproduction control is particularly important. Here are some of the basic principles for the common carp.
8. In adult carp (1) the reproduction cycle initiates in the gonads the ovaries of the females and the testes of the males with the development of the sexual products, eggs and spermatozoa. (2)
When spawning takes place, the eggs are fertilized (3) and attach themselves to aquatic vegetation (4). They develop and hatch into carp larvae (5). Within a few days, these larvae start feeding and become early fry (6).
Further development and growth in new environments successively produces advanced fry (7), fingerlings (8) and adults (9).
9. As you may observe in Figures 1-5, the development of the eggs in the ovary goes through several stages during which single cells grow to 800-1000 microns in size at the end of yolk accumulation.
The egg has now reached the resting stage and it may remain in this state for several months: this is a dormant egg, with a micropyle and a central nucleus.
(6) In favourable conditions the dormant egg will start developing again until final ripening or (7) ovulation and (8) spawning. In the absence of favourable conditions, dormant eggs will degenerate and be reabsorbed by the ovary.
10. The presence of favourable spawning conditions stimulates the further development of the dormant eggs in the ovaries.
First, the central nucleus migrates toward the micropyle, and hydration slightly increases the egg size. Then, ovulation occurs during spawning: the membrane of the nucleus disappears and the chromosomes become visible, the first cell division takes place, the egg follicle dissolves liberating the egg from the ovary wall, and the ripe egg is spawned.
Eggs develop independently; eggs at different stages of development are found in the ovary simultaneously.
11. The development of the sexual products in the gonads is mostly determined by water (1) temperature and (4) availability of food. Other factors such as (2)/(3) dissolved oxygen and the diurnal rhythm of light also influence this development.
To produce dormant eggs efficiently female carp need warm water above 17°C and food which is rich in protein.
The production of sperm is far less complicated than that of eggs and, except for water temperature, the environmental requirements are not so rigid.
12. Final ripening of the dormant eggs and spawning are regulated by gonadotropin hormones, formed and stored in the hypophysis or pituitary gland.
Through its sense organs, the female carp gathers information about its environment, such as morning light, water temperature, atmospheric pressure, presence of male carp and vegetation. This information accumulates in the hypothalamus of the brain.
When environmental conditions become suitable, this part of the brain gives the order to the hypophysis to release gonadotropin hormones into the blood stream. When these hormones reach the ovaries they trigger the final ripening of the dormant eggs and spawning. Males also become ready for spawning on gonadotropin command.
13. According to the climate, carp may spawn once or several times a year.
In temperate regions (Figure A), spawning occurs once a year in late spring (1). New eggs start to develop in early summer (2) and by autumn dormant eggs are present in the ovaries (3). They remain in this dormant stage through winter (4) and early spring (1), until suitable spawning conditions occur.
In tropical regions (Figure B), carp may spawn several times a year. High water temperature accelerates the development of new eggs after each spawning and the dormant stage may be reached when suitable spawning conditions still exist. A similar process may be repeated three to four times a year (1-4).
14. In tropical and subtropical regions, carp usually become sexually mature in their first year, but in cooler climates it takes them 3-4 years.
Groups of mature carp naturally spawn in freshly flooded grassy areas along rivers and lakes. The fertilized eggs are very sticky and they adhere firmly to the submerged vegetation.
15. (1) Male and female carp spawn side by side swimming close to the submerged vegetation. (2) As the ripe eggs fall into the water, they are surrounded by a multitude of fast moving sperm. (3) One of them penetrates the micropyle, fertilizing the egg. (4) The micropyle closes as the egg swells and becomes very sticky.
In such conditions some ripe eggs are not fertilized because the high motility of the sperm lasts for only 30-60 seconds and the egg micropyle closes within one minute, after their contact with water.
16. When a ripe egg falls into the water, it becomes round (I) and within a short time begins to swell (2).
Water seeps in between the shell and the cell kernel (nucleus and yolk mass), creating the perivitelline space. If it is fertilized, the egg soon start to develop.
By the time the swelling is complete (3), the animal pole of the kernel rises as a small hillock on the yolk mass. It divides into several cells (4) and reaches successively the morula (5), the blastula (6) and the gastrula (7) stages.
The embryo finally appears with tail, head and eyes (8). It develops into a larva and hatches, breaking out of the egg shell.
17. The newly hatched larva (1) is still very different from the adult carp: it has no mouth and is nourished from the yolk sac.
After about 4 days at 20-24 C, the mouth is formed, the swim bladder is inflated with air, and exogenic feeding starts (2).
This is the beginning of the fry stage. Well-fed carp fry grow rapidly, from 10-12-day-old fry (3) into 30-day-old advanced fry (4).
18. It may be said that the natural reproduction of mature carp is essentially controlled by two kinds of environmental factors: basic and stimulating factors.
(A) The three basic factors are: (1) the water temperature which should preferably range from 18 C to 24°C, (2) the dissolved oxygen content which should be between 5 to 10 mg/l, and (3) the light which should be the same as the light at sunrise.
(B) Among the stimulating factors are (1) specific weather conditions such as a stable atmospheric pressure, (2) the presence of males, and (3) the presence of grassy vegetation.
19. Both semi-artificial and artificial reproduction techniques are commonly practiced in carp culture.
The factors controlling the spawning of females with dormant eggs differ accordingly. Semi-artificial reproduction (orange arrows) is controlled by the same basic (A) and stimulating (B) factors as shown above, except that (4) the injection of gonadotropin hormone becomes a major stimulating factor.
On the other hand, in artificial reproduction (red arrows) where (4) the artificial fertilization of the eggs is carried out after two injections of gonadotropin hormone, two basic factors control its success: (1) water temperature and (2) dissolved oxygen content.
20. Why should artificial fertilization be carried out under dry conditions?
The reason why eggs and sperm should be collected avoiding any contact with water is because (a) as soon as eggs come into contact with water they start to swell and their micropyle closes within a minute; (b) as soon as spermatozoids come into contact with water, they become highly motile, but this activity lasts for only 30-60 seconds.
<section>4</section>
Propagation methods
21. PROPAGATION METHODS
Several methods exist for propagating the common carp. They are all based on its reproduction biology and they may be grouped into these three categories:
Natural propagation, no gonadotropin hormone treatment but environmental manipulation, if necessary.
Semi-artificial propagation, one injection of gonadotropins to induce ovulation/spawning.
Artificial propagation, two injections of gonadotropins, stripping of sexual products, artificial fertilization, incubation of the fertilized eggs and larval rearing.
22. Large ponds with grassy areas may be used for the natural propagation of carp. Kept dry during the cold season, they are filled as the water temperature starts increasing.
Adult fish which have developed dormant eggs are stocked in these ponds at the average rate of 3-4 fish per hectare, 2-3 males for each female.
Breeding success is very dependent on weather conditions which cannot be controlled; over- or understocking of the pond with juveniles may result.
23. The popular Dubisch method induces carp spawning by simulating the decisive natural environmental conditions of warm water temperature (18-22°C), dissolved oxygen saturation, slowly rising water level, grassy substrate and presence of the other sex.
(1) A small pond (100-1000 m²) is specially prepared. A ditch 12 m wide and 60-80 cm deep is dug along the banks of the pond around a central platform covered with short grass. At maximum water level, 30-50 cm water will cover this platform. When the water temperature becomes suitable, the pond ditch is filled with filtered clean water.
(2) One or two sets of breeders each consisting of two females and three males are then stocked. They are kept there for a few days, in a gentle continuous flow of water. (3) Then the water level is slowly raised, flooding the grassy area. This operation usually triggers the breeders into vigorous spawning.
(4) A day later, the breeders are carefully removed from the pond by lowering the water level slightly and netting them in the ditch. The presence of eggs sticking to the submerged grass is confirmed.
(5) After hatching, the larvae are easily observed using a white plate.
When the fry reach 12-15 mm about 10 days later, they are harvested by draining the pond.
24. Another method of propagation consists in catching wild carp while they are actively preparing to spawn
(1). These spawners are immediately stripped (2). The eggs are artificially fertilized (3). They are then transported to a suitable place for incubation and hatching, such as, for example, a nearby hatchery (4).
25. Another method requires the stripped and fertilized eggs (1) to be placed in immersed baskets (2), where protected incubation takes place (3).
The hatched larvae swim freely out into the water (4).
Instead of baskets, other containers such as cloth enclosures (hapas) and wooden boxes covered with mosquito netting may also be used.
26. Semi-artificial propagation involves a single injection of potential spawners with gonadotropin hormones (e.g. 3 mg dry hypophysis/kg) when the water temperature has reached at least 18°C (1).
The injected spawners are then transported (2) and stocked in newly filled grassy ponds (3). Spawning usually takes place one to two days later, depending on the water temperature (4). This technique may be applied, for example, in large ponds or in smaller Dubisch ponds, see preceding methods.
27. In some tropical countries semi-artificial propagation is combined with the use of breeding hapas, 1 x 1 x 2 m cloth enclosures (0.5-1-mm mesh) supported by four poles at the corners (1).
The injected carp breeders are put into the hapas and spawning occurs within a few hours (2). The breeders are then removed (3) and the larvae hatch in the hapas (4).
28. Semi-artificial propagation is also carried out in small spawning ponds (20-40 m²) and in wire-meshed boxes ( 1 x 1 x 2 m), using kakabans as spawning substrates. These are made with long plant fibres (1).
The injected breeders (2 males for each female) are stocked in the spawning ponds or boxes (2).
Spawning takes place and the eggs are found sticking to the kakabans (3). The kakabans are then removed from the spawning ponds and placed for incubation either directly into a pond (4) or first into wire-meshed boxes (5), the larvae being later stocked in ponds (6).
You will require 1-1.5 m² of kakaban per female spawner.
29. Artificial propagation, the principal subject of this manual, is based on (1) the injection of selected spawners with gonadotropin hormones, usually in two phases, (2) the hand stripping of the sexual products, (3) the artificial fertilization of the eggs and the removal of the egg stickiness, egg incubation and hatching under close supervision, and (4) the initial rearing of the newly hatched larvae. (5) All these procedures normally occur in a hatchery building.
As soon as they begin to feed, the early fry are taken away to rearing ponds.
30. (B) The artificial propagation of common carp in a modern hatchery has many advantages over (A) the natural and semi-artificial methods.
(1) The need for male spawners is reduced by 4-6 times.
(2) During incubation, it is possible to protect the eggs against parasites and diseases, (3) bad weather conditions, and (4) predators. (5) The newly hatched larvae may also be better protected against their enemies and (6) their survival is further enhanced through controlled first feeding. (7) The stocking of early fry in well-prepared ponds ensures better growth and better survival.
<section>5</section>
Organization of production in the hatchery
31. ORGANIZATION OF PRODUCTION IN THE HATCHERY
The artificial propagation of carp in the hatchery is only a step in the general scheme of fish production for food. But its success greatly depends on the efficient organization of hatchery production.
32. Good broodstock management (1) produces selected spawners for successful artificial propagation in the hatchery (2).
Here early fry are mass-produced and stocked in well-prepared ponds to produce advanced fry (3). These are moved to larger ponds where they become fingerlings (4).
Stocked in fattening ponds (5), fingerlings grow into marketable fish which are harvested for marketing.
Manual 1 deals with steps (1) and (2).
Manual 2 is concerned with steps (3) and (4).
33. In temperate regions, the production of marketable fish starts in the spring of the second year, with (1) the stocking of fingerlings in fattening ponds.
(2) Well fed until autumn, these fish reach the average weight of 200-300 g.(3) They are harvested and sorted by size. (4) Overwintering proceeds in smaller ponds.
Next spring, the third year starts and progresses similarly until autumn, when the carp average 1-2 kg each. (3) When they have been harvested and sorted by size, some of them are marketed, while (4) the rest are overwintered. (5) The following spring, the adult fish are sorted and marketed, some of them being retained as young broodstock.
In tropical regions, where seasons are not so well marked, the production cycle can be shortened by one year, since the carp grow at a regular pace during most of the year.
34. The staff necessary to carry out the production programme efficiently in a large-scale hatchery work under (1) a Production Manager.
In Hungary, for example, the Production Manager supervises three production sections for (A) eggs and early fry, (B) advanced fry and (C) fingerlings respectively.
Each of these sections is supervised by (2) an experienced technician, with 3-5 years of university background, such as an Agricultural Engineer. Under him, (4) skilled manual workers are supervised by a (3) Fishery Master with a lot of local experience.
35. Support services are essential.
They deal with: (1) administration, (2) fish health, (3) transport, (4) maintenance, (5) security, and (6) stores.
36. This is a summary of the advanced Hungarian technology for the mass production of eggs and early fry of common carp, based on artificial propagation in a modern warm-water hatchery.
The following illustrations deal with each of these subjects in detail:
(1-8) broodstock management and selection, hormonal treatment of the spawners,
(9-11) collection of the sexual products,
(12, 13) egg fertilization and treatment, (14-16) incubation period,
(17, 18) hatching of the larvae,
(19, 20) their first rearing, and finally
(21, 22) their transport from the hatchery building.
<section>6</section>
Broodstock management
37. BROODSTOCK MANAGEMENT
Broodstock management covers three particular aspects of the rearing process:
(a) The selection of fish with desirable hereditary qualities typical of improved strains such as rapid growth potential, higher resistance to dissolved oxygen deficiency and adverse water quality, strong appetite, omnivorous feeding regime. (b) The selection of fish with well-developed sexual organs.
(c) The rearing of these selected fish to produce healthy potential spawners, with dormant eggs well developed in the females.
38. What is the basis on which to select good future breeders?
The selection of future carp breeders should take into account the general shape of the fish body, scale distribution, state of health and development of sexual organs. In particular,
(1) the selected fish should be in good health,
(2) with no body wounds,
(3) no parasites,
(4) a typical scale distribution, and
(5, 6) no fin or body deformation.
(7) The body should possess the required shape and proportions, being neither too fat,
(8) nor too thin.
39. How can the difference between male and female carp be determined?
Male and female breeders may be easily differentiated by the shape of the body and the relative position of the genital papilla. In females, the body is plump and the genital opening is situated above the genital papilla. In males, the body is slender and the genital opening is found behind the genital papilla.
40. What are the external signs of the breeder's maturity?
To check whether a carp breeder has reached maturity (presence of dormant eggs or sperm) and may be selected for artificial propagation, the belly and genital papilla should be examined carefully.
A mature female has a well-rounded and soft or semi-soft belly; its genital papilla is erect and reddish; its anal opening is enlarged and protruding.
A mature male will release milt under a slight abdominal pressure; its belly is not blown up but rather slim; it sometimes has callosities on the head.
41. Broodstock ponds are 0.5-1 train size end 1-2m deep.
The dikes should be protected by vegetation. Water control structures exist at the inlet and outlet of the pond. Access by road and good protection against poaching should be ensured. The stocking rate varies from 100 to 300 breeders per hectare.
42. Broodstock management is one of the most important elements of the hatchery production system.
In temperate climates, the spent spawners leave the hatchery in late spring. They are given a quick salt bath (2-3% salt solution, for 30-40 seconds) against ectoparasites (1) and they are stocked in broodstock ponds where they are well fed during summer and autumn (2).
Overwintering takes place in the same pond. The following spring, the breeders are seined out of the pond (3). They are sorted by qualified personnel who select the good potential breeders and separate them by sex. The other fish are marketed.
The selected breeders receive a quick salt bath and are stored in storage ponds, the sexes being kept well separate (4).
When the reproduction season starts in mid-spring, the breeders are seined out of the storage ponds as necessary; those which are mature are chosen, receive a quick salt bath (5), and are then stored in the hatchery where they will be propagated artificially a few hours later (6).
43. Broodstock management in tropical climates is somewhat different because of the possibility of multiple spawnings during the yearly cycle.
(A) Females and (B) males are preferably kept in separate broodstock ponds.
Two sets of ponds are used for the ripening males and females, and two sets of ponds are used for the spent spawners. This wild prevent wild spawning. It will also enable higher protein feeds to be distributed to the females, and to lower the stocking rates.
44. In the broodstock ponds, it is advisable to include some smaller (100-200 g) carnivorous fish with the carp breeders.
About 200-400 ind/ha is sufficient to control the wild fist which might enter the pond and compete for food with the broodstock.
Similarly, these carnivorous fish will eliminate the juvenile' born from wild spawning.
45. Broodstock feed varies according to the season.
(2) After stripping, when the breeders form new eggs which develop toward the dormant stage, they should eat a mixture of 50% natural food organisms rich in protein and 50% artificial feeds with a high content of carbohydrates, such as maize.
(1) Later, when the dormant eggs have been developed and when the breeders await spawning, they should receive artificial feeds with a 30-40% protein content in order to prevent the accumulation of fat in their gonads.
46. The breeders which are to be propagated artificially on a particular day, are taken from the storage ponds the day before. They are crowded into a corner of the half-drained pond with a seine net.
A skilled worker selects the breeders one by one: mature breeders are brought into the hatchery building (1), immature breeders are put back into the storage pond (2), and unhealthy or invalid fish are sent to the market (3).
This selection process is especially important for the females, whose maturity should be thoroughly checked, to ensure the success of the artificial propagation.
47. It is important to avoid dissolved oxygen deficiency which may damage the sensitive breeders during seining and selection.
During handling, fresh water may be pumped into the crowded enclosure if necessary.
48. It is best to handle carp breeders using a special net with a strong mesh.
It should be open at both ends, the stiffened mouth opening measuring about 30 cm in diameter and the netting 1 m long. A breeder may easily be caught in it (2) and transported with two hands (3). When the end of the net is released, the fish can swim out easily (4).
49. A double hammock (85 x 20 x 16 cm) of waterproof canvas, attached to a solid frame is very useful for the transport of the selected breeders to the hatchery.
Broodstock transport may also be mechanized, using fibreglass containers and compressed oxygen as detailed in the next picture.
50. A fibreglass tank (200 x 100 x 80 cm) may be put on a trailer or on the platform of a lorry. It should contain about 1 m³ of water.
The fish are introduced through the top door and removed through the back door.
Compressed oxygen is delivered in fine bubbles from the bottom of the tank through a perforated plastic tube attached to a metal frame.
In such a tank 20-30 carp breeders per cubic metre of water can be safely transported for journeys of up to several hours.
<section>7</section>
Injection and stripping of spawners
51. INJECTION AND STRIPPING OF SPAWNERS
The advanced technique of the artificial propagation of common carp involves a hormonal treatment prior to hand stripping of the mature spawners to obtain sperm and eggs.
Note 1: How much dried hypophysis do you require?
Females First injection: 0.3 mg/kg
Second injection: 3.5 mg/kg
Males One injection: 2.0 mg/kg
Example: You are planning to treat 34 females (average weight 4 kg) and 17 males (average weight 2.5 kg). You will require the following quantities of dried hypophysis:
(a) for the first injection of the females: 34 fish x 4 kg x 0.3 mg/kg = 40.8 mg
(b) for the second injection of the females: 34 fish x 4 kg x 3.5 mg/kg = 476 mg
(c) for the injection of the males: 17 fish x 2.5 kg x 2 mg/kg = 85 mg
It is good practice to add 10% to these calculated quantities of dried hypophysis to compensate for the losses occurring during the injections. If you know the average weight of one dried hypophysis (about 2.5-3 mg), you may then easily calculate how many hypophysis glands are necessary in each case.
Note 2: How to prepare the 0.65% salt solution?
Dissolve 6.5 g of common kitchen salt in 1 litre of distilled water. You may also use boiled and filtered water.
Note 3: How much salt solution do you require?
Females First injection: 1 ml/fish
Second injection: 1.5 ml/fish
Males One injection: 1.5 ml/fish
Example: For the above example (Note 1), you will require the following volumes of salt solution:
(a) for the first injection of the females: 34 fish x 1 ml =34 ml
(b) for the second injection of the females: 34 fish x 1.5 ml = 51 ml
(c) for the injection of the males: 17 fish x 1.5 ml = 26 ml
It is good practice to add about 10% to these calculated volumes of salt solution to compensate for later losses.
Note 4: The 100 litre anaesthetic solution may be used several times for a full day to save on the high cost of MS 222.
Note 5: Which anaesthetic should be used?
Three chemicals may be used as fish anaesthetics:
(a) MS 222 or tricaine methane-sulphonate (Sandoz, Basel, Switzerland) is a very mild and safe anaesthetic from which fish easily recover. Fish may be kept in it for about 30 minutes at 20-25°C. But it is now thought to be a possible carcinogenic in man; it is rather expensive and must be used sparingly.
(b) Quinaldine or 2-4 methylquinolin is a toxic chemical which should be handled with great care and stored safely. During the treatment of the fish, they should be carefully watched and transferred quickly to well oxygenated water if necessary.
(c) Phenoxyethanol is milder and less effective than MS 222 but is far cheaper.
Note 6: How should anaesthetics be used?
It is advisable to determine the correct dose of anaesthetic to be used by preliminary tests. For common carp for example the following doses are used in Hungary for 24°C water:
MS 222 1:10000 or 10 g dissolved in 100 l water
Quinaldine 1:40000 or 2.5 ml dissolved in 100 l water
Phenoxyethanol 1: 5 000 or 200 ml dissolved in 100 l water
52. Injections of gonadotropin hormones induce the final ripening of the dormant eggs in the selected females.
These injections replace the natural release in the bloodstream of such hormones by the hypophysis, at the command of the hypothalamus.
As seen earlier, only two basic environmental factors have to be at optimum level: water temperature and dissolved oxygen content.
53. The dose of hormones to be injected to the spawners is based on the live weight of each spawner, see Note 1.
As far as possible, it is better to use batches of spawners similar m size to simplify calculations. The spawners are weighed in a netting bag, using weighing scales.
54. The gonadotropin hormones to be injected in the breeders are extracted from dried hypophyses.
Fresh hypophyses are collected, for example, from live sexually mature fish prior to their marketing and then prepared for preservation as further described in the last section of this manual.
(1) The necessary number of hypophyses is calculated on the basis of the dose of hormones to be injected in the breeders brought into the hatchery, see Note 1. (2) The dried glands are carefully ground into a fine powder in a mortar. (3) The resulting fine powder is then well mixed with a certain volume of a 0.65% salt solution which extracts the gonadotropin hormones from the gland tissue, see Notes 2 and 3. (4) It is the supernatant fluid which is used for the injections.
55. This is a summary of the treatment applied in the hatchery to the female spawners to obtain mature eggs, using 24°C water.
(1) Early in the morning, selected mature females are brought in from the storage ponds. They are put into a small mobile tank. At about 8 a.m. they are slightly anaesthetized (2) and receive the first injection of hypophysis extract (3). They are then stored in a large tank with a good water supply (4).
At about 8 p.m., they are anaesthetized again (5), their genital opening is sutured (6) and they receive the second injection of hypophysis extract (7). They are stored in the large tank (8) and a male fish is generally added (9) as an indicator of ovulation. The latter occurs about 10 hours later, at which point the females are anaesthetized (10) and stripped of their eggs (11). More detail on this procedure is given in the following pictures.
56. (1) When the selected female breeders are brought into the hatchery early in the morning, they are placed in a small tank containing 100 litres of water.
(2) They are anaesthetized, using for example MS 222, see Notes 4, 5 and 6.
(3) From now on the anaesthetized breeders should be watched carefully to see if their opercules keep moving. The life of the fish is in danger when this movement stops. In this event the breeder should be immediately removed from the anaesthetic solution and put into well-aerated fresh water.
(4) The anaesthetized fish can be handled very easily.
57. Usually in the morning around 8 a.m., a first injection of 1 ml hypophysis extract is given to each anaesthetized female. It should correspond to an average dose of 0.3 mg dry hypophysis per kilogram of fish.
This is the preparatory injection of gonadotropin hormones which will result in the initial development of the dormant eggs: their nucleus will migrate near to the micropyle and their first hydration will take place.
The type of injection varies according to the presence or absence of scales on the body.
(A) For mirror carps, the injection is intramuscular. It is generally given in the muscles below the tip of the dorsal fin, at a 45' angle. To avoid losing some of the injected solution, a finger should be kept on the punctured skin which should be slowly massaged (1, 2).
(B) For scaly carps, the injection is intraperitoneal. It is generally given into the body cavity from behind the base of the abdominal fin.
58. After being injected, the females are placed in a large tank.
A plentiful supply of well-aerated water should be provided. The water temperature should be kept constant, if possible within the optimum spawning temperature range of 22°C-24°C. To reduce stress, the females should be kept in a quiet environment and left undisturbed for 10-12 hours.
59. When this 10-12-hour period is over. usually in the evening by around 8 p.m. the females are anaesthetized for the suture of their genital opening and for the second injection of gonadotropins.
The genital opening is closed to prevent egg losses through wild spawning.
A needle and strong cotton thread are used as shown in steps 1 to 4. Nylon thread should be avoided because it cuts into the skin too easily as the fish swim.
60. The second injection is then immediately given to the anaesthetized females, using 1.5 ml of hypophysis extract per fish. It should correspond to an average dose of 3.5 mg dry hypophysis per kilogram of fish.
This is the decisive injection of gonadotropin hormones which should cause the eggs to ripen fully. According to the carp strain used the type of injection varies as described above for the first injection.
61. The injected females are put back into the large tank, supplied with warm and well-aerated water.
As the length of the ovulation period is closely related to the water temperature, the latter should be measured and noted regularly throughout the night.
(1) As the end of the ovulation period approaches, the females with fully ripe eggs start looking for a place to spawn, moving along the sides of the tank.
(2) If an indicator male has been added to the tank, it will then closely follow ripe females as for spawning.
62. The length of the ovulation period is closely related to the water temperature.
The sum of the hourly water temperatures should reach 240°C-260°C. By measuring the water temperature in the tank every hour, it is possible to predict the time when the females will reach full maturity relatively well, especially if the water temperature varies.
If, on the contrary, the water temperature remains nearly constant, the graphic method may be used. According to the actual water temperature (°C) prevailing during ovulation (1), the number of hours necessary (2) may be read on the horizontal scale. For example, at 24°C ovulation takes place a little more than 11 hours after the first injection. As the exact length of the ovulation period varies slightly from one female to the other, the result will be only a close approximation.
63 When the females are fully ripe, they are crowded into one end of the tank with a sliding net frame. They can then easily be removed individually, for anaesthetizing and stripping (1)
After stripping, the females are gently replaced in the tank where the well-oxygenated water supply will help them to recover from narcotization (2).
A similar crowding procedure is also used to remove the females from the tank and to transport them back to the broodstock pond.
64. Early the next morning, when judged fully ripe, the females are anaesthetized using a fresh solution of a selected anaesthetic, see Notes 5 and 6.
They are then prepared for stripping.
(1) First, the suture of the genital opening is cut and the cotton string carefully removed.
(2) The free genital opening is immediately closed with the thumb of the left hand to prevent egg loss.
(3) The ventral part of the body is then carefully dried with a clean towel.
65. Small anaesthetized females weighing 4 kg or less are stripped by one man.
The fish is held firmly with a towel by the tail and pressed under the right arm. The right hand gently massages the lower flanks of the female, from front to back, releasing the ripe eggs from the ovaries into a plastic bowl. The eggs should run along the side of this bowl, as they are sensitive to shocks.
Remember that no water should reach the eggs at this stage: the bowl, the fish and the hands should be carefully dried.
It is also necessary to make sure that the female is stripped empty of ripe eggs. A good female breeder may provide up to 20% of its own live weight in ripe eggs. A 5-kg female for example produces about 1 kg of them, containing 700 000 to 1 000 000 eggs.
66. Larger females weighing 5 kg or more are stripped lying on a table, preferably on a piece of thick foam rubber.
The head is held down in a towel by one person. A second person holds the tail part of the body with one hand while stripping the eggs into a plastic bowl with the other hand.
Very large females may provide several kilograms of eggs and, in such cases each kilogram of eggs is collected into a separate bowl. Water should be avoided and the female stripped empty.
67. This is a summary of the treatment applied in the hatchery to the male spawners to obtain sperm.
In the morning the required number of mature males is brought in the hatchery from the storage ponds (1), which is normally half the number of ripening females.
They are temporarily stored in a separate large tank with a good water supply (2).
After the females have received their second injection the treatment of the males starts by placing them in an anaesthetic solution (3), see above. One injection of 1.5 ml of hypophysis extract is given to each fish, which corresponds to a dose of 2 mg dry hypophysis per kilogram live weight (4).
As for the females, the type of injection varies also according to the carp strain. One of these injected males is placed with the ripening females to act as an ovulation indicator (5). The other males are kept in a large storage tank with a good water supply (6).
At least 6 hours after the hormone injection, the males are ready. They are anaesthetized (7) and the milt is collected (8) while the females are stripped.
68. The milt containing the spermatozoids should also be kept dry as it is collected.
The anaesthetized male is placed on its back on a table preferably on a piece of foam rubber. Its ventral surface is carefully dried with a clean towel. If a slight pressure along the flanks of the belly releases milt, it is collected in a dry small glass. If the milt is less abundant, it is better to use a milt collector, sucking the milt from the genital opening.
A 4-5 kg male spawner provides an average of 20 ml milt.
<section>8</section>
Artificial fertilization and hardening of the eggs
69. ARTIFICIAL FERTILIZATION AND HARDENING OF THE EGGS
Milt is added to the ripe eggs in dry conditions. The fertilization process occurs as soon as the fertilizing solution is added. The swelling and hardening of the eggs starts simultaneously.
70. To summarize, (1) the dry eggs are weighed and (2) the required amount of milt is added.(3) After thoroughly mixing the milt and the eggs, (4) fertilizing solution is poured into the bowl. (5) Fertilization takes place and the eggs begin to swell. (6) When the swelling is complete and the eggs have hardened they are treated with a tannin solution to remove their stickiness. (7) They are then ready for incubation in special jars.
71. The stripped eggs, henceforth termed "dry eggs", are weighed in their plastic bowl (2) which has previously been weighed empty (1).
The weight of the dry eggs may thus be easily calculated for each bowl. The necessary amount of milt may be determined on this basis (3).
72. Milt should be added to the dry eggs in the proportion of 1:100, i.e. 10 ml of milt are required per each kilogram of dry eggs.
For each batch of eggs it is advisable to obtain the milt from two different males, as a male is occasionally infertile.
In general, the milt collected from each male is sufficient to fertilize the eggs obtained from two females.
There are two methods of adding the milt to the dry eggs: (A) it may either be stripped directly into the bowl containing the eggs or, what happens more often, (B) the milt is poured onto the eggs from the collecting glass.
73. The fertilization of the eggs will be increased by the use of a fertilizing solution.
To prepare this solution (1) 40 g common salt Na Cl and (2) 30 g urea (= carbamide) CO(NH[2])[2] should be weighed. These two chemicals should then be added to (3) 101 water and (4) mixed well.
74. The dry eggs and the milt are gently but thoroughly mixed for a few seconds.
The fertilizing solution is then poured on the eggs in the ratio of 1:10, using 100 ml of solution per kilogram of dry eggs, while gently mixing with a plastic spoon. Fertilization is completed within 20-30 seconds but the mixing should continue for 3 to 5 minutes more.
75. As soon as the dry eggs come into contact with the fertilizing solution they begin to swell through hydration.
The swelling process lasts from 1 to 1.5 hours. Within this period (A) each litre of dry eggs will give (B) 6-9 litres of swollen eggs.
(1) The fertilizing solution should be changed three to four times during the swelling period to eliminate some of the stickiness of the fertilized eggs.
76. In order to remove every trace of the natural stickiness of the fertilized eggs, it is necessary to use a tannin solution. (1-3) This is prepared by adding 5 g tannin (= tannic acid) to 10 litres of water. (4) This solution is well mixed before being used.
77. The tannin treatment of the swollen eggs will not only dissolve the sticky layer surrounding the eggs, but it will also complete the hardening of the eggs.
(1 ) Approximately 2-4 litres of tannin solution are added to 2-3 litres of swollen eggs in a plastic bowl. (2) This is mixed rapidly, and (3) after a pause of 20 seconds (4) the bowl is filled with clean water.
Once the eggs have settled down, (5) the water is drained out. This rinsing is repeated twice, (6) then 1-2 litres of tannin solution are poured into the bowl. (7) This too is rapidly mixed, and there is another pause (8) this time for 10 seconds. (9) Clean water is again added, (10) followed by draining. (1112) This rinsing process is repeated twice. The fertilized eggs are now fully hardened and non-sticky. (13) They are ready for incubation.
78. In the hatchery rooms where stripping and artificial egg fertilization take place, various items of equipment should be available to ensure efficient working conditions.
(1) Large storage tanks with a good water supply are used for maturing the breeders. (2) Fish, water and chemical solutions are easily transported with a fibreglass tank on wheels. (3) Many plastic containers of various sizes are necessary. They include 3-4-litre bowls, 15-litre bowls (for egg swelling), 10-litre buckets, and 25-30-litre bins (for egg fertilization). (4) In a smaller separate room, smaller pieces of equipment (such as clean towels, measuring jugs/cylinders, plastic tubing, needles and thread, syringes, etc.) are stored, together with chemicals and the stock of dried hypophyses.
A production programme is followed, and its implementation accurately recorded every day by the hatchery manager.
<section>9</section>
Incubation of fertilized eggs
79. INCUBATION OF FERTILIZED EGGS
80. The water supply for a carp hatchery may be obtained either from a well (ground water) or from a natural water body such as a river or lake.
(A) If the water is obtained from a water body (1) it first enters a sedimentation basin (2) from which water is pumped through a sand filter (3) into a raised storage tank.
(B) If the water is obtained from a well, (1) it is pumped (2) directly to the storage tank. In both cases the quality of the water is improved by (4) its aeration in the storage tank.
If necessary, part of the water may be also heated and stored separately in the water tower.
81. Basically, there are two possible types of carp hatchery. In the first, the hatchery functions at the natural temperature of the water supply.
(1) From the outside water tower the water enters the hatchery by gravity and fills a series of overhead storage tanks where the water pressure will equalize. The water may be used for various purposes, (2) such as the incubation of the fertilized eggs in jars. A pressure head of 0.5- 1 m is then advisable between the overhead tank and the incubation jars.
82. In the second type of hatchery, a double water supply is available, a cool one at ambient temperature and a warm one, such as the heated effluent of a power station, for example.
The two are mixed to produce the best temperature, in this case 22°-24°C for common carp.
In this case, two series of overhead tanks (1, 2) are required in the hatchery. Water mixing occurs below these tanks, for example before the incubation jars (3).
A pressure head of 1-1.5 m is then advisable between the overhead tanks and the jars.
83. The incubation of the fertilized eggs takes place in Zug jars (A).
A continuous vertical flow of well-oxygenated water through these jars may be maintained, the water entering at the bottom and overflowing at the top. This flow may be regulated at will by a valve. Usually, a series of Zug jars are placed in successive rows on metal frames (B). A common gutter collects the overflowing water of each row and drains it at one end. The Zug jar pictured here has a 7-litre capacity. It is made of thick glass, except for the top plastic collar. The funnel shape of the bottom part of the Zug jar which creates the water movement best suited to the gentle incubation of the eggs is particularly important.
84. To start the egg incubation, 7-litre Zug jars should be half filled.
The water inflow should be stopped and 1.5-2 litres of swollen carp eggs should be put in each jar (1). These will settle at the bottom of the jars (2). Open the water supply so that 0.6-0.8 l/min overflows at the top of each jar (3). The eggs are now gently moved around in the funnel-shaped part of the jars (4). It is useful to remember that each 7-litre jar may incubate the equivalent of 250-300 g of dry eggs. Knowing the total quantity of dry eggs to be used at any one time, the minimum required number of such Zug jars can be calculated. Vice versa, it is also possible to calculate the maximum quantity of dry eggs which may be incubated simultaneously, on the basis of the number of jars available.
85. The water flow passing through each jar varies during incubation according to the stage of development of the eggs.
(1) For the first 10 hours the water flow should be regulated so that 0.6-0.8 l/min overflows at the top of each jar.
(2) When the eggs have reached the end of the morula stage and the blastula stage has begun, the water flow should be increased to 1-1.2 l/min.
(3) Finally, when the tail, the eyes and the pigmentation of the embryos become visible, the water flow should be increased to 1.5-2 l/min.
86. The duration of the incubation period is closely related to the water temperature.
On the basis of the average of the latter during the day (°C) incubation of common carp eggs requires a total of 60-70 degree-days. This can be estimated from a simple graph showing (2) the length of the incubation period in days, in relation to (1) the average water temperature in centigrades.
The best water temperature for incubation ranges from 22 to 24°C which guarantees the production of strong larvae within a reasonably short time.
87. It is important to protect the eggs from fungal infection during incubation.
Every 6-12 hours, the eggs should be treated with malachite green, at a concentration of about 6 mg/l. A stock solution is prepared containing 500 mg/l. malachite green.
(1) The water flow is stopped in the jars to be treated, and 10 ml of the stock solution are poured into each 7-litre jar.
(2) The chemical is thoroughly mixed in the jar, care being taken not to damage the eggs. (3) After about 5 minutes, the water supply is reopened and (4) the chemical gradually washes out.
88. When the fertilization of the eggs has not been very successful, a layer of white dead eggs gradually accumulates above the fertilized eggs.
Soon they will be covered with the fungus Saprolegnia which endangers the fertilized eggs. In such cases, when the eggs have reached the eyed embryonic stage at the end of the second day of incubation, (1) the water flow should be stopped and (2) the eggs allowed to settle at the bottom of the jar. (3) The ring of white eggs at the top of the others can now be clearly seen.
(4) The dead eggs are carefully siphoned out of each jar, and the water flow is reopened. This operation should be repeated about 10 hours later, if necessary, before the hatching of the eggs occurs.
89. During the incubation period it is essential to inspect the working jars regularly, day and night:
* the water flow should be controlled and regulated
* the mater temperature should be checked,
* the development of the eggs should be closely followed, and
* the malachite-green treatment should be administered according to the schedule.
Such close and constant supervision will help to avoid important losses in production.
<section>a</section>
Rearing larvae in the hatchery
90. REARING LARVAE IN THE HATCHERY
The hatching of the carp eggs occurs outside the incubation jars. The larvae are reared in larger jars until they develop into early fry, which feed on exogenous food.
91. This is a summary of the last phase of the rearing in the hatchery building.
(1) The eggs are transferred from the incubation jars to shallow bowls (2) where hatching takes place. (3) The young larvae are then put in large rearing jars. Larval rearing lasts for 3-4 days, after which (6) the just-feeding fry are removed from the jars and (7) transported to outside ponds.
92. As soon as the hatching of the eggs begins and some free-swimming larvae are observed, the eggs have to be removed from the incubation jars. The water flow is stopped.
The eggs are slowly siphoned into a plastic bowl, care being taken not to damage them. (1) The head between the water in the jar and the water in the bowl should never exceed 50 cm, keeping the bowl relatively high at first and (2) lowering it gradually as the jar empties. (3) The eggs should be transferred gently directly to the bottom of the bowl (4) to avoid dropping them from any distance.
93. To complete the hatching process (1) the bowls containing the eggs are left standing for 10 minutes maximum. (2) The larvae are then climbing along the wall of the bowl.
(3) Care should be taken to monitor this process very closely: it is the reduction in the dissolved oxygen content of the standing water which stimulates the embryos to swim free from the eggs, but a too pronounced lack of oxygen may become fatal to them.
Do not wait more than 10 minutes!
94. Larval rearing takes place in large jars which operate on the same principle as the Zug jars.
(A) In the present case, 200-litre jars standing on an individual tripod are used.
(B) The water flow (12-15 l/min is vertical, from the lower funnel part of the jar to the enlarged upper part.
At the top of the jar a light frame supports a filtering ring of 0. 2mm mesh netting.
(1) The lower part of this netting is glued to the jar wall, about 10 cm below the water surface.
95. (A) The newly hatched larvae are put in these large rearing jars, at the average density of about 500 000 ind. per 200 l water.
In practice, this is equivalent to the egg content of 5 incubation jars (7-litre type).
A few litres of water are taken from the rearing jar and added to the bowl containing the newly hatched larvae, which helps to equilibrate any small difference in temperature. There should never be more than a 0.5-1° C difference.
(B) Especially at the beginning of the larval rearing, the empty egg shells accumulate on the inside surface of the filtering net, reducing the water outflow. The top netting ring should therefore be cleaned regularly.
(1) The outside of the netting should be cleaned first, which will simultaneously release the attached larvae. (2). Only then should the inside of the netting be cleaned' and pieces of the egg shells forced through it.
These operations should be repeated as often as necessary.
96. During larval rearing which lasts about 4 days depending on the water temperature, three successive phases can be distinguished from the technical point of view.
(1) For about 1.5 days the newly hatched larvae attach themselves vertically along the wall surface.
(2) During the next 1.5 days the freely swimming larvae first move vertically through the water, up and down, then they gradually assume a more horizontal position, reaching to the water surface to fill their air bladder; (3) once this is filled and functional, the larvae swim horizontally; they have developed their digestive tract and they are able to eat exogenous food (3). Rather than "larvae" they are now called "early fry".
When they have reached this stage, which requires from 60 to 70 degree-days from hatching, the young fish should be transferred to outside ponds as soon as possible.
97. (1) The first exogenous food of early fry consists of hardboiled eggs (1).
(2) Three hard-boiled eggs are finely ground and mixed with 0.5 I water, using for example an electric mixer.
(3) Every 2-3 hours, 5-6 tablespoons of this mixture (4) are poured into each rearing jar for feeding the early fry.
As this kind of food does not contain all the elements required to nourish the young fish adequately, it must not be continued for more than a short time, 1.5 days at most.
It is necessary for the early fry to eat a rich complete food as soon as possible.
98. If no electric mixer is available, the same type of food may be prepared by forcing the hard-boiled egg yolk only through a fine mesh.
(1) A sieve or (2) a cloth bag can be used, for example under water. But in each case it is important that the size of the mesh does not exceed 0.2 mm.
99. The early fry are very delicate and they should never be kept out of water.
(1) A mobile fibreglass tank is the most convenient means of transport, similar to that used for the handling of the breeders inside the hatchery.
(2) A fine-mesh container is placed in the tank.
(3) This container consists of a light metal frame inside which is hung a fine-mesh (0.2 mm) rectangular bag.
(4) The water of the storage tank is regulated to the desired level by inclining the mobile external outlet pipe.
100. As soon as the early fry accept exogenous food well, they should be removed from the rearing jars and stocked in plankton-rich ponds.
(A) The water flow of the rearing jar is stopped and the early fry are gently siphoned into a fine-mesh bag placed in the well-aerated water of a mobile tank.
(B) The water level in this tank is then slowly reduced and the small fish are transferred with a bowl into a larger container.
(1) The functioning air bladder of the early fry is now clearly visible.
It is very important not to forget to check that the water temperature in the various containers should be similar!
101. The early fry to be moved are transferred to various containers according to the type of transport to be used.
For long-distance journeys, bags of strong plastic (0.3-0.5 mm thick) are preferable. (1) These bags (55-60 cm in diameter and 80-90 cm deep) are filled with 20 litres of clean water, its temperature being the same as that of the water containing the early fry. (2) Put 100 000 early fry into this water and fill the free space above the water surface with oxygen. (3) The bag should then be tightly closed with a piece of string and checked for possible leaks.
For further safety, it is common practice to use two plastic bags placed one inside the order, before pouring the water in.
102. For shorter distances to ponds close to the hatchery Building, a fibreglass water tank (200 x 100 x 80 cm) equipped with a compressed oxygen supply may be used.
In such cases, one million early fry per cubic metre of water can be safely transported to the ponds. To avoid injuries, they are either siphoned from the tank directly into the pond water, using for example a 6-8-cm diameter rubber pipe, or they are released through a 20-cm flexible ripe attached to the bottom of the tank.
<section>b</section>
Collection and storage of hypophyses
103. COLLECTION AND STORAGE OF HYPOPHYSES
Whenever possible, hypophyses (pituitary glands) should be collected from mature, freshly killed carp. They should then be dehydrated and stored. These dried hypophyses will be needed for the preparation of the hormonal extract to be injected into the carp breeders for inducing their maturation.
104. To remove the hypophysis from a freshly killed carp, (1) in electric drill with a special drilling head may be used.
The head of the fish being firmly held vertically between two pieces of wood, proceed as follows: (a) draw a line perpendicular to the lateral side of the head from each eye; (b) place the centre of the drill at the meeting point of these lines; (c) adjust he drilling angle so that it equals 90°; (d) drill through the top of the skull, the brain and the base of the skull, down to the mouth cavity; (e) take out the drilling head together with the small cylinder made of bone and tissues. (2) Using a wooden finger fixed to the table, remove this cylinder from the drilling head. 3) Cut it in two, carefully lift the brain tissue (including the hypothalamus) lying on the base of the skull, and pick out the hypophysis with a forceps.
Place it in a bottle containing acetone, together with the other hypophyses collected on the same day.
105. Before storage, (1) hypophyses (2) are dehydrated in acetone for three periods of eight hours each. New acetone should be used at the beginning of each period. (3) At the end of this treatment, the hard hypophyses are dried on blotting paper. (4) They are then placed in small glass containers and pressed down with a ball of fine cotton.
These containers should be tightly sealed, using for example wax or paraffin. A label should be added, indicating the date of collection and the origin of the glands. Even in tropical regions, acetone-dried hypophyses can be stored for at least 5 years without refrigeration. The sealed containers should be kept either in a plastic bag or in a desiccator, in the presence of a water absorbent such as silica gel or calcium chloride.
TABLE 1. SELECTED DATA ON THE REPRODUCTIVE BIOLOGY OF COMMON CARP
First sexual maturity
Temperate
climate Warm
climate
Age, years Males 2 - 3 1
Females 4- 5 1 - 2
Weight, kg Males 3 - 4 -
Females 4- 5 -
Standard length, cm Males 25 - 30 15 - 20
Females 30 - 40 15 - 20
2. Spawning
Spawning water temperature, °C at least 17
Optimum range temperature, °C 22 - 24
Spawning behaviour in groups, in fully inundated grassy areas
3. Egg stage
Ovulation period in hour-grades (°C) 240 - 260
Incubation period in day-grades (°C) 60 - 70
Number eggs per kg carp body weight 100 000 - 200 000
Number dry eggs in one kg 700 000 - 1 000 000
Number swollen eggs in one litre 80 000 -120 000
Diameter of dry eggs, mm 1 - 1.5
Diameter of swollen eggs, mm 2 - 2.5
4. Larval stage
Total length newly hatched larvae, mm 4.8 - 5
Duration larval stage, day-grades (°C) 60 - 70
5. Early fry stage
Total length early fry at first feeding, mm 6 - 7
Size at first food, mm 0.1 - 0.2
TABLE 2. SELECTED DATA ON THE ARTIFICIAL PROPAGATION OF COMMON CARP IN A HATCHERY
1. Broodstock management
Pond size: 0.5 - 1 ha
Stocking rate: 100 - 300 inc./ha
Feeding:
(a) during formation of dormant eggs: 50% natural food and 50% artificial feeds rich in carbohydrates.
(b) after formation of dormant eggs: artificial feeds containing 30-40% protein.
2. Production of sexual products, milt and eggs
Water temperature, °C 20 - 24
Sex ratio of breeders 2F:1M
First injection of females, 
dried hypophysis mg/kg 0.3
salt solution ml/fish 0.1
Second injection of females, 
dried hypophysis mg/kg 3.5
salt solution ml/fish 1.5
Single injection of males, 
dried hypophysis mg/kg 2.0
salt solution ml/fish 1.5
Time between two injections of females, hours 10 - 12
Time between 2nd injection females and ripening, 
hour-grades °C 240- 260
Minimum time necessary after injection males, hours 6
Percentage of ripening females 60 - 90
3. Artificial fertilization of the eggs
Quantity of milt necessary, ml/kg dry eggs 10
Percentage fertilization success 80 - 95
4. Incubation of the fertilized eggs
Water temperature, optimum °C 22 - 24
Quantity of eggs in 7-litre jar 
e.g. dry eggs, kg 0.25 - 0.30
swollen eggs, litres 1.5 - 2
Water flow, litres/minute 0.6 - 2
Duration of incubation period, day-grades °C 60 - 70
Malachite-green treatment, cone. mg/l. 6
Percentage hatching success 95
5. Rearing of larvae and early fry
Water flow, litres/minute 12 - 15
Number of larvae in 200-litre jar 500 000
Duration of yolk-sac stage, day-grades °C 60 - 70
Duration of rearing in jar, days 3-4
Percentage survival rate 60 - 90
Number of early fry produced/kg dry eggs, thousands 500 - 700
Size of first food, mm 0.1 - 0.2
<section>c</section>
WHERE TO PURCHASE FAO PUBLICATIONS LOCALLY
Algeria Société nationale d'édition et de diffusion, 92, rue Didouche Mourad' Alger.
Argentina Libreria Agropecuaria S.A. Pasteur 743, 1028 Buenos Aires
Australia Hunter Publications, 58A Gipps Street, Collingwood, Vic. 3066: Australian Government Publishing Service, Sales and Distribution Branch, Wentworth Ave. Kingston, A.C.T. 2604 Bookshops in Adelaide, Melbourne, Brisbane. Canberra, Perth, Hobart and Sydney.
Austria Gerold & Co., Graben 31, 1011 Vienna
Bahrain United Schools International, PO Box 726 Manama.
Bangladesh ADAB, House No. 46A, Road No 6A Dhanmondi R/A, Dhaka
Belgium M. J. De Lannoy 202, avenue du Roi 1060 Bruxelles. CCP 000-0808993-13
Bolivia Los Amigos del Libro, Peru 3712, Casilla 450, Cochabamba: Mercado 1315, La Paz.
Botswana Botsalo Books (Pty) Ltd PO Box 1532, Gaborone
Brazil Livraria Mestre Jou, Rua Guaipa 518, Sao Paulo 05089; Fundaçao Getulio Vargas, Praia de Botafogo 190, C P 9052, Rio de Janeiro: A Nossa Livraria, CLS 104, Bioco C, Lojas 18/19, 70.000 Brasilia D.F.
Brunei SST Trading Sdn Bhd., Bangunan Tekno No 385, Jin 5/59, PO Box 227, Petaling Jaya, Selangor.
Canada Renout Publishing Co. Ltd 61 Sparks St (Mall), Ottawa, Ont KIT 56:, toll- tree calls in Canada: 1-800-267-4164, Iocal and other calls: 613-238-8985.
China China National Publications Import Corporation, PO Box 88 Beijing.
Congo Office national des librairies populaires B. P. 577, Brazzaville
Costa Rica Libreria, Imprenta y Litografia Lehmann S.A, Apartado 10011 San Jose
Cuba Ediciones Cubanas, Empresa de Comercio Exterior de Publicaciones, Obispo 461, Apartado 605. La Habana.
Cyprus MAM, PO Box 1722, Nicosia.
Czechoslovakia ARTIA Ve Smeckach 30 PO Box 790 111 27 Prague 1
Denmark Munksgaard Export and Subscription Service 35 Norre Sogade DK 1370 Copenhagen K.
Dominican Rep. Fundacion Dominicana de Desarrollo, Casa die las Gárgolas, Mercedes 4, Apartado 857, Zona Postal 1, Santo Domingo
Ecuador Su Libreria Cia. Ltda. Garcia Moreno 1172 y Mejia, Apartado 2556, Quito.
El Salvador Libreria Cultural Salvadorena S.A. de C.V., Calle Arce 423, Apartado Postal 2296, San Salvador.
Finland Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 1 Keskuskatu, PO Box 128, 00101 Helsinki 10.
France Editions A. Pedone 13 rue Soufflot 75005 Paris
Germany, F.R. Alexander Horn internationale Buchhandlung, Friederichstr. 39, Postfach 3340, 6200 Wiesbaden.
Ghana Fides Enterprises, PO Box 14129, Accra: Ghana Publishing Corporation PO Box 3632, Accra.
Greece G C. Eleftheroudakis S.A., 4 Nikis Street, Athens (T-126) John Mihalopoulos & Son S.A. 75 Hermou Street PO Box 73, Thessaloniki
Guatemala Distribuciones Culturales y Técnicas Artemis, 5a. Avenida 12-11, Zona 1, Apartado Postal 2923, Guatemala.
Guinea-Bissau Conselho Nacional da Cultura, Avenida da Unidade Africana, C P 294, Bissau
Guyana Guyana National Trading Corporation Ltd. 45-47 Water Street, PO Box 308, Georgetown.
Haiti Hong Kong Librairie "A la Caravelle", 26 rue Bonne Foi B.P. 111, Port-au-Prince Swindon Book Co., 13-15 Lock Road, Kowloon.
Hungary Kultura, PO Box 149, 1389 Budapest 62
Iceland Snaebjörn Jónsson and Co. h.t., Hafnarstraeti 9, PO Box 1131 101 Reykjavik.
India Oxford Book and Stationery Co., Scindia House, New Delhi 100001; 17Park Street, Calcutta 700 016: Oxford Subscription Agency Institute for Development Education, 1 Anasuya Ave. Kilpauk, Madras 600 010
Indonesia P.T Inti Buku Agung 13 Kwitang Jakarta
Iraq National House for Publishing, Distributing and Advertising, Jamhuria Street, Baghdad.
Ireland The Controller, Stationery Office, Dublin 4.
Italy Distribution and Sales Section, FAO, Via delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome- Libreria Scientifica Don. Lucio de Biasio "Aeiou", Via Meravigli 16 20123 Milan; Libreria Commissionaria Sansoni S p.A. "Licosa", Via Lamarmora 45, C.P. 552, 50121 Fiorence
Japan Maruzen Company Ltd. PO Box 5050, Tokyo International 100-31.
Kenya Text Book Centre Ltd. Kijabe Street, PO Box 47540, Nairobi
Korea, Rep, of Eulyoo Publishing Co. Ltd. 46-1 Susong-Dong, Jongro-Gu, PO Box 362, Kwangwha-Mun, Seoul 110.
Kuwait The Kuwait Bookshops Co. Ltd. PO Box 2942 Satat.
Luxembourg M. J. De Lannoy, 202, avenue du Roi, 1060 Bruxelles (Belgique).
Malaysia SST Trading Sdn. Bhd., Bangunan Tekno No. 385, Jin 5159, PO Box 227, Petaling Jaya, Selangor.
Mauritius Nalanda Company Limited, 30 Bourbon Street, Port-Louis
Mexico Dilitsa S.A, Puebla 182-D, Apartado 24-448, Mexico 06700, D.F.
Morocco Librairie "Aux Belles Images", 281, avenue Mohammed V, Rabat.
Netherlands Keesing Boeken V.B., Joan Muyskenweg 22, Postbus 1118, 1000 BC Amsterdam.
New Zealand Government Printing Office, Government Printing Office Bookshops: 25 Rutland Street Mail orders: 85 Beach Road Private Bag, CPO Auckland Ward Street, Hamilton; Mulgrave Street (Head Office), Cubacade World Trade Centre, Wellington; 159 Hereford Street, Christchurch; Princes Street, Dunedin.
Nicaragua Libreria Universitaria, Universidad Centroamerica, Apartado 69 Managua
Nigeria University Bookshop (Nigeria) Limited University of Ibadan Ibadan
Norway Johan Grundt Tanum Bokhhandel, Karl Johansgate 4143, PO Box 1177, Sentrum Oslo 1.
Pakistan Mirza Book Agency, 65 Shahrah-e-Ouaid-e-Azam, PO Box 729, Lahore 3; Sasi Book Store, Zaibunnisa Street, Karachi.
Panama Distribuidora Lewis S.A., Edificio Dorasol, Calle 25 y Avenida Balboa, Apartado 1634, Panama 1.
Paraguay Agencia de Librerias Nizza S.A., Casilla 2596, Eligio Ayala 1073, Asunción.
Peru Libreria Distribuidora Santa Rosa., Jirón Apurimac 375, Casilla 4937, Lima 1
Philippines. The Modern Book Company Inc., PO Box 632, Manila.
Poland Ars Polona, Krakowskie Przedmiescie 7, 00-068 Warsaw.
Portugal Livraria Bertrand, S.A.R.L., Rua Joao de Deus, Venda Nova, Apartado 37 2701 Amadora Codex; Livraria Portugal, Dias y Andrade Ltda, Rua do Carmo 70-74, Apartado 2681, 1117 Lisbonne Codex.
Romania Ilexim, Str. 13 Decembrie No. 3-5, Bucharest Sector 1.
Saudi Arabia The Modern Commercial University Bookshop, PO Box 394 Riyadh.
Singapore MPH Distributors (S) Pte. Ltd. 71/77 Stamford Road, Singapore 6; Select Books Pte. Ltd. 215 Tanglin Shopping Centre, 19 Tanglin Road,
Singapore 1024; SST Trading Sdn. Bhd., Bangunan Tekno No. 385, Jin 5/59, PO Box 227, Petaling Jaya, Selangor.
Somalia "Samater's", PO Box 936, Mogadishu.
Spain Mundi-Prensa Libros S.A., Castelló 37, Madrid 1, Libreria Agricola, Fernando VI 2, Madrid 4
Sri Lanka M D. Gunasena & Co. Ltd. 217 Olcott Mawatha, PO Box 246, Colombo 11.
Sudan University Bookshop, University of Khartoum, PO Box 321, Khartoum.
Suriname VACO n.v. in Suriname, Domineestraat 26, PO Box 1841, Paramaribo.
Sweden Books and documents: C E. Fritzes Kungi. Hovbakhandel, Regeringsgatan 12, PO Box 16356, 103 27 Stockholm. Subscriptions: Vennergren-Williams AB, PO Box 30004, 104 25 Stockholm
Switzerland Librairie Payot S.A., Lausanne and Geneva; Buchhandtung und Antiquariat Heinimann & Co., Kirchgasse 17. 8001 Zurich
Tanzania Dar-es-Salaam Bookshop, PO Box 9030, Dar-es-Salaam; Bookshop, University of Dar-es-Salaam, PO Box 893, Morogoro
Thailand Suksapan Panit, Mansion 9, Rajadamnern Avenue, Bangkok.
Togo Librairie du Bon Pasteur B.P. 1164, Lomé.
Tunisia Société tunisienne de diffusion, 5, avenue de Carthage, Tunis.
Turkey Kultur Yayinlari is-Turk Ltd Sti., Ataturk Bulvari No. 191, Kat. 21, Ankara. Bookshops in Istanbul and Izmir.
United Kingdom Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 49 High Holborn, London WC1V BHB (callers only) HMSO Publications Centre, Agency Section 51 Nine Elms Lane London SW8 5DR (trade and London area mail orders), 13a Castle Street, Edinburgh EH2 3AR; 80 Chichester Street, Belfast BT1 4JY: Brazennose Street, Manchester M60 BAS; 258 Broad Street, Birmingham B1 2HE; Southey House, Wine Street, Bristol BS1 2BQ.
United States of America UNIPUB, PO Box 1222, Ann Arbor, MI 48106.
Uruguay Libreria Agropecuaria S.R.L., Alzaibar 1328, c.c. 1755, Montevideo.
Yugoslavia Jugoslovenska Knjiga, Trg. Republike 5/8, PO Box 36, 11001 Belgrade; Cankarjeva Zalozba, PO Box 201-lV, 61001 Ljubljana.
Zambia Kingstons (Zambia) Ltd. Kingstons Buiding, President Avenue, PO Box 139, Ndola.
Other countries Requests from countries where sales agents have not yet been appointed may be sent to: Distribution and Sales Section, FAO,, Via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
