<title>The community's toolbox: The idea, methods and tools for participatory assessment, monitoring and evaluation in community forestry</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
In June of 1988, in the small town of Kisumu, on the shore of Lake Victoria in Kenya a workshop on participatory monitoring and evaluation was held. It was sponsored by the FAO/SIDA Forests, Trees and People Programme, CARE International and the Ford Foundation; and was attended by people from many countries. In the year preceding the workshop, case studies on the information systems of six forestry projects in East Africa had been done by a team of researchers. The results of the workshop, and the case studies have been reported in "Proceedings of the National Agroforestry Monitoring and Evaluation Methodology Project (AFMEMP) Workshop".
The field staff who attended this workshop expressed their concern that although "participation" was now considered essential for sustainable and successful community/social forestry, there was little information available to them on "how to do it". As one workshop participant said: "I'm convinced that participation is necessary, but when I return to my country and the communities I work with, I don't know where to begin!".
Soon after the workshop, D'Arcy Davis-Case, a forester specializing in grass-roofs participation and a member of the AFMEMP case study team, began putting together a concept paper on this topic for the FAO/SIDA Forests, Trees and People Programme. The concept paper is now being followed by this field manual, which has been built on the needs expressed by field staff f at the AFMEMP workshop; and based on field staff experiences. Many of the traditional monitoring and evaluation methods and tools have been adapted to be more participatory. The result is "The Community's Toolbox".
The manual is organized into Three Sections. Section One introduces the idea, and benefits to be gained from a new approach. This section also provides some two-way communication exercises for field staff. Section Two provides the methods for determining information needs, and ways that information can be analyzed and presented. Section Three describes the information collecting tools, and offers some suggestions for selection of tools.
Because the manual will be used by field staff in many countries of the world, the illustrator has used simple drawings so that differences such as nationality, culture, dress and race are not a problem. Three distinct categories of people are characterized in the illustrations.
"Insiders" are those who belong to the community. They are distinguished by textured clothing.
"Outsiders" (frequent) are field staff who visit the communities often. They look the same as insiders except that they do not have textured clothing.
"Outsiders" (infrequent) are those who seldom visit the communities. They are characterized by sunglasses and a clipboard
New ideas take time to develop. We invite you to be flexible, adaptive, creative and critical when using this field manual. Share your experiences with others and with us, so that we can continue to build on this approach.
We hope you enjoy using "The Community's Toolbox", and we look forward to hearing from you.
Marilyn Hoskins, Senior Community Forestry Officer,
FAO/SIDA Forest, Trees and People Programme
Via delle Tame di Caracalla,
Rome 00100
Italy
<section>2</section>
Definitions
Activities: specific tasks within a project or programme. For example, community nurseries, farm forestry and improved stoves can all be activities.
Assessment: identification and analysis of the problems and solutions which then form the basis of a project, a programme or an activity.
Baseline: information collected in the early stage of activities in order to focus the activities and describe the starting point against which future change can be measured.
Beneficiaries: those people who directly benefit from project activities. The term "the community" is used for those who indirectly and directly benefit.
Community: a group of people who live in the same area, and often share common goals, common social rules and/or family ties.
Community Forestry: any forestry activities which are carried out by individuals in the community in order to increase benefits they value.
Effects: the result brought about by a specific activity or set of related activities.
Evaluation: a measure of progress to determine whether original objectives have been achieved and if they are still relevant.
Extension: transfer of ideas and technologies through media or dialogue. Extension generally implies a one-way transfer of knowledge, from outsider to insider. But in a participatory approach, extension is defined as a two-way communication of knowledge.
Impact: the broad changes (for example in economic and social terms) brought about by the project or programme.
Information System: the organization, collection, analysis and presentation of information.
Inputs: the resources such as time, labor, materials that are necessary to carry out activities.
Insiders: those people who identify with and belong to a community and/or have a dependent relationship with the community.
Indicators: (Indirect) substitute or proxy for phenomena that cannot be measured directly or conveniently. For example an indirect indicator of poverty might be whether a house has a thatch or a tin roof. (Direct) measurement of phenomena that directly relate to question asked. For example a direct indicator of crop productivity would be measurement of crop yields. (Key) direct or indirect indicators essential to answer the questions being asked.
Method: a way to go about planning, organizing and implementing an activity or group of activities.
Monitoring: systematic recording and periodic analysis of information.
Objectives (Overall): what the project or programme hopes to achieve in the long-term. Overall objectives are often very broad, such as "to increase the quality of rural life".
Objectives (Immediate): the particular accomplishments that, when achieved, will result in the overall objectives being met. Immediate objectives are often more tangible than overall objectives. For example, "to increase crop production by 25%".
Outputs: the measurable results of activities.
Outsiders: those people who may be involved in a community for a period of time, but who do not identify themselves, or are not identified by the community as belonging to that specific community.
Participation: the active involvement of insiders and outsiders in all decisions related to objectives and activities, as well as the activities themselves. The primary purpose of participation is to encourage community self-determination and thus foster sustainable development.
Programme/ Project: the organization of material resources, people and labour for specific and stated purposes. A programme or project can be created and controlled by insiders, or by insiders and outsiders working together.
Qualitative: information which is descriptive, having to do with quality.
Quantitative: information which is numerical, having to do with quantity.
Sustainability: the continuance, by insiders, of community and forestry development after the majority of inputs from outsiders have ceased.
Two-Way Communication: interaction between people that allows for both parties to contribute equally.
Common understanding of words and ideas is important
<section>3</section>
Section one: The idea
Chapter One : Getting the idea
Participatory Assessment, Monitoring and Evaluation (PAME) is an idea whose time has come. It offers new and promising ideas for sustainable and appropriate community forestry development.
PAME "flips" the traditional "top-down" development approach to a "bottom-up" approach which encourages, supports and strengthens communities' existing abilities to identify their own needs, set their own objectives, and monitor and evaluate them.
The he PAME approach focuses on the relationship between the beneficiaries and field staff and the beneficiaries and the community. It builds on two-way communication, clear messages, and a joint commitment to what "works" for the community.
PAME is a combination of three interlinked parts: the IDEA, the METHODS and the TOOLS. While it may not always be possible to adopt the whole PAME approach in every project, it is possible to experiment with some activities to see if PAME works. Try it, adapt it, play with the ideas presented here, and observe the effects.
Sustainable development can be built on the foundation that PAME sets out, especially when approached with the sense of adventure and creativity that is called for by new ways of thinking!
Chapter One : Getting the idea
1. Changes in community forestry.
2. What is PAME?
3. The principles of PAME.
4. The benefits of PAME.
5. Where will PAME work ?
6. When can PAME begin ?
7. Changing ideas about community development.
8. PAME builds on two-way communication.
1. Changes in community forestry.
In the first stage
In the past twenty years Community Forestry has gone through two very definite stages, and is now entering a third stage.
The outsiders made most of the decisions. They decided what the problems were, and how to solve them. They designed the project and set the project objectives and activities. They provided the necessary inputs, management, and then monitored and evaluated, to see that their objectives and activities had been achieved.
The results were not encouraging. Community interest often decreased over time. Very seldom were activities continued by the community after the outsiders withdrew. It became clear that sustainability was not being achieved.
The outsiders still made most decisions, but they began to ask insiders more questions. Overall, the outsiders role was much like that in the first stage, except that studies of the community done by outsiders to help them establish the needs of the community, offered new insights into community preferences and motivation.
The result was that outsiders began to realize that insiders knew a great deal. Insiders could often identify why activities had or hadn't worked.
In the second stage
In the third stage
Insiders, with support from outsiders, are active in decision making. Insiders identify their problems and the solutions. They set objectives and activities, monitor and evaluate progress to see these are being achieved, and continue to be relevant. Outsiders adopt a participatory approach, encouraging insiders to identify their own needs, set their own objectives, manage, monitor and evaluate the activities.
The results are promising. The participatory approach has begun to show encouraging results. With time and experience, this approach will continue to develop methods and tools, which hold great potential for sustainable development.
The Community's Toolbox describes some of the participatory methods and tools which can help field staff and communities to further develop this third stage.
2. What is PAME?
Participatory Assessment, Monitoring and Evaluation (what we will refer to as PAME) is a creative and adaptive information system which is based primarily on the information needs of the insiders.
Based on insiders point of view
When insiders make decisions, they must have good information available. PAME encourages and supports an information system that responds to what insiders need to know. But PAME also assumes that while people are actively trying to cope with their problems, they cannot have perfect knowledge or understanding of their political, economic or social situation. Effective development is more than "asking the people themselves-; it is a process of helping them formulate their own questions.
The PAME approach does not assume that the "insiders points of view" are all going to be the same, but information from PAME can aid negotiations between conflicting points of view.
PAME links information to decision-making
Making good decisions requires timely, relevant understandable and accurate information. PAME provides beneficiary and community decision makers with the information they need. Field staff must also make decisions regarding the community. The communities' information needs and field staff information needs may be very similar, especially when both parties objectives are to make changes that will improve conditions in the community.
Decision makers at the national and international level can also benefit from PAME. It can provide them with an analysis which reflects the reality of the community.
FAME considers the whole picture
PAME provides the opportunity to analyze both the qualitative and quantitative information, thus providing more complete information on which to base decisions.
Often, an information system focuses on only numbers (quantitative) information, but numbers alone produce an incomplete picture of what is really taking place in the community.
In the following example, only the quantitative information was known to evaluators, and decisions were made on this basis. If the "story behind the numbers" had been available to them, a different evaluation might have been made.
FAME considers the whole picture
PAME is experimental
PAME is experimental
Each community is unique. Different information is required. Different ways of processing information are needed. There is no blueprint, and no two PAME information systems are going to look alike.
Although there are many examples of successful use of the ideas, methods and tools presented in "The Community's Toolbox", they have not until now been put together. Nor have participatory methods been tried in all cultures.
When you understand the approach used in "The Community's Toolbox", filter it through your own experiences. Be critical, but constructive. Think about adapting the approach if necessary.
PAME is made up of three parts
The ideas, the methods and the tools work together to support each other. PAME will not work very well if the new methods and tools are introduced, without the new ideas; or if the ideas of participation are introduced with methods and tools which do not encourage participation
1. New idea
o outsiders encourage insiders to find their own answers.
o outsiders are encouraged to respond \ to the needs identified by the insiders.
o outsiders and insiders see themselves as partners.
o insiders are the implementers and managers of the project.
2. New methods
o insiders and outsiders jointly determine what information is needed.
o analysis and feedback is done in a way that encourages insider input and thus ensures insider understanding.
o deeper understanding of the project is possible because the whole picture \is considered.
3. New tools
o two-way communication is encouraged.
o a range of possible tools ensures that tools appropriate to the community can be chosen.
o traditional information gathering is considered and/or fried before tools are introduced.
3. The principles of PAME.
PAME has been built on a number of overall principles which will help you understand the PAME approach.
Tools chosen to fit community
PAME seeks to find the appropriate tool for each unique community.
Information that is useful rather than perfect
It is often only necessary to have information that shows trends rather than statistically exact information. Information showing trends and delivered on time is often more useful to decision makers than precise information delivered late.
Outsiders help community to focus on a specific issue
Outsiders facilitate but do not direct.
Attitude of partnership
Insiders and outsiders can both contribute to community development.
Supports existing community skills
PAME builds on existing community skills.
Essential information
PAME seeks to identify information that is "necessary to know" rather than "nice to know". This ensures that the information system is not overloaded with unnecessary information.
Two way communication and clear messages
PAME is built on ideas, methods and tools that support equal and clear communication between insiders and outsiders.
The community is the final evaluator
Since it is the community alone who decides whether or not to continue the project, they are the final and most important evaluators.
People who make decisions need timely, reliable and useful information
The right information at the right time will facilitate better decisions.
4. The benefits of PAME.
Empowers insiders
With PAME, people are encouraged and supported to take control of decisions that affect their environment, building the courage and commitment to take part in other decisions. They also develop important contacts with those outside their community so that they can seek advice on their own. Sustainability is more likely to be achieved because insiders develop the skills, contacts and confidence that are necessary to continue after outsiders leave.
Provides checks and balances for development
Insiders take the greatest risks, not only because they give their time and labour, but more importantly, because they have the most to gain or lose. PAME gives insiders the opportunity to explore the risks, the costs and the benefits. In this way they are better prepared to decide whether the activities provide them with the development they want.
Provides timely information
Information gathering and analysis are done at the community level and therefore information is available to the community when decisions are made. When information is timely, potential problems can be identified and remedies can be sought early.
Provides accurate and understandable information
With PAME, information is produced and validated by insiders, who are accountable to one other. This helps assure that information is accurate and reliable.
Information from PAME is understandable to community members because they have determined what information is needed and how it will be analyzed and presented.
Provides cost effective information
When outsiders monitor and evaluate activities the costs are often very high, and the impact of the activities may still not be well understood. PAME provides the opportunity for insiders to communicate their analysis of activities to outsiders. Costs are reduced because only essential information is sought, collected and analyzed.
Benefits both the insiders and the outsiders
Good information is available to both insider and outsider decision makers. Insiders who hope to gain directly from the activities are able to clearly see the costs and benefits. Insiders who may gain or lose indirectly can see the costs and benefits of their support. Outsiders can respond more readily to the real needs of the community.
Identifies community research needs
When insiders decide what information is important to them, their immediate and most important research needs can be identified. These needs can be addressed by community research or outside research agencies. Field staff can play an important role, presenting community identified research questions to higher research institutions and bringing research results back to the community.
Provides a direct line from community to outside decision makers
PAME can present a realistic picture of the community that includes both quantitative and qualitative information. This lessens the chance of poor communication between the community and outside decision makers.
Provides a new way to look at old problems
PAME can provide insiders with new analytical skills which open up new approaches to old problems, shedding light on new solutions.
5. Where will PAME work ?
The focus does not have to be forestry
While PAME has been developed to apply to community forestry, it can be adapted to work in other fields such as health care, watershed management, irrigation, agriculture, fisheries, and projects which integrate forestry and nutrition.
The PAME approach will work in most communities, in most countries, and over a wide range of activities.
PAME will work differently in each culture
Some cultures may have political, religious and cultural systems that lend themselves to the participatory approach. Introducing PAME in these cultures may be relatively easy. Other cultures are more "top-down" with strict rules regarding interaction between individuals or groups. Participatory methods may be more difficult to introduce in these situations and may require more time and commitment on the part of both insiders and outsiders. There may also be great variation within cultures. What may be common to all communities is the wish to influence the process of development, continuing to improve the situation, with or without the assistance of outsiders.
Communities are seldom harmonious groups of people. They are often characterized by deep resentment, grudges and open hostilities. While total community agreement is not always possible, PAME encourages cooperation through focus groups, information sharing, and open negotiations.
PAME can be appropriate to any community forestry activity
Community forestry can include only one activity or many different activities. The difference between community forestry and other forestry activities is that the benefits from forestry stay within the community. These benefits can be gained by individuals or by the community as a whole.
Community forestry can be
6. When can PAME begin ?
Everybody wants and benefits from sustainable development. But not everybody agrees on the ways to achieve it
Field staff need the support of their supervisors
PAME is introduced to the communities by field staff who must have, or gain the support of their supervisors. It may take extra time for field staff to learn the PAME approach, and develop a dialogue with communities. This may conflict with time frames, work plans and/or targets which are often the responsibility of field staff supervisors. Time frames, work plans and/or targets may have to be modified to accommodate the PAME approach.
If you believe that the PAME approach will benefit the communities, discuss it with your supervisors and try to obtain their support.
PAME can be introduced at any time
Ideally, PAME should be introduced at the early stages of a programme, project or activities. However, benefits are possible at all stages.
Time Method used
Beginning Introduced at the beginning PAME will have the greatest benefit because of the early participation of insiders in planning and design. o Assessment
o Baseline
Midway Introduced midway PAME can provide insight on activities that are not going well so that they can be changed or discontinued. o Assessment
o Baseline
o Monitoring
o Evaluation
End Introduced towards the end PAME can help the next phase or future activities by identifying the reasons for success or failure from the insiders point of view. o Evaluation
7. Changing ideas about community development.
By trying PAME initially in one community field workers can learn more about the approach and how to modify or adapt it to suit the community. Additionally the risks of changing an overall strategy are minimized. If the effects are satisfactory, field staff and community members will have gained experience, and can pass their experience on to others.
New ideas mean change
Be patient! Don't give up if the PAME approach doesn't work in the first week! It has been found that some communities, especially those who have "top down" cultures or those who have long term exposure to outsider development programmes have become dependent on outsiders to do the thinking for them. They may not be interested or familiar with attempts to involve them.
Accepting or rejecting new ideas usually means going through a personal "sorting out". We may examine other similar ideas, or our personal experience, and imagine whether or not the new idea makes sense relative to this. We can react very differently to new ideas.
New ideas mean change
Changing is not easy. Sometimes it means giving up something that is comfortable, such as a definite strategy for community development, even when we know it isn't working very well. Staying with what is comfortable may seem better than risking the unknown.
Accepting new ideas and changing is what "development" is all about! Risking the unknown may be as difficult for some communities as it is for us. People in a community are just like us, comfortable with things the way they are, even if they aren't working well.
PAME offers a new way to look at development
Generally, it is thought that communities participate in OUR activities. This is because in the past outsiders have decided which activities will be conducted. PAME works with a different perspective. Outsiders participate in the activities that belong to the community.
Think of the community as a river which flows on and on. It has flowed for generations, and will continue to flow. As outsiders, we enter the flow of the river (community) at a certain point and exit at another point Hopefully, we leave something positive and lasting with the community. That is sustainable development!
PAME offers a new way to look at development
Participatory means partnership
The idea behind PAME is that insiders and outsiders see themselves as equal partners in development, neither one has more control. Insiders and outsiders realize that each will contribute something unique that the other does not possess. They recognize the value of each other's contribution, and that together they can accomplish what neither can do alone.
Participatory means partnership
8. PAME builds on two-way communication.
In the following pages there are three exercises for you to go through with your colleges: a communication exercise, a listening exercise and a self-reflection exercise. These can help you to improve your two-way communication skills.
Communication Exercise
Think about your communication training.
Were you trained to have special information that you would then teach others?
How do you share your knowledge?
As trained foresters, agriculturalists, or extensionists we are taught about certain subjects. We are often expected to teach others, and to do this we are trained in one-way communication.
Role playing "teacher" and "student" with your colleagues can be a very effective way of understanding the differences between one-way and two-way communication.
Choose a "teacher" and decide on a subject for the lecture. Try to make it a subject that is more familiar to the "students" than the "teacher".
During the lecture, the "students" are not allowed to contribute. After some time (five or ten minutes) stop the lecture and discuss amongst yourselves what it felt like to be a "student" with knowledge of a subject but without a chance to contribute. Discuss what it felt like to be a "teacher", knowing the "students" had something to contribute but were unable to speak. Then try the role play exercise with the "teacher" encouraging "students".
Communication exercise
Listening Exercise
Do you communicate well?
Are you most comfortable as a listener or as speaker? Do you ask questions that show you understand what was said, and that you are interested in more information?
Although we are often trained to speak, we are seldom trained to listen. Listening also requires training. Using PAME, it is important to be a good listener. How can we train ourselves to listen and respond in a way that ensures that the other person will come to their own decisions and gain their own insights?
With your colleagues, choose a topic on which opinions are likely to differ. Write a strong statement for both sides of the topic. For example:
"I feel women should not work as foresters."
"I feel women foresters are as effective as male foresters."
or...
"I feel development people from outside the country can never really understand our situation."
"I feel development people from outside the country understand our situation better than we do."
Break into groups of three. Two people will discuss the topic. One of these persons will be a "sender" of the message (Whichever opinion they wish to support), the second person will be a "receiver", trying only to understand the "sender's" point of view. The third person will be a "critic", observing the "sender" and the "receiver". After five minutes, stop the conversation and ask for feedback from the "critic":
Did the responses of the "receiver" criticize the "sender" ? Were the responses supportive of the "sender" ? Did the responses probe for more information? Did the "receiver" seem bored?
The most effective response is one which communicates to the "sender" that the "receiver" is interested in the "sender" as a person, has an accurate understanding of what has been said, and encourages the "sender" to go on, elaborate and further explore the topic.
Change "roles" until everyone has had a turn being a "receiver".
Self Reflection Exercise
How did you communicate today?
Did you feel people enjoyed talking with you?
Did you talk as much as you listened?
What did you learn?
How could you have communicated better?
Good two-way communication takes some time to develop. It can be nurtured by continual reflection, by asking yourself and those around you how you are doing (asking them to be a "critic" ).
Allow some time during field staff meetings to talk about experiences in communication. Discuss communication that worked and communication that did not work. We often learn more from our mistakes, although they are sometimes more difficult to talk about!
At the end of a working day, perhaps on the way home from work, take some time to think about the conversations you had with people. Do you think they went well? What could you have done better? If you are working with colleagues, ask them to give you some feedback. Do the same for them.
Self reflection exercise
Ask community members how you are doing. You could have them do the S.W.OL. Analysis (Tool 18) on your performance. This is a good exercise because it recognizes that there will be BOTH strengths and weaknesses in your performance.
Being aware of different kinds of communication, learning to listen, and being aware of how you are doing, are the first steps toward two-way communication.
<section>4</section>
Section two: The Methods
Chapter two: Participatory assessment
Chapter three: Participatory assessment
Chapter four: Participatory monitoring
Chapter five: Participatory evaluation
Chapter six: Information analysis
Chapter seven: Presentation of results
A method is a way to go about planning, organizing and carrying out an activity or group of activities.
In forestry, we are familiar, with planting methods, pruning methods, thinning and harvesting methods. Each of these describes a way to go about performing a certain activity at a certain time. Each of these activities contributes to the realization of an established tree, or a whole woodlot.
The methods of PAME are also distinct in what they do, and when they are done. Each method contributes to the whole information system, just as a thinning method contributes to the whole woodlot! The methods of PAME are:
Participatory Assessment Chapter Two
Participatory Baselines Chapter Three
Participatory Monitoring Chapter Four
Participatory Evaluation Chapter Five
Each chapter first describes the method, and its main purposes. Following this, the benefits of the method are listed. Finally, steps to help organize the information gathering are described.
It is expected that the methods may need to be modified during the process of field experimentation, according to the community response and existing community skills.
Chapters Six and Seven introduce some of the ways to analyze information and present results.
Chapter two: Participatory assessment
1. What is participatory assessment?
2. Benefits of participatory assessment.
3. Steps to participatory assessment.
1. What is participatory assessment?
Participatory Assessment is a method for determining, from the insiders point of view: what activities are needed and can be supported; whether insiders accept the activities proposed by outsiders and; whether the activities are reasonable and practical.
Insiders, facilitated by outsiders, go through a process in which they identify the conditions that are necessary for successful completion of activities, and gather information to determine whether or not their community has these conditions or can create them. An "Assessment Framework" examines each activity in terms of necessary conditions and eliminates those activities which do not have necessary conditions.
Decisions may have already been made by outsiders
Often the way that activities are planned can mean that some decisions have already been made without input from the community. It may be:
o that the problems and the solutions to the problems have been established by outsiders,
o that funding has been decided upon,
o that the national or local governments have negotiated with outsiders or, in some cases, have initiated the project,
o that the area within a country has been determined and that field staff have been assigned specific roles.
Activities can be initiated by outsiders
One of the decisions often left to field staff is the choice of communities in which to carry out activities. For example, in a designated area, there may be a great many communities in which activities could be introduced. But there may be field staff constraints, such as lack of vehicles and trained field staff, which make serving some communities difficult. Field staff will have to consider their own abilities and constraints. As well, they will have to consider which communities have both the problem that the activities address and the physical and community conditions necessary for success.
If field staff must choose communities, a modification of the Participatory Assessment method that is described in this chapter can help them decide which communities to approach.
Participatory Assessment when activities initiated by both insiders and outsiders
In community forestry, insiders provide many of the inputs, such as labour, materials, and management. While the outsiders may have chosen the community as having the conditions necessary for activities to succeed, the insiders will not always agree; they will have to decide for themselves.
Participatory Assessment provides a framework for insiders and outsiders to determine whether or not they want, need, and can support the activities proposed.
Participatory Assessment when activities initiated by insiders
When insiders approach outsiders for assistance with activities, a Participatory Assessment can be very useful. It can confirm to insiders that they have identified the right problem and the right solutions. It can also help outsiders understand the proposed activities and why the community has chosen them.
Community are not always harmonious
Participatory Assessment is facilitated by outsiders
An insider assessment may be something that has not been done before. It may be a learning experience for everyone!
As facilitators, outsiders openly discuss what they can offer to the community. This may be material resources that the community does not have, such as seeds or shovels. It may be technical or organizational advice. Outsiders also communicate to insiders that the decision to accept, modify or reject proposed activities is a decision insiders must consider carefully. After all, potentially they have the most to lose if the activities fail and the most to gain if they succeed.
Many objectives are considered
To ensure, as far as possible, that everyone receives what they want and need, Participatory Assessment considers all relevant objectives. The objectives of insiders who may directly benefit, those of insiders who may indirectly benefit, and those of outsiders are all identified and considered. Participatory Assessment encourages discussion of all objectives, thus it can help identify conflicting and complementary objectives.
Even when the objectives of insiders and outsiders are different, often with slight changes, everyones objectives can be achieved. In the following example, where outsiders have proposed community woodlots, there are three "sets" of objectives that must be considered.
Outsider objectives: To maintain a sustainable fuelwood supply for the landless poor.
Insider objectives: (people with land) To reduce soil erosion by wind. To obtain more fodder for their livestock.
Insider objectives: (landless people) To continue to collect fuelwood from the surrounding area.
Are these objectives in conflict? If outsiders objectives are met, does this mean that the objectives of insiders with land will not be achieved? Can something be done so that all objectives are met to some degree?
Addressing conflicting objectives is possible. One solution might be to change activities. Instead of community woodlots, landless people could plant coppicing fuelwood and fodder species on private farmland.
Modification of the activities would meet the objectives of the insiders with land by providing windbreaks to reduce soil erosion, and increasing the fodder supply in the community. The objectives of the landless could be achieved by their planting and managing the windbreaks by selective cutting, so that the windbreak effects would always be present, and yet they could obtain a steady supply of fuelwood, as well as collect and sell the fodder.
Even with different objectives
Good communication, good information, and imagination can lead to successful negotiations
So that everyone can benefit
Builds on existing community skills
Over the years, communities develop their own unique ways to deal with problems. For the most part, these work well. But sometimes, when new, unexpected problems present themselves, or when the community social structure has broken down, the community is unable to cope. It is then that outsiders can intervene and introduce a new way to look at the situation.
Time to leave alone
Time to intervene
New skills can be introduced
For example, in the past, the community leader may have allocated land to individuals on the condition that they use it for growing crops, as land was in short supply. However, national government policies have changed, and now land is sold to individuals. Some of the new landowners do not belong to the community. They do not plant their lands, and as a result there is a shortage of food in the community. The traditional ways of dealing with this situation no longer work and new skills and strategies, which might include approaching the government with realistic options, must be explored.
Time to intervene
The basis for negotiation of conflicts
Participatory Assessment, through discussions of the proposed activities, identifies potential conflicts which can be dealt with before they become a problem.
For example, one proposed activity might be setting up a community nursery to produce nitrogen fixing tree species to plant with agricultural crops. These species will benefit only those who have land. The strategy proposed is that the community supply volunteer labour to the nursery. However, there is a strong possibility that those without land may be coerced into providing volunteer labour. Compensation, such as wages and perhaps free seedlings to plant around homes, must be negotiated from the beginning, or nursery labour may be withdrawn at a critical time.
Necessary conditions are determined
Participatory Assessment is built on "necessary conditions", factors which are important for successful completion of an activity. Using PAME, necessary conditions are discussed and ranked in order of importance for each specific activity. Information is then gathered to establish whether necessary conditions are present or possible. This information is used to eliminate those activities which have the least chance of success.
Necessary conditions are the factors that must be present for a certain activity to happen. While some factors are more important than others, they must an exist. For example, the necessary conditions far growing a seedling are soil, water, seed, and light. Without seed, there an be no seedling, even if everything else is available.
Necessary conditions can be created
If the necessary conditions are not present in the community, there is the possibility that they can be created.
If the activity were a community woodlot, the most important necessary condition could be available communal land. But, if this necessary condition is not present, alternatives can be explored. Private lands might be leased and the landlord might receive a portion of the wood produced.
2. Benefits of participatory assessment.
The beginning of the participatory relationship
Participatory Assessment is often the first interaction of outsiders with the community. It encourages the beginning of a participatory relationship between insiders and outsiders. First impressions are important and set the stage for the future.
Involvement of the community at an early stage
Participatory Assessment provides the community with the opportunity to decide, at the beginning, whether or not to accept the project as planned by outsiders or accept it with some modifications. When the community makes this first decision, there is a greater chance that they will be committed to what is, in actuality, their project.
Recognition of objectives provides the basis for negotiation
Encourages discussion of all relevant objectives so that potential conflicts can be identified and negotiated early, before they hinder success.
A learning experience
Participatory Assessment provides the opportunity for both insiders and outsiders to better understand the development process in which they are engaged.
Information for future reference is provided
The information from Participatory Assessment can complement baseline and evaluation information.
3. Steps to participatory assessment.
Outsiders and insiders (spokespersons for the community) should first discuss the purpose and benefits of a Participatory Assessment, and plan for the initial meeting if they decide to proceed.
A Participatory Assessment can begin with a community meeting, (see Tool 1: Group Meetings). Invite interested community members, the intended beneficiaries and others that may be affected by the project (such as nomadic herders or downstream communities).
The time required to do a Participatory Assessment will vary, depending on the community. It may take a large group meeting to go through the first analysis, another smaller team to gather information, and then another meeting of the large group to do a final analysis using the new information. In smaller communities, the people that are present may supply enough information, and the Participatory Assessment can be done in one meeting. Take as much time as is needed and try not to rush things.
The format for the Assessment Framework is presented throughout the following steps, and then completely on the last page of this chapter.
First step 1
Establish insiders and outsiders objectives.
Insider and outsiders share their objectives. Outsiders state clearly what they can and cannot do.
Responsibilities should be clear
Insiders may take some time to discuss and determine their problems and solutions to establish their own objectives. Insiders and outsiders should clearly understand the responsibilities and inputs that are expected of them.
Whether the activities are initiated by insiders or outsiders, it will be insiders who must identify their own objectives. Some tools useful to this are:
Tool 2 Drawing and Discussion
Tool 4: Flannel Boards
Tool 5: Open-ended Stories
Tool 6: Unserialized Posters
Second step 2
Describe three categories.
On a large sheet of paper, draw the Assessment Framework and explain the three categories.
Describe three categories
Problem identification
It is most important that insiders and outsiders have identified somewhat the same problem, that this problem is of high priority to insiders, and that the activities address the problems.
Problem identification is useful to both insiders and outsiders. It is the basis for determining objectives which are used to negotiate the best options for all.
Problem identification
Physical conditions
Some important physical conditions must be present in order for activities to be carried out. For example, are land, water or near-by markets available to support activities?
It is important that the community identify physical conditions necessary for activities.
Physical conditions
Community conditions
Consider the necessary socio-economic conditions. Are there community organizations that can implement the activities? Is there strong community leadership? Is there sufficient community labour available? What community skills are required? Are there social, religious, economic, class/caste, legal, and/or political conditions that might affect activities?
If a community organization is needed to carry out the activities an existing group may be able to handle the extra responsibility. If a new community structure is required, one of the existing successful community organizations can be used as a model.
Community conditions
The community may be divided in such a way (class, caste, politics) that groups will not cooperate and may even openly oppose the project if they perceive that activities will not benefit them. Discussions of community constraints may bring up very sensitive issues. However, sensitive issues do not have to be challenged or resolved. They must only be recognized so that planning and negotiations take them into account.
Third step 3
Identify activities within the three categories.
Within each of the three categories, the community will identify activities. These are written in the left hand column.
Identify activities within the three categories
Fourth step 4
Identify necessary conditions within each category for each activity.
Discuss and list all the conditions necessary in each category, and for each activity.
Identify necessary conditions within each category for each activity
Fifth step 5
Rank necessary conditions.
Have the group discuss and chose the most important (first) necessary condition in each category for each activity. Then choose the necessary condition next (second) in importance, then third and so on.
Omit those that the group does not consider important.
Rank necessary conditions.
This kind of a framework should give a focus for discussion and a way to organize information. However, it may not work in each community. It may be too complicated, or just not the way some people organize their thoughts.
Field staff can try the framework with each other first. If it "works" (assists with understanding) then they might ask a few people from the community to try it, and give their feedback.
If the framework goes through these two "screens" it has a better chance of being useful to a larger group. If it doesn't "work", think of what may work better.
Sixth step 6
Identifying information needed.
For each proposed activity, the necessary conditions are examined and the information required to see if these are present is identified. To do this, Activity Information Sheets, such as shown below, can be used for each activity proposed.
Identifying information needed
Seventh step 7
Gather information.
The people at the meeting may have much of the information needed. Individuals can contribute information, and the validity, or truth, of individual information can be confirmed by the group.
If further information gathering is needed this can be done by designing teams for each activity, once the larger group has decided what information is needed.
Depending on the information that is needed, tools that might be helpful are:
Tool 2 Drawing and Discussion
Tool 4 Flannel Boards
Tool 6 Unserialized Posters
Tool 9 Semi-structured Interviews
Tool 10 Ranking, Rating and Sorting
Tool 15 Maps and Mapping
Gather information
Eighth step 8
Analyze information.
Returning to the larger group, the facilitator uses the Assessment Framework and the completed Activity Information Sheets to discuss and consider each activity in turn. The facilitator draws a line from left to right through each activity, indicating OK when necessary conditions are not present, or can be created, and indicating STOP when necessary conditions are not present and cannot be created. The lines with the OK right through to the end will be the activities that have all the conditions necessary to make them work.
Analyze information
The information from Participatory Assessment will be useful in the future, and should be stored in a safe place.
The information from Participatory Assessment will be useful in the future, and should be stored in a safe place.
Chapter three: Participatory assessment
1. What is a participatory baseline?
2. The benefits of participatory baselines.
3. Steps to participatory baselines.
1. What is a participatory baseline?
A Participatory Baseline provides a description and information, mainly from the insiders perspective, of a specific situation. It is done so that activities can be focused, and change can be measured by comparison with similar situations at some future time. Information is identified and collected to describe the present situation as it specifically relates to the objectives. For example, if one of the objectives is to increase the supply of fuelwood to a community, the baseline information required might include:
What is the present fuelwood supply?
What is the source of the present fuelwood supply (local and/or imported)?
What is household fuelwood consumption?
Main purpose is to establish criteria to measure change
A Participatory Baseline enables insiders to measure and evaluate change in specific conditions providing a common understanding, from the beginning, of how change will be measured.
Suppose you want to measure change in a family. It could be decided that this could best be done by measuring the number and growth of children. Measuring change in a family might include a photograph of the family at the beginning, and series of photographs or drawings over time. The photograph at the beginning would be a "baseline," while the other photographs would show change over time.
In forestry, if the project objective is to plant trees in a school yard, measurement might be the number and growth of trees in the school yard. Drawings of the school yard before any project trees are planted, and each year throughout the activity can give a measurement of change.
What is a participatory baseline?
Provides information needed to start activities
A baseline can provide additional information about a specific topic. For example, a new activity to collect and sell forest products, might require a market survey.
2. The benefits of participatory baselines.
Community can, readily observe change
The communities discuss and agree upon ways to measure and observe change.
Provides a way to obtain information when needed
When insiders need specific information about an activity or proposed activity, the baseline method is a way for them to organize and obtain the information.
Complements baselines by outsiders
Baseline surveys by outsiders may be costly, and often the information is difficult to interpret. Participatory Baselines can complement and enrich outsider baselines by providing a comparison of the perceptions of insiders and outsiders.
Information is immediately useful to insiders and outsiders
Because insiders and outsiders are both involved in the planning and analysis of baselines, it is a learning experience for both groups. The information is understandable and can be used for confirmation of problem identification and solutions, planning project activities and identifying potential problems.
Can identify research needs
If it is not known what information is needed, and/or if information is not available, topics that need to be researched can be identified. This research can be done by insiders and outsiders (see Participatory Action Research Tool #12), or requested of local research agencies.
3. Steps to participatory baselines.
Participatory Baselines can be done with the whole community or with the beneficiary group. This will depend on the size of the community and their interest. If there is a large community group, it may be best if responsibilities for baseline are delegated to a few people, (a baseline team). The baseline team will be directed by the baseline questions developed by the larger group, and report the results back to them.
The facilitating role of the outsiders should be discussed. Outsiders generally have access to information from urban markets, libraries, other agencies and government sources which can be of use to communities.
A baseline framework is used to plan information gathering and analysis. The following steps describe sections of the framework.
First step 1
Discuss the purpose of a baseline.
Describe baseline information to the group. Discuss with them the benefits of baseline information. Will this kind of information be beneficial to them? If they decide to proceed, what do they want to know? Do they want to measure progress or obtain information about a specific issue?
Discuss the purpose of a baseline
Second step 2
Review objectives and activities.
If baseline is being done for the purpose of being able to measure change at a future date, then objectives and activities can be reviewed. These may have been established during a Participatory Assessment. If not, the objectives and activities established by the outsiders can be reviewed and discussed.
If a baseline is being done to obtain specific information for a new activity or because of a problem, reviewing of the central questions can be useful.
Review objectives and activities
Third step 3
Establish baseline questions.
Once the reason for the baseline has been determined, the group must decide what information will tell them what they want to know. This can be discussed by the group, and then later prioritized if there are too many questions. If the group is large, they may wish at this point, to delegate responsibility to a baseline team.
Direct and Indirect Indicators
Direct indicators are pieces of information that expressly relate to what is being measured. For example, if information on crop yields are required then crop yields are measured.
Indirect indicators are essential pieces of information chosen from amongst many possible pieces of information to serve as substitutes or proxys to answer questions and/or respond to statements that are difficult to measure.
For example, instead of the direct indicator of income, indirect indicators of poverty chosen by insiders might be:
o Persons are poor if they have to hire themselves out as labour,
o Persons are rich if they can hire labour
Key indicators are essential pieces of information that open doors to understanding. Indicators can be compared to road signs. Road signs give information that tell the traveler how far it is to a certain town. The traveler can then estimate the time it will take
Establishing indicators may take some time, but experience Shows that this is lime well spent Three important questions to be answered are:
o What do we want to know?
o What are the many pieces of information that could tell us this ?
o What are the few pieces of information ( key indicators ) that will tell us this ?
Establishing good indicators will reduce the amount of information that needs to be collected .
Direct and indirect indicators
Fourth step 4
Choose key indicators.
To establish direct or indirect indicators, for each baseline question think of the indicators that are possible. Will the indicators answer the questions with the level of accuracy required? Record indicators for each baseline question.
Fifth step 5
Identify the information sources and tools for baseline questions.
For each baseline question decide where and how the information can best be obtained. Some information may be available from a secondary source (such as a recent agricultural survey), while other information will have to be collected.
Fifth step 5
It may be that many baseline questions can be answered using the same information gathering tool. Some of the information gathering tools that can facilitate participatory monitoring are:
Tool 2 Drawing and Discussion
Tool 4 Flannel Boards
Tool 5 Open-ended Stories
Tool 9 Semi-structured Interviews
Tool 10 Ranking, Rating and Sorting
Tool 14 Maps and Mapping
Decide on skills and labour required to obtain information.
Participatory Baselines may require the assistance of people with specific abilities, such as interview skills, math skills, artistic skills and/or dramatic skills. It will also require a certain amount of labour (time) from people.
The group (or small team) must decide which skills and labour (resources) are available within the community, and what other outside resources are available to them. They might ask the questions:
What resources do we need?
What resources do we have, or can we develop?
What other resources do we need to get?
Sixth step 6
Seventh step 7
Decide when information gathering can be done.
The time for the baseline must be determined taking into account factors such as: seasonal constraints (planting and harvesting times); religious holidays; field staff availability; and community labour demands.
For each key indicator, or baseline question the group decides approximately how long each task will take and when it will be done.
Seventh step 7
Eighth step 8
Decide who will gather information.
When the specific dates, the time and the skills required are known, the tasks can then be delegated to individuals or small working groups.
Ninth step 9
Decide what to do with the information.
Depending on the purpose of the baseline, the information can be analyzed and stored, analyzed and presented, or roughly analyzed and stored.
Ninth step 9
Chapters Seven and Eight describe ways to analyze and present information.
The information from Participatory Baselines will be useful in the future. Store the information in a safe place.
<section>5</section>
Chapter four: Participatory monitoring
1. What is participatory monitoring?
2. The benefits of participatory monitoring.
3. Monitoring people's participation.
4. Steps to participatory monitoring.
1. What is participatory monitoring?
Participatory Monitoring is the systematic recording and periodic analysis of information that has been chosen and recorded by insiders with the help of outsiders.
Participatory Monitoring measures progress
The main purpose of Participatory Monitoring is that it provides information during the life of the project, so that adjustments and/or modifications can be made if necessary.
Sun
Take the example of a bus trip from one community to the other. When passengers can see out the windows, they can monitor progress by observing the passing landscape, reading the road signs, and watching the movement of the sun across the sky. Monitoring these kinds of information on a bus trip lets them know whether they are heading in the right direction.
Participatory monitoring is having all passengers on the bus know their destination and decide how they will measure their progress.
Rain
But, suppose a rainstorm made it impossible for passengers to see out the windows. The bus would be moving, but passengers would be unable to know if they were on the right road, or headed in the right direction. That is what it would be like without monitoring. If only the bus driver of the bus knows where the bus is going, and measures progress without discussion with the passengers, that is like monitoring without participation.
Provides information for decision makers
Keeping track of activities by recording information on a daily, weekly, monthly or seasonal basis, and taking the time to Stop and analyze the information monitored can provide important immediate feedback, and can be used in the future for Participatory Evaluations.
For example, a community charcoal marketing cooperative might monitor monthly sales over a year. This might show that sales were low over a three month period. They would realize that this three month period is the rainy season, when transportation is a problem. Using this information, the community might decide to transport and store charcoal close to the market before the rainy season.
Information is periodically analyzed
Participatory Monitoring is not only keeping records. It is also stopping at set times to analyze (add up, discuss, integrate) information. The time to Stop and analyze will vary according to the nature and/or seasonality of activities.
For example, projects with small forest based enterprise activities may have daily recording of cash, and monthly balancing of the records. Reforestation activities may only require record keeping during nursery production and planting periods, with an analysis at the end of each planting season.
Agreement on the objectives ant activities is necessary
Before Participatory Monitoring begins, the community must understand why they are monitoring. Information should keep everyone informed of progress (or lack of progress) toward planned objectives and activities.
Insiders choose the terms of measurement
When the terms of measurement, (kilos, grams, guntas, sacks, cans, pounds, bundles, etc.) are chosen by insiders, the information is better understood. The chances of the monitoring continuing in the future are more likely.
Insiders choose the terms of measurement
If this kind of information is required by outsiders, they can translate the insiders' terms of measurement into terms that they use. For example guntas, bags, and bundles can be translated into kilograms or pounds.
Broadly examines progress towards objectives ant activities
Insiders, given the opportunity, have the ability to combine qualitative (descriptive) information with quantitative (numbers) information, providing a more complete analysis.
For example, an objective may be to reduce soil erosion by wind, and the activity to establish 400 kilometres of windbreaks. Information from monitoring in the first year might show that, as planned, 100 kilometres of windbreaks have been established around farmer's fields. This is important and useful information. It shows that activities are going according to plan. But it is may not be complete information if the objective of reducing soil erosion is not also considered. Farmers may be experiencing increased soil erosion in fields outside the windbreak. This information can bring up the question of whether the windbreaks, as currently planted, are a worthwhile activity or should be modified in some way. It may call for an early evaluation.
Broadly examines progress towards objectives ant activities
Before another 300 km. of windbreaks are planted, important questions can be answered, and the activities and/or objectives can be modified. A potential disaster can become a success!
2. The benefits of participatory monitoring.
Provides an ongoing picture
Participatory Monitoring provides an ongoing picture that allows the community to determine whether activities are progressing as planned. It may also show when activities are not leading to objectives, so that early adjustments can be made.
Problems are identified and solutions sought early
Participatory Monitoring provides an "early warning" which identifies problems at an early stage. Solutions can then be sought before the problems get out of hand. This is especially important with new technologies that may have negative effects after introduction.
Good standards are maintained
Continuous feedback throughout the life of the activities ensures that the quality of the activities is sufficient to provide good results. For example, seedling survival surveys in the first few months after seedlings are outplanted can indicate whether the quality of nursery stock and/or planting and stock handling are good. Survival surveys done when the most critical limits to survival of seedlings has passed, can indicate whether the protection and management are sufficient
Resources are used effectively
Participatory Monitoring can show the resources that are required to produce a certain effect, or how necessary resources can be distributed differently to get a better effect.
Complete picture of project is produced
When insiders are in control of monitoring, the results are examined relative to past experience. This broader picture enhances all other benefits of monitoring.
Information base for future evaluations
Both insiders and outsiders can benefit from the information base provided by Participatory Monitoring, which can provide realistic information while also showing trends.
Sometimes things will get worse before they get better. Try not to be too hasty about giving up something that doesn't appear to be working right away! Sometimes targets have been unrealistic, and will have to be reconsidered. Remember to think of both short-term and long-term effects.
3. Monitoring people's participation.
Outsiders monitor participation
Both insiders and outsiders can monitor participation, but it may be for very different reasons. Outsiders may be interested in equal community representation in decision making, while insiders may be interested in equal distribution of costs and benefits.
Participation is often an outsider objective because they are concerned with equal representation of all elements and groups in the community. Outsiders may want to ensure, through monitoring participation, that all involved and affected people in the community are represented when decisions regarding activities are made.
Because "participation" is a process that emerges and develops as the activities progress information needs regarding participation may undergo significant change over time.
For example, increases and decreases in turnout at community meetings are not always an effective indicator of participation. There may be enthusiastic turnout at meetings when the activities are first introduced to the community. However, as groups and committees take over decision making, the community only has to be kept informed. Therefore the turnout at meetings may drop off, especially if things are going well.
Insiders monitor participation
Insiders may wish to know who participates in communal activities, so that benefits can be equitably distributed.
In many instances, community forestry activities will be done using the volunteer labour of community members. Those who contribute their labour may wish to be acknowledged in some way. They may also want sanctions taken against those who do not volunteer labour. For example, those who contribute labour in the tree nursery might receive free seedlings, while those who do not contribute labour might pay for the seedlings.
Insiders and outsiders monitor participation together
Whether monitoring participation is important to insiders or outsiders it makes sense to have insiders define it and help either measure it (if it is information important to them) or help outsiders identify indicators. When insiders choose participation indicators, they are likely to be more locally relevant than indicators chosen by outsiders.
For example, individual participation cannot always be measured in hours. One person may supply skilled labour for a shorter period of time and still be considered by others to have equally participated. Communities may choose to evaluate participation based on the skill and quality of work, rather than the time spent. A carpenter's time contribution may not be considered equal to an unskilled labourer's time contribution. The community may feel that a leader who has more obligations should have a larger share of the benefits.
While Participatory Monitoring can be introduced at any stage of activities, it is best introduced at the beginning stage, before activities are implementated. At this stage, preparations are made for how and who will do the data collection, and when the periodic analysis will take place. After implementation, when the activities have begun the recording begins. At set periods, which can be either daily, weekly, monthly, or seasonally, the information that is being recorded is analyzed.
If the activities are already ongoing, there are still many benefits to be had from introducing Participatory Monitoring. If the current monitoring is not working well, if the information that is generated is not useful to insiders, or if other PAME approaches are being tried, introducing Participatory Monitoring may still be appropriate. It may be useful to compete the kinds of information and the value of the information before and after participatory monitoring!
4. Steps to participatory monitoring.
Take the time to prepare and plan monitoring. It helps everyone know why they are monitoring, and how it will be done. The first meeting (see Group Meetings Tool 1) to plan for monitoring can include all those directly involved in the activities as well as other interested groups. But it will be concentrated on those directly involved or those selected by the groups who will be responsible for monitoring. Planning for monitoring can use a framework much like those used for Participatory Baselines and Participatory Evaluation. This framework is explained in the following steps.
First step 1
Discuss reasons for monitoring.
Review the benefits and purpose of monitoring, so that insiders can decide for themselves whether monitoring will help them.
Second step 2
Review objectives and activities.
If PAME has been continually used, the insider objectives and activities will have been established during the Participatory Assessment. If insiders have not previously been involved, the objectives and activities as established by outsiders can be reviewed and discussed by insiders. A Participatory Assessment may be necessary if insiders and outsider objectives are very different.
Third step 3
Develop monitoring questions.
After objectives and activities are reviewed, discuss the information needed to help know if activities are going well. Focus on the questions "What do we want to know?" and "What do we monitor that will tell us this?".
The facilitator can write (or draw), on large sheets of paper or a blackboard, monitoring questions generated around each objective and activity. There should be agreement by the group on each monitoring question. If many questions are generated they can be ranked in order of importance.
Develop monitoring questions
Fourth step 4
Establish direct and indirect indicators.
For each monitoring question, determine direct and/or indirect indicators that will answer the monitoring questions. Indicators are described in chapter 3.
Fifth step 5
Decide which information gathering tools are needed.
For each lay indicator or monitoring question, the most appropriate information gathering tool must be chosen. Remember one tool can gather information that answers many monitoring questions. Some of the information gathering tools useful in Participatory Monitoring are:
Tool 11 Community Environmental Assessment
Tool 12 Survival Surveys
Tool 15 Farmer's Own Records key
Tool 16 Nursery Record Books
Tool 17 Community Financial Accounts
Fifth step 6
Decide who will do the monitoring.
Monitoring may require people with specific skills such as bookkeeping or mathematics. It will also require a certain amount of labour (time) from people. Those with the skills and the time can be identified. There may have to be compensation for the task of monitoring. It might be part of the job of a paid nursery person, or the community members responsible for monitoring might receive free seedlings from the nursery.
Decide who will do the monitoring
Seventh step 7
Analyze and present results.
It is important that information monitored be analyzed at specific times throughout the activities. The analysis can be discussed at community meetings, posted or put in community newsletters. The community will then know whether or not activities are progressing as planned or if changes or modifications are required.
Total distributed in community 1985-1989
Stoves distributed in community 1985-1989
Chapters Six and Seven deal with information analysis and presentation.
Chapter five: Participatory evaluation
1. What is participatory evaluation?
2. The benefits of participatory evaluation.
3. Steps to participatory evaluation.
1. What is participatory evaluation?
Insiders take the lead in participatory evaluation
A Participatory Evaluation is an opportunity for both outsiders and insiders to stop and reflect on the past in order to make decisions about the future. Insiders are encouraged and supported by outsiders to take responsibility and control of:
o planning what is to be evaluated
o how the evaluation will be done
o carrying out the evaluation
o analyzing information and presenting evaluation results.
Insiders already, intuitively and informally evaluate in light of their own individual and/or group objectives. This is because:
o community forestry activities often require involvement and inputs from insiders
o it is ultimately insiders who reap the benefits and bear many of the costs of the project
o insiders choose whether to continue or discontinue activities when the outsiders leave.
Thus, it makes sense for outsiders to help insiders conduct an effective evaluation. With the results of evaluation, insiders may choose to continue activities, modify all or some, change the strategy, change the objectives, or discontinue activities.
Evaluations reflect on the past to help make decisions about the future
Outsiders facilitate Participatory Evaluations
Outsiders assist insiders in planning and conducting the evaluation. They lead but do not direct. They can provide the focus, the idea, and some help, intervening when assistance is required.
Participatory Evaluations are not conducted for the purpose of answering the questions that outsiders need answered. However, in many instances, insider and outsider evaluation questions may be the same and both may be answered through Participatory Evaluation.
Governments and donors may want very specific information, but both will need to know if the activities are relevant to the problems perceived by insiders and if they are likely to continue when the outsiders withdraw support.
Information to guide management decisions
A Participatory Evaluation should not be thought of as a final judgement on whether activities are successful or unsuccessful. The information should encourage changes and adjustments either during the life span of the activities, for future phases of the activities, or for future new activities.
In a Participatory Evaluation, people learn more about the things that have worked well, and why they worked. They also learn more about the things that haven't worked well, and why they didn't. When the people involved go through the process of examining, it is more likely that corrective measures will be implemented in the future because they are discovered and understood by the community.
For example, a Participatory Evaluation mid-way through the activities might reveal that fuel efficient stoves were only helpful to those who must pay for fuelwood. This information might be used in the next phase of activities, to offer those who collect fuelwood as a free good a less expensive alternative, such as construction of mud walls around the traditional three stone fire.
Information to guide management decisions
Both objectives and activities are considered
In a Participatory Evaluation, the overall and immediate objectives, their continued relevance, and the effectiveness of the activities are all taken into account.
For example, the overall objective might be to conserve existing forest resources, and the immediate objective to reduce household fuelwood consumption. The activities have tried to meet these objectives by introducing fuel efficient stoves. An evaluation can provide information such as the number of stoves currently being used, and the fuelwood saved. This information will let people know if their objective, to reduce household fuelwood consumption, has been achieved.
Evaluation is done in light of original objectives
Other methods contribute to participatory evaluation
Much of the information from Participatory Assessments, Participatory Baselines, and Participatory Monitoring can be used in Participatory Evaluation.
For example, information from Participatory Assessments can be used to identify the original overall and immediate objectives, re-acquainting the community with their original analysis of the problems. Information from Participatory Baselines can provide information (such as average household fuelwood consumption before fuel efficient stoves were introduced) that is useful for comparison.
1985...Baseline
1990...Evaluation
Information from Participatory Monitoring will give progressive trends and total amounts.
1985-1988 Monitoring
2. The benefits of participatory evaluation.
Better decision making by insiders
Participatory Evaluations, by examining the activities individually and relative to objectives, give insiders relevant and useful information. Helping them decide whether the objectives and/or activities should stay the same or change.
Insiders develop evaluation skills
Participatory Evaluation reveals community skills that were undervalued, and/or develops analytical skills needed to make good decisions. It helps insiders better organize and express their concerns and interests in ways outsiders can understand. This strengthens two way communication.
Outsiders have better understanding of insiders
Outsiders benefit from Participatory Evaluation as it complements and enriches their own evaluations. This is especially so when the outsiders objectives are self-help and sustainability. A Participatory Evaluation will let them know whether or not the community is likely to continue the activities when outsiders have left.
Participatory Evaluations also benefit field staff by providing support for the participatory approach. The insider perspective can by-pass any "filters of self-interest" that might be present and reach high level decision makers, providing them with the community's perspective, and encouraging a deeper understanding of community development.
Information flow with outsider evaluation
Information flow possible with participatory evaluation
Insider to insider communication is strengthened
Participatory Evaluation can be used for local extension, with results presented to other communities who are experiencing the same kinds of problems. In this way insiders learn from insiders.
Information is useful for ongoing management of project
Information from Participatory Evaluations can be used by insiders and outsiders to identify strong and weak points of activities. If activities are to be continued, or phased over to insiders, information can be used to modify activities and make them more effectively meet objectives, and better respond to real community needs and priorities.
Entry point for the participatory approach
In a community where participation has not been a feature, Participatory Evaluation may be the beginning of a participatory approach. It may be that including school children in the process not only helps the community gather information, but also helps the children develop analytical skills and experience
School children can collect information
And learn about forest!
Participatory Evaluation may be done:
Because they have been planned
Participatory Evaluation can be planned for set times through out the life of the activities. These can be mid-way through the activities, or after each season of planting, depending on when the community decides it needs to Stop and examine past performance.
Because there is a crisis
Participatory Evaluation can help to avoid a potential crisis, providing a chance to discuss important issues. For example, suppose an area of common land had tradition ally been used by the landless group to collect fuelwood and graze their animals. Without consulting this landless group, the activities implemented by other community members have fenced and planted trees on this communal land. The landless group have vandalized the fence, and allowed their animals to graze, destroying the newly planted trees. Bringing people together to discuss and mediate a solution can be done using a Participatory Evaluation.
Because a problem has become apparent
Problems, such as a general lack of community interest in the activities may be realized. Participatory Monitoring may provide more information that can help people determine why there is a problem and/or how to remedy it..
It participation is new
A Participatory Evaluation may shed some understanding on why a project isn't working very well. The results of a Participatory Evaluation may be the entry point for a more participatory approach. If participation has not been a feature of the project, outsiders who are experienced in participatory evaluation approaches may be very useful, as they can sensitize and train field staff in this approach, facilitating the evaluation.
3. Steps to participatory evaluation.
The time that is taken to carefully prepare and plan a Participatory Evaluation is time well spent. It helps everyone know why they are evaluating and how they are going to do it.
The first meeting to prepare and plan the evaluation should be open to all interested groups (see Tool 1: Groups Meetings). This meeting could include beneficiaries, others in the community, as well as groups from outside the community who have an interest in the project.
If a great number of people are interested in the evaluation, some of the responsibilities of the evaluation can be delegated to a small group, a community evaluation team. But the larger interested group, at this first meeting, must first discuss why they are doing an evaluation and what they wish to know, in order to provide guidance to the community evaluation team.
First step 1
Review objectives and activities.
The larger group, as described above, decides why an evaluation is necessary.
The community's long-term and immediate objectives and the activities they have chosen to meet these objectives can be reviewed at this meeting. If PAME has been used, the objectives and activities established during the Participatory Assessment can be reviewed. If the activities have not been participatory, the objectives, as established by outsiders, can be reviewed.
Review objectives and activities
Second step 2
Review reasons for evaluation.
After objectives and activities are reviewed, discussion can focus on the questions:
"Why are we doing an evaluation?"
"What do we want to know?"
Review reasons for evaluation
Third step 3
Develop evaluation questions.
Develop evaluation questions
The facilitator can write (or draw), the evaluation questions on large sheets of paper or a blackboard. The group should agreed on each question. If many questions are generated around each objective and activity, they can be ranked in order of importance.
Fourth step 4
Decide who will do the evaluation.
In the larger group meeting, decide who will do the evaluation, and who will want to know the results. It may be decided to include the whole community (especially if it is small), only the beneficiaries, or delegate the responsibility for the evaluation to an evaluation team. The composition of the evaluation team should be decided by the larger group at this first meeting. If it is known that some minority groups will not be represented, the facilitator may encourage the participation of spokespersons from these groups on the evaluation team. The evaluation team may include beneficiaries, those who may be disadvantaged by an activity, community members and other affected groups.
The larger group also decides who needs the results of evaluation, and when the results should be ready. This will depend on who needs the information to make decisions, and when decisions are to be made.
Fifth step 5
Identify direct and indirect indicators.
Taking the evaluation questions that were generated in the first meeting, direct and indirect indicators are chosen for evaluation questions.
A description of "direct and indirect indicators" is presented in Chapter 3.
Sixth step 6
Identify the information sources for evaluation questions.
For each evaluation question and indicator that is chosen, the evaluation team identifies where information is available, or if it is not available, how it will be obtained. Some information may be available in an unanalyzed form, and require some effort to analyze. Other information may not be readily available, and will have to be gathered.
The information that is required may be available from either Participatory Assessment, Participatory Baselines, and/or Participatory Monitoring.
Identify the information sources for evaluation questions
If information is not readily available, it must be decided which information gathering tool will be used to obtain information. Remember it is possible to use one tool to gather information for a number of indicators. Some of the information gathering tools useful in Participatory Evaluations are:
Tool 7 Community Case Studies
Tool 9 Semi-structured Interviews
Tool 10 Ranking, Rating and Sorting
Tool 11 Community Environmental Assessment
Tool 12 Survival Surveys
Tool 15 Farmer's Own Records
Tool 16 Nursery Record Books
Tool 17 Community Financial Accounts
Tool 18 S.W.O.L. Analysis
The choice of tools will depend on the kind of information needed. If an information gathering tool has been used before, it may be used again to update the information and show change.
Seventh step 7
Determine the skills and labour that are required to obtain information.
The assistance of people with specific skills, such as interviewing, mathematics, art and/or drama, as well as a certain amount of labour (time) will be required.
The evaluation team must decide which skills and resources are available to them. They might ask the questions:
What resources do we need?
What resources do we have, or can we develop?
What other resources do we need to get?
Determine the skills and labour that are required to obtain information
Eighth step 8
Determine when information gathering and analysis can be done.
It is important to assure that information will be gathered and analyzed within the time frame that is given to the evaluation team, so that the results can reach decision makers on time. The timing of the evaluations must take into account factors such as: seasonal constraints (planting and harvesting times); religious holidays; field staff availability; and community labour demands.
For each tool that is used, the evaluation team decides approximately how long each task will take, and when it will be done.
Ninth step 9
Determine who will gather information.
When the specific dates, the required time and skills are known, then the tasks can be delegated to individuals or small working groups.
Tenth step 10
Analyze and present results.
When all the tasks have been completed, it will be necessary to analyze and synthesize information for presentation. Some of the information may already be analyzed. It will simply have to be put in its place in the presentation. Many of the information gathering tools, such as case studies or popular dramas, lend themselves to certain types of presentation. Analysis and presentation of results is the subject of Chapters Six and Seven.
The evaluation team can decide what will be the best way to present results, given the audience for whom the results are intended, the resources and time available.
Evaluation framework
Chapter six :Information analysis
1. What is analysis?
2. Steps to analysis of information
1. What is analysis?
Analysis is examining information (sorting it out, adding it up, comparing it) in order to understand the "parts" in relationship to the "whole".
The parts
The whole
Both insiders and outsiders contribute
Insiders and outsiders together plan the analysis. This helps ensure that information is comprehensive, valid and understood.
Analysis may be included in information gathering
Some of the analysis may have already been done, or partially done, depending on which information gathering tools have been used.
For example, suppose the Ranking, Rating and Sorting Tool (Tool 10) is chosen to answer the question: "which tree species do farmers prefer to plant with their crops?" Using this tool, a list of ten species, from most preferred to least preferred, has been produced. This information is already analyzed. It only needs to be examined along with other information, such as the species farmers request from the community nursery.
Partial analysis
If a team has been given responsibility for the analysis and are to present their results to the larger community group, presenting the information in partly analyzed form can be very effective.
The benefits of partial analysis are:
o the larger group has an opportunity to contribute to analysis;
o the results are validated by more people and will be more reliable;
o the analysis process is understood by more people.
<section>6</section>
2. Steps to analysis of information
First step 1
Review the questions.
The questions generated before the information was gathered should be reviewed. Why was this particular information necessary? What questions was it to answer? What kinds of decisions are to be made based on this information?
Review the questions
It is common for people to work very hard planning for the information they need and then, once the information is collected to not look back and renew their understanding of the central issues and key questions.
Important results that were not anticipated should not, however, be ignored. Sometimes putting information together will raise important, unforeseen and relevant questions. These can be noted for future reference and pointed out in the presentation of results.
Second step 2
Organize the information.
The mechanics of organizing information for analysis will vary according to the thinking processes of different people. Sometimes it is best not to force a certain way of thinking. On the other hand, there is a certain logic that can be followed.
o Gather together all relevant information that has been collected.
o If necessary, sort information into parts which belong together.
o Some may have already been analyzed. Some may be partly analyzed, and some may need analysis.
Third step 3
Decide how to analyze information.
Analysis of parts may be simply adding up numbers and averaging them or comparing information to examine the relationship of one thing to another, or two things together.
Decide how to analyze information
Analysis can also take note of similarities
It can contrast information by setting two things in opposition so as to show the differences
It can relate pieces of information to establish relationships between them
Fourth step 4
Analyze quantitative information.
It is likely that quantitative (numbers) information will be computer by hand, or with the use of adding machines. Two straightforward ways to analyze information are Tally Sheets and Summary Sheets.
Tally sheets
Tally sheets are useful for summarizing information such as production figures, survival, figures, and nursery sales. It is especially important to think carefully about the pieces of information that, when paired, will answer the questions that were originally asked.
The tally sheet is an especially good way to analyze information when literacy is not high. Sketches and/or symbols can be used to show the columns. When the tally sheet is prepared at a meeting, or in a group, patterns emerge in a way which everyone can see.
Analyze quantitative information
Summary sheets
To show information individually in order to see clearly the differences between each piece of information, a Summary Sheet can be used. They are especially useful for analyzing information from interviews.
Summary sheets
Fifth step 5
Analyze qualitative information.
Analysis of qualitative (descriptive) information is a creative and critical process. The way the information has been gathered will probably determine how it can best be analyzed.
For example, if drawings of a community have been done at the beginning, middle and end of the project, can be analyzed by presenting a series of drawings to a number of individuals and asking them to:
o validate the drawings (are they truly representative, and if not, why not).
o rate the difference (very good, good, not very good).
Analyze qualitative information
Sixth step 6
Integrate the information.
Putting the analyzed parts together in a way that tells the complete story can be done by the team that has been assigned to gather and analyze information. Partial analysis can be presented to the larger community group for completion.
Integrate the information
Chapter seven: Presentation of results
1. The importance of presenting results.
2. Who will receive the results?
3. When and where are the results needed?
4. How will results be presented?
5. Some guidelines for presentation of results.
6. Written presentation of results.
7. Visual presentation of results.
8. Oral presentation of results.
1. The importance of presenting results.
PAME's focus on the community assures that the community and field staff benefit by identifying, gathering and analyzing information. But, the job is not done until the results are delivered to the intended audience, and decisions made.
Too often, valid, reliable, vitally important results are not used. This is not only a waste of resources (information planning, gathering, and analysis) it also means that important decisions are made without adequate information.
It is important that decision makers get the relevant information, and that the information is received on time. It is also important that the results are presented in a way that is understandable to the people for whom they are meant.
The importance of presenting results
2. Who will receive the results?
There are many potential information users. The community must decide who will receive information.
(A) Project beneficiaries
Individuals or groups in the community who have participated directly in the project
(B) Community
Community members who have not directly participated, who may not directly benefit from activities, but who may be very interested in knowing how things are going.
(C) Other communities
Communities nearby, within the country or even outside the country can benefit from the lessons and experiences of others.
(D) Forestry staff
Field staff, project administrators, country directors and staff from other sectors will be interested in the experience of the community.
(E) National forestry services
National forest services are interested in community forestry development in their country. They will be interested in knowing collectively, or even individually, how forestry activities are doing.
(F) Donors
Government agencies, non-government organizations (NGOs), individual funders and other development agencies working in similar or related activities will be interested in the results.
(G) General public
People within or outside the country may be interested in the community's experiences.
(H) Research organizations
Researchers within or outside the country will be interested in results that help to focus their attention on relevant research.
The presentation of results can vary according the "users". In some cases it may not be up to the community to prepare results in any form other than what is useful to them. If results are required by others, it must be with the consent of the community. If a great deal of time is required to prepare results for others, the community may have to be compensated in some way. Whenever results leave the community, this should be done with respect for the "owners" of the information, and their input should be acknowledged.
If outsiders request information, they should be prepared to provide resources for the presentation and translate the information into a form that is understandable to them. For example, the insiders might present results in the form of a popular drama If others outside the community also require the results: the drama could be taken to nearby communities with outsiders supplying the transportation; the drama could be videotaped for other countries, with outsiders supplying the necessary resources; the drama could be photographed and tape-recorded to produce a slide/tape show, or video.
3. When and where are the results needed?
There may be time constraints that limit the ways that results can be presented. If results are needed fairly quickly for a decision making the presentation may not be so elaborate.
4. How will results be presented?
The way the results are presented will depend on: the kinds of information that have been collected, (quantitative or qualitative); the information gathering tools that were used; whether it is results from Participatory Assessment, Baseline, Monitoring or Evaluation; and the resources that are available.
Quantitative/qualitative results.
Quantitative results (numbers) are more easily presented in visual form, such as tables or graphs, while qualitative results (descriptions) can make use of presentations such as stories, case studies or dramas. Both types of information can be integrated for presentation to complement and support each other. Think of a televised news story. Quantitative information (numbers) are often reported alongside quotes or interviews to effectively communicate a message.
Information gathering tools used
The way to communicate results may be closely linked with the information gathering tools that have been used. For example, if a Community Case Study (Tool 7) was done on the management of a nearby natural forest, the case study could be presented in written form, read aloud, or acted out for the community and video-taped and edited for distribution to a wider audience.
If possible, the results should relate to the information gathering tool which has been used. People are then familiar with it. For example, if Ranking, Rating and Sorting (Tool 10) was used with picture cards, use these same picture cards when presenting the results.
Methods used
The methods that are used will have a bearing on how the results will be presented. In some instances, the information may just be roughly analyzed to give immediate information, and then stored for future use. In other cases, it may be more fully analyzed and integrated.
Results of Participatory Assessment: are mainly for immediate use, but should be documented and stored for future use.
Results of Participatory Baseline: may not have to be presented in a final form until incorporated with evaluation results.
Results of Participatory Monitoring: may be presented monthly, seasonally and/or annually to the community. These may also be incorporated with evaluation results.
Results of Participatory Evaluation: evaluations are generally presented in complete "story" form, where the "parts" have been incorporated into the "whole", and include both qualitative and quantitative information.
Methods used
When results are going to be used later, always store them in a safe place, avoiding damage by sun, water, pests, dampness. Make two copies and store separately. Use good quality materials.
Resources available
The skills of the people, the time available to spend on preparing a presentation, and access to resources such as cameras, tape recorders and paper will all have a bearing on how the results can be presented.
5. Some guidelines for presentation of results.
Results should be interesting
Use a form of communication that catches the attention of the audience.
Results should be understandable
Communicate in the language of the intended audience. This is not just a question of Spanish, Swahili, French or Hindi, but also a question of "jargon ". Whenever possible use common names which everyone understands.
Results should be convincing
The results should not be the opinions of only a few. It is important to present facts and information verified by community members who were not involved in the process of collection or analysis. Have as true a picture as possible.
Results should be timely
In order to reach those who make decisions, results should be presented in time to provide them with information before final decisions are made.
Results should be timely
Results should be participatory
The community should decide what and how to communicate to other interested parties. It is their story and it will be all the more powerful if they tell it in their own way. There should, of course, also be room for the story of the project staff
Results should be presented in a form appropriate to the audience
There are three main ways to present results:
Written Oral Visual
Reports Drama Photographs
Case Studies Tape Recordings Drawings
Community Newsletters Video Video
Slidetape Slidetape
Story-telling Cartoons
Graphics Graphics Graphics
6. Written presentation of results.
If a written report, case study or community newsletter is chosen to present results, there are some things to consider. A Community Case Study can be used in the school programme, or in adult literacy classes. It may be one of the few locally relevant reading pieces. When presenting written results:
(a) Once you have identified your theme, stick to it.
(b) Identify the audience, then use imaginative language, introduce stories related to local practice, things that will hold the readers interest.
(c) Identify the communication barriers that might exist between the writer and the reader and be sensitive to them (language, jargon, sensitive issues).
(d) Include dialogue, quotes from people, illustrations. When people are described, they should be not merely numbers, but mobile characters who are active decision makers, people who question, adopt or share innovations. Pictoral reports of activities or photographs will also add interest to written results.
(e) Be brief and easily readable. Use short sentences and clear writing.
Written presentation of results
7. Visual presentation of results.
Visuals can present some results clearly and concisely. They can be used for written reports, newspapers, slides, handouts at meetings, posters, and wall-charts.
Visuals help show information quickly, make written reports more interesting, enhance important points in a report and present the total picture in a small space.
A number of visual presentations of results are possible: tables, graphs; histograms; horizontal and vertical bar charts; pie charts; map charts; pictograms; and cartoons. The choice will depend on the information that is to be presented and the intended audience.
Choose the best method for the purpose. For example, graphs will show trends better than a table, while bar charts are effective, when comparing differences between similar information.
Tables
Organizing and listing information in a way which shows the relationships between the information is called a table. Words and numbers are possible in tables. Plans, activities, and statements of progress can be presented in a table. Numbers such as survival rates of seedlings by species are also easily presented in a table. Tables which present only a few items of information are most effective. Too much information may confuse the reader.
TITLE: SEEDLING DISTRIBUTION, 1984-1988
HOUSEHOLDS 425 700 1250 500 2600
FARMS 900 2340 3720 1800 4050
SCHOOLS 300 660 720 200 550
COMMUNITY 50 400 2950 - 1230
Tables can easily be interpreted by people with low literacy if symbols and/or pictures are used. This helps people to see, understand and remember the information.
Seedling distribution, 1984-1988
When presenting a table:
1. Give the table a full title.
2. Label the table fully, both inside and outside the frame or box.
3. If symbols are used, provide a key to explain them.
4. List information sources (how, where, when information was obtained).
5. Include the day, month and year.
Graphs
Graphs organize items of information visually and draw lines or bars to show relationships and comparisons. They can represent results clearly and effectively in a small space. Graphs can show whether changes have occurred and when, so that trends can he clearly seen.
Number seedlings planted with crops, 1983-1988
Graphs are also used to show different results or sets of information at the same time.
Number seedling planted
When presenting a graph:
1. Label the graph so that it reads consistently.
2. Place figures for the horizontal scale at the bottom, leaving the top of the graph clear.
3. Place figures for the vertical scale on the left of the graph.
4. Keep it simple, with as few lines as possible.
5. Place zero point at the bottom left point of the vertical scale.
6. Show equal increments on the scales to represent equal numbered units.
7. Show scale divisions and units clearly.
8. Have a vertical line linking each point to guide the eye.
Histograms
Limited and precise numerical information can be effectively presented with a histogram. The horizontal scale shows the particular characteristic being presented, and the vertical scale shows the frequency with which the characteristic occurs.
Histogram
Charts
Results that can be presented in tables or graphs can also be presented in charts. Charts are visual presentations that compare different items of information at the same time. They are often easier to read than tables or graphs. There are a number of different charts: vertical and horizontal, charts, bar charts, pie charts and map charts.
Bar Charts
Vertical and horizontal bar charts are useful to compare different items of information at the same time. The length of each bar indicates the quantity that the bar represents. Unlike histograms, bar charts have spaces between the bars.
Vertical bar charts
Horizontal bar charts
When presenting bar charts:
1. Arrange the bars in either ascending or descending order to make the chart clear.
2. Bars c-an be arranged horizontally or vertically.
3. Horizontal bars can contain words.
4. Bars can be shaded or coloured.
5. Precise numbers can be spaced over specific bars to indicate the number of cases on which each result is based.
6. Label bars at the bottom and to the left of the chart.
7. A bar chart can be easily made into symbols or figures. Provide a key to symbols.
8. A second result can by putting o second bar behind the first bar.
Pie charts
To present information for comparison, pie charts are useful as they show the parts in relation to the whole. A familiar round object such as an orange or fruit which is easily separated into parts or segments can be used.
Pie chart
Map charts
To help people to understand fairly complex relationships map charts are useful. By using different patterns or colors, it is possible to visually compare information.
Map charts
Pictograms
A pictogram is a type of bar chart that uses pictures or symbols to represent the information. Each symbol may represents an item or a particular unit of information.
Pictograms
Cartoons
It can be very effective to present information using cartoons, especially when the information is descriptive. The audience should be familiar with cartooning. It generally requires some skill to produce a good cartoon, but it is well worth it as people often remember something that is interesting and amusing. Humor can also take the edge off sensitive issues.
The women are happy to have shade trees in the village
The herders were angry that we had fenced of some forest area without first telling them
Photographs
Good photographs which pertain to the subject can enhance any presentation. If photographs were one of the information collection methods, they can be sorted and labeled to support the message and they can be displayed for a larger audience.
Photographs 1
Photographs 2
Photographs 3
Photographs 4
Photographs can be put in protective albums and provide a visual documentation for the community. The albums can also be shown to other communities during farmer to farmer visits.
8. Oral presentation of results.
Drama, puppet theatre, story-telling, songs, and meetings can all be used to present information in an interesting and understandable way. In a community with low literacy and/or a story-telling culture, oral presentation with some visuals may be the most appropriate method of presentation.
Oral presentations can be enhanced by combining them with visuals. For example, a puppet theatre with the characters explaining the information by using a bar graph!
Written presentation (such as a case study) can be restructured and presented in the form of a drama or puppet show.
Oral presentation of results
Oral presentations can be tape-recorded and photographed. In this way results can be presented to other communities (used as extension), or other interested groups. Video presentations combine both oral and visual and are an effective way to present results.
Results should be presented in a way that the audience finds:
o useful (timely and relevant),
o interesting (entertaining),
o appropriate (understandable)
<section>7</section>
Section three: The tools
Chapter eight: The tools and how to use them
The tools of PAME are the instruments that are used to gather, synthesize, and analyse information in a way that is appropriate and participatory.
The tools should be approached with an open mind; they may have to be adapted and rethought for each situation. Think of them as "ideas" to be developed to respond to the field reality. Experiment with them to determine what will work, what will be more participatory. Combine the tools in different ways. For example, use some of the Ranking, Rating, and Sorting "games" to make Surveys more interesting. Combine a Case Study with Popular Theatre or a Puppet Show.
Many of the tools work individually to gather and analyse information, while helping develop communication skills. Drawing and Discussion is one example of such a tool. Other tools are more specific, such as Survival Surveys.
All of the tools, because they are developed with and for the community, serve also as extension and learning tools. Be flexible! If one tool is not working well, re-think it or suggest another one.
Choosing the best tool for a situation is a unique and creative process. To assist in narrowing the choices of appropriate tools from the wide range of possibilities offered, some tips on determining which tool the community might find most useful are discussed in Chapter Eight, along with a list of the main characteristics of tools and some sampling methods.
Chapter Eight presents the tools in a way which seeks to encourage creativity and flexibility. The following descriptions are brief, as most are adaptations of tools with which most field staff are familiar. There are methodological texts for many of these tools and the following is not a substitute for more detailed instruction on sample selection, sample size, or research design. This description is focused on how the tools may be or may have been adapted to strengthen local participation.
Enjoy the tools! PAME should be an exciting, dynamic learning experience for everybody.
Chapter eight: The tools and how to use them
1. Some guidelines for choosing the most appropriate tool for a community.
2. An overview of the tools.
3. Sampling methods.
4. Sample size
Tool 1: Group meetings
Tool 2: Drawing and discussion
Tool 3: Murals and posters
Tool 4: Flannel boards
Tool 5: Open-ended stories
Tool 6: Unserialized posters
Tool 7: Community case studies
Tool 8: Historical mapping
Tool 9: Semi-structured interviews
Tool 10: Ranking, rating and sorting
Tool 11: Community environmental assessment
Tool 12: Survival surveys
Tool 13: Participatory action research
Tool 14: Maps and mapping
Tool 15: Farmer's own records
Tool 16: Nursery record book
Tool 17: Community financial accounts
Tool 18: Strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and limitations (S.W.O.L.) analysis
Tool 19: Popular theatre
Tool 20: Puppet theatre
Tool 21: Community directed visual images
Tool 22: Community directed tape recordings
Tool 23: Community directed videos
Source
1. Some guidelines for choosing the most appropriate tool for a community.
Watch and listen
Become aware of how community members think and communicate information. This will give clues as to what tools might work best. For example, ask a number of people directions to the next village, and observe the ways they relay this information. People from some cultures may draw a map on the ground. This could mean that visual tools would work best for them. People from other cultures may give instructions such as "go 17 kilometers down the road then turn left". These people may be comfortable with the written tools.
A third culture might respond: "Go to the village market, and when you see the coal merchant's store, go down the road beside it until you come to a leaning tree with a large branch hanging down. There are two roads there. Take the one which has two tracks." People from this community might find the story-telling and drama tools the most appropriate.
Observe
Do they have books and magazines in their homes? Do they have pictures decorating their homes? Do they use symbols to decorate their implements? These kinds of observations will give clues as to which communication type (written, oral or visual) is basic to the community.
Ask
Ask how information is relayed around the community. Is it exclusively by word-of-mouth ? Are there newspapers? Posters?
Reflect
Think about which extension efforts have worked well (or not so well) in the community in the past.
Knowing which methods of communication are most commonly used in a community will help the field worker to "short list" tools that are likely to work in a particular setting. From this "short list" the community can choose.
Reflect
The following list shows the main characteristics of tools (visual, oral or written). Each ( o ) is the value of the tool within each characteristic. For example, meetings have value to all characteristics, but mainly in the oral category.
2. An overview of the tools.
Tool Visual Oral Written
1. Group Meetings o o o o o o
2. Drawing/Discussion o o o o o o
3. Murals/Posters o o o o o o 
4. Flannel Boards o o o o o o
5. Open-ended Stories o o o o o o
6. Unserialized Posters o o o o o o 
7. Community Case Study o o o o o o
8. Historical Mapping o o o o o o
9. Semi-structured Interviews o o o o o o
10. Ranking, Rating, Sorting o o o o o o 
11. Community Environmental Assessment o o o o o o
12. Survival Surveys o o o o o o
13. Participatory Action Research o o o o o o
14. Maps and Mapping o o o o o o
15. Farmer's Own Records o o o o o o
16. Nursery Record Books o o o o o o
17. Community Financial. Accounts o o o o o o
18. S.W.O.L. Analysis o o o o o o
19. Popular Theatre o o o o o o 
20. Puppet Theatre o o o o o o 
21. Community Directed Visual Images o o o o o o 
22. Community Directed Tape Recordings o o o o o o
23. Community Directed Video o o o o o o 
3. Sampling methods.
When collecting some kinds of information it is important to choose the sample (usually the people from whom you are going to obtain information) that will provide the most accurate information. If statistically valid information is required, rather than "a pretty good idea", it is best to get assistance with sampling methods.
Systematic sampling
Every person/house/seedling, etc. is given a number. Then every fifth, tenth, etc. person/house/seedling is chosen for the sample, until the required sample size is obtained.
Simple random sampling
Where records or lists of people/households/seedlings exist, a certain number of them can be chosen using a random sampling method. Assign each sample a number. Put all the assigned numbers of the people/households/seedlings in a basket and pick (without looking!) one by one, from the basket until the desired sample size is obtained. Random sampling methods are used to reduce bias.
Stratified random sampling
Groups or strata of the population of people/households/seedlings are separated (for example people with land and landless people/large households and small households/fruit tree species of seedlings and fuelwood species). Then each group/strata is treated as a separate case, and a sample established for each group/strata.
Cluster sampling
People/households/seedlings are chosen in groups or clusters and not on an individual basis. For example, a particularly dry area with poor growing conditions might provide one "cluster", while an area with rich soil and higher rainfall might provide another "cluster". Within each "cluster" a random sampling method is used.
Multi-stage random sampling
Samples are selected using simple random sampling, but at different times or stages. For example, one stage may be 100 farms. A random sample would be chosen from these 100 (it would be 15). The next stage would be seedlings planted. On these 15 farms there are 15,000 seedlings planted. A sample of seedlings would be 750 (5%), or 50 seedlings from each of the 15 households. Another sampling method (every 10th seedling in the field) can be used for each farm surveyed, so that there will be as little bias as possible in choosing which seedling to "survey".
Quota sampling
A certain number of samples (people/households/seedlings) or quota are required. The person taking the information goes out looking for information, arid stops when the quota is reached. For example, going to the market and questioning people who are willing to talk until the necessary quota has been completed. This method relies on personal judgement, such as who is willing to talk and who is at the market. The information can thus be biased.
4. Sample size
The following tables can help you to decide the sample size that is needed.
Total Sample Suggested Sample Percentage
Tool 1: Group meetings
Group meetings
Tool description
A meeting is a coming together of people for a specific purpose. The meeting can involve a large number of people, or a smaller (under 10) number of people who focus on a specific problem or purpose. Meetings generally have a facilitator who encourages two-way communication. Smaller focus group meetings can be made up of people with common concerns (women, herders, people who are poor) and can speak comfortably together, share common problems and a common purpose. The outputs from focus group meetings can be presented to larger group meetings, giving a "voice" to those in the community who are unable to speak up in a larger meeting.
Purpose of she tool
o Give and receive information
o Discuss issues of relevance to the community
o Receive community agreement on an issue
o Help identify problems and solutions
o Plan activities and negotiate conflicts
o Validate evaluation results and formulate recommendations
Major benefits
A large number of people can be reached in a relatively short period of time.
Meetings are usually the first and most consistent exposure of the project staff to the community as a whole. It may very well be here that the cohesion and trust of the community is gained.
Community meetings with open invitations can mean that all those who wish to participate may do so.
Focus groups meetings can bring together those who have a particular problem; those who cannot speak up at large meetings (such as women or minority groups) or those who are peripherally involved, such as nomadic herders.
Regular small group meetings can foster group discipline, encourage a cooperative approach to identifying and solving problems, provide a forum for decision making by consensus, provide a practical means of developing shared leadership, promote activities, and make it possible to share experiences.
Using the tool
A lot of careful planning goes into a successful meeting. Two-way communication must be fostered, interest must be maintained and "work" must get done. These steps can help to plan a good meeting:
1. Have a clear purpose. Know what the meeting is to accomplish, from both outsiders' and insiders' perspectives. Obtain the approval and involvement of the local leaders. Be aware of the customs and protocol of the village.
2. Prepare a calendar of dates to help check day-to-day preparations.
3. Arrange a convenient time and place for the meeting. Consider the size and composition of the group. Remember that people have different time constraints, women may not be available to attend at the same time as men.
4. After establishing a time when most can attend, let people know about it well in advance.
5. If outsiders are involved, they may require accommodations and food.
6. Inform the community or the group of the purpose of the meeting using posters, home visits, public announcements, radio, telephone and/or word of mouth.
7. If entertainment is planned, ensure that it does not distract from the purpose of the meeting, but lends itself to the topic.
8. Plan/prepare handouts/materials to be distributed. Plan a method of distribution.
9. Plan focus groups and feedback mechanisms if necessary.
10. Plan a strategy to encourage discussions. For example: prepare leading questions; stop the slide show or film in the middle and open discussions; or have insiders create their own "endings". Think always of TWO-WAY communication, and how to adapt extension aids from one-way to two-way communication.
A community person such as a schoolteacher or local leader, with experience in meetings, can help facilitate the meeting. Consider that there may be factions of a community (women for example) who are unable or unwilling to speak up. Separate meetings with these people can be held, and their perspectives as a whole brought back to the larger meetings.
11. Expect that there will be high turnout at the beginning with decreases over time as only those especially interested or involved will attend. A focus group meeting can usually handle activities, with large meetings periodically to inform the whole community. If the turnout at meetings changes abruptly, look for the cause.
When facilitating meetings it is important to:
o prepare and check visual aids, audio aids, and electrical outlets or generator power well before meeting;
o ensure that there is a comfortable, pleasant atmosphere. Arrange snacks/drinks when appropriate;
o make the introduction brief, and tailor it specifically for those attending;
o make the purpose of the meeting clear in the introduction and place that purpose in the context of past, present and future events;
o begin and end at more-or-less the stated time;
o start with items/topics/issues on which it is easy to get agreement or acceptance of differences of opinion;
o allow conflicting opinions to emerge and try either to have these difference resolved or accepted by the group;
o summarize the proceedings, outline the decisions that have been made and identify "next steps". Confirm time and place of next meeting;
o try to end on a high "positive" note.
Precautions in using the tool
Beware of hidden agendas, groups who might use the meeting to bring up their own concerns. The facilitator might side-step this by saying, " That's hat's not the purpose of this meeting, you might want to hold another meeting to discuss that issue".
The facilitator of the meeting must have enough authority to keep the meeting on track, but enough sensitivity to include as many people in the discussions as possible.
The community or group may put the facilitator in a position of "expert" and expect them to carry the whole meeting. Develop methods that foster participation.
Tool 2: Drawing and discussion
Drawing and discussion
Tool description
The Drawing and Discussion tool is most useful in a culture with a strong visual tradition. Drawings are produced jointly by the community, or by individuals, and discussions focus around them. When one drawing is produced by a number of people, discussions can center on the relative importance of each new item introduced to the drawing. When individuals drawings are done these can be compared and/or discussed in a group.
Purpose of the tool
o Identify an issue or a problem
o Gauge community perception of a current situation, providing a record for comparison at a later date (for evaluation)
o Develop a group analysis
o Strengthen the connection between "thinking" and "doing"
o Promote discussion at points where bridging, reforming or focusing are needed
o Provide a visual objective statement
Major benefits
People who live in communities where there are class/language barriers or who are not well developed speakers can often express opinions and feelings more easily through drawing.
Using self-created visuals, individuals are able to see and jointly develop an analysis. It deepens group identity.
The expenses are relatively minimal, and if good materials are used, the "outputs" can be used at a later date for comparisons.
This tool can be used for planning on a macro (community) level or on a micro (farm) level. It can be used for comparative analysis with drawings from participatory baselines compared to drawings from Evaluations.
Using the tool
1. Gather materials: paper, cloth, wood; and drawing implements.
2. Introduce the idea to the group, making the purpose or focus of the drawing exercise clear to all.
3. Explain that the main purpose is not to produce a work of art, but to bring out discussion on a specific subject.
4. Let the group dynamics evolve. Often it is a simple matter of giving everyone a drawing implement and the opportunity to use it.
5. Group discussions which focus on the placement and the size of objects often indicate the relative importance of issues.
6. It can be useful to conduct this exercise with separate groups such as men and women; land owners and landless; rich and poor, and then compare drawings in the larger group meetings.
7. Having each member of the group draw their own picture and then using these to contribute to the larger, group produced picture may be useful to initiate the exercise.
8. When the drawing is completed (hopefully after much discussion), the group can analyze it. What does it tell them about the issue under discussion? Have they discovered things they did not know before? Have they seen things differently? The interpretations of the group should be recorded for future reference.
Precautions in using the tool
It may be difficult for outsiders to interpret drawings. Recording the group's interpretation will help overcome this.
People may at first be uncomfortable drawing, feeling that they cannot produce a "work of art". Ensure the group that the purpose of the exercise is to better understand an issue, rather than produce a masterpiece.
Tool 3: Murals and posters
Murals and posters
Tool description
Murals and posters are large, semi-permanent drawings designed by the community and
drawn by an artist. They are generally located where they can be frequently seen by
members of the community.
Purpose of the tool
o Develop visual objective statements
o Develop community extension messages
o Present past, present and future images for inspiration
Major benefits
The community becomes committed as they direct the artist.
Murals and/or posters are constant reminders to inspire activities and/or change attitudes.
Well located murals and posters can provide constant monitoring and evaluation.
Having an artist in the village can spur community interest and commitment
Using the tool
1. This tool has many of the characteristics of the: Drawing and Discussion tool, especially in the way the community goes through the collective discussion and analysis stages in order to direct the artist.
2. The community must choose and agree on content, presentation and location of the murals, especially if they are publically displayed.
3. An artist needs to be hired and understand the objectives of the exercise and the community directed process. The artist is guided and directed by the community at all stages of production of the mural or poster.
4. In order to give good direction to the artist, a first drawing can be done with the community (see Drawing and Discussion Tool). This can be given to the artist as a first step.
Precautions in using the tool
This tool will not be appropriate for non-visual cultures. The community must agree to the placement and content of the mural. Materials (paints and surface on which to paint) should be of high durability.
Tool 4: Flannel boards
Flannel boards
Tool description
Flannel boards are picture "paste-ups" which can be sequenced or prioritized in any order on a surface on which they stick (hence the name "flannel board"). The paste-ups are pictures of common problems (fire, poverty, soil erosion, drought, increasing population, etc.) and some common solutions to these problems. The subject of the paste-ups and the position or priority (if any) they will have on the flannel board are both discussed.
Purpose of the tool
o Raise, discuss, and rank issues according to priorities
o Identify and discuss appropriate community solutions to problems
Major benefits
In communities where issues may be too sensitive to discuss or openly identify, this tool is especially useful as it has "pre-identified" the issues.
This tool is especially useful in cultures with a visual orientation.
The pre-identified issues can trigger discussion by the group.
If this tool is used often it can monitor community needs, checking to see if the same problems are continually identified and ranked in the same way.
Using the tool
1. The facilitator should prepare for this exercise by having paste-ups that portray current and potentially sensitive issues. Extra materials should be available to allow for preparation of paste-ups of issues or solutions that may be raised by the group.
A good range of possible solutions should be available in paste-ups. A couple of inappropriate solutions can be useful to encourage the group to disagree with "set" solutions if they are not appropriate.
2. The facilitator should be aware that flannel boards can limit spontaneity and two-way communication unless they are done in a way which gives the group choices.
3. Introduce the exercise and the objectives of the exercise to a small group (6 - 10 people).
4. People should be physically involved putting the paste-ups on the flannel board, and moving them when placing in priority. This encourages participation.
5. Discussion should identify and rank the problems/ issues, and then identify possible solutions.
6. The results of the final composition of the flannel board should be recorded for future reference. This could be by a photograph or drawing of the completed board.
Precautions in using the tool
Flannel Boards can limit spontaneity and two-way communication unless they are done in a way which allows the group to make the choices.
Tool 5: Open-ended stories
Open-ended stories
Tool description
Open-ended Stories have either the beginning, middle or ending of a relevant story, purposely left out. The audience discuss what might happen in the part of the story that has been purposely deleted.
Usually, the beginning will tell a story about a problem, the middle will tell a story about a solution, and the end will tell a story of an outcome.
Purpose of the tool
o Facilitate discussion within a group
o Identify problems and/or solutions
Major benefits
This tool can be especially useful with non-literate or low-literate groups who have a rich oral or "folkstory" background.
This tool can be combined with a drama or puppet show.
This is a dynamic tool which elicits good group participation.
Purpose of the tool
1. The whole story needs to be designed before hand, so that the part which is left out "fits" the complete story. A story teller with good two-way communication skills is necessary. Depending on the amount of group discussion, telling the story and filling in the missing part may take up to 2 hours.
2. The storyteller must be able to tell the story, listen, and respond to the community analysis. Using two facilitators can help: one to tell the story and one to facilitate the community in filling in the "gap".
3. The story and the response need to be recorded. Tape recordings can be helpful in this instance, although it is commonly believed that people with an oral culture have excellent memories.
Precautions in using the tool
A good storyteller with good two-way communication skills may be difficult to find, and using two people (one to tell the story and one to encourage discussion) may be necessary.
Tool 6: Unserialized posters
Unserialized posters
Tool description
This tool consists of a set of pre-designed posters which depict local happenings, usually over a long period of time. The posters are then chronologically sequenced by the group to tell the story as it happened. The posters can cover the community's history, problems, beliefs, practices, and values.
Purpose of the tool
o Facilitate discussion
o Assist in making a chronological pictorial record of village history
Major benefits
Group discussion is encouraged as posters are sequenced.
This tool can be tried with different groups within the community, and the difference in sequencing can then be compared.
This tool is especially useful in communities with a visual oriented culture.
Using the tool
1. Explain the purpose of the exercise to the group.
2. Display all the pictures to the group, and open discussion regarding each picture to determine its relevance to the community.
3. If sequencing is done in a small group, posters can be moved into sequence by group members. If a large group is present, group consensus can determine the position of posters, which are displayed for all to see.
4. Temporary removal and reintroduction of one or more of the posters can help determine its importance, and encourage the same kinds of responses as Tool 5, Open-ended Stories.
Precautions in using the tool
The pre-designed posters may not depict an important event. Blank posters can be drawn on to portray the missing event.
Tool 7: Community case studies
Community case studies
Tool description
A case study is a description and analysis of a specific situation or issue that is done by insiders and outsiders together to represent the insiders perspective. Information gathering and analysis can consider the cultural context, gender relationships economic relationships, social and/or environmental aspects of a situation or issue.
Presentation can be in the form of drawings, popular theatre, songs, stories, photographs, slide-tape or video presentations. The community should present the case study in the form which is most comfortable to them.
Purpose of the tool
o Increase knowledge and understanding of any given community situation
o Provide information for Participatory Assessment, Baselines and Evaluations
Major benefits
Case studies (often called monographs) written in the local language, can be made into a reading book for local schools, increasing pride in local accomplishments and commitment to activities.
The production of a case study helps encourage focused discussion, and is a powerful tool to build self-sufficiency. In the process of developing a case study, insiders must analyse the reasons for change, as well as the possible effects of change.
Case studies encourage integrated thinking and awareness of the complexities of real situations.
Information that is useful to both insiders and outsiders is provided.
Using the tool
1. There should be one main issue or theme of the case study. These issues or themes must be placed in context and clearly understood to ensure that they remain the central focus. It is easy to get sidetracked as other important issues arise.
2. While field staff should guide and encourage the process of developing the case study, responsibility should be assigned to one or several delegated community members who can gather information and then obtain "validation" of the case study from the rest of the community.
3. Outsiders can provide valuable information from government records or urban markets, which insiders may not be able to readily access. Outsiders can "translate" information so that it is useful to insiders.
4. The method of presentation for the case study should be chosen early in the information gathering and analysis stage.
5. Other information gathering tools can be used to develop the case study.
Precautions in using the tool
The case study may take a long time and the initial enthusiasm may be lost. If one person provides consistent encouragement and support, this potential problem can be averted.
Tool 8: Historical mapping
Historical mapping
Tool description
This tool assists with the documenting of the history of the community or beneficiary group. It can do this either in pictures, writing or symbols. A timetable (either every five or ten years) is established, going back as far as people can remember. The timetable is focused on a specific subject such as natural or communal resource management, or village growth and its effect on the surrounding environment.
Purpose of the tool
o Stimulate discussion of why and how a problem arose.
o Provide community insight into the "root" of the problem.
Major benefits
Understanding the origin of a problem can provide both insiders and outsiders with a clean slate on which to start building activities.
Create a timeline to follow, (every five or ten years) with events to be filled in through group discussion.
Allow ample time for discussion around each time period. and make sure that all relevant issues are recorded.
Precautions in using the tool
Sensitive issues from the past may be raised. If this happens, the facilitator can move to the next time period and return to the sensitive issue later on. The group should not get stuck in deep discussion over sensitive issues.
<section>8</section>
Tool 9: Semi-structured interviews
Semi-structured interviews
Tool description
Semi-structured interviews are conducted with a fairly open framework which allow for focused, conversational, two-way communication. They can be used both to give and receive information.
Unlike the questionnaire framework, where detailed questions are formulating ahead of time, semi structured interviewing starts with more general questions or topics. Relevant topics (such as cookstoves) are initially identified and the possible relationship between these topics and the issues such as availability, expense, effectiveness become the basis for more specific questions which do not need to be prepared in advance.
Not all questions are designed and phrased ahead of time. The majority of questions are created during the interview, allowing both the interviewer and the person being interviewed the flexibility to probe for details or discuss issues.
Semi-structured interviewing is guided only in the sense that some form of interview guide, such as the matrix described below is prepared beforehand, and provides a framework for the interview.
Tool description
Purpose of the tool
o Obtain specific quantitative and qualitative information from a sample of the population
o Obtain general information relevant to specific issues, (ie: to probe for what is not known)
o Gain a range of insights on specific issues
Major benefits
Less intrusive to those being interviewed as the semi-structured interview encourages two-way communication. Those being interviewed can ask questions of the interviewer. In this way it can also function as an extension tool.
Confirms what is already known but also provides the opportunity for learning. Often the information obtained from semi-structured interviews will provide not just answers, but the reasons for the answers.
When individuals are interviewed they may more easily discuss sensitive issues.
Help field staff become acquainted with community members. Outsiders may be better at interviewing because they are perceived as more objective.
Using both individual and group interviews can optimize the strengths of both.
Using the tool
1. Design (facilitator and/or interview team) an interview framework such as the matrix example. Include topics or questions for discussion.
2. Establish the sample size and method of sampling.
3. Interviewers can conduct a number of practice interviews with each other and/or with a few community members, to become familiar with the questions, and get feedback on their two-way communication skills.
4. Record only brief notes during the interview. Immediately following the interview elaborate upon the notes.
5. Analyze the information at the end of each day of interviewing. This can be done with the interview team or group.
6. Discuss the overall results of the analysis with community members so that they can challenge the perceptions of the interview team. This can make the process even more participatory.
Precautions in Using the tool
A lot of extra information may surface during interviews. Team meetings can help identify similarities in responses.
Assure that, in a personal interview, the person being interviewed understands and trusts that the responses will be confidential.
It may take some practice for the interviewer to find the balance between open-ended and focused interviewing.
In a semi-structured group interview people may interrupt one another or "help one another out," or not take turns. They may get off the topic completely.
Interviewers need some skills. The most common problem with interviewers is asking leading questions. Other problems are: failure to listen closely; repeating questions that have already been asked; failure to probe when necessary; failure to judge the answers; and asking vague or insensitive questions.
Tool 10: Ranking, rating and sorting
Ranking, rating and sorting
Tool description
The Ranking, Rating and Sorting tools are simple and inexpensive ways to obtain information about: why people make certain choices, (or have certain opinions) how many people in the community make certain choices, (opinions) and the choices they make. For example, this tool can be used to gain information on the reasons why farmers choose to plant some tree varieties rather than others; or why forestry staff decide to promote a certain species in preference of others. The results and reasons for the choicest opinions are recorded and compared.
This tool provides insight to individual or group decision-making and identifies the criteria that people use to select certain items or activities. When used with different groups and compared, it can pin-point the differences in perception between groups such as those with land and landless. or insiders and outsiders.
Purpose of the tool
o Identify needs and priorities
o Monitor changes in preference
o Gather qualitative and quantitative information
o Compare preferences and priorities between groups (ie: land holders/landless; foresters/ local people)
o Facilitate discussion and analysis
Major benefits
These are flexible tools, which can be used in a variety of situations. They are fun to use.
With Ranking and Sorting, handling the cards or objects encourages people to become more committed and involved in the process.
Ranking provides information on both the choices and the reason for the choices. Sorting provides a community perspective on a topic. Rating is an effective way to quantify "opinions."
Using the tool
1. Decide which tool, Ranking, Rating or Sorting will be most effective at collecting the kind of information needed.
2. Design the exercise and collect the materials required: picture cards, forms, baskets, etc. Examples of Ranking, Rating and Sorting are described below:
3. Whether you use the ranking, rating or sorting tool, select a sample that will be representative of the community or the group from whom information is required. See the beginning of chapter eight for information on sample size and method.
4. Design forms to record responses. A team of at least two persons is required, one to facilitate and one to record responses. They should have a basic working knowledge and experience of the Rating, Ranking or Sorting tool they are using.
5. Explain the tool to the individual or the group. Keep the choices straightforward and make sure that people understand what is required of them.
6. Summarize results using a format that is easily understood. The Tally Sheet described in chapter six might be useful.
7. Present the results to the community or group.
Ranking
One idea is to make picture cards which people can rank from first choice to last choice. Generally it is not recommended that more than 6 items be ranked at any one time.
One set of picture cards might represent 6 local tree species. The cards are given to respondents to rank. Either each time a choice is made, or after ranking of each "set," respondents are asked why they made the choice they did.
Ranking tools
When doing paired comparisons (the person must choose between two items) begin with the two most similar items, for example, cards with two varieties of Acacia. A good question could be "If you could have only one of these trees, which would you choose?" The next question could be "Could you tell me why you have made that choice?"
Continue through the entire set of comparisons, allowing time for participants to place the cards with their choices in assigned place.
Sorting
An example of a sorting tool was found in a community which needed information on the economics of households. A list was made of all 100 households, and each household was assigned a number (the exercise works best with fewer than 150 households). The name of each household and the number from the master list was written on a separate card. Selected community members (a cross section shows interesting results, and exercise may be done in separate groups) were asked to sort the cards into three baskets (if the sorter is not literate, the name on the card is read, and then handed to them to place in the basket of their choice).
Each sorter places the card for each family in one of three baskets, which had been categorized by insiders.
Basket One: families who have enough to eat, send their children to school, and are able to help relatives from time to time.
Basket Two: families who seem to make ends meet, have the basics to eat but live very simply. These families neither take assistance from others nor are they able to give it.
Basket Three: families who are very poor, they do not have adequate food or clothing, and frequently need assistance from others.
The cards are shuffled between sorters so that each starts with a random pile of cards. The sorters should not distribute or discuss the ranks of individual families so as not to cause hard feelings within the community.
The "scores" were added up and divided by the number of sorters. As shown below, the 5 sorters in this example had the following "results".
Sorting tool
Rating
Rating is a useful way to measure attitudes toward opinions, and perceptions of change. However, it requires a certain sophistication on the part of the respondent to understand the system of marking responses. Rating works best with literate people, and those more accustomed to structured answers.
To design a Rating exercise, a list of statements is produced. These statements touch on the aspects of the activities (or topic, species, technologies) being rated. The number of statements should be no more than 25.
A five category scale is devised to indicate how much the respondent agrees or disagrees with the statement.
Strongly Agree Agree No opinion Disagree Strongly Disagree
Code the responses 1 through 5. Give high scores to those opinions that will require changes.
Be careful in your coding that you keep the scales the same for each answer ("agree" on the left, "disagree" on the right) but your coding may vary according to the question.
Pre-test the form to ensure that the statements are clear. Disregard statements that are too extreme or ambiguous.
Total the points for each statement and divide the number of responses for the item. For example, 40 people responded to the statement shown below, the average "score" for the statement was 4.1 Which indicated that most people Agreed or Strongly Agreed with the statement. For all those items which rate over 3.5 Do further investigation to see what the problems are and how they can be resolved.
Rating tool
Precautions in using the tool
The testing of the tool is important, as the physical objects (cards with drawings or writing) must be clearly understood by those who are to make the choices. Carefully test the tool and eliminate any unclear methods and choices.
Recording of the responses, if reasons for choices are required, may be difficult, especially in a group exercise. A tape recorder may help record responses.
The choices that are made are very specific to communities or individuals, so for the information to be reliable a relevant sample of the population must be chosen. As the results are subjective, findings may not be applicable to other areas.
Tool 11: Community environmental assessment
Community environmental assessment
Tool description
Community Environmental Assessment is used to gather information in order to analyze the environmental effects of planned and/or completed activities. The tool provides a framework in which insiders can make observations and judge the value of the change. The value is determined by giving a number value to each environmental factor. In this way an environmental score is established. It is not this score that is useful, but the way the number values show the importance of one factor compared to another. The values can also indicate which factors should be closely watched.
Purpose of the tool
o Provide systematic and consistent value judgements which can be compared over time
o Predict, as far as possible, the various positive and negative impact the proposed activities might have. When these are understood, trade-offs, which are favourable as possible to the people involved, can be made.
o Identify where environmental problems may occur
Major benefit
Community Environmental Assessments create an awareness of the potentially negative and positive environmental impact of activities.
Provides "warning flags" for environmental factors which are potentially negative.
Using the tool
1. In a meeting with concerned community members, discuss the purpose of this tool and how to use it. Determine a definition for "the environment," such as: "the environment of a community is defined by the health, social, economic, broadly cultural and physical aspects of that community."
2. Introduce the value assignments in a chart form, so that they are easily seen. Value assignments may be made in the following way:
Very positive, clear and decisive positive impact +2
Some, but limited positive impact +1
No effect, not applicable, no impact 0
Some definite, but limited negative impact -1
Very specific or extensive negative impact -2
3. Introduce the Community Environmental Assessment Worksheet, a sample of which is shown below. Descriptions of the categories are also given.
4. Two separate operations are required: OBSERVATIONS (results from measurements or judgements 1-4); and CALCULATIONS (5-12)
5. Test the materials with a small group first so that the problems are worked out and facilitators become familiar with the tool.
6. Go through the exercise, for each category, asking the basic question "How will the proposed activity affect" The "answers" are the value assignments, as given above.
7. This tool can be used periodically throughout the project, to monitor changes in environmental factors.
COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK
CATEGORY BASIC UNADJUSTED SCORE ADJUSTMENTS ADJUSTED SCORE POSITIVE VERSUS NEGATIVE IMPACTS SHORT TERM LONG TERM TOTAL SCORE
RELATIVE IMPORTANCE PEOPLE AREA ALL + ALL -
1a WATER 
1b WATER (SURFACE) 
1c WATER
(GROUND) 
2a VEGETATION (COMPOSITION) 
2b VEGETATION (DENSITY) 
3a SOIL
(EROSION) 
3b SOIL
(FERTILITY) 
4a FISHERIES/ WILDLIFE 
4b PARKS/RESERVE 
5a HEALTH 
5b HEALTH 
6a SOCIOECONOMIC (FOOD SECURITY) 
6b SOCIOECONOMIC (INCOME EQUITY) 
6c SOCIOECONOMIC (EFFICIENCY OF LOCAL) 
6d SOCIOECONOMIC (WAY OF LIFE) 
7a POLITICAL (RULES, LAWS) 
7a POLITICAL (RIGHTS, DUTIES BENEFITS OF PEOPLE) 
7a POLITICAL (GOVERNMENT POLICIES, SERVICES) 
Some of the categories that can be discussed are:
Surface Water: Runoff, peaks and yields. Will/Does the project activity affect runoff. Will/Does it affect the peaks (flood discharges)? Will/Does it affect the amount of water flow?
Groundwater: Its quality, recharge rates. Does/Will/Has the project alter(ed) its chemical composition?
Vegetation: Will/Has natural vegetation be/been reduced (bad) or increased (good)? How will /has natural regeneration be /been affected? Will/Has there be /been additional or fewer demands on trees, bushes, glasses, etc?
Soils: Will/Do the project increase or drain soil fertility? Where land surfaces will be /are affected by the project, does /has the best land use produce favourable or unfavourable results? Will/Has erosion be /been more or less likely?
Other: Basic questions dealing with favourable or unfavourable changes in wildlife, fisheries, natural features.
Food: Will/Do people have more food? Dry season foods? A more complete diet?
Disease: Will/Has the project create /created more standing water? Will/Has the project increase /increased fast flowing water?
Other: Basic questions dealing with toxic chemicals, exposure to animal borne diseases, etc.
Agriculture Productivity: Will/Have per capita food production (staples or cash crops) yields be /been affected?
Volume of Goods Services: Will/Has the project provide /provided more or fewer goods (food, firewood, water, etc.)?
Common Resources: Water, pasture, trees, etc. Will/Has the project eliminate/ eliminated community use of any of these resources? Will/Has it restrict /restricted access to these resources?
Project Equity: How will /have benefits been distributed? Who will /has profited from these activities. How "fairly" will /have the benefits be /been shared?
Precautions in using the tool
This tool will not provide exact, mathematically precise measurements, but will provide systematic and consistent judgements which can be compared over time.
Leave room for new categories and questions that might come up during the exercise.
This is a somewhat complicated tool, so be sure it is well understood before using it.
o Provide information about correct site/species selections.
o Adjust stocking rates based on local survival expectations.
Tool 12: Survival surveys
Survival surveys
Tool description
Seedling survival surveys count and record live and dead trees after they have been planted. Some factors that have a bearing on survival are: species, site, configurations, spacing, weather, planting methods, protection, and management. Height, circumference and general condition can be recorded for live trees. Possible reasons for mortality can be recorded for dead trees.
Purpose of the tool
o Provide information about correct site/species selections
o Adjust stocking rates based on local survival expectations
o Determine reasons for seedling mortality
Major benefits
Serves as an "early warning indicator" for both technical and social problems.
The stocking rates can be adjusted to maintain optimal stocking targets.
Indicates community interest (protection, management, watering) in trees.
Using the tool
1. Determine (through discussions with insiders) WHY a survival survey may be useful to them, HOW they may benefit from the information, and WHICH information they need.
2. Design the survival survey considering the specific information needs identified by insiders. There may be many considerations: different configurations (woodlots, alleycropping, boundary planting, compound planting, random field planting, etc.), variation in species, possible reasons for mortality (weather, animal browse, etc.), different sites (dry/wet, fertile/infertile, etc.).
3. In the design, decide HOW the survey will be conducted. There are a number of options:
(a) When distributing seedlings, give each individual a card listing the number of each different species of seedling taken. Ask that the card be returned, with survival recorded, when receiving seedlings the following season. Check the validity of the information by conducting physical spot checks on some of the cards.
(b) Survival information can be a part of Tool 15, Farmer's Own Records. If this is the case, a representative sample of these records can be used to establish overall survival rates.
(c) If micro farm planning is done, a representative sample of the farms can be taken, and a survival survey can be done on a few farms.
(d) If there is no record of seedling distribution, an "as is" inventory can be made, and a survival survey designed from this information.
(e) For small communities, maps which record the households with seedlings, seedling species and seedling survival can be created and compared over time.
(f) Demonstration plots (fenced areas with planted seedlings) can provide "benchmarks" of seedling performance when seedlings are given optimum protection.
4. When determining the size of the sample for the survey, a rule of thumb sample size is:
Total Sample Sample Size %
5. When determining how to establish a sample there are a number of options. Some of these options are: a representative sample, a random sample, a stratified sample, or a blend of these. Sampling methods are discussed at the beginning of chapter Eight.
6. Once the sample has been decided upon, it must be determined whether it makes sense to have a permanent (go back to the same trees every year) or a temporary sample (count only the trees planted in the last season).
There has been a great deal of difficulty with permanent samples because with many fast growing species it is very difficult to tell the age of a seedling. Tagged trees lose their tags.
If sample accuracy is of concern, basic statistics may be required. Get help before beginning the survey if a high level of confidence in the data is required or/and if unsure about the process of statistical analysis.
7. It is important to decide WHEN to sample for survival. There are four discrete periods when trees can be checked. Define the period in which the survival surveys have taken place and keep the period consistent over time.
(a) Initial check is done soon after planting, mainly to evaluate planting quality and handling practices. It is especially useful to make estimates for re-planting, "gapping" or "beating up". The initial check is NOT a survival survey and should not be used to estimate future survival.
(b) A Survival survey can be done at end of limiting factor which can be factors such as drought, rain, pests, animal browse and/or frost. The sampling at this period can give good information on how things are going, whether there are problems such as species, site selection, protection. This information can be used to focus extension efforts on the areas where there are problems.
(c) A survival survey can be done at the "free to grow" stage, which is when the critical limits to growth have passed. This survey will provide information which estimates final tree establishment. Critical limits to growth will depend on local factors, such as height away from browse or height above competing vegetation.
(d) A survival survey can be done after spacing operations when optimal stocking is assumed.
Precautions in using the tool
Some sampling methods will give a "pretty good" estimate of survival, but may not be statistically valid. What is important is that the survey provide useful, and fairly reliable information.
Survival surveys are done once the LIMITING FACTOR has passed. This can be after the dry period, after herder's have passed through, or after seasonal problems such as wind and water. A check on seedlings before this (an initial check) will not give reliable survival figures, although a check at this time might be useful information for replanting.
Survival surveys are most useful as a management tool, not as indicators of "success" of activities.
Be consistent and systematic in conducting survival surveys as this will give useful information over time. Stick to the pre-selected sample and sampling methods so that bias is limited and results reliable.
<section>9</section>
Tool 13: Participatory action research
Participatory action research
Tool description
Participatory Action Research is a continuous cycle in which insiders and outsiders together decide what needs to be researched, design the research (what will be measured and how) and collect the necessary information. This information is then put into practical applications or used to identify new research ideas.
Three examples of Participatory Action Research are given here: Yields, Soil Traps and Research Plots. Basic to all is a consistent, comparative and/or systematic measurement which shows the effects of the activity or intervention.
Yields Farmers measure and record information. A separate booklet may be provided, or a section can be provided in the Farmers' Own Records(Tool 15).
Soil Traps This is a physical structure established to monitor effects of activities which may have an effect on soil stability. A number of strategically located soil traps or soil sticks are constructed so that soil movement can be periodically measured and recorded.
Research Plots Insiders and outsiders are involved in setting research priorities, and designing research plots. Research plots can be either central or on individual farms.
Central plots are located in an area with high local visability, and generally focus on research that has a high risk to farmers, but that is potentially of great value. Responsibility for inputs and recording of measurements can be shared between insiders and outsiders. These plots are easier to manage and seen by some as more "scientific".
Individual research plots are established on farm lands, with farmers taking measurements and keeping records. The information from the many plots is then added up and/or compared. The information from farm research is often more realistic and useful, because it involves real farm situations, shows variation in sites, is more realistically managed in terms of labour inputs, and may facilitate better farmer to farmer interaction. A disadvantage is that records are kept by each farmer, and there may be variation because of this.
Purpose of the tool
o Locally test new technologies (species, management practices, soil conservation measures, etc.)
o Determine the effectiveness of interventions after trees are planted
o Support and strengthen indigenous research skills
Major benefits
Research relevant to the real needs of farmers is identified and can be further developed by outside research agencies.
Supports and strengthens existing local research.
Farmers are aware of the changes (positive or negative) brought about by a change in former practices.
Participatory Action Research lowers the risks associated with large scale promotion and adoption of new, locally untested technologies.
Using the tool
1. Arrange a meeting with relevant community members to discuss: which interventions and management practices they wish to test; what methods they wish to employ; (ie: whether it will be a test/control plot, or yields before and after treatments); the terms of measurement; and the method of measurement
2. Some examples are:
Soil Traps small pits of the same size can be dug and reinforced with some solid material. Soil traps can be located below fields where there has been a forestry intervention (for example, contour lines planted with trees) and in similar places below sites that have not had any interventions.
Soil Sticks sticks with measurements carved or coloured on them are firmly placed in the ground below similar fields with and without interventions. The measurements on the stick are recorded.
Research Plots whatever is being researched, there should be a "test" plot and a "control" plot that are as similar as possible in all aspects except the one factor that is the subject of the research.
Yields conducted to measure the effects of an intervention (alley cropping, windbreaks, boundary plantings, etc.) on crop yields, and/or to measure the outputs from the intervention (poles, fodder, firewood, etc.) The areas where measurement is being made should be as similar as possible.
3. Insiders and outsiders design the monitoring format for this tool. This could be a separate booklet or card, or an insert to Farmers' Own Records.
4. Information from Participatory Action Research is shared and analyzed by insiders and outsiders together, and the results used either to change existing practices, not change existing practices, and/or call for further research.
Precautions in using the tools
The attention that is paid to the selected farmers may induce them to apply more attention to the test plots (weeding, watering, etc.) than to the control plots, biasing the information.
Other factors that might influence research must be considered (ie: unusually heavy rains over one year might result in heavy erosion; use of improved crop seed could improve harvests; years the land has been fallow could affect productivity).
Results over the long term will increase accuracy, and decisions should not be made on a few years results.
Tool 14: Maps and mapping
Maps and mapping
Tool description
This tool uses purchased maps, maps produced by the group and/or aerial photographs to assist with community land use planning and monitoring changes in land use.
Purpose of the tool
o Monitor changes in land use
o Assist insiders with planning and designing
o Evaluate changes in land use through comparison
Major benefits
This tool can give a broad overview of the evolution of community land use. It is thus useful for planning and monitoring community forestry/watershed areas.
It is less time consuming than other information gathering tools as many different interventions can be identified using the one tool.
Communities, some for the first time, can analyse the linkages, patterns and inter-relationships of land use.
Maps and mapping can be a multipurpose tool, useful for Extension, Assessment, Planning, Monitoring, Baselines, and Evaluation:
Using the tool
1. Introduce both the concept of maps, mapping, and/or aerial photographs, and the purpose of the exercise to groups of 5-7 persons. These small groups can be composed of representatives of different groups within the community, or different interest groups can do the mapping separately and then compare them.
Aerial photographs may be expensive if not readily available. Local maps or purchased maps can be used, or the community can draw the map themselves (see Tool 2: Drawing and Discussion), in which case expenses are minimal.
If this tool is used for planning, the various activities can be drawn in on the map/photograph or overlayed.
If this tool is used for monitoring, changes can be recorded on the maps/ photographs periodically.
If this tool is used for evaluation, a comparison of maps and/or photographs at different times will be most useful.
2. If using aerial photographs or maps, common landmarks are first identified (local names for lakes, rivers, roads, buildings,) and other areas are then identified relative to these.
An overlay can be used on an aerial photograph, to sketch in the areas of importance (communal grazing lands, private farms, state forest, etc.)
3. There are a number of different ways mapping can be organized. For example people can (separately or in groups) draw their own maps of the community, and these can be compared and synthesized into one large map. This may be especially useful if different interest groups in the community are involved, as they will have different perceptions of land use. If activities affect the different interest groups each of their perceptions should be recognized in order to begin successful negotiations.
4. For microfarm planning, separate maps can be created by individual farmers (for either planning, monitoring and/or evaluation) and then combined on a larger community map.
5. It is important to use good quality maps or paper, and keep them in a safe place for future reference.
Precautions in using the tool
Aerial photographs may be difficult to obtain, and/or expensive to buy. They may also be difficult to read and interpret.
A comparison of individual maps may bring out feelings of inadequacy, or unwillingness to acknowledge specific ownership of land.
Conflicts may result if inequities become apparent, or old hostilities are rekindled.
A cross section of the community is required to validate the overall community perceptions.
One person may dominate or direct drawing if mapping is done by the group as a whole.
Tool 15: Farmer's own records
Farmer's own records
Tool description
A farm or community record booklet containing simple procedures to monitor information can be designed by insiders and outsiders to suit a specific area and situation. Monitoring indicators and terms of measurement are chosen by insiders. The recorded information is useful to individual farmers, when synthesized it is valuable to other farmers and outsiders.
Purpose of the tool
o Judge whether the activities (new species, new methods of management, etc.) are beneficial to the farmer
o Test and compare old practices with new practices
o Define future research and development priorities for improving the technology
o Provide an "early warning system" for new, locally untested technologies
Major benefits
Farmers can see and judge for themselves, from their own information sources, the benefits or disadvantages of activities.
The tool can be modified for use in all types of forestry activities such as agroforestry, compound plantings, fodder banks, community woodlots, and small scale forest based enterprises.
The tool can monitor inputs (seed, fertilizer, tools, labour) and outputs (crop yield increases, polewood, fodder, secondary forest products).
Monitors what the farmers' perceive as important inputs/outputs.
The tool provides "on-farm" research information which can be compared between farms (communities) and help to identify future research priorities.
Provides site and situation specific information in a consistent format.
Using the tool
1. Insiders first identify their reason for keeping track of information. Then, the overall method that will be appropriate for the purpose and the situation; what will be measured; and the terms of measurement (for example, bags or kilos, labour measured by half-day or by the hour).
2. Insiders and outsiders design a record keeping booklet (this may be only one page, or a number of pages, depending on the situation) that will meet their information needs. After being drafted, the booklet should be reproduced on sturdy paper, with strong binding.
If literacy is low, drawings can be substituted for writing, and pencil strokes for measures as shown below, where time spent working in various activities was recorded. By making one mark for every half-day spent doing specific jobs, a farmer can compare the time worked on the control plot with the time spent on the test plot.
Sample of farmers own records
3. Produce the appropriate number of record keeping booklets and distribute them to beneficiaries with a short familiarization session.
4. Consistent follow-up and evaluation of the utility of the tool is necessary to encourage its continued and systematic use over time.
5. Meet periodically to synthesize, compare and discuss the results.
Precautions in using the tool
The results may be somewhat general if the tool is used to assess activities and/or technologies which are being used over a wide area.
There should be space in the booklet for recording unexpected factors.
The booklet should be designed and produced and analysed with input from insiders.
Tool 16: Nursery record book
Nursery record book
Purpose of the tool
A record book is maintained by either the community nursery committee, a community representative, or a paid nursery worker. It records what the insiders feel is important information. This may include cost accountability, a record of technical information, species preferences, labour inputs, etc.
Major benefits
o Assist and improve nursery administration
o Retain valuable information about new nursery and disease control techniques, sources of seeds, etc
o Keep track of seedling distribution for future follow-up
o Keep cost accounts
Major benefits
This tool helps insiders with new or untested nursery practices.
Can identify nursery research needs.
Helps to establish effective nursery techniques.
A record book is maintained by either the community nursery committee, a community representative, or a paid nursery worker. It records what the insiders feel is important information. This may include cost accountability, a record of technical information, species preferences, labour inputs, etc.
Using the tool
1. Meet with insiders and/or the nursery committee to discuss which information to collect, and to choose a person responsible for record-keeping.
2. Set up the record book according to the information needs discussed and agreed upon. An example of a nursery record book is given below:
SAMPLE OF NURSERY RECORD BOOK
DISTRIBUTION RECORD
DATE NAME OF FARMER LOCATION SEEDLING INTENDED FUNCTION REMARKS
No. SPECIES
OPERATING COST RECORD
DATE ITEM MATERIAL QUANTITY COST REMARK
LABOUR RECORD
DATE NAME ACTIVITY HOURS
3. Provide follow-up and assistance as required.
4. Hold periodic larger meetings to provide feedback to the community.
Precautions in using the tool
Outsiders should ensure that they do not force their own information on insiders.
Tool 17: Community financial accounts
Community financial accounts
Tool description
This tool utilizes basic single-entry bookkeeping techniques (receipts, input/output columns, etc.) to record and monitor financial information.
Purpose of the tool
o Monitor the finances of small-scale forest based enterprises
o Provide accountability to the community
o Assist in evaluating the inputs/outputs
Major benefits
Helps insiders identify financial problems quickly.
Assists insiders by providing information on which to base financial management decisions.
Develops and/or strengthens insider record keeping skills.
Using the tool
1. Meet with insiders to discuss which information they need, identify the probable inputs and outputs, where the information will come from, and who will be responsible for the accounts.
2. Design a record keeping system that will easily provide the information needed.
3. Follow-up and assist with record keeping for ongoing accounts, balancing and reporting results to the community.
Precautions in using the tool
The bookkeeping should be kept as simple as possible.
Tool 18: Strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and limitations (S.W.O.L.) analysis
Strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and limitations (S.W.O.L.) analysis
Tool description
This tool provides a framework which allows for group analysis and/or evaluation of issues. Four categories (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Limitations) in the framework are used to examine, define, discuss and record the issues.
Purpose of the tool
o Provides a framework for analysis of a given situation
o Encourages input from many people
o Facilitates discussion of potential solutions (opportunities) and constraints (threats)
o Gathers qualitative information
Major benefits
Field staff have found the S.W.O.L. Analysis easy to explain, easy to use, and easily understood by communities.
This tool can be used in information gathering and analysis for Assessment, Monitoring and Evaluation.
The best thing about this tool is that it recognizes that there are usually two different sides (positive and negative) to any given issue or situation and it encourages discussion of both. It helps to set the basis for negotiations and trade-offs.
Open, in-depth, focused and frank discussions are facilitated because agreement must be reached to identify what is a strength and what is a weakness. What is seen as a strength to one person may be a weakness to another.
Encourages thinking about creating opportunities, considering strengths and weaknesses, and the limitations that might be present.
This tool allows for ALL ideas around a specific issue to be discussed.
Used consistently over time, this tool can record changes in attitude and perception.
Using the tool
1. Approximately two hours will be needed to explain the tool to participants, go through the exercise, analyze and synthesize the information.
2. Materials required are large paper or newsprint and big pens, or chalk and a blackboard.
3. Explain the purpose of the tool. Decide on the issue or situation that will be discussed. The issue or situation can be broad or narrow, S.W.O.L. analysis can handle most issues, as long as they are clear and understandable.
4. Explain the categories to participants. Description of categories is as follows:
Strengths Strengths are those things which have worked well, the things that you are proud to tell others, that you like to "brag" about! Strengths are the best aspects of any given situation, issue or persons.
Weaknesses Weaknesses are those things that have not worked so well, the things that you would rather others didn't know about! Weaknesses are the inferior aspects of any given situation, issue or persons.
Opportunities Opportunities are the possibilities for positive change, given both the strength and weaknesses. Opportunities are the chance to change things for the better.
Limitations Limitations are the things that stop us from realizing the opportunities. Limitations stop change from happening. Some limitations can be overcome, others cannot.
TOPIC
TOPIC: EVALUATION OF NURSERY
STRENGTHS WEAKNESSES OPPORTUNITIES LIMITATION
5. As the four categories are being explained, write them at the top of the columns across the top of the page. Leave space to insert the main points of discussion as shown in the sample below.
6. There are two ways to approach the S.W.O.L. Analysis, depending on the specific situation or issue. Either go through all the strengths first, then all the weaknesses, all the opportunities, and all the limitations. Or identify each strength, then each "matching" weakness, and so on. A small "test" of the tool use will help you to know which approach is going to work best in each instance.
7. Some points may be discussed at length before agreement is reached. Each point is written on the framework only after agreement has been reached.
Precautions in using the tool
Sensitive subjects may arise. The facilitator may wish to change the topic and return to the sensitive point later on. This can reduce the chance of possible problems.
Some of the group may dominate discussion. The facilitator can ask specific persons for input, or the exercise can be done with different focus groups.
Synthesizing discussion into a few words may be difficult. The facilitator should always check to see that the audience agrees with the reporting.
Tool 19: Popular theatre
Popular theatre
Tool description
This is a tool to develop awareness through the use of local media such as dance, song, drama and mime. Popular Theatre is different than traditional theatre because rather than mirror and mimic the culture, it shows the contradictions, leaving the audience with unanswered questions upon which to reflect and hopefully seek answers.
Popular Theatre is not meant to produce a masterpiece, it is a tool to better understand a situation.
Purpose of the tool
o Express feelings, tell a story, or bring up community concerns around an issue
o Use the potential of theatre as a "rehearsal for life," helping to overcome fears and build confidence
o Encourage the audience to reflect upon and seek answers to community problems
Major benefits
This tool is multipurpose. It can be used for Assessment, Evaluation and Monitoring. It can be used often throughout the project to build a story. It can be used to present the "results" of analysis, and have those results verified by a wider audience. It can be used to present (through video, slide tapes or tape recordings) information to other communities, other decision makers and/or other interested parties.
This tool encourages a high degree of community/beneficiary participation, identifying community concerns and working towards solutions.
Overcomes fears and builds confidence.
Using the tool
1. For a fairly elaborate presentation this tool requires some time. However, if the community is familiar with their chosen form of communication it may be done fairly quickly and easily. Expenses are minimal if locally available costumes and props are used. If recording is done (photographs, slides, video, tape recording) it can be more expensive.
2. Training in the use of Popular Theatre is recommended. Experience has shown that once a group is presented with the idea, they enthusiastically proceed. An outside popular theatre group may be used to facilitate presentation if local expertise is not available.
3. There are four basic steps involved in producing popular theatre:
Taking in: Create an atmosphere in which insiders and outsiders can feel free to talk openly of experiences or problems which are painful, difficult or taboo to discuss. Most people begin by exploring their own experiences, and later begin to study experiences of others.
Analyzing material: Analysis is done by discussions between insiders, outsiders and animators/actors/facilitators. In discussions the information about the issue is examined in its wider social, economic or political context. This approach brings to light the relationships and contradictions between problems.
Creating material: Convert the major issues into entertainment. This entertainment can be in the form of a series of workshops, or a play. Activities can be structured into entertainment by:
Asking people to take on the role of a group or community unfamiliar to them and to feel and reflect on the experience. For example, an urban group may be asked to experience, or act the pan of members of a rural group, or men may be given roles as women. When people take on very unfamiliar roles they are forced to learn and explore new feelings and experience.
Building the new thoughts and emotions that are learned into stories or scenes for a play. This can be done by incorporating ideas into the narrative for a drama or shaping it into a discussion between the actors and the audience.
Reflection leads people into the next and important stage, "rehearsal for life" where there is the opportunity to create a theatre situation where people "practice" change and new perceptions emerge.
The participants or audience are asked to intervene to solve a problem or resolve a contradiction. By resolving the contradiction, the drama reaches a new phase, and becomes a new drama. This new drama may have new contradictions built into it and so the process becomes continuous.
All of these stages can take place in the natural setting. They do not require a traditional theatre nor all the trappings of a theatre such as scripts, sets, costumes and lighting.
Organization: A vital pan of Popular Theatre is organization of a small group of people that work well together, and understand the community of people. This group is responsible for developing ways for the community to participate in the analysis and decision making that is central to the work. The group guarantees that resource people/animators and writers remain in touch with the feelings of the groups with whom they work, and vice versa.
Precautions in using the tool
It may be difficult to record the process and the outcome especially if there is a great deal of audience response. Tape recordings, photographs, or videos may be useful for recording.
Actors have to "create" quickly, based on audience response.
The entertainment value should not outweigh the learning value.
Tool 20: Puppet theatre
Puppet theatre
Tool description
Puppets are used to represent characters which act out the issues and/or story determined by insiders. If an outside professional puppet group is used, the assistance of insiders to develop scripts around the issues is required.
Purpose of the tool
Puppet theatre has the same purpose as Popular Theatre (Tool 19), but because the puppets are not viewed as "real people", they can often deal with sensitive situations and more easily obtain feedback from the audience.
Puppet theatre has high entertainment value in some cultures, and can reach and receive feedback from a wide audience.
This tool is multipurpose. It can be used for Assessment, for collection of qualitative information; as an extension tool, and for presentation and communication of results.
By using this tool continually, an ongoing process of audience feedback exists. This strengthens the group analysis.
Using the tool
1. Meetings of insiders/outsiders and the puppet group (if applicable) will be needed to identify key issues, and design a presentation that will encourage response. After the messages and key issues to be communicated are identified, it should be determined how this can best be done. For example the puppets can tell a story or act out a drama
The puppet group will require manual dexterity, voice and story telling abilities. If local people are going to be the puppet group, they may require some training and rehearsal.
2. Construct puppets and stage if not available. To build puppets and stage, local materials should be sought: gourds can be used for puppet heads, stages can be made of local cloth and scrap wood, and lighting systems can be constructed from old tin cans. Often, however, these are not of good quality and materials have to be purchased.
3. Select characters and begin designing the script.
4. Rehearse the shows with a small group playing the role of audience.
5. Present the puppet show to the larger group. Record responses so that they can be used to develop the message and story in the future. See Popular Theatre (Tool 19) for funkier suggestions.
Precautions in using the tool
Puppeteers must handle a variety of unexpected and often sensitive responses.
Recording the responses for future use may be difficult. A tape recorder can help, or a number of people can take notes.
Ensure that the messages/issues are relevant to the community (there is one example of a puppet group which encouraged farm tree planting to a group of landless people!). When the issues and messages are decided upon by insiders, this problem is reduced.
<section>a</section>
Tool 21: Community directed visual images
Community directed visual images
Description of tool
This tool includes drawings, photographs, and/or slides which have been "directed" and/or "edited" by the community. They are visual images that insiders choose.
Purpose of the tool
o Focus and stimulate group analysis
o Support and add interest to written results
o Monitor change over time and record events
Mayor benefit
Can enhance the credibility and interest of written reports.
This tool can be used to focus, analyze and present information from Participatory Baselines, Monitoring and Evaluation.
Using the tool
1. Visual images can be produced easily and economically using locally available skills such as (drawings). Somewhat more expensive are photographs and slides. A professional photographer with some experience in participatory methods may also be considered.
2. There are a number of options available to produce Community Directed Visual Images. Some of these are:
A local artist who works with, and is directed by insiders can produce a series of drawings. The interactive process between the artist and the insiders produces drawings which are, as much as possible, the insiders perceptions.
School children, can be a valuable asset in producing drawings. There are also educational and extension benefits available to the school children. For example, a contest can be organized with the subject of the drawings:
"What our village looked like when my grandfather was a child"
"What our village looked like when my mother was a child"
"What our village looks like now"
"What our village might look like when I am old"
A photographer can obtain direction and/or work with insiders to produce photographs or slides which capture the images the insiders choose to highlight their story, monitor activities, or "tell their story" in a slide/tape presentation. Insiders should discuss and edit photographs/slides.
3. Ensure that the equipment and skills are available. There is some expense using a camera (film, development, projector, etc.) and film development may be a problem in some countries.
4. Discuss and decide on the purpose of producing visuals.
5. Construct a production plan for the visual images: WHAT, WHERE, WHO, WHEN, HOW. Consider available resources. Obtain materials such as paper, drawing implements, boards, and film.
6. If necessary, employ an artist or photographer, and/or organize the school contest. Ensure that resources are available for these services.
7. Produce the visuals. All production can be done at one time, or, if used for monitoring visual images, production may be periodic. If production is periodic consistency is important, for example, if taking an annual photograph of the village, take it from exactly the same location each year.
8. The group then analyze, sort, and/or judge the visual images and either prepare them for presentation or store them safely for use at a later date.
9. Whatever presentation is used, make sure that the materials are sturdy. School drawings can be plasticized, or done on cloth. Photographs can be sealed. Slide shows can be made into more durable filmstrips.
Precautions in using the tool
School children can talk to the different age groups to get an idea of what to draw and these same people can validate the children's interpretations. Having a local artist work with the school children is also possible.
Precautions in using the tool
Insiders must be involved in the production of the visual images, directing the artist or photographer and/or setting the topics for school drawing contests. Yet artistic freedom is also necessary.
Ensure that the photographs/slides are recognized as the property of the community.
Visuals are not always an effective way to make ideas clear. It may be necessary to have some context to add to the visuals. Context can be provided by insiders verbal or recorded explanations of the images.
If a local artist or photographer is used, some training in participatory (listening) methods may be needed. Working with school children, a facilitator/organizer may be needed.
Tool 22: Community directed tape recordings
Community directed tape recordings
Tool description
A message or story developed by the community can be tape recorded for presentation to the community for analysis, given to local radio stations for broadcasting, used in nearby communities for farmer-to-farmer extension, and/or present to other interested parties such as national governments or donors.
Community Directed Tape Recordings can use interviews with community members, tell a story or record a drama or puppet show that has been developed by the community.
Other options available using this tool are to combine tape recordings with slides for a presentation or to form a dialogue between communities.
Purpose of the tool
o Develop a message to present results
o Record stories or drama that have been developed using other tools
o Assist with information gathering from meetings, focus group discussions, interviews
Major benefit
Communities with an oral (story-telling) culture can record information for analysis and future use (Baseline, Assessment, Evaluation)
Useful for broader extension purposes such as forestry radio programmes
Tape recordings can be combined with slides, drawings or photographs.
Can record verbal goal statements.
Native languages and/or dialects can be used and translated if necessary. Literacy is not required.
Tape recordings can be heard repeatedly to analyze messages.
Using the tool
1. Ensure that tape recording equipment and some skills are available. Depending on the quality, tape recordings may require trained people, directed by insiders, to edit them.
If a high quality product is desired, for example a radio broadcast, editing may take some time. The expenses may initially be high for tape recorder, editing equipment, microphone and tapes, but these may serve many communities. There is the problem that the community must rely on the outsider for audio equipment. However, the benefits are mainly to be found in producing and distributing tape recordings rather than keeping them.
2. If this tool is being used to present results ensure that the results are suitable for tape recording. They should be more oral than visual.
3. If this tool is being used to record discussions make clear to everyone present that the event is being tape recorded.
Precautions in using the tool
Tape recordings may be new to communities. It is important to ensure that the purpose of the recording is clear and people know they are being recorded.
Tool 23: Community directed videos
Community directed videos
Tool description
Community Directed Videos (this includes film) involve the community in all aspects of production, deciding what "story" will be told, choosing the images and ensuring that the video produced truly represents them. With the help of the equipment and a facilitator, a video (or series of videos or films) can be produced for a specific purpose (evaluation, extension, information gathering problem analysis). The video/film can be used within the community, and can also be distributed to others.
Purpose of the tool
o Empowers local people
o Analyzes, monitors, and evaluates a specific situation or sets of activities
o Documents/records other information gathering tools such as Popular Theatre, Puppet Theatre, and open-ended Stories.
o Relays community concerns to national governments, donors, and other interested Parties
Major benefits
Unlike drawings, slides or photographs, video integrates movement and sound and can therefore be more effectively interpreted.
Community Directed Videos are conducted in the community and this allows insiders to communicate their opinions without being intimidated by unfamiliar surroundings.
As well as inspiring self-confidence in the community, videos are a way of helping outsiders understand the insiders perspective. They can also inspire information sharing between communities; and provide evaluation information to donor agencies and decision makers.
Community Directed Videos can gather information on things difficult to understand, such as group dynamics. They can be viewed frequently for analysis.
Video can perform many functions. Group meetings, insider and outsider interactions and other community dynamics can be taped and analyzed. Activities such as planting, nursery construction and distribution can be observed and reviewed frequently to gain insight into various aspects of human interaction.
Because it is visual and oral rather than written, it has many advantages for non-literate or semi-literate populations.
Presentation of results (Popular Theatre, Stories, Puppet Theatre) of Participatory Assessment, Baselines, and Evaluation can be videoed for wider distribution.
Using the tool
1. If the video is being used to communicate with others, insiders and outsiders work together to clearly determine what information they need to convey, to whom they need to convey it, and how they want it conveyed. It is important the community have a clear sense of the message they want to convey before choosing video. Video is a form of communication that should only be used if it is the best, most effective way to communicate.
2. If the video is being used to help with analysis, it is important that the person directing the camera know what is being analyzed.
3. Before choosing this tool it is necessary to have available:
Video equipment
There are many different video formats. Some of them are more "user friendly" and therefore more accessible to people with little technical knowledge. When considering equipment, the following should be taken into account:
o get the best technical advice available,
o use the format most commonly used in the region,
o make sure the system is compatible with available viewing equipment,
o the quality required (professional equipment is more difficult to use, but has better quality than consumer video which is easy to use)
o if the community will be involved in editing, consider how difficult it will be to operate and have access to the equipment.
Video training
The facilitator must be well versed in participatory methods and two way communication techniques. There needs to be a free flow of ideas between the community and the camera.
Video cost
The costs can be relatively high, but sometimes they are not excessive when the potential benefits are considered. The main cost will be the video facilitators. Many come with their own equipment. Establish what level of quality is needed to help determine costs.
4. Establish how, when and where the final product will be viewed.
5. Determine a plan and a time frame for the different production phases. This will depend on the extent to which the community is involved in the various stages: planning, message design, video taping or filming, pre-edit viewing, editing, post edit viewing, presentation, distribution to outside groups. Remember that the more the community is involved (and hence the more participatory), the more time will have to be allowed for community discussion and input into decision- making. The extent of participation should be carefully considered when planning and scheduling time and expense.
6. Plan appropriate equipment carefully. Special provisions should be made for the care of tapes, especially under conditions of extreme dust, dampness, heat and/or cold.
Ensure that the participants have the time to produce the desired end product.
Precautions in using the tool
Production may take more time than anticipated, and facilitators may be tempted to do most of the work, reducing the participatory benefits.
It can be difficult for large audiences to view videos.
Source
Byron, N. (1988) Learning from Farmers About Their Trees (Draft). FAO, Community Forestry Unit, Forestry Department, Rome, Italy.
Bhasin, K. (1976) Participatory Training for Development. Report of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign, Action for Development. Regional Change Agents Programme. FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, (RAPA) Bangkok, Thailand.
Bhasin, K. (1979) Breaking Barriers: A South Asian Experience of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign, Action for Developement. FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, (RAPA) Bangkok, Thailand. (March-May, 1978).
Chambers, R. (1983) Rural Development: Putting the Last First. Longman, London, England.
Chambers, R. (1986) Shortcut Methods in Social Information Gathering for Rural Development Projects. In Rapid Rural Appraisal. Khon Kaen University, Bangkok, Thailand.
Davis-Case, DJ. (1987) Factors to Consider When Deciding on Appropriate Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation Tools. Presentation at AFMEMP Regional Workshop, ILCS, Kimusu, Kenya (May).
Falconer, J. (1987) Forestry Extension: A Review of the Key Issues. Overseas Development Institute. Social Forestry Network Paper 4E (June).
FAO. (1986) Report on the Use of Theatre, Puppets, Mime, Story-telling as a Forestry Extension Tool. Field Document No. 20. Government of the Republic of Sudan (GCP/033/SUD/NET) to FAO, Rome, Italy.
FAO. (1987) Permanent Self-Evaluation: The Latin American Experience. In Ossandon, CJ. Ideas in Action FFHC/AFD. Vol 165:1987/3. FAO, Rome, Italy.
Feuerstein, M. (1986) Partners in Evaluation: Evaluating Development and Community Programmes with Participants. Teaching Aids at Low Cost, St. Albans, UK.
French, D. (1984) Monitoring Across the Grain. In Monitoring and Evaluation of Participatory Forestry Projects. FAO Forestry Paper No. 60. FAO, Rome, Italy.
Friere, P. (1973) Research Methods. In Studies in Adult Education. Institute of Adult Education, University of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Gianotten, V. (1986) Methodological Notes for Evaluation: Experiences and Results. Freedom From Hunger Campaign/Action for Development, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Hoskins, M. (1982) Social Forestry in West Africa: Myths and Realities. Paper presented at American Association for the Advancement of Science, Washington, D.C.
Hoskins, M. (1986) Participatory Action Research Information Gathering Methods (draft). The East-West Centre, Hawaii, USA.
ILEIA. (1988) Participatory Technology Development in Sustainable Agriculture. Proceedings of the Information Centre for Low External Inputs and Sustainable Agriculture Leusden, Holland (April).
Morse, R.; Tingsabadh, C.; Vidyarthi, V. (1984) People's Institutions for Forest and Fuelwood Evaluations in India and Thailand, East-West Centre, Resource Systems Institute, Hawaii, USA.
Oakley, P.; Marsden, D. (1984) Approaches to Participation in Rural Development. International Labour Organization, Geneva, Switzerland (91 pp.).
Oakley, P. (1988) Participation in Evaluation. In Community Development Journal, 23(1):1-58, Special Issue.
Pietro, D.S. (Ed.) (1983) Evaluation Sourcebook for Private and Voluntary Organizations. American Council for Voluntary Agencies for Foreign Service, New York, USA.
Rahman, A. (1984) Grassroots Participation and Self-Reliance. Oxford & IBH Press, New Delhi, India.
Rocheleau, D. (1988) Landscape and Place in Agroforestry Planning and Evaluation: Using Maps, Pictures, Memories and Projections. Presentation at AFMEMP Regional Workshop, Kimusu, Kenya (May).
Rugh, J. (1985) Self Evaluation: Ideas for Participatory Evaluation of Rural Development Community Projects. World Neighbours, Oklahoma City, USA.
Sandford, D. (1989) A Note on the Use of Aerial Photography for Land Use Planning in a Settlement Site in Ethiopia In Rapid Rural Appraisal Notes, No. 6. The International Institute for Environment and Development, London, England (June).
Speich, A. (1988) Pakistan Social Forestry: A Socio-Ecological Contribution to the Pakistan-German Integrated Rural Development Programme (IRDP), Mardan District. Consultants Report. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland.
Steele, S. (1981) Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches in Programme Evaluation, DRAFT. North Carolina State University, USA (July).
Stephens, A. (1988) Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation: Handbook for Field Workers. FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, (RAPA), Bangkok, Thailand.
Tilakaratna, S. (1988) The Animator in Participatory Rural Development Concepts and Practice), DRAFT. Rural Employment Policies Branch, International Labour Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
Uphoff, N. (1987) Participatory Evaluation of Participatory Development A Scheme for Measuring and Monitoring Local Capacity Being Introduced in Sri Lanka. Paper prepared for PPP workshop (Ghana) on Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation. FAO, Rome, Italy.
Weber, F. (1988) Notes on Survival. Presentation the AFMEMP Regional Workshop, Kimusu, Kenya (May).
Windey, M.A. (1974) Do Villages Have a Future? Village Reconstruction Organization (Pamphlet), Hyderabad, India.
Other Community Forestry Publications
Community Forestry Notes
1. Household food security and forestry: an analysis of socio-economic
2. Participatory assessment, monitoring and evaluation in community forestry
3. Rapid appraisal
4. Herders' decision-making in natural resources management in arid and semi-arid: Africa.
5. Rapid appraisal of tree and land tenure
6. The major significance of "minor" forest products : the local use and value of forest in the West African humid forest zone
Community Forestry Field Manuals
1. Guidelines for Planning Monitoring and Evaluating Cookstove Programmes
Community Forestry Case Studies
1. Case studies of farm forestry and wasteland development in Gujarat, India
2. Forestland for the people : a village forest project in northeast Thailand
3. Peasant participation and community reforestation : four communities in the Department of Cuzco Peru
Charcoal in northeast Thailand : Rapid rural appraisal of a wood-based small scale entreprise
Community forestry : Lessons from case studies in Asia and the Pacific region
