<title>Livestock & the environment: Finding a balance</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgments
This study has benefited from a large number of background documents prepared by several scientific institutes and not-affiliated individuals. Contributors to these background reports include Drs. D. Barton, M.A. Conroy, R. Crawshaw, All. Frost, M. Gill, C.R.C. Hendy, U. Kleih, C. O'Reilly, M. Phillips, L. Reynolds, D. Thomas, and R.T. Wilson, of the Natural Resources Institute of the UK; Drs. V. Bruzon, M. Carrière, P. D'Aquino, P. Lhoste, A. Le Masson, J.M. Pierre, and B. Toutain of CIRAD-EMVT of France; Drs. J.F.F.P. Bos, P.J. Brandjes, J. De Wit, L.W. Hulshoff Pol, J.C.M. Jansen, A.J. Nell, H.G. van der Meer, H. Van Keulen, L.A.H.M. Verheijen, P.T. Westra and D. Wiersema of the International Agricultural Center of the Netherlands; Dr. M. Gibbs of the ICF Incorporated of the United States; Drs. R. Conner, W. Hamilton, D. Sheehy, J. Simpson, and J. Stuth of the Grazingland Management Systems Inc. of the United States; Drs. S. Bauer, J.-P. Abresch, A. Schmidt, J. Steinbach,
and C. Willeke-Wetstein, of the University of Giessen, Germany; Carlos Sere; and E.P. Cunningham.
This report has been prepared by a Coordinating Group of the Steering Committee for this Study composed of Cees de Haan (Chair of the Steering Committee, World Bank), Henning Steinfeld (Implementing Agency for the Study, FAO) and Harvey Blackburn (USAID).
Background material was prepared by Clare Narrod (World Bank) and Takuo Sukigara (FAO) and editorial work was undertaken by Christine Ellefson-Tavella (FAO).
Detailed reviews were carried out by a specialized peer review group with Mike Young (CSIRO), C. Ford Runge (University of Minnesota) and Peter Oram (IFPRI, Washington D.C.), in a workshop held as an associated event of the 4th Annual World Bank Conference on Environmentally Sustainable Development in Washington D.C. on September 27 and 28, 1996. The Study was guided by the Steering Committee composed of the representatives of the sponsoring agencies, which, in addition to the Coordinating Group, included Flemming Winther Olsen (Denmark), Michael Dale and Amos Tincani (EU), Christophe Crépin and Laurent Bonneau (France), Hermann Grell and Annette von Lossau (GTZ, Germany), Henri Jorritsma (Netherlands), Guy Freeland (ODA, United Kingdom) Joyce Turk (USAID, USA), Mark Orlic (USEPA, USA) and Ahmed Sidahmed (IFAD).
However, the analysis and conclusions are those of the main authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the reviewers, the donors and the collaborating institutes.
Cover photograph by J. Van Acker, WFP from an Egyptian tomb painting.
All pictures supplied by FAO with the exception of the photographs which appear on pages 9, 41 and 49 which were taken by Michael Pickstock/WRENmedia.
Designed and produced by WRENmedia, Fressingfield, Eye, Suffolk, IP21 5SA, United Kingdom.
<section>2</section>
Preface: Livestock & the environment: Finding a balance
THIS REPORT is intended to contribute to solving one of today's most crucial agricultural dilemmas: how to find a balance between a fast growing global demand for food and the need to sustain the natural resource base of land, water, air and biological diversity. It is a direct response to the concern for food security, as expressed at the World Food Summit, and to the concern expressed for the environment through several international conventions, such as the International Convention on Biological Diversity, the Montreal Protocol on the emission of greenhouse gases and the Convention to Combat Desertification. It is also cast in the light of changes in the global trade environment, following the Uruguay Round Agreement, which may bring about significant changes in the patterns of trade in livestock and livestock products.
Fully aware of these concerns, a group of multi-lateral and bilateral donors and other organizations undertook to identify ways to help the livestock sector to satisfy future demands while at the same time preserving the natural resource base. These are the Commission of the European Union, DANIDA of Denmark, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Ministère de la Cooperation of France, BMZ through GTZ in Germany, the Directorate General of International Cooperation of the Netherlands, the Overseas Development Administration of the United Kingdom, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Agency for International Development of the United States, and the World Bank.
Focussing on livestock production and processing, which often have been associated with negative environmental effects, this report identifies how to alleviate the negative and enhance the positive impact of livestock on the environment and thereby contribute to the sustainable use of the natural resource base. This main report is directed at a technical audience in the domains of agricultural development, livestock production and the environment. In parallel, a shorter version will be published directed mainly at policy makers.
We sincerely hope that this document will contribute to finding practical solutions to these important global issues.
Abdoulaye Sawadogo
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR GENERAL
Agriculture Department
Food and Agriculture Organization
John Lewis
DIRECTOR
Office of Agriculture and Food Security
United States Agency for International Development
Alexander McCalla
DIRECTOR
Agriculture and Natural Resources Department
World Bank
<section>3</section>
Introduction
A changing world
The role of livestock in this changing world
The implications for global natural resources
A changing world
A changing world
ONE OF THE great challenges facing the world over the next decades is to preserve its natural resources while at the same time producing sufficient food to satisfy the demands of a growing human population. World population is expected to grow from 5.5 billion now to about 8 billion in the year 2020. Incomes also continue to grow, especially in the developing world and future projections estimate an annual per capita income growth ranging from about 3 percent in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America to about 6 percent in Asia. Furthermore, there is a strong population move from the rural to the urban areas, again primarily in the developing world. By the year 2000, approximately 44 percent of the world's population is expected to reside in urban areas, up from 30 percent in 1980 (IFPRI, 1995). These trends will have immense consequences on the volume and composition of global food demand, especially in the developing world. Specialists of the International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI) estimate that the current demand of 1.7 billion tons of cereals and 206 million tons of meat, may rise by the year 2020 to 2.5 to 2.8 billion tons of cereals and at least 275 to 310 million tons of meat.
At the same time, alarming symptoms of deterioration of the resource base are being observed world-wide:
o Land degradation. Although there is substantial discussion on the extent of the problem, between 700 million (Oldeman et al., 1991) and three billion hectares of land (Dregne et al., 1991) are reported degraded because of human activities.
o Water scarcity and pollution. Twenty-two countries suffer severe water scarcity (less than 1000 cubic metres per capita per year) and a further eighteen countries have dangerously low levels (less than 2000 cubic metres per capita per year) (World Bank, 1992). In addition, much of the global fresh water supply is unsafe because of pathogens and industrial pollutants.
o Global warming. Global temperatures have risen by 0.3 °C to 0.6°C over the last century, together with a 26 percent increase in carbon dioxide and 115 percent rise in methane levels of the atmosphere (World Bank, 1992). A further increase of the global temperature by 1.8°C is foreseen over the next 35 years (International Panel on Climate Change, 1990).
o Diminishing biodiversity. About 160 bird and 100 mammalian species are known to have become extinct over the last three centuries and the rate of extinction is increasing (World Bank, 1992). The rate of losses in other animal and plant species may be higher. McNeely et al., (1990) estimates that more than 3,000 plant species and more than 500 animal species are in immediate danger of extinction.
The role of livestock in this changing world
The way livestock are kept and milk and meat is produced will be a key factor in the future health of the planet. Animal agriculture is one of the most important components of global agriculture and livestock is one of the main users of the natural resource base:
o livestock use 3.4 billion hectares of grazing land (Sere and Steinfeld, 1996) and the production from about one-quarter of the world's croplands. In total, livestock make use of more than two-thirds of the world's surface under agriculture, and one-third of the total global land area;
o livestock raising is the sole source of livelihood for at least 20 million pastoral families, and an important, often the main, source of income for at least 200 million smallholder farmer families in Asia, Africa and Latin America;
o livestock provide the power to cultivate at least 320 million hectares of land (FAO, 1994), or one-quarter of the total global cropped area. This would otherwise would have to be cultivated by hand tools resulting in harsh drudgery, especially for women, or by tractor power with an inevitable drain on foreign exchange;
o livestock provide the plant nutrients for large areas of cropland. For example, estimates carried out under this study (Jensen and de Wit, 1996) showed that, for the tropical irrigated areas, manure provides nutrients of an estimated value of US$ 800 million per year;
o finally, livestock are an important asset for investment and insurance for hundreds of millions of rural poor, in situations where banks are often too remote and the banking systems too unreliable for safeguarding any savings a smallholder might accumulate.
Table 1.1: Regional consumption levels of meat and milk (kg capita/year, 1990).
Source: FAO, 1995.
Table 1.2: Regional growth estimates (5) of demand for meat & cereals over the period 1990-2020.
Region
Meat
Cereal
World
Developed
Developing
Sub-Saharan
Latin America
West Asia & North Africa
Rest of Asia
Source: IFPRI, 1995.
The importance of livestock production can be expected to increase over the next decades. While, in the industrial world, demand for meat and milk will probably plateau, or even decline, in the developing world, income growth and urbanization will fuel a strong increase in demand. Current levels of meat and milk consumption in the developing world are only about one-fifth of those in the industrial world (Table 1.1). The surge in demand from present levels of 206 million tons to 275-310 million tons or more per year by 2020, will be especially strong in Asia and Africa where the demand for meat is expected to triple (Table 1.2).
The implications for global natural resources
The challenge will be to satisfy this substantial rise in demand for livestock products at a technological level which the natural resource base can sustain. The pressure will be heavy. Agriculture, including livestock production, already contributes, to a greater or lesser extent, to the degradation and erosion of these resources. Livestock production may specifically contribute to land degradation, the decline and pollution of water resources, the emission of greenhouse gases and the erosion of biodiversity. However, as this paper demonstrates, the negative role attributed to livestock is frequently a result of other pressures and distorted policies. These pressures and distortions should be addressed.
With good management, livestock production can also make a positive contribution to the natural resource base by enhancing soil quality, increasing plant and animal biodiversity and substituting for scarce, nonrenewable resources such as fossil fuels. Wherever possible these win-win (economically and environmentally attractive) scenarios should be promoted, and policies and technologies which do so should be identified. However, as the expected increase in demand referred to above is to be met, it is likely that negative effects of livestock production will continue to emerge. The challenge is thus to identify policies and technologies which mitigate any negative environmental impact but which, at the same time, satisfy the considerable demand for livestock products.
This document takes up the challenge. To maintain a strong focus, it will deal only with some of the socio-ethical issues related to production and livestock products as they affect the natural resource base (Box 1.1).
The document will first provide the analytical framework for this study, by briefly presenting a classification of the main production systems as the key building blocks for understanding livestock-environment interactions. The different potential growth patterns of these production systems will then be analyzed and their environmental impact summarized. Subsequently the organizing principles for the analysis will be described. The major part of this document will consist of an assessment of the main environmental challenges presented by each production system and by those factors which cut across production systems, such as the cultivation of livestock feeds, domestic animal resources, greenhouse gas emissions, and processing waste. Finally, the main conclusions will be presented, and major constraints to their application ("the policy void") described.
Box 1.1 Document framework.
THIS DOCUMENT focuses on livestock-environment interactions. In doing so, it deliberately omits a number of issues related to the subject from the discussion:
o Concern for animal welfare. Often strongly reflected in a parallel concern for the natural resource base, this issue involves, however, a completely different set of standards and mitigating measures and is therefore outside the scope of this paper.
o Indigenous knowledge. This is often regarded as an environmental resource. In this study, although it is used extensively in the search for more sustainable systems, especially in the marginal areas, it is not reviewed as an environmental resource in its own right. This is because the institutional and policy framework to preserve such knowledge was considered outside the scope of this paper.
o Consumption levels of animal products. For the majority of the global population, particularly in the developing countries, animal products are, and will remain, desired foods because of their taste and nutritional value. Respecting this, and the developing needs of the majority of countries, this study does not adopt an ego-centric approach but takes an anthropocentric approach to development and to the use and preservation of the environment. For the industrialized world, where consumption of meat and other livestock products causes medical problems such as cardiovascular diseases and high blood pressure, attention is given to education to reduce consumption as one option of mitigating the negative aspects of livestock production.
The implications for global natural resources
<section>4</section>
Chapter 1: The framework
Livestock production systems and the main environmental challenges
The changing importance of different production systems
The conceptual models: Driving force state-response and induced innovation frameworks
Cows
LIVESTOCK RAISING is carried out in many forms, usually referred to as production systems or agro-ecosystems. Production systems evolve as a result of agro-ecological potential, the relative availability of land, labour and capital and the demand for livestock products. Many production systems are currently at a sustainable equilibrium, with livestock being produced in harmony with nature and in environmentally sound systems. However, over the last decades, several production systems have lost this equilibrium because of the pressure caused by growing human populations and increased demand for animal products. This chapter first provides an overview of the main production systems, the relative changes in the importance of these production systems and how these changes will affect the resource base in the future. It then presents the framework used to understand the nature and causes of livestock-natural resource interactions, and the policy changes and technology innovations
which can be used to influence these interactions.
Livestock production systems and the main environmental challenges
Based on the degree of integration with crops and its relation to land, the world's livestock sector has been classified in this study into three broad livestock production systems (Sere and Steinfeld, 1996), i.e. grazing, mixed farming and industrial systems. For land-based production forms, i.e. grazing and mixed farming systems, a sub-division is then required to allow for differences caused by agro-ecological conditions and the ways in which livestock affect the natural resource base. The broad categories are:
Grazing systems. These are systems based almost exclusively on livestock production, with little or no integration with crops. They are mainly based on native grassland. In terms of total production, grazing systems are of lesser importance because they supply only 9 percent of global meat production. Of this, three-quarters comes from Central and South America and of the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Livestock interact in these systems with land, water and plant and animal biodiversity, especially wildlife. Agro-ecological conditions strongly define the nature and scope of livestock-environment interactions in grazing systems. The study therefore distinguishes between arid, semiarid and sub humid, humid and temperate grazing systems. In principle, grazing systems are closed systems, where the waste product (manure) is used within the system and does not present a burden on the environment. Resource degradation, especially of land and
biodiversity, is now developing in many of the world's grazing areas. For the most part this is occurring where, as a result of external pressures, traditionally well-managed common lands are becoming open access areas. In such open access situations, the interests of individual users conflict with those of the community, causing what economists call "market failures". In these "free for all" situations, degradation is most severe. On the other hand, the grazing systems also offer potential for biodiversity enhancement. Identifying institutions and incentives to correct the market failures and enhance the livestock-environment synergies is thus one of the biggest challenges in this system.
Mixed farming systems. In mixed farming systems, crops and livestock production are integrated on the same farm. Globally, mixed farming systems produce the largest share of total meat (54 percent), and milk (90 percent). Regionally, the mixed farming systems of the OECD countries and Asia provide by far the largest share of these products, but also in sub-Saharan Africa, West Asia and North Africa (WANA) and Central and South America, mixed farming is the main system for smallholder farmers. Resource use in mixed farming is often highly self-reliant as nutrients and energy flow from crops to livestock and back. By definition, such a closed system offers positive incentives to compensate for environmental effects ("internalize the environmental costs"), making them less damaging or more beneficial to natural resource base. Because of the completely different approaches needed to address the environmental effects of mixed farming, this study distinguishes between mixed
farming in the developing and in the industrial world. The main challenge is to identify those policies and technologies which allow these systems to grow while sustaining their environmental equilibrium.
Industrial systems. These systems cover industrial types of production and small-scale urban or pert-urban production in developing countries. Both monogastric (pig and poultry) and ruminant production systems exist. They provide 37 percent of the total global meat production. These systems are open both in physical and economic terms. They depend on outside supplies of feed, energy and other inputs. These systems are strongly market driven, making them less resilient to market upheavals than other systems. Because of their many interfaces with the outside world, these systems, if not properly controlled, offer many opportunities to neglect ("externalize") their environmental costs. The challenge is to identify the regulations and incentives which force the polluter to internalize the environmental costs, at a minimum cost to the consumer.
Global overlays. In addition to the site-specific and production system related impacts of livestock, such as land degradation in the arid zones, deforestation in the humid zones or livestock-wildlife interactions in the savannas, there are a number of effects which transcend the specificity of production systems. These are the global overlays, which include the environmental aspects of feed production, the emission of greenhouse gases, the erosion of wild and domestic genetic resources, and the management of waste. As in the industrial system, some of these impacts (for example, processing waste) can be traced to one polluter (called "point source pollution"), and can therefore be controlled with appropriate regulation at the source. The other impacts cannot easily be traced to one polluter ("non-source pollution"), and the challenge is then to find the incentives to encourage all producers to reduce these emissions.
The changing importance of different production systems
The rapid increase in demand for meat and milk over the next decades is likely to cause a dramatic shift in the relative importance of the main production systems in their contribution to global meat and milk supply:
o The growth potential for extensive grazing and roughage production is limited. In response to increased population pressure, good pasture land is being converted into cropland, leaving increasingly poorer land for grazing and mixed farming. Industrial production from pigs, poultry and beef is therefore likely to increase relative to production from grazing and mixed farming systems. Past trends and future projections (Table 1.3) clearly point in that direction. One relatively unknown factor in this discussion is the effect of global trade reform combined with a strongly growing demand for feed grains. The first projections of the effect of trade reforms (Alexandratos, 1995) show that cereal prices will increase more than milk and meat prices. This, combined with the increased demand for feed grains, will certainly lead to higher feed prices. Although this would seem to favour grass-based production, the limited growth potential of grazing and mixed farming systems,
combined with significant potential for improvements in feed conversion efficiency, will probably result in continued strong growth of the industrial system;
o Pork and broiler (poultry) meat production will increase, relative to beef production (Table 1.3). This is a direct result of the better feed efficiency of pigs and poultry;
o Livestock production is therefore likely to become more crop-based. Furthermore, as it is generally less expensive to transport and store grain than the corresponding amount of meat, intensive livestock production will move nearer to urban centres;
o Growth will be mainly in Asia and Africa (Table 1.2). In Asia growth will be very fast as meat demand almost triples till the year 2020;
o For various reasons, including higher energy prices and less stringent pollution controls, livestock production in the industrial world is likely to move to warmer areas. For example, over the last decade, pig and poultry production has grown faster in Mediterranean countries than in northern Europe, and in the southern rather than the northern United States of America;
o In the developing world, aided by the recent availability of better disease control technologies, there has been a strong shift in production from the arid zones and the highlands to the more humid zones. For example, over the last two decades, millions of cattle were moved into the more humid savannas in Africa, Latin America and India.
Table 1.3: Past and expected growth of different types of meat.
Product
World Annual Growth Rate (%) over 1983-1993
Developing World Total Growth (%) over 1990-2020
Developed World Total Growth (%) over 1990-2020
Beef
Pork
Poultry meat
Source: Sere and Steinfeld, 1996 and IFPRI, 1995
These changes will have a major effect on the nature and degree of the livestock-environment interactions. Implications are:
o a shift from relatively closed systems, in which its waste products are being used within the system, to a more open system in which its waste products are not returned; and
o a move from systems with good opportunities for synergies and win-win situations, such as the conservation and use of indigenous livestock breeds, nutrient recycling and livestock-wild life integration, to systems where the opportunities for such win-win situations are much more limited.
The conceptual models: Driving force state-response and induced innovation frameworks
Driving forces
State
Societal response: Technology and policy options
Induced innovation
Two interlinked frameworks are used as the central organizing concepts for this study. The Driving Force-State-Response (DSR) framework is based on the environmental impact assessment model developed by the OECD (1996). This model consists of three major components which are described below: Driving forces, state and societal response, as detailed below and in Annex 2.
The Induced Innovation model holds that, over time, technological innovations and institutional changes are guided so as to make the most of abundant resources and economize on scarce resources. The model is a logical sequence to DSR, as the societal response (through policy changes) changes the relative abundance of the resources. For example, the introduction of a grazing fee in communally-owned rangelands, will increase the price of land and feed, and will therefore lead to more efficient feed use (earlier off-take, greater use of byproducts). More examples will be given in the following chapters.
Driving forces
Driving forces cause changes to the natural resource base (OECD, 1996). In the case of livestock production, this can be a direct (or on-site) force such as increasing the number of grazing animals which may lead to trampling, depletion and pollution of water, the emission of greenhouse gases, and the loss of plant and animal genetic resources. Livestock production can also have an indirect (or off-site) force such as the expansion and intensification of cropland to satisfy the increasing demand for feed concentrates and this, in turn, may lead to erosion and pollution. A beneficial force may be the use of organic manure for fertilizer, or the use of livestock for traction, thereby reducing consumption of nonrenewable resources.
While it is important to measure the impact of these forces, it is even more important to understand the underlying causes or the 'driving forces' themselves. Some of the causes are fundamental and inherent in the structure of a society, and go beyond the traditional domain of livestock policy (Young, 1996). Demographic pressure and food consumption habits clearly fall into this category. Other forces are more directly related to livestock production and are easier to change. Incentive policies for inputs used in livestock production (feed, water, energy), pricing of meat and milk and infrastructure development for livestock, fall into this category. They are called amendable forces. For example, infrastructure investments, credit and land tenure policies are important forces causing livestock pressure on tropical forests, and the differential tariffs for cassava in the European Union (KU) are significantly contributing to nutrient loading of soil and water in the
Netherlands and northern Germany through increased intensive pig production. An analysis of the underlying pressures is thus of critical importance in understanding changes in the natural resource base.
State
The state of the natural resource base refers to the changes in environmental conditions that may arise from various driving forces. It is, in essence, an inventory of the existing condition of land, water, air and biodiversity. Pressures described in the previous section affect the state. The substantial void in objective and precise assessments of the current state of the resource ecosystem in which it is set. It is essential that, as the livestock sector grows and develops, adequate base, as affected by livestock use, is one of the main reasons for the conjecture which surrounds the livestock-environment debate. This lack of accurate data has contributed to some costly investment blunders in international development aid. For example, the overestimation of the degree of land degradation in the arid areas, has led to excessive investments in "desertification control", at the expense of the much more serious, but under-estimated, land degradation in semi-arid and sub-humid
areas.
Box 1.2 Impact assessment.
Much of the controversy about the impact of livestock on the environment is due to a lack of quantitative information to describe not only the livestock production system but also the ecosystem in which it is set. It is essential that, as the livestock sector grows and develops, adequate measurements are taken over time. Environmental impact assessments for livestock development can show if livestock are improving or degrading the environment. In this respect impact assessment should provide users not only with a picture of the current status but also a mechanism to project future trends. The economic cost of impact assessments are of concern to some decision makers. Although start-up costs may be high these costs reduce over time and costs will continue to decrease as more governments and research organizations develop and use impact assessment. Furthermore, as global databases are built, allowing a number of users to share data, the costs will reduce even further.
Selection of environmental impact indicators is an important and evolving process. It is essential that indicators have a certain universality in meaning and application. Furthermore, they must have the ability to be extrapolated directly or indirectly to larger geographic areas, rather than be specific to the site of data collection. Because indicator selection is an evolving process it will be some time before the most useful parameters are identified. In Annex 3 various indicators which can be used to measure the interaction between livestock and the environment are presented. At present they should be considered as a starting place from which a robust set of indicators can eventually be developed.
The aggregate environmental pressure of industrial production systems is probably over estimated in the public perception, especially if some of the positive indirect impacts (for example, reducing pressure on more fragile environments) are taken into account. However, the public perception of the excessive environmental pressure exerted by the industrial system has made this system the "scapegoat" of many environmentalists and has directed investment away from this system. Some of the issues related to the environmental assessment of livestock production systems are presented in Box 1.2 and Annex 3, while more detailed information is provided in Bauer et al., (1995).
Societal response: Technology and policy options
Response refers to the reaction to actual and perceived changes in the environment. This can be through changes in farmer behaviour, i.e., through changes in input use and farm management practices and changes in food consumption patterns by consumers (OECD, 1996). Above all, these changes can be brought about through government action with the following instruments (Young, 1996):
o Education and motivation are essential to any environmental package. They are most appropriate for mobilizing public opinion and bringing about pressure on degraders. For example, pressure for change is more likely to be applied if public opinion is informed of the health problems associated with the increased nitrate levels which result from excessive manure production;
o Financial policies are more effective when costs external to the production system have to be reduced. They include the appropriate pricing of inputs. For example, if subsidies on inorganic fertilizers are too generous, there is a risk of excessive nutrient loading while, at the same time, available organic manure may be wasted. They cover also environmental levies, which are charged to pay for services to prevent or control environmental pollution, for example, of water sources by slaughterhouses;
o Policies relating to property will provide resource users with a tangible interest in the future consequences (including environmental) of their actions. The current strategy to strengthen traditional users' rights of commonly owned rangeland, to improve the ecological sustainability of the pastoral system is an example;
o Zoning is one of the most commonly used tools for alleviating potentially adverse siting of production and processing. It can also be an effective means of limiting livestock densities; and
o Regulations normally establishing maximum emission standards of pollutants (nitrate, ammonia, organic material) are very effective when dealing with strong institutions and clearly identifiable polluters.
Throughout the document, these policy instruments will be demonstrated within particular production systems, following one of the central themes of this study, i.e. correcting the underlying causes is more effective than addressing the symptoms.
Induced innovation
Changes in policies and regulations lead to changes in prices which consequently promote certain technological interventions. Resource constraints and income levels then largely determine the scale and flexibility of these interventions. This leads to the second conceptual framework, the "induced innovation" framework of Hayami and Ruttan (1985). This model explains the evolution of production technologies in response to resource endowment and institutional factors. Runge (1987) added non-market forces such as environmental impacts and regulatory responses to these factors.
Technological options and institutional factors normally change with resource availability, income levels and regulations. The shift in production technology is being driven in part by institutional factors, specifically by responses to regulatory and financial instruments. For example, if feed, such as cassava chips, becomes less expensive because of special import arrangements, greater "feed intensity" will be favoured. On the other hand, if water becomes more expensive as environmental concerns result in a higher implicit price for water (through regulations on manure disposal), technologies that save water will be favoured. Thus outside forces will determine what is possible.
Where feed is scarce, water is under-priced and/or relatively abundant, and land is unregulated (as might be the case in developing countries), different opportunities exist for producers. Thus, in low income countries, the technology of production is largely determined by available natural resources. In higher income settings, an additional set of possibilities and constraints is introduced due to the existence of subsidies (e.g. on feed) and environmental regulation (e.g. restriction on water and land use).
Induced innovation
<section>5</section>
Chapter 2: Livestock grazing systems & the environment
Environmental challenges
Grazing systems of the arid areas
Grazing systems in the semi-arid and sub-humid tropics
Grazing systems and tropical rainforests
Grazing systems in temperate zones
Conclusion
Livestock grazing systems & the environment
ABOUT 60 PERCENT of the world's pasture land (about 2.2 million km^2), just less than half the world's usable surface is covered by grazing systems. Distributed between arid, semi arid and sub humid, humid, temperate and tropical highlands zones, this supports about 360 million cattle (half of which are in the humid savannas), and over 600 million sheep and goats, mostly in the arid rangelands. The distribution of livestock over the different ecological zones is provided in Annex Table 2.
Grazing systems supply about 9 percent of the world's production of beef and about 30 percent of the world's production of sheep and goat meat. For an estimated 100 million people in arid areas, and probably a similar number in other zones, grazing livestock is the only possible source of livelihood.
Environmental challenges
Grazing can be visualized as beautiful cows in lush pastures in north-western Europe or New Zealand-livestock in harmony with nature. Indeed, livestock can improve soil and vegetation cover and plant and animal biodiversity, as described in this chapter's case studies of widely different conditions in Kenya, the western United States and Guinea. By removing biomass, which otherwise might provide the fuel for bush fires, by controlling shrub growth and by dispersing seeds through their hoofs and manure, grazing animals can improve plant species composition. In addition, trampling can stimulate grass tillering, improve seed germination and break-up hard soil crusts.
However, many people associate grazing animals with overgrazing, soil degradation and deforestation. To them livestock keeping in arid regions of the tropics provokes images of clouds of dust, bleached cow skeletons and an advancing desert. The two most quoted sources are the Global Assessment of Soil Degradation (Oldeman et al., 1991), which estimates that 680 million hectares of rangeland have become degraded since 1945, and Dregne et al., (1991) who argue that 73 percent of the world's 4.5 billion hectares of rangeland is moderately or severely degraded. In humid areas, livestock are associated with ranch encroachment and deforestation of tropical rainforests and competition with wildlife.
Prolonged heavy grazing undoubtedly contributes to the disappearance of palatable species and the subsequent dominance by other, less palatable, herbaceous plants or bushes. Such loss of plant and, in consequence, animal biodiversity can require a long regenerative cycle (30 years in savannas, 100 years in rainforests). Excessive livestock grazing also causes soil compaction and erosion, decreased soil fertility and water infiltration, and a loss in organic matter content and water storage capacity. On the other hand, total absence of grazing also reduces biodiversity because a thick canopy of shrubs and trees develops which intercepts light and moisture and results in overprotected plant communities which are susceptible to natural disasters.
The environmental challenge is thus to identify the policies, institutions and technologies which will enhance the positive and mitigate the negative effects of grazing. Environmental challenges, issues and options differ significantly according to climate and land capabilities. Livestock-environment interactions are therefore described separately for the arid, semi-arid and sub-humid, humid rainforest, and temperate and tropical highlands grazing systems respectively. As will be seen, that differentiation is particularly important for the arid eco-systems. As aridity increases, so does variability of rainfall, to the extent that the periodicity of rain becomes the single most important factor affecting the state of the natural resource base. Classical concepts of vegetation succession and climax vegetation do not apply in such environments and new concepts are required. These are detailed below.
Grazing systems of the arid areas
State
Driving forces
Response: Technology and policy options
State
Land. Probably more than any other system, at least until recently, arid rangelands^1 have been associated with land degradation. The concept of "desertification" originated from the sight of degrading fringes of arid rangelands and advancing deserts. In addition, arid grazing systems and nomadic pastoralism have been associated with inefficient and backward production.
^1 Arid rangelands refers to land with mostly native and annual vegetation, with an average growing season of less than 75 days.
Area of Sahara desert (million km^2)
The type of variation presented in this graph highlights the difficulty in obtaining an accurate assessment of land degradation in arid areas.
Box 2.1 The resilience of the arid lands.
THE GRAPH how the Sahara expands and contracts over time (and conversely the Sahelian rangelands contract and expand) as measured infrared reflection of the vegetation. it shows the effect of the dry year of 1984 (rainfall deficit of 55%) and the recovery in 1988 (rainfall deficit of 19%)
Over the last decade these views have changed radically. First, there is now significant evidence that in the arid zones the extent of land degradation is greatly exaggerated. Part of the doom view of continuing degradation is caused by problems of definition and time frame. Definitions were based on parameters, which could not easily be measured ("diminution or destruction of biological material, which can lead to desert-like conditions" (UN 1977), or mixed process and end state ("the expression of natural, economic and social processes, which destroy the equilibrium of soil, vegetation, air and water" (FAO/UNEP, 1984)). Even more importantly, most assessments covered only a short period, and did not include the concept of reversibility, which seems critical from a development and long term sustainability perspective (Nelson, 1990). If desertification is defined as an irreversible process of land degradation, there is less "desertification" than previously claimed. Two
recent findings support this view:
o Long term monitoring of the infra-red reflection index (measuring the amount of green biomass) by NASA in West Africa (Tucker et al., 1991), clearly shows the "contracting and expanding Sahara", rather than a continuously expanding desert (see Box 2.1). More recent observations confirm this earlier finding. In effect, the northern vegetation limit of the Sahel is now approximately where it was in 1970 (Tucker, personal communication);
o An analysis, carried out under this study, shows an overall increase in productivity of Sahelian land and livestock (Box 2.2) albeit with considerable year to year variations. While this increase in productivity is undoubtedly the result of several factors, it certainly does not point to the continuing downward spiral in pasture production, and hence productivity, which has traditionally been assumed.
Series of vegetation of Mali in consecutive years at the same time each year (a)
Series of vegetation of Mali in consecutive years at the same time each year (b)
Series of vegetation of Mali in consecutive years at the same time each year (c)
Photo series of a vegetation of Mali in consecutive years at the same time each year Courtesy ILCA.
Secondly, there is convincing evidence that traditional transhumance production systems on arid rangelands are highly efficient. Studies show that production of protein per hectare of traditional nomadic pastoralists in Mali and Botswana is two- or three-fold higher (and at much lower cost in non-renewable fuel resources) than production from sedentary production systems or ranching under similar climatic conditions in Australia and the USA respectively (Breman and de Wit, 1983, de Ridder and Wagenaar, 1984). In addition, arid grazing systems are often multiple-use systems, with wildlife and other plant products being important additional products.
Productivity trends in the Sahel.
Box 2.2 Productivity trends in the Sahel.
AN ANALYSIS of livestock production in five Sahelian countries over a thirty year period, carried out as part of this study, shows a 93 percent increase in the meat produced per ha, and 47 percent increase in the meat produced per head. At the same time, there was a 22 percent increase in the animal population (from 14.5 to 17.6 million TLU^2) over the same period.
^2 Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Niger, Senegal and Sudan
This productivity increase occurs in both cattle and small ruminants. Part of the increased productivity may be the result of a progressive shift of the livestock population to the higher potential areas in more humid zones, and the increased use of crop residues. However, apart from the sharp inter-annual variation, the long term trend points to sustained productivity, and to an obviously stable resource base.
Source: Analysis carried out under this study, based on FAO production data.
The greatest degradation of land and vegetation is around settlements and water points. These areas are usually within a radius of about 1-5 km of the waterpoint and often look quite spectacular. However, assuming an average distance of 10 to 30 km between waterpoints, degraded areas would, even in the worst cases, amount to no more than 10 percent of the total area.
Biodiversity. Arid rangelands contain a broad variety of plant species for wild and domestic herbivores. For example, Le Houerou (1989) estimates that, in Africa, there are perhaps as many as 3,500 plant species upon which the continent's herbivores feed, compared with less than 150 species on which humans depend. There is no widespread risk of an immediate irreversible loss of plant biodiversity. Mixed grazing systems (cattle, small ruminants, camels and wildlife) help to maintain wide plant diversity and, because the vegetation is extremely resilient, any changes in the vegetation are likely to be the result of an unusually dry period and, therefore, temporary.
Driving forces
Underlying pressures. The way most dryland ecosystems are traditionally used explains, to a large extent, their resilience. Arid rangelands have traditionally been used under a communal property regime by nomadic producers who move their stock in search of pasture according to season. From the wet season grazing they will move their animals to higher-potential river valleys, cropland or mountain meadows (the "key resources") for the dry season. With highly variable rainfall (both in time and space), pastoral economies are typically of the "bust and boom" type: a "boom" when rainfall is plentiful and herds and flocks grow, and a "bust" when drought (or late winter storms in Central Asia) occurs and animals die. Thus, abiotic factors such as rainfall, rather than livestock density, determine long term primary production and vegetation cover (Mearns, 1996).
This continuous dis-equilibrium conserves soil and vegetation, especially annual vegetation in more arid areas, because grazing pressure has to adjust to the quantity of feed available. The theoretical bases for range management under those conditions ("opportunistic range management") have recently been well described by Behnke, Scoones and Kerven (1993) and Scoones (1994).
A substantial body of evidence from the last decade (Thomas and Middleton, 1994), shows that arid regions contain dynamic and highly resilient ecosystems, with a strong capacity to regenerate rapidly when the rains return. Similarly, traditional pastoral systems have conserved biodiversity because pastoralists have a direct interest in preserving a wide variety of plants and animals. Gathering range products, such as medicinal plants, gums and resins, is an important part of the pastoral way of life.
The fundamental driving force on natural resources is population pressure, especially that applied from outside the arid rangelands and their traditional inhabitants. While population growth of pastoral peoples has been slow (Pratt et al., in press), growth of non-pastoral groups in the arid and semi-arid regions have been among the highest in the world. This strong growth of other groups results in an increasing encroachment by arable farmers on to the pastoralists' "key resource" sites. Flood plains which have been traditionally used for wet season grazing, such as the Interior Delta of the Niger and the Senegal Valley in West Africa, and also smaller sites of high potential, are being converted into cropland. Furthermore, flexibility of animal movement is progressively hampered by increased population pressure and loss of corridors between wet and dry season grazing areas. Stock is increasingly concentrated the entire year on the same lands, breaking the ecologically
sound cycle of alternating use of wet and dry season grazing areas, leading to over-use of dry season grazing land and, inevitably, to human suffering. Such increased pressure often results in war, as shown by the recent confrontation between Senegal and Mauritania and the many armed conflicts in East Africa.
Increased population pressure also leads to greater water development and permanent human settlement in arid rangelands. Although the direct effect of waterpoints on land degradation is relatively limited, the development of water supplies for more intensive use can upset an entire eco-system. It may lead to de facto privatization of land around the water point (IFAD, 1995) and change the relationship between traditional wet and dry season grazing areas, changing traditional dry season grazing into year around grazing.
But not all forces are exogenous to the pastoral system. In the Borana region of southern Ethiopia, because of indigenous population growth, the number of milk producing cattle per head of the pastoral population is falling. In consequence, the pastoralists face increasing poverty, decreasing food energy levels and greater risk from the effects of drought (Coppock 1996). Furthermore, the larger number of people in the region means that fuelwood is being cut at an ever greater rate. The inevitable result of all these pressures is land degradation. Drought often exacerbates such situations and, indeed, the ability to recover after drought is one of the main indicators of long term environmental and social sustainability of arid grazing systems.
Policy pressures. Several human activities exacerbate the fundamental driving force of increasing population pressure. They are:
"Stabilization" of the system. Often well-intentioned policies sought and still seek to stabilize the "boom and bust" cycles which exist between man, animals and vegetation in arid rangelands. Examples of these are:
o Attempts to regulate the stocking rate. This was the main focus of many rangeland development projects in the seventies and early eighties. Development projects promoted individual ranch development, or the allocation of grazing areas to groups, under strict maximum stocking rate obligations. Such attempts failed completely because of the irrelevance of any carrying capacity estimate under variable conditions and because of the difficulty of enforcement (Box 2.3). In addition, these attempts reduced the essential mobility and flexibility of the system, and concentrated stock on limited grazing areas, which may have received little rain.
o Feed subsidies for drought relief. Under the argument that it would be necessary to protect national livestock assets, North African and Middle Eastern governments, in particular, have had a policy of subsidizing feed grains as emergency assistance in times of drought. Besides the questionable social effect (subsidized feed tends to benefit wealthier herders only) and the doubtful overall economic benefit, subsidized feed also has a harmful effect on the rangelands. The tendency is for too many animals to be retained on the rangeland, thereby preventing normal regeneration of the vegetation after drought.
Changes in access to land. Traditionally, Muslim land tenure rules favour crop farmers over pastoral herders in access to land because "laying of the hand" (e.g. evidence of use) confers exclusive ownership. This was exacerbated by nationalization of arid rangelands which was introduced by many governments in the postcolonial period in Africa and Asia (IFAD, 1995) and undermined still further the intricate fabric of customary practice. An ecologically well-balanced system of communal land use degenerated into a "free for all" open access system in much of sub-Saharan Africa and India or was replaced by individual farms, such as in Algeria, Botswana and Zimbabwe. Individual farms were too small to permit an efficient use of the erratic rainfall patterns inherent in these areas. In communal areas, the traditional collective internal discipline in the management of the resources disappeared and overgrazing and land degradation followed. Jodha (1992) demonstrated this most
convincingly in India (see Box 2.4). The same mistakes are now occurring in the Middle East and are likely in Central Asia. Under the slogan "privatization is desirable", state farms are privatized, the more productive land (and especially the key resources) falls into the hands of the most powerful individuals and sound management of the entire resource base is put in jeopardy.
Box 2.3 Experiences with stocking rate controls.
TO DEVELOP new rnanagement practices for arid rangelands, GTZ sponsored from 1981-1993 a controlled grazing experiment in Senegal, seeking to balance available pasture and stocking rates within a fixed territory in six 200 hectare plots, privatized for the purpose of the experiment. The system was monitored for 12 years for its environmental and socio-economic impact and herd performance, and results were compared with those from herds outside the scheme.
Several problems emerged. First, the constant stocking density proved to be incompatible with the wide variations in rainfall and therefore available forage. In bad years, stocking densities were too high and herds had to be moved out to survive. Available forage was insufficient in three years but under-utilized in four years out of the 12. Only in two years did stocking density actually match carrying capacity. Second, the impact on vegetation was more negative than positive, owing to under-utilization, a decline in quality of pasture, and a thinning out of drought-resistant fodder species. Third, while animal production was good in the best years, animal vulnerability increased in bad years.
Comparisons with pastoral management practices within and outside the scheme revealed the superiority of the latter. The controlled grazing experiment revealed the inherent limitations of the concept of carrying capacity in an environment not at equilibrium; the difficulties of applying a closed model of water and grazing management on a large scale; the reduction in animal mobility and flexibility which resulted; and the removal of the positive symbiotic interaction of animals and plan. communities. GTZ concluded that efforts to support pastoralists' self-reliance would have to depend much more on the creation of a favorable institutional environment, including securing pastoral land rights, and access to fall-back areas.
Source: Mearns, 1996, from; Thébaud, Grell and Miehe, 1955.
Box 2.4 Deterioration of the common property resources (CPR) in India.
IN A STUDY of 75 villages in seven rather arid states of India, Jodha (1992) found that the CPR area had declined by as much as 30 to 50 percent between the 1950s and 1982, and there had been a reduction of cattle by 20 percent in favour of small ruminants. The traditional communal management of the CPR had basically broken down:
o While in 1950 seventy villages had formal or informal rules for the management of the CPR, in 1982 only eight villages maintained those rules.
o While in 1950 fifty-five villages levied formal or informal taxes to maintain the CPR, none did so in 1982.
o While in 1950 sixty-five villages had formal or informal obligations to maintain their CPR, in 1982 there were only thirteen.
Thus traditional CPR management shifted to open access, causing a significant degradation of the CPRs as shown by the decrease, by about 75 percent, of the number of trees in the CPR, and the decline in the number of grazing days.
Source: Jodha, 1992.
Inappropriate incentives. Under a nationalistic strategy of food production self-sufficiency, many governments (especially in North Africa and West Asia), have subsidized tractors and fuel and supported high producer prices for domestic cereal production, further encouraging the encroachment of crops in the "key resource" sites of the arid zones. Many of these areas are marginal for crop cultivation and would not have been cultivated without the subsidies. However, as noted before, these key resource areas constitute the "safety net" for rangeland livestock production and are the key to environmentally sound arid land management. Cheap fuel and trucks have also led to "motorized nomadism" which has allowed the wealthier herders to move their animals rapidly to wherever pasture was available. This has also interfered with the normal regeneration process of the emerging vegetation. Finally, high meat import tariffs also contributed to over stocking.
Response: Technology and policy options
The over-riding need is to stop the building-up of further human pressure in arid zones. As discussed, arid rangelands are already efficiently used and no significant increases in productivity can be envisaged. Since populations in these areas experience a downward spiral of declining livestock/people ratios and increased vulnerability to drought, employment generation outside the dry rangelands is therefore the most critical component of developing sustainable rangeland resource use in the arid zones.
As the second priority, although still of crucial importance, external interventions in the system need to take account of the non-equilibrium status of pastoral systems in arid zones and enhance rather than restrict flexibility and mobility. This means that attempts to regulate stocking rate should be stopped. First, the carrying capacity of rangelands in these non-equilibrium environments cannot be estimated with any acceptable degree of reliability. Second, such estimates can even be dangerous, as they may lead to the wrong intervention in an attempt to control stocking rates (see Box 2.3). Third, even apart from the technical flaws in the estimation of the carrying capacity, experience has shown that it is almost always impossible to enforce stocking rates.
The third priority should be the strengthening of traditional pastoral institutions and resource management practices. "Getting the institutions right", by empowering pastoral people, is now generally considered the main challenge in pastoral and arid land development. Furthermore there has been a growing acknowledgment of the multiple uses that arid rangelands provide to a wide variety of users (IFAD, 1995, de Haan, 1996).
Specific actions to support these strategy elements are to develop effective co-management regimes, forging partnerships between the State and a wide variety of users, with the State carrying the overall responsibility for arbitrating conflicting interests at national level, and facilitating negotiation. Practical management decisions and negotiations between competing users should, however, be delegated to the local level (Mearns, 1996). The delegation of powers would aim to strengthen:
o the application of the "subsidiarity" principle (Swift, 1995), within the local administrative capability which requires devolution to local groups of those public administrative powers that undermine or duplicate traditional governance structures. The creation of pastoral associations has already been an important focus of arid land institution building, although results have been mixed (Box 2.5);
o customary resource user rights. The need for flexibility and mobility would require the boundaries to be "fuzzy" (Behnke and Kerven, 1994), although with more clearly defined territorial boundaries for the "key resources";
o conflict resolution mechanisms, with clear sets of procedural tasks for formal law, and clearer definition of when customary law takes precedence (Swift, 1995).
Box 2.5 Pastoral organizations and arid land management; lessons from the past.
THE DEVELOPMENT of grassroots, regional national herder organizations has been a major thrust of most donors in West and North Africa over the last decade. While there has been considerable progress in establishing viable organizations for the provision of services such as animal health and education, these organizations have, with some exceptions, such as the World Bank funded Middle Atlas programme in Morocco, been less successful in range management (Shanmugaratnam et al., 1992). They failed to fully facilitate the participatory process, as they were embedded in authoritarian cultures of government, project administrations and the social structure of the groups themselves (Vedeld in de Haan, 1994). Key lessons which emerge from these experiences are the need to (i) focus attention on procedural law and conflict resolution rather than on specifying rigid tenure rights (ii) assume a gradual transfer of responsibilities to pastoral groups, starting with services, and
progressively moving towards more sophisticated responsibilities, such as range management; and (iii) tailor the size of the group to the goals envisaged. Range management tasks might, for example, need a different group size than veterinary services.
The fourth priority is the identification of effective drought management policies. Irreversible land degradation in arid zones, if it occurs, originates as a result of high stocking rates during droughts. The appropriate drought strategy is to de-stock as early and rapidly as possible, rather than seeking to maintain maximum stock numbers. Policies and subsequent investments which support such rapid de-stocking are the development of savings and credit schemes, and infrastructure investments in roads, markets, slaughterhouses and cold storage (Pratt et al., in press). However, little experience has been gained of the application of these concepts in dis-equilibrium systems. The only notable exception is Australia.
Incentive policies also play an important role in arriving at sustainable rangeland use. Key elements of appropriate incentive policy would be:
o Increasing the costs of grazing in order to reduce animal pressure would promote earlier off-take. The perception of pastoral people keeping livestock for wealth and social status has been abandoned and there is now a general acceptance that pastoralists' behaviour is, as may be expected, economically rational. This economic rationale should induce herders to forsake liveweight gains of their almost mature and only slowly growing animals, and sell them earlier, because the cost of the grazing would outweigh the benefits of the final liveweight gain. But cost recovery has to be combined with a decentralized management of the proceeds by the beneficiaries, to provide appropriate feedback mechanisms to producers and could cover:
o Levying grazing fees for communal areas. Such fees have been proposed often but little experience exists of them in practice. A system of progressive fees, with larger herds paying more per head (Narjisse, 1996), is attractive, particularly for many of the dry areas in Africa where livestock are increasingly concentrated in the hands of outside owners, such as civil servants, traders and crop farmers;
o Full cost recovery especially for water supply and animal health services. In many cases, water has been a free resource supplied by the public sector (and frequently financed by the international donor community). Full cost recovery, including construction costs, should most likely reduce the number of large boreholes and, therefore, reduce local degradation around these water points;
o Removal of price distortions for other agricultural inputs, in order to reduce the conversion of pastoral key resources into marginal crop land.
Most donor agencies now accept these as basic elements of their pastoral strategy as shown, for example, by the excellent recent review by IFAD (1995) of common property resources. In addition, African and Middle Eastern government authorities are increasingly adopting participatory and decentralized approaches, with a greater degree of cost recovery, although considerable apprehension still persists in allowing pastoral groups any great degree of independence.
Research needs. The key areas where future research is urgently needed emerge from the above recommendations. With limited opportunities for increasing production, the emphasis must be on conservation. This implies:
o the identification of appropriate indicators to provide reliable information on resource trends in arid areas;
o the development of appropriate methodologies for economic appraisal of investment in the conversion of pastoralists' "key resources". These appraisals normally compare only the pasture yield during the dry season or summer grazing, with the cereal yields and, in most cases, the economic benefits from the increased cereal yields outweigh the pastoral use. If the impact of crop encroachment on the entire eco-system is calculated, the use of such high potential areas for livestock is economically more efficient, and certainly environmentally more efficient, than conversion into cropland;
o continued research on pastoral institutions;
o the design of sustainable drought preparedness plans, with particular emphasis on decentralized management and the design of appropriate banking and insurance schemes; and
o the identification of appropriate conflict resolution schemes.
Grazing systems in the semi-arid and sub-humid tropics^4
^4 Areas with respectively 75-180 and 180-270 days growing season.
State
Driving forces
Response: Technology and policy options
Although these two zones are combined in this discussion because of their similar physical livestock-environment interactions, many of their agro-ecological and socio-economic conditions are different. The semiarid zones are generally densely populated. Typical areas include parts of the Sahel, the rainfed crop-livestock areas of North Africa, some of the rangelands of Central Asia and the drier areas of the Indian subcontinent. The sub-humid zone savannas have, until recently, been rather sparsely populated because access was impeded by human diseases (such as river blindness, African sleeping sickness) and tick-borne diseases in animals. Typical areas include the savannas of West Africa, eastern Colombia and the Cerrados of Brazil, southern and eastern Africa and eastern areas of the Indian subcontinent. These areas are now becoming the main frontier for agricultural development and worldwide it is where ruminant livestock numbers still grow, as they accommodate, in
sub-Saharan Africa an overflow of animals from the drier areas, and, in South America, animals from the Andean Highlands. Livestock interaction involves most components of the environment e.g. land, water and biodiversity.
<section>6</section>
State
Land. In the semi-arid and sub-humid tropics, rainfall, and thus feed availability is less variable and therefore livestock are no longer in continuous dis-equilibrium with feed resources. More reliable and more abundant rainfall allow higher population density, more cropping, and more perennial grass and shrub species (which are less resilient) but also implies fewer possibilities for herd flexibility and mobility. As a result, pressure on land resources mounts and land degradation becomes more severe. Although data on a global basis are not available, data from a transect in Mali for example, (Mainguet et al., 1992) showed that land degradation in the 600-800 mm rainfall areas was significantly greater than in the 350-450 mm rainfall area. In the higher rainfall area, the percentage of bare soil increased from 0 to 10 percent over the period 1950 to 1990, whereas in the more arid areas there was no significant change. Irreversible degradation is also reported in the
semi-arid regions of North Africa and the Middle East (Sidahmed, 1996). The amount of available fodder from rangeland per hectare declined, indicating long term decline in range productivity. For the former Soviet Union, Gilmanov (1996), estimated that about one-third of the total area of 370 million hectares of rangeland was degraded although, from his figures, no decline in fodder availability per hectare can be detected. Zonn (1995) estimates that for the Kalmyk Republic in Southern Russia 6 million hectares out of a total of 7.6 million is moderately to heavily degraded. Irreversible land degradation in the sub-humid savannas of Africa and South America is still minor.
Box 2.6 Desertification or land degradation.
With mounting evidence of high resilience in arid zones and serious degradation in higher rainfall areas, it is more appropriate to use the term "land degradation" than "desertification". In fact, as the terminology used in the recent "Desertification Convention'' shows, this is already beginning to happen. The term "desertification", which conveys images of advancing deserts for which pastoralists are to blame, should be abandoned and attention focused instead on land degradation in semi-arid and sub-humid areas. Persistent use of the term "desertification", which is increasingly being shown to be inaccurate, has more to do with funding strategies of political and bureaucratic constituencies than with science.
Water. With a high population density, the development of livestock and human drinking water supplies has been a key aspect of rangeland development in semi-arid zones where surface water is a constraint. Proportionally, degraded lands extend over a larger area in the semi-arid zones than in the arid zones, as a result of higher population densities and greater concentration of water points. As in arid zones, a circular area of degradation of 1-5 km radius around the water point is quite normal, although these "sacrifice areas" are normally quite fertile and are surrounded by bushes at the outer edge of the sacrifice area which balance out the negative effects. Long term studies in Senegal and Sudan (Thomas and Middelton, 1994) did not find a significant expansion of the sacrifice areas of individual water points in these countries.
As the environment becomes more humid, the animal disease threat, especially that imposed by parasites, also increases. In Africa, in particular, control of livestock disease "vectors" such as ticks (carriers of many diseases, such as Anaplasmosis and East Coast Fever) and tsetse flies (carriers of African sleeping sickness in man and trypanosomiasis in animals) is therefore essential for livestock development. Ticks have traditionally been controlled by cattle dips or sprays using organo-chlorines. Several donor-supported projects promoted this technology in the seventies and early eighties. Inappropriate dosing resulted in increased tick resistance, and inappropriate drainage of dip liquid caused water pollution and damage to the fauna. Very little quantitative data are available on the impact of these acaricides on flora and fauna but it can be assumed to be substantial at the local level.
Biodiversity. The semi-arid and sub-humid tropics are one of the world's most important repositories of plant and animal biodiversity. Wildlife is an important income earner for African countries, with a large part of the wildlife population outside the protected areas. For example, in Kenya, 70 percent of the large mammals are outside the game parks, and many are under considerable stress (Western, personal communication). Ottichilo (1996) reported a 30 percent decline in these populations over the last 20 years.
In the sub-humid savannas, weed invasion is a major problem threatening biodiversity, although the role of livestock is only secondary here. For example, the grass Imperata cylindrica in the Philippines and Indonesia has now infested more than 5 million hectares. Invasion with broad-leafed plants and shrubs is more common in the savannas of Africa and the Americas. A study using satellite imagery found that 10 percent of the savannas of the Central African Republic, were infested with Chromoleana ("Herbe de Laos") (Audru, 1995).
Driving forces
Population growth and poverty are the underlying factors determining land degradation and biodiversity loss in the semi-arid zones. The human population in the semi-arid countries of sub-Saharan Africa^5 has grown at a rate of 3.2 percent over the last decade, resulting in greatly increased demand for food and fuel. Many countries in the semi-arid zone belong to the poorest in the world. Land degradation is thus clearly a result of cropping in fragile areas, fuelwood collection and overgrazing by the prevailing sedentary livestock production systems. Several attempts have been made to determine the relative share of each of these pressures. The UNEP study (Oldeman et al., 1991) estimated that overgrazing causes 35 percent of land degradation whereas agricultural activities and deforestation (or over-exploitation of forest resources) is responsible for 28 percent and 37 percent respectively. For Africa, the estimate is that overgrazing contributes to 49 percent of the total
degraded land area. For the USA, tourism and military bases are also important causes of rangeland degradation.
^5 Botswana, Burkina Faso, Chad, Ethiopia, Kenya, Mali, Namibia, Niger, Senegal and Zimbabwe.
However, with multiple and interlocking forces affecting rangeland degradation, such precise allocation of the causes of degradation seems an oversimplification. It might even be dangerous because it can easily lead to the wrong type of intervention. Nevertheless, it is important to understand the dominant pressure factor in any region in order to be able to identify the correct mitigating measures. For example, quite clearly, to lessen land degradation caused by fuelwood cutting requires different measures than if overgrazing is the main cause of degradation.
A better approach for defining the relative weight of the different causes of land degradation is to define the sustainable human population for each factor. Steeds and Gore (1985) did this for different West African eco-zones (Table 2.1). This table demonstrates that, for the Sahel, fuelwood is the most limiting factor in meeting the subsistence requirements of its human population. For the higher rainfall areas, livestock production remains below that necessary to satisfy subsistence requirements. For all the zones, however, fulfilling food subsistence needs with a combination of livestock and crop production (which is the normal situation) exerts less pressure on the land than satisfying fuelwood requirements.
In the sub-humid savannas, increased cropping leads directly to growth in the livestock population. For example, Bourne and Wint (1994) found that, for every 10 percent increase in cropping, the livestock numbers grew by about three TLU per km^2. This is a beneficial strategy, mainly brought about by livestock herders' need for markets and crop farmers' need for organic fertilizer.
Table 2.1: Sustainable human population (no/km^2) with traditional rainfed cropping, livestock production and natural forest cover.
Zone
Under crops
Under livestock
Under natural forest
Actual (1980)
Saharan
Sahelian
Sahelo-Sudanian
Sudanian
Source: Steeds and Gore, 1985.
However, heavy livestock grazing in open park land savannas leads to the disappearance of the most palatable grass species where they will be replaced by other herbaceous plants. This leads to increased encroachment of shrubs and bushes which, in the normal vegetation succession, leads to forest regeneration. The forest would not develop into a closed canopy but would, in this system, where bushfire is a normal phenomena, become an open parkland. This cycle usually takes about 30 years (Audru, 1995). Overgrazing in savannas thus leads to initial bush encroachment, with increased biomass production (Caesar, 1992), but, because it can no longer be grazed, the diversity of plant and animal (including game animal) species declines. In some cases the bush encroachment leads to the use of economically and environmentally expensive herbicides.
There are a large number of cases which show increases in plant biodiversity in well-balanced grazing systems, especially those using multi-species. An extensive review of grazing and production data of 236 sites worldwide, including many sites in the semi-arid zone, showed no difference in biomass production, species composition and root development in response to long term grazing in the field (Milchunas and Lauenroth, 1993).
The interaction between wildlife and livestock in these eco-systems is complex. First, there is increasing evidence of a possible complementarily, and only limited competition, of wildlife and livestock in grazing. As already shown by Schwartz and Ellis (1981) the grazing "overlap" between most wildlife species and livestock is limited. Mwangi and Zulberti (1985) and Western (1991) showed that the combination of livestock raising and wildlife management resulted in an equal or better species wealth than either of these activities individually. Furthermore, in national parks in Kenya, such as Amboseli, where livestock are not permitted, biodiversity is decreasing, and there is a corresponding increase in unpalatable species and bush-encroachment (Ottichilo, 1996). On the other hand, as the same author points out, there are many degraded areas in Kenya due to combined wildlife-livestock pressure. The picture is thus not uniform but potential for benign and even synergistic
co-existence certainly exists and needs to be encouraged. As previously mentioned, 70 percent of big game animals are outside national parks and, because population pressure is likely to preclude a large increase in the area or number of such parks, the preferred approach must be to maintain a better wildlife habitat outside the park system.
The driving forces leading to losses in animal biodiversity are habitat destruction, species introduction and hunting (WRI, 1994). In an analysis of the threats to mammals in Australia and the Americas, UNEP (1993) argues that pastoral development affects about 30 percent of the species, compared to logging, which affects about 25 percent, and cultivation which affects 55 percent of mammalian species on those continents. Habitat destruction is playing an important role in the developing world, especially in the sub-humid savannas. Road construction, and immigration from the drier areas, leads, in Africa, to the destruction of the habitat of the carriers of African sleeping sickness. In turn, this removes the protection of wildlife which is tolerant to the disease. International agencies, including GTZ and the World Bank, have financed extensive tsetse clearance campaigns in West Africa. Traditionally, these campaigns used a combination of hand sprayers and aerial spraying of
insecticides, initially with organo-chlorines, to eradicate the tsetse fly. Nagel (1993) argues that pesticides from this period are still found in some African birds. Since the mid eighties, compounds with shorter residual effect, such as synthetic pyrethroids have been used. These second generation compounds caused substantial initial damage to flora and fauna but permanent effects were not observed with single spraying. For example, in the World Bank funded tsetse clearance project on the Adamaoua Plateau of Cameroon (Muller, 1985), where permanent damage and high residue levels were found, they appeared to be the result of repeated spraying in the border areas. Bush encroachment, as a result of inappropriate grazing management was reported to be the most serious environmental damage. Land use plans have often been advocated as an essential pre-condition for tsetse clearance, and international donors have made the preparation of such plans conditional to the financing of
the eradication campaigns. However, experience with the enforcement of such land use plans has been dismal because local authorities lacked the authority and means for their enforcement.
Traditional land tenure practices have tended to be less robust in these more humid areas than in the drier areas. This lack of strong traditional tenure practices has been particularly significant in sub-Saharan Africa where after tsetse clearance operations, uncontrolled settlement patterns developed.
In addition, hunting and culling of wildlife was encouraged in the past, because wildlife in general was considered to be a reservoir of diseases, such as Rinderpest and Malignant Catarrhal Fever and vectors of disease, such as East Coast Fever and Trypanosomiasis (Grootenhuis et al., 1991). However, the control of the above mentioned diseases has improved considerably and there is a much better understanding of which species harbour which specific diseases.
Policy pressures. Inappropriate policies, whether institutional or those governing incentives, often exacerbate the negative effects of livestock on land and biodiversity and undermine some of the potentially positive effects.
The effect of price policies has often been to discourage livestock off-take and thereby increase the pressure on grazing:
o The urban bias. Many African governments maintained overvalued exchange rates and allowed the importation of highly subsidized milk and meat from the EU in order to provide cheap food to urban populations. For the semi-arid and sub-humid grazing systems, especially in West Africa, this dumping of meat and milk reduced off-take and increased grazing pressure. The recent devaluation of the CFA franc almost doubled off-take from the Sahelian herds, thus reducing grazing pressure, and almost eliminated the imports of dumped meat from the EU (Vergriette and Rolland, 1994, and Box 2.7);
o Absence of banking institutions. Similarly, with high inflation rates yielding a low return on deposits and, in many cases, the absence of any form of reliable banking system, livestock have become the main form of investment in many developing countries. This is the case not only for the pastoralists themselves but also for urban investors, who rely on hired labour for herding their animals. Although difficult to quantify, some estimates suggest that as much as 50 percent of the livestock in the Sahelian countries are now owned by outsiders. These outside investors have different objectives, less environmental concern and less respect for traditional tenure rights. A similar phenomena can be observed in South America (Sapelli, 1993);
o Under investment and market failure in plant and animal biodiversity. Even where there is no deliberate attempt to distort markets, valuable natural habitats are converted to agricultural production, including livestock, because other costs, such as loss of biodiversity, have not been accounted for. Such adverse conversion would be less likely if an appropriate value, including future potential value, was given to the natural vegetation, including medicinal plants and animal wildlife.
Box 2.7 Macro-economic measures and livestock-offtake from traditional pastoralists.
THE RESPONSES of traditional herders to changes in cattle prices has been the subject of considerable debate, and the perception of a negative price response (i.e. less cattle sales when cattle prices rise) and a keeping of animals for prestige, still prevails. Response to price changes is now better understood. In systems, where the prime objective is flow products (draught, milk, manure) an increase in livestock prices will depress off-take. However, in production systems where the prime objective is meat (as it is nowadays in most pastoral systems), a price increase will produce an increased off-take (Pratt et al., 1996). The latter is illustrated by livestock exports from two Sahelian countries, where the devaluation of the CFA franc in January 1994, caused a 20-40 percent increase in price, with the following rise in cattle exports.
The 1994 devaluation demonstrates that cattle producers respond to market incentives as it caused a substantial increase in the livestock off-take and hence a reduction in grazing pressure. On the other hand the devaluation has reportedly increased the prices of kerosene for domestic use and hence the pressure on the woody vegetation of the Sahelian rangelands.
Annual cattle exports (heads) before and after the CFA devaluation
Burkina Faso
Mali
Source: Chartier, 1996.
The value, costs and returns from wildlife, compared to livestock and agricultural production, is highly variable. At the level of the national economy, the opportunity cost of wildlife biodiversity conservation in protected areas in terms of foregone livestock and agricultural production seems to outweigh the income from tourism and forestry generated by these protected areas. For example, in Kenya, Northon-Griffiths and Southey (1995) estimated the foregone revenue from livestock and agriculture from the parks at US$ 203 million, whilst the revenue from these parks amounted to only US$ 42 million. On the other hand, Engelbrecht and van der Walt (1993) estimated that the Kruger Park in South Africa contributed more than US$ 110 million per year in tourism, compared to a foregone production of only US$ 6 million. A key issue in these estimates is the allocation of benefits. For example, in the Kenyan study, only half of the national revenue from tourism was allocated to the
game parks, assuming that the other half applied to other tourist attractions. At household level, the comparative profitability of wildlife and livestock raising varies greatly, according to the ecological conditions and wildlife use (meat, trophy hunting, tourism). Overall, under present conditions of niche markets for game-meat or tourism, wildlife ranching seems financially more attractive (Box 2.8). For the communal areas, however, wildlife cannot provide the multiple functions of producing milk for subsistence and providing traction, fertilizer and investment that livestock can. Without any doubt, the combination of wildlife and livestock is the most appropriate under those conditions.
Inappropriate institutions constrain sustainable wildlife livestock integration on communal areas. Traditionally there has been a rigid, centralized and regulatory attitude of public institutions in the protection of wild animals. This was especially the case in East Africa, where wildlife management was typically organized by central administrations in a rather military fashion. There was no benefit sharing with the local population, even though wildlife brings high financial cost to the local population because of crop damage, livestock loss to predators and diseases transmitted from wildlife. This has lead to the antagonistic reactions of many herding and farming communities. In addition, the prohibition in many countries of sport hunting and consumption denies important potential benefits from wildlife (Ottichilo, 1996).
Box 2.8 Comparative income levels from wildlife and livestock production on ranches.
A RECENT World Bank Study gives information on four African countries. In Ghana, investments in cattle had an Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of close to zero, whereas private wildlife ranching had an ERR of about 8 percent. In Kenya, financial return on investment (FRR) from game ranching was estimated at 7-12 percent, compared to 6-8 percent for livestock ranching. In Namibia, the study gave a wide range of net returns varying from 0-0.28 rends per hectare under livestock, to 0.21.50 rends per hectare under wildlife. Pearce (1996) gives ERR of 13% for mixed cattle-game, compared to 19% for game viewing in that country. In Zimbabwe the FRR for livestock was about 2 percent, compared to 10 percent for wildlife. Economic returns per hectare were higher for ranching than for wildlife. All wildlife enterprises, however, benefited from special niche markets, either through higher meat prices, or through revenue from tourism or trophy hunting.
Source: Bojo, 1996.
Response: Technology and policy options
The prevailing combination of poverty and high population growth, which characterizes the countries of the semi-arid regions of the world, cannot easily be broken. This will mean continued pressure on the remaining trees and shrubs for fuel, on higher potential land for crop production, and therefore more pressure on the grazing resources. Nevertheless, livestock populations can be expected to grow, especially in the sub-humid areas. Physically, these areas are characterized by much more stable climatic conditions, and traditional grazing management concepts of stocking rate control and individual land tenure become more valid as the precipitation increases.
The introduction of market pricing for inputs and outputs will promote more sustainable livestock production. On the institutional side, again, most of the arid land recommendations concerning decentralization and local empowerment apply also here.
Community-based wildlife management is now generally accepted as an important component of sustainable wildlife management in communal areas. Key issues involve:
o the strength and cohesion of the traditional social fabric, as shown by the difference between the successful community management around the Maasai Mara park and the difficulties experienced by a similar initiative in Amboseli where traditional authority is much weaker (Kiss, 1990); and
o achieving an equitable distribution among the local population of the proceeds of wildlife revenue.
For the African savannas, little progress has been made in developing more appropriate land tenure systems, and land use planning is still as ineffective as in the past. Furthermore, many of the areas cleared in the 1980s have been re-invaded by the tsetse fly. Most donors have stopped funding tsetse eradication for this reason and, where tsetse eradication still continues, such as in the EU funded programme in southern Africa, this is done with environmentally more benign methods and a stronger grassroots participation. The impact of those programmes still has to be assessed. In any case, the threat of the tsetse fly is diminishing, as population pressure destroys the habitat of the fly, with or without eradication campaigns. Finally, especially for these areas, there is a great need for alternative investment possibilities, such as savings banks, to divert savings away from investment in livestock.
Before the introduction of technologies intended to rehabilitate degraded land, it is essential that institutional arrangements are in place. For the semiarid rangelands, once the institutional framework is in place, it should be possible to:
o develop water supplies. Before any development is undertaken, very careful consideration should be given to the possible impact on the distribution of wet and dry season grazing, to settlement patterns and on the efficiency of feed utilization. There is convincing evidence (King, 1983) that increased watering frequency (say from a two-day to a one-day regime) increases the metabolic rate and hence decreases the efficiency of the utilization of scarce feed resources;
o regenerate the vegetation, through resting (deferred grazing, a traditional practice in many Middle Eastern countries), over seeding (normally done with local, adapted species) or planting of adapted fodder and fuelwood shrubs. The latter has been widely practiced in North Africa although with limited success (Msellati, 1995);
o breed for hardiness in indigenous breeds, with selection schemes based on producers' herds;
o introduce multi-species, to encourage a better utilization of the vegetation. There is growing evidence that the combination of different species, including wildlife and livestock has a positive effect on plant and animal biodiversity;
o introduce overall "management" approaches, such as Holistic Resource Management, which establishes clear goals, including environmental ones, and then selects the most appropriate tools for particular site conditions. This approach is strongly based on the principle, that it is not the total grazing pressure, but the continued grazing on the same area, which causes degradation. Timing of the grazing is therefore of critical importance. Initial results with this approach in Chad and Namibia are promising (Pratt et al., in press); and
o improve infrastructure, especially roads and markets, to allow a smooth movement of goods and services and rapid herd off-take, especially in times of drought.
For the sub-humid tropical savannas, the emphasis has to be on the development of multiple uses, combining sustainable farming systems with integrated wildlife-livestock management and the establishment of a few protected areas for key plant and animal species. However, with increasing population pressure, this becomes more difficult. Furthermore, many government agencies in the developing world are too weak and, in the developed world, too dependent on political fashion, to rely exclusively on protected areas for biodiversity conservation, especially for big game of the sub-humid savannas. Eco-tourism and commercial (trophy) hunting would need to be integrated with commercial livestock production and mixed farming.
There is a wide array of technologies available:
o for the management of the natural savannas, regulated burning, i.e., deliberately using fires at different times of the year to affect different classes of plants, can be one of the most efficient ways of maintaining a good tree/shrub/grass mixture. However, regulating savanna burning has not worked in the past because of weak enforcement agencies, and this has led to a general distrust, and often a blanket prohibition, of burning by departments responsible for rangeland and savanna management. This technology may not work if governance is weak unless there is strong participation by the local population;
o for vector control, new and environmentally more benign methods are now available. For tick control, vaccines are available for the diseases spread by a number of sub-species, although not yet for East Coast Fever. Long duration tick sprays, which can be applied on individual animals (pour-on) now exist, and these have a negligible environmental effect. A number of environmentally benign control methods also exist for tsetse control (World Bank, 1995); and
o CIAT has developed a means of improving savanna in South America with improved grass (Andropogon) and legume species in rotation with rice (CIAT, 1994), and ILRI (1994) has proposed improved fodder production using leguminous plants.
Research needs. A number of research needs emerge. More research is needed on the institutional framework, especially regarding access to land and land improvement since these semi-arid and, in particular, sub-humid eco-systems offer more potential for increased productivity. Better adapted fodder species and techniques, water harvesting and livestock breed improvement are some of the technologies to be explored. A campaign to encourage the use of multiple species of both livestock and wildlife, and on combinations which improve species wealth, would be required to capitalize on the environmental potential of these zones.
Grazing systems and tropical rainforests
State
Driving forces
Response: Technology and policy options
Tropical rainforests cover about 750 million hectares, with half of that area located in four countries: Brazil, Zaire, Indonesia and Peru. These rainforests are estimated to contain 50 percent of the worlds' plant and animal species. For this system, the interaction of livestock production and biodiversity is therefore the main focus in this study although there are also significant effects on land and air quality. Ranch encroachment in tropical rainforest has probably, more than anything else, typified the negative effects of livestock development and, while generally the effects have been negative, even here positive examples exist (Box 2.9).
<section>7</section>
State
Land. The transformation from tropical forest to crop and pasture land brings about substantial losses of soil fertility and soil erosion. Furthermore, in many tropical rainforest areas, pastures can only be sustained for a short period of up to ten years. Soil nutrients are rapidly depleted after clearing and grasses are soon replaced by less useful vegetation. Natural regeneration of forests is quite difficult, especially in large degraded areas. More than 50 percent of the pasture areas in Amazonia have now been abandoned in a degraded state. For the total area of tropical forest, WRI (1994) estimates that 427 million hectares are degraded, most of it as abandoned pasture or fallow after shifting cultivation.
Plant and animal biodiversity. For the rainforests, data on biodiversity losses are dramatic. Since 1950, about 200 million hectares of tropical forest have been lost, with the result that of some unique plant and animal species, in one of the world's richest sources of biodiversity have become extinct. Forest areas of Central America have declined from 29 to 19 million hectares, since 1950, although, since 1990, the rate of deforestation in this region has fallen. In Central America in the 1980s rainforests disappeared at the rate of 430 thousand hectares per year but this declined to 320 thousand hectares over the period 1990 to 1994. In South America, the deforestation rate in the 1980s was about 750 thousand hectares per year. It is not known, whether this rate has declined over the last years. Table 2.2 gives quantitative information on the rate of degradation, and the current area of remaining tropical rainforest.
Box 2.9 Competition and symbiosis between livestock, forests and people in Africa.
IN THE eastern area of the Central African Republic, the incursion of Fulani pastoralists with their cattle in the tree parklands of the Zande people leads to:
o increased openings in the forest cover
o decrease in animal biodiversity
o degradation of the hunting potential of the Zande, and thus the quality of their diet
o loss of the traditional values of the Zande people.
On the other hand, farmers in the Kissidougou area of Guinea developed a symbiotic rainforest-livestock system. Livestock here are used to clear up undergrowth in the forest, which could then be used for fuelwood and shade for the perennial crops. The population density increased over the last two decades from 10 to 60 persons/km^2, but here a positive relationship emerged between population density and forest cover.
Source: Carrera and Toutain, 1996.
Much of the deforested areas in Latin America went into ranching, sometimes after initially being cropped. In Central America, pasture areas have increased from 3.5 million to 9.5 million hectares, and cattle populations have more than doubled, from 4.2 million head in 1950 to 9.6 million in 1992 (Kaimonitz, 1995). In Brazil, about 70 percent of the deforested areas are converted into ranching. In Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, the decline in the forest area is mainly the result of crop expansion and not livestock related.
Table 2.2: Annual deforestation 1980-1990 (million ha and percent) different regions of the world.
Region
Annual change in area (m.ha)
Annual rate of change (%)
Remaining forest area (1990) (m.ha)
Latin America
Africa
Asia
Source: FAO, 1996.
Driving forces
Land use. Livestock ranching has often been regarded as the driving force behind the deforestation of tropical rainforests. However, there is increasing evidence that livestock ranching in deforested areas is merely the most obvious symptom of a much more complex degradation process with a variety of driving forces. They are detailed below.
Road construction leads to accelerated deforestation, and is possibly the single most important direct cause of deforestation. For example, Ledec (1992) found that in Panama, for each kilometre of an all-weather road, between 400 and 1,000 hectares of forest were cleared. Roadside ranchland was sold in Nicaragua at about three times the price of comparable land one day's walk away (Maldidier, 1993). In Rondonia, Brazil, the paving of an existing road was the main factor in clearing 100,000 km^2 of rain forest, and focused, in the early eighties, the world's attention on this relationship (Myers, 1981). Livestock ranching, with little supervision requirement and few bulky inputs became an attractive activity along these new roads.
Arable farming, in the rainforest areas, usually takes the form of "slash and burn" agriculture, especially in the forest areas of sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. Several studies (Bruenig, 1991) describe this as the most important mechanism of deforestation in these areas. Overall the area cropped increased over the last two decades. When population pressure is low (less than 30 people per km^2), and the area deforested is relatively small, secondary forest climax vegetation can return, thus limiting longer term soil erosion. If population pressure increases further, a downward spiral of declining soil fertility and crop yields emerges. In Central and South America, the total area under crops has remained stable, but slash and burn cultivation continues at the primary forest frontier, and is compensated by desertion of earlier depleted cropping areas, or their conversion into pasture. This conversion of crop land to pasture is common practice, as many ranchers use a crop of
corn to generate income for future ranching.
In Indonesia, transmigration projects (moving people from the over populated areas of Java to the lesser populated outer islands) have often been cited as the principal cause of deforestation. Again, cropping is the first land use and livestock are introduced quite late in the farming system and mainly in environmentally friendly stall feeding systems. Animal agriculture is therefore not one of the leading causes of deforestation. In sub-Saharan Africa, crop production, and especially the expansion of permanent plantation crops, such as oilpalm and rubber, have been major causes of deforestation. Very little tropical rainforest has been converted into ranches on this continent. Forest overexploitation is also an important factor in deforestation, especially in Asia and Africa, where about 20 percent of the areas are over-exploited. Such over-logged areas are then easily converted into shifting cultivation areas. Logging is not important as a cause of over-exploitation in
South America (Sharma et al., 1993).
Relative importance of different pressure factors in deforestation. As in the case of desertification, there have been several quantitative estimates on the individual importance of these factors. However, unlike in the case of desertification, the direct cause is easier to ascertain, making these estimates more relevant. Nevertheless, there are some overlaps, especially as logging is often a precursor for cropping, which in turn often precedes ranching. This means that even in tropical rainforests the cause of environmental damage is hard to apportion. For the record, Table 2.3 provides some estimates. Overall, "slash and bum" agriculture is said to cause 60 percent of the deforestation (Bruening, 1991).
Policy pressures. Probably more than for any other livestock- environment interaction, inappropriate incentives, land tenure and institutional policies have played a major role in deforestation. land degradation and erosion of biodiversity in the humid tropical areas.
Figure 2.1: Population density and forest coverage in the humid zone.
Source: Unasylva, 1993.
Table 2.3: Some estimates of the main causes of deforestation (percent of total deforestation).
Region
Crops
Livestock
Forest exploitation
South America
44 (70 in Brazil)
Asia
Negligible (Philippines & Indonesia to some extent)
Africa
Negligible
Source: Bruenig, 1991.
Inappropriate incentives from governments and international agencies in support of livestock development, played an important role in the destruction of the Latin American rainforests. Especially in the seventies, the livestock sector secured a disproportionate share^6 of credit at subsidized rates and with lenient re-imbursement conditions and control. Most of these loans were invested in land or deforestation, and in turn raised land prices even further. However, it appears that the role of subsidized credit is limited. For example, Ledec (1992) showed that only 7 to 10 percent of the deforestation in Panama could be attributed to subsidized credit. A similar picture emerges from Brazil. The large ranches greatly benefited from investment subsidies (up to 75 percent of the investment costs), tax holidays, and subsidized interest rates. However, the large ranches caused only a small part of the deforestation (up to 30 percent in some states, mostly less) and most ranching
in Amazonia is in the hands of medium to small size ranchers, who have had less easy access to these subsidies (Hecht et al., 1992).
^6 Between 25 and 45 percent of the total agricultural loans, more than double the share of livestock in the sector. This benefited only the bigger ranchers (Kaimonitz, 1995).
Beef exports to the USA, frequently quoted as one of the main causes for ranch development in Latin America (the "hamburger connection" was coined on that premise), were important in Central America in the 1960s and early 1970s, when international beef prices were high (Myers, 1981). But the Amazon area never produced more than 5 percent of the total beef supply of Brazil, and that production was not exported. Furthermore, declining global prices in the eighties, and increased protection in the USA market, especially following NAFTA, have reduced exports from the other Latin American countries. However the fall in prices seems to have had only a limited effect on deforestation. It may have pushed traditional livestock ranches into cropland, but it has not halted expansion in the frontier zones. Ranchers have had very few alternative opportunities.
Regarding land tenure, the key phenomenon was the land grab in rainforests, which occurred as a result of a general increase in land prices in Central and South America over the last decades (Kaimonitz, 1995). "Money laundering, labour remittances and a hedge against inflation" kept prices above the productive value (Shearer et al., 1993). The almost permanent price increase made land a safe investment and led to increased speculation. Finally, recent government settlement programmes and the establishment of internationally funded protected reservation areas, raised prices further. A large part of the expansion of pasture land may therefore have had more to do with land speculation than with cattle raising per se. Deforestation for ranching thus became more a titling strategy than one based on an economic activity (Jones, 1990). Indigenous users and tenure rights, although existing, played practically no role in the protection of the tropical savannas and forests.
Institutional requirements concerning land titling procedures reinforced these trends. Several Latin American countries actually prescribed occupation, and thus deforestation, as a condition for giving out ownership titles. As clearing land for ranching was much easier than establishing proper cropland, ranching became the preferred occupation to fulfill the title requirements. Furthermore, land clearing discouraged squatters. For example, Edelman (1992) reported that practically all 13 squatter invasions that occurred in one particular area of Costa Rica, took place in heavily forested areas, and not in ranching country. Ranchland was psychologically better protected. Finally, some governments even encouraged deforestation for livestock production by colonization schemes.
Response: Technology and policy options
Many causes for ranching encroachment in rainforest areas have disappeared. Subsidized credit for ranching has been phased out almost everywhere and the overall volume of credit to the sector has declined. In addition, some of the more exogenous factors turned against ranch expansion. Meat exports from Central and South America have declined dramatically and world market prices for beef have dropped over the last decade. All these measures reduced investments by large and urban investors in ranching, and brought down the overall rate of deforestation. However, these changed incentives had little effect on the small and medium producer, and deforestation for crops and small-holder ranching continues. A new look at the policy instruments for these farmers is thus required, as additional action is necessary to halt the still on-going conversion of rainforest into ranches. The following measures have been suggested (Kaimonitz, 1995):
o Discourage road construction. Road construction is the single most important factor in deforestation. Discouraging road construction would probably be the most powerful deterrent for ranch and farm establishment and even though it may be politically difficult, this should seriously be considered for highly valuable forest areas;
o Establish protected areas, and expand the rights and protection of indigenous land use rights. While effective protection of large areas may be difficult to implement under the prevailing situation of understaffed, underpaid and poorly motivated government staff, the most valuable areas can be set aside. Testing of revenue-sharing mechanisms of the proceeds of rainforests, involving all stakeholders (and not only the indigenous occupants, but also the ranchers) could be tested, to improve the incentives for forest conservation;
o Introduce taxation for pasture and crop land to discourage conversion of forest to crop and pasture land. This is an attractive concept although, with poor or even non-existing property registry service in many of the rainforest areas, it will be very difficult to enforce;
o Promote more research and extension. Kaimonitz (1995) especially stresses these needs, as he sees slow technological change as one of the key factors favouring extensive livestock production. Indeed, the basic ranching system has changed very little since the early 1960s, and no agricultural alternatives to ranching have been developed. However, intensification of livestock production in one area can certainly reduce the pressure in another area, if well connected (see Box 2.10), although the validity of this principle cannot be universally assumed.
Grazing systems in temperate zones
State
Driving forces
Response: Technology and policy options
Grazing systems in the temperate zones cover about 440 million hectares, or 13 percent of the world's pasture lands. They contain about 2 percent of the world's cattle and 10 percent of the small ruminants. They are mainly based on natural permanent pastures, and occur mostly in China, northern USA and South America and the CIS. They contribute about 5 percent of the global beef supply, 12 percent of mutton supply and 3 percent of the global milk supply.
Box 2.10 Does intensification reduce grazing pressure?
MANY DEVELOPMENT projects have been based on the assumption that intensification reduces 9 razing pressure. However, there is no empirical evidence that this is the case. Social forestry projects in indict, for example, promoted stall feeding with improved crossbred cows, but there is no evidence that this decreased the number of traditionally managed animals in the forest. Similarly, stratification of production in, for example, North Africa and the Middle East, has not shown a clear reduction in grazing pressure in the young lamb production areas. It appears that intensified production alone does not reduce grazing pressure, and institutional and incentive changes (such as access to common grazing resources) need also to be changed.
State
Most grazing areas in the temperate zones are in relatively good vegetative condition. They were originally formed by the grazing of wild animals and, because livestock grazing is not fundamentally different, there is no convincing evidence that the change from wild to domestic grazing has, in general, had any long term detrimental effect. Long term stocking trends both in the USA and Australia show an initial high stocking rate in the late 19th century and early 20th century, falling off after a period of about ten years, to a lower level which is then sustained over the following decades. This indicates a fairly stable eco-system. Indeed, independent observers argue that rangelands in the western United States are now in a better ecological condition than at any other time in this century (General Accounting Office, 1988). For example, in 1987 there was half as much "poor" rangeland but double the area of "good" rangeland as in 1964 (USDA, 1988). In this equilibrium
environment, there is ample experimental evidence (Blackburn et al., 1982) that there is no difference in erosion and water infiltration between light, moderately grazed and un-grazed areas. In addition, there are some excellent examples of how grazing with domestic stock can improve biodiversity (Box 2.11) and how grazing can reduce fires and promote seedling establishment by reducing biomass accumulation. Box 2.12 demonstrates how livestock can be used to reduce the amount of petroleum based herbicides.
However, there are regions where the vegetative condition of temperate grazing land is less satisfactory, notably in the CIS and Asia, western Europe and the western United States. Grasslands in the CIS are often heavily overgrazed. This is caused by the significant preference given under the previous command economy to industrial, mechanized production, with a strong dependence on feed grains. Meadows and grazing animals did not fit well in such systems and therefore received scant attention. Although incentives have changed, there is still a dearth of appropriate technology to improve pasture lands in the CIS and overgrazing, resulting in increased erosion and reduced water infiltration, is still a common phenomenon. Overgrazing in the temperate, high altitude pastures of Central Asia is particularly severe after the transition to a market economy (Schillhorn van Veen, 1996). Zhong (1993) estimated that, in Mongolia, 40 percent of the country's 65 million hectares is
degraded, especially on state farms.
Box 2.11 Riparian health, sheep and elk
RlPARIAN HEALTH ifs an important issue driving the monitoring and use of public grazing lands. However, it is often overlooked that any species of wildlife or livestock can overgraze these critical areas. A key example of such a situation exists today in Yellowstone National Park (YNP), the crown jewel of the US park system. It has recently been demonstrated that elk are severely overgrazing riparian areas in YNP. In a study comparing riparian areas in Yellowstone National Park and on the summer range of the US Sheep Experiment Station (approximately 30 miles from YNP) it was shown that grazing of sheep had a more benefical impact on riparian health, as measured by willow populations, a key indicator species. Furthermore, as a result of healthier willow communities on the Sheep Station, beaver populations are also in better condition. This work demonstrates that any grazing animal can cause environmental instability and/or degradation and that by using an appropriate
livestock species environmental health can be maintained or increased (Kay and Walker, in press).
Average height of willow population inside and outside Yellowstone National Park
Box 2.12 The control of the leafy spurge.
LEAFY SPURGE is an aggressive perennial weed that typifies the impact of noxious weeds. It has now infested about 600,000 hectares in the western USA, greatly reducing the habitat for cattle, bison, and deer. In North Dakota alone it has cost the state US $75,000,000. However, grazing by small ruminants, especially goats, can greatly reduce this pest and improve plant and animal biodiversity, and this is becoming increasingly popular as the sole acceptable control method.
Sources: Walker et al., 1994 and Bureau of Land Management, 1994.
Many grazing areas of western Europe and the eastern USA are over fertilized. The highly subsidized and guaranteed milk price under the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) of the EU in the seventies and eighties encouraged strong intensification, and this led to very high nitrogen fertilizer use on pastures. For example, in the eighties, the average nitrogen application on grassland in the Netherlands was about 500 Kg N per hectare per year (two-thirds inorganic and one-third organic), whereas the average N outflow in milk and meat did not amount to more than 82 kg N per hectare per year (Steenvoorden, 1989) As a result, these meadow soils are now overloaded with nutrients, especially nitrogen and phosphorus, contaminating ground and surface water.
In the western USA, there is currently strong concern about the impact of grazing along the banks of rivers and streams: the riparian areas. Such stream sides, which normally comprise less than 5 percent of the total area, receive often 20-30 percent of the use and therefore water quality (increased nitrates and phosphates), plant biodiversity, and trout yields may be impaired (Sheehy et al., 1996). It is estimated that more than 50 percent of riparian areas are seriously damaged (Armour et al., 1994). On the other hand, there is ample evidence that nutrient leakage into streams is minimal where streamside pastures remain in good condition (Sheehy, et al., 1996).
Driving forces
Policies continue to drive livestock production into degrading temperate grazing systems:
o In Central Asia, changes in fuel prices and privatization of land are currently the driving forces causing overgrazing. Previously, annual movements of animals were greatly facilitated by low energy prices but market pricing of transport has reduced animal movements and is changing the traditional cycle of seasonal grazing and rest periods into year-round grazing;
o In western Europe and the USA, the most significant driving forces to have an impact on the environment are those policies which foster intensification of livestock production. The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) of the EU (then European Economic Community), which heavily subsidized dairy production (US$ 250 per dairy cow per year [Knudsen and Nash, 1990]) encouraged intensive production at high stocking levels and therefore excessive use of fertilizer and concentrate;
o The phasing out of feed subsidies in Central Europe is still too recent to have had a measurable effect;
o Grazing on public lands in the western USA is being driven by a larger concern over how public lands should be utilized (ecotourism vs agriculture, mining and/or timber). Currently riparian areas are the focus of the debate. In the past, the importance of riparian areas was under estimated and they were largely viewed as sacrifice areas, while upland grazing (>95% of the area) was the focus of range improvements. Also contributing to the stress on riparian areas has been the inappropriate conversion of sheep permits to cattle permits. One particularly important area of this debate has been the cost charged for grazing public lands. Some have argued that the grazing land is under-valued and that fees are therefore too low. However, in a recent CAST (1996) report it was demonstrated that grazing on public land is more expensive than with private leases. CAST reports on an animal unit month basis, a cost of $19.59 for public grazing and $17.18 for private leases. Use of
public grazing lands are now the focus of conflicts between opposing national environmental and livestock interest groups, with active involvement of the federal Government because both groups claim that some form of public administration is required. There are many examples of effective wildlife preservation and effective livestock-wildlife integration by these respective groups (Sheehy et al., 1996). Even though there are conflicts on land use the public administration of these lands has been largely successful, as demonstrated by the continuous trend in rangeland improvement.
Response: Technology and policy options
The first priority in reducing the environmental impact of the over-fertilized grazing systems in the EU and USA, and enhancing their environmental condition, is to phase out the current system of milk and meat subsidies. The current shift in EU policies to replace the subsidies on these products by subsidies on farmers' income, and tie this to landscape maintenance, is a very positive development. In addition, much can be done to achieve a better nutrient management. Work in the Netherlands (Box 2.13) shows clearly the possibility of reducing input levels by introducing a ley farming system with more farm grown fodders, careful application techniques and lower nitrogen inputs, without substantial reduction of the output. Experience from Europe and the USA shows that farmer education is a key factor in arriving at better nutrient management. The introduction of a mineral balance at farm level has helped farmers to recognize the excess nitrates and ammonia which are emitted
(Aarts, 1996). Experience with farmer study groups in the Netherlands, clearly shows that it is possible to decrease the nutrient loading by 25 to 50 percent with an improved financial result on many farms (Aarts, ibid). Similar results are emerging from the USA, where, under the motto "it is better that we do it now voluntarily, than have it imposed by the Government", farmers, for example, in the Chesapeake Bay area, are drastically reducing their fertilizer input levels (O'Connell, personal communication).
A greater reliance on market mechanisms, combined with a less restricted use of wildlife, are essential elements in the management of riparian areas in the western USA. Once such land is available to the highest bidder (be it private conservation organizations or livestock ranchers) and exploitation of wildlife is attractive, more land would go into wildlife or combined livestock-wildlife production, and grazing pressure would be more evenly spread. Some regulation of the riparian areas might be necessary and community-based landscape objectives and values (rather than interference by federal agencies and national environmental pressure groups) would probably be more effective.
Research needs. For the Central Asian and Russian grasslands, there is a need to increase research on pasture management. The changed incentive framework fosters the use of farm-grown grass and fodders, but there is a large gap in skills and tradition in applied grassland research. More research is also needed on better land use policies for the temperate summer pastures of the Central Asian highlands.
For the highly intensive grazing systems, further research in nutrient management is clearly essential. Experience in the Netherlands clearly shows the potential for such research. It should be multidisciplinary and involve the different animal science disciplines (breeding, nutrition and pasture agronomy), environmentalists and socio-economists. It should look critically at input-output management and the relationship between cause and effect.
Box 2.13 Reducing inputs, without losing production; The "Marke" experience.
THE EXPERIMENTAL farm "the Marke", located on sandy soils in the eastern part of the Netherlands, aims at testing how, through very careful nutrient management, the emissions in nitrates, ammonia and phosphates can be brought within the future Dutch policy requirements, without reducing output. Below are the results:
Milk production (kg/ha)
Purch. Concentrate (kg/ha)
Area grassland (%)
Area fodder crops (%)
Fertilizer application (kg N/ha)
id (kg P/ha)
N balance (accum. in soil and losses to air and (ground) water
N
P
Average nitrogen content in upper ground water
This work clearly shows that it is possible, with better information, to reduce inputs to about one-third, with only a 10 percent decrease in output. Key technological inputs are: changes in the farming systems to allow for crops with can use manure more efficiently, much lower N percentage in the feed, and a higher production per cow (with low fat percentage). This case highlights the need, and current move, towards more knowledge intensive agriculture, whereby knowledge replaces physical inputs.
Source: Aarts, 1996
Regardless of the environmental setting, there is a clear need for better monitoring tools which can effectively document the current status of grazing lands and project possible changes in these lands as weather or usage patterns change.
<section>8</section>
Conclusion
Over the last decade, a strong public awareness of the value of grazing areas has emerged. Rangelands in all zones are increasingly seen as a global resource, not only for livestock production but also for eco-tourism, carbon sequestration and biodiversity conservation. For the tropical rainforests, it is general acknowledged that their conversion into ranching is economically, socially and environmentally wrong.
An important future challenge will be to design the educational, financial and institutional instruments which promote multiple use of grazing areas. This will require a major change in attitude to, first, a public perception of pastoralists and ranchers as efficient users and potentially responsible stewards of all their resources and, second, in the attitude of the world's rangeland and pasture agronomists, many of whom think exclusively in terms of increasing levels of beef and milk production. Finally, there needs to be a change in attitude towards the management of temperate grazing lands to encourage a move from a high input-based system to one based on very precise information in order to achieve nutrient balance.
These changes need to be supported by systems that give proper value to the wider benefits of rangelands, such as biodiversity and carbon sequestration, and mechanisms that allow the costs and the benefits to be shared so that rangeland users are able to diversify.
In addition, development policies must recognize the links between the different eco-systems. An important component of past livestock strategies in the developing world has been the promotion of stratification. Under stratified production, the more arid rangelands provide the feeder stock to the higher potential areas for finishing before slaughter. This is the main strategy in the USA, Australia and China. Experience shows that its success depends on price differentials between the feeder animals and the fattened animals, and this differential turns into increased profits when the transport costs are brought down through improved infrastructure development. If the prices per unit of live-weight are similar, there is no incentive for the pastoralist to sell his animal, because additional growth will cost very little for labour and other inputs.
Quite clearly, future diversification policies need also to be accompanied by measures to address the underlying forces of population pressure and poverty. Price distortions causing environmental damage need to be corrected. Alternative means of nutrient management need to be vigorously pursued. Above all, future policies need to be pro-active and participatory, and must clearly identify alternative uses, institutions and financing mechanisms, which involve all stakeholders and recognize all the values the world's grazing lands provide.
Grazing systems in temperate zones
<section>9</section>
Chapter 3: Mixed farming systems & the environment
Environmental challenges
Mixed farming systems in the developing world: Nutrient deficits
Mixed farming systems in the developed world: Nutrient surpluses
Conclusions
Mixed farming systems & the environment
MIXED FARMING systems, the largest category of livestock system in the world, cover about 2.5 billion hectares of land, of which 1.1 billion hectares are arable rainfed crop land, 0.2 billion hectares are irrigated crop land and 1.2 billion hectares are grassland. Mixed farming systems produce 92% of the world's milk supply, all buffalo meat and approximately 70% of the sheep and goat meat (Figure 3.1). About half of the meat and milk produced in this system is produced in the OECD, Eastern Europe and the CIS, and the remainder comes from the developing world. Over the last decade, meat production from this system grew at a rate of about 2 percent per year and thus remains below global in demand.
Environmental challenges
The evolution of the mixed farming system
Mixed farming is probably the most benign agricultural production system from an environmental perspective because it is, at least partially, a closed system. The waste products of one enterprise (crop residues), which would otherwise be loaded on to the natural resource base, are used by the other enterprise, which returns its own waste products (manure) back to the first enterprise. Because it provides many opportunities for recycling and organic farming and for a varied, more attractive landscape, mixed farming is the favourite system of many agriculturalists and environmentalists.
In many situations crop and livestock production is largely in balance with nature. There are important exceptions, such as some mixed farming systems of the tropical highlands of Asia and Central Africa which, partly because of overgrazing, are amongst the most eroded and degraded systems of the world. On the other end of the development spectrum, heavy use of feed and fertilizer in the industrial world and in some of the fast growing economies of East Asia, has led to nutrient loading, habitat destruction and water pollution. In this context, it has to be remembered that integrating crops and livestock neither generates new nutrients (with the exception of nitrogen fixation by leguminous plants) nor reduces nutrient surpluses.
Figure 3.1: Share (%) of global production produced by mixed farms.
In order to understand the environmental impact of livestock it is important to understand how mixed farming systems evolved. A brief description follows.
The evolution of the mixed farming system
As rural population pressure increases, both crop and livestock farmers need to intensify production. McIntire et al., (1992) show that, as population pressure increases, the two activities often become integrated. Traditional soil protection techniques, in particular the long fallow periods which protected against erosion and allowed soil nutrients to recharge, are no longer possible (Kjekshus, 1977). If farmers cannot resort to external inputs, the integration of livestock and crop activities represents their main opportunity for intensification. Mixed farming has therefore become the basis for modern agriculture. Mixed farming systems provide farmers with an opportunity to diversify risk from single crop production, to use labour more efficiently, to have a source of cash for purchasing farm inputs and to add value to crops or crop by-products. Combining crops and livestock also has the potential to maintain ecosystem function and health and help prevent agricultural
systems from becoming too brittle, or over connected, by promoting greater biodiversity, and therefore increased capability to absorb shocks to the natural resource base (Holling, 1995).
Environmentally, mixed farming systems:
o maintain soil fertility by recycling soil nutrients and allowing the introduction and use of rotations between various crops and forage legumes and trees, or for land to remain fallow and grasses and shrubs to become reestablished;
o maintain soil biodiversity, minimize soil erosion, help to conserve water and provide suitable habitats for birds;
o make the best use of crop residues. When they are not used as feed, stalks may be incorporated directly into the soil, where, for some time, they act as a nitrogen trap, exacerbating deficiencies. In the tropical semi-arid areas, termite action results in loss of nutrients before the next cropping season. Burning, the other alternative, increases carbon dioxide emissions; and
o allow intensified farming, with less dependence on natural resources and preserving more biodiversity than would be the case if food demands were to be met by crop and livestock activities undertaken in isolation.
Under different sets of pressures and opportunities, several developments are possible, depending on resource endowment and market access. Initially, and if market opportunities open up, the symbiosis between crops and livestock can intensify (Christiaensen et al., 1995 and Box 3.1), and the nutrient balance can be maintained. This chapter's case study (Box 3.6) on the long term evolution of a mixed farming system in the semi-arid regions of Kenya illustrates this development.
Box 3.1 Population pressure and the evolution of the cassava-livestock system in sub-Saharan Africa.
POPULATION PRESSURE and the evolution of the cassava-livestock system in sub-Saharan Africa. A comparative analysis of cassava-livestock interactions in six countries, covering seven regions in sub-Saharan Africa, clearly shows that as population intensity increases, crop-livestock interactions intensify as organic fertilizer and the use of cassava as a livestock feed gain importance. For example, in the densely populated areas of Nigeria, between 77 and 100 percent of the animals were fed farm-grown cassava, whereas in the sparsely populated areas of Zaire and Tanzania, this varied between 8 and 50 percent. Livestock thus help to conserve a better nutrient balance within the system, and reduce the threat of nutrient loss.
Source: Christiaensen et al., 1995.
If pressure increases further, crop-livestock systems can separate into specialized crop or livestock activities. If there are no improved market opportunities, which is the case in many developing countries, and as human population pressures continue, the arable land part of the system will experience increased rates of nutrient depletion (and therefore flora and fauna biodiversity loss) and soil erosion. This can, in turn, lead to a downward spiral of mono-culture with lower quality food crops, increased under-nutrition and famine (Cleaver and Schreiber, 1994). This development path is illustrated in this chapter's case study on Rwanda in Central Africa (Box 3.4).
However, if urban incomes rise, more market opportunities open up and farmers become more integrated into the market economy, allowing them to specialize, take advantage of economies of scale and develop greater levels of expertise. Finally, under very strong demand, and often encouraged by input or price subsidies such as exist in many developed countries and in the fast growing economies of East Asia, excessive importation of nutrients can lead to soil and water tables being overloaded with nitrogen or phosphorus. The case study on Brittany in France illustrates this condition (Box 3.7).
The challenge for the mixed farm sector will therefore be to maintain a nutrient and energy equilibrium through crop-livestock integration and at the same time allow sustainable productivity growth. The mixed farming system, more than any other production system, operates under a wide range of environmental and economic conditions and requires regional solutions and practices. However, there is one overriding criteria in determining the size and nature of the system's impact on the environment, and this is the nutrient balance. This balance is determined by the nutrients (N. P and K) brought into the farming systems by inorganic fertilizer, feed, nitrogen fixed by leguminous plants and transfer from grazing areas outside the farm, and the amounts exported in animal products or lost from the land to the air or groundwater. A positive balance of nutrients will have a completely different effect (and will require different measures) than a nutrient deficient system. In this
analysis, the mixed farming systems are classified either as nutrient deficient systems, which occur mainly in the developing world, or as nutrient surplus systems, mostly found in the industrialized world and increasingly in the fast growing economies of East Asia.
Mixed farming systems in the developing world: Nutrient deficits
State
Driving forces
Response: Technology and policy options
The mixed farming systems of the developing world contain about 67 percent of the cattle and 64 percent of the small ruminants of the world. Throughout the world, animal numbers are growing in the mixed farming system, most rapidly in the humid/sub-humid regions (Annex 2). Sheep and goat numbers show the fastest growth rates in the humid/sub-humid region, underlining how human population pressure is reducing farm size and access to and use of resources.
Irrigated mixed farming systems have shown the greatest increase in productivity, particularly in the humid regions of Asia. This is clearly a result of the strong growth in demand for animal products and better access to feed resources and other types of infrastructure in Asia. Milk production is important, particularly in south Asian countries, due to the growing demand in the region and the favorable policies that many governments have created for the dairy sector. Although the growth of dairy production can place more pressure on land resources, it can also increase the use of crop by-products which in turn improves nutrient recycling and, if of high quality, can diminish methane production.
State
There is a considerable range of positive and negative interactions between livestock and the environment within the different sub-systems. These interactions can affect land quality in its physical (soil erosion) and chemical properties (soil fertility), the use of nonrenewable resources, such as fossil fuels and fertilizer, and the conservation of agricultural (plant and animal) biodiversity. They are detailed below.
Soil erosion is probably the most pervasive form of land degradation in the developing world. Erosion rates are particular high in Asia, Africa and South America where they average 30 to 40 tons/ha/year, compared with an average soil formation of 1 ton per ha/per year (Pimental et al., 1995). In Africa, 60 percent of soil erosion damage occurs in the semi-arid and dry sub-humid regions where cropping and livestock co-exist (Thomas and Middleton, 1994), with strong interlocking factors of cropping, fuelwood collection and grazing.
Soil erosion is even more damaging on sloping lands. Poorly managed sloping terraces under crops and degraded rangelands can lose up to 100 MT/ha/year. Conversely, well managed pasture land loses 7 MT/ha/year or less and well managed forest land losses range from 0-10 MT/ha/year. Bojo and Cassells (1995) quantified these losses in the degraded Ethiopian Highlands (Box 3.2). Their results showed the effect of including pastures in those environments as a means of reducing erosion.
Box 3.2 Effect of soil erosion and nutrient export on mixed farm productivity in Ethiopia.
Soil losses
Grazing systems
5t/ha/) ear
Crop land
42t/ha/year
Crop production losses
500,000 ton
Livestock production losses
1000,000 TLU
Gross Annual
US $ 100 million
Immediate Losses
Gross Discounted
US $1.9 billion
Cumulative Losses
The nutrient export results from the use of dung an crop residues as fuel.
The Gross Discounted Cumulative Loss captures the cumulative nature of the land degradation, in which each year's erosion and nutrient loss is followed by another adding layers of losses and hence cost on top of each other
Source: Bojo and Cassells, 1995.
Soil fertility. Livestock play a significant role in maintaining soil fertility. In partially closed mixed farming systems, livestock can replenish a substantial share of soil nutrients, and therefore reduce the need for inorganic fertilizer, with corresponding savings for farmers in terms of cash outlay, for the country in foreign exchange, and for the world in non-renewable resources. The total value of this contribution is not known, although approximate figures are given by Jansen and de Wit (1996) for the irrigated mixed farming systems of Asia. Assuming manure production of about 1 ton dry material per year per Tropical Livestock Unit^1, and an effective availability^2 of 15 percent of the nutrients in the case of stall fed and half that amount for grazing animals, the amount of nutrients under stall fed conditions is about 8 kg N and 6 kg P per year per TLU.
^1 A Tropical Livestock Unit (TLU) is an animal unit used to aggregate different classes of livestock. One TLU equals an animal of 250 kg liveweight.
^2 The balance is lost through evaporation, leaching and, in many arid areas, through use as fuel.
Under those assumptions, livestock in the mixed irrigated farming system can supply between 2 and 10 percent of the nitrogen requirements for rice, and about 40 to 120 percent of the requirements for phosphorus in cassava (Table 3.1).
As can be clearly seen from Table 3.1, nitrogen is the most depleted nutrient, with the amount lost varying, depending upon the technology used in collection, storing and application practices. How farmers approach these three factors largely determines the effectiveness of the recycling process and therefore provides an avenue for intervention. As shown, stall feeding significantly increases the amount of nutrients available from manure.
To demonstrate the importance of these contributions, an estimate was made of the amount of fertilizer that would be required to replace the manure that is used in the irrigated system of the humid tropics. The value of this is estimated to be between US$ 700 to US$ 850 million per year, depending on various assumptions (Table 3.2).
The economic benefits of improved soil structure as a result of adding soil organic matter from manure are more difficult to estimate. Adding manure to the soil increases cation exchange capacity, and improves soil physical conditions by increasing the water-holding capacity and improving soil structure stability. When adding the manure output from pigs and ruminants together, livestock may contribute up to 35% of the soil organic matter requirements. This is a crucial contribution because this is the only avenue available to many farmers for improving soil organic matter.
Non-renewable resources. Draught animal power, in addition to other economic benefits, provides an important source of energy in the mixed farming systems of the world and helps to reduce dependence on nonrenewable fuel resources. In developing countries, animal power is used to cultivate about 52 percent of the 480 million hectares of cropland (FAO, 1994). Draught animals provide between 25 to 64 percent of the energy needed for cultivation in the irrigated systems of the world. Worldwide 300 million draught animals are used in small-scale agriculture, while 30 million tractors would be needed to make the same contribution. This is equivalent to an US$ 200-300 billion investment in tractors plus a $5 billion annual fuel cost. Assuming that approximately 50 percent of the arable land is cultivated in the world's irrigated areas with draught animal power, complete replacement by tractors would require annually 888 million litres of diesel at a cost of US$ 222 million, and US$
429 million for depreciation of the equipment (Jansen and de Wit, 1996).
Table 3.1: Estimated contribution of livestock to crop nutrient requirements in irrigated systems in Asia (% N and P removed by crops).
System
Rice
Cassava
N
P
N
P
Pigs
Ruminants-grazing
Ruminants-stall-fed
Pigs+Ruminants-grazing
Pigs+Ruminants-stall-fed
Assuming rice yields of 4 tons per ha, and cassava yields of 10 tons Per ha
Source: Jansen and de Wit, 1996.
The value of animal manure for cooking fuel is more controversial. Dung cakes are the main source of household energy for millions of poor households in the developing world. It is often argued that using dung for fuel removes soil nutrients and therefore carries high opportunity costs (Mearns, 1996). However nitrogen is the only major nutrient that is lost because the remaining ash is high in phosphorus and potassium.
Biodiversity. In mixed farming systems, livestock-environment interactions can be a key focal point. As human population pressures increase, some types of wildlife or plant diversity can be lost while other types of biodiversity may actually increase. Reid et al. (1995) demonstrate how the number of tree, bird and mammal species changes as human use of the resource base intensifies (Figure 3.2).
These results are important for demonstrating the dynamic nature of ecological systems. They also show that man's agricultural activities must be balanced with the environment's capacity to sustain them.
An often overlooked component of biodiversity is soil micro-flora and fauna. Arthropods, with 90 percent of all species, dominate biodiversity (Pimental et al., 1992). For example, in a New York alfalfa "ecosystem" Pimental et al., (1992) reported 600 species of above ground arthropods. Livestock and manure have a beneficial effect on this biodiversity. For example, in mixed farms in Japan, the species diversity of the micro-fauna under grass more than doubled when manure was added to the land (Kitazawa and Kitazawa, 1980).
Table 3.2. Amount and value of manure in fertilizer equivalents in Asia's irrigated areas.
Nitrogen
Phosphorus
Manure kg/ha
Fertilizer Equivalent (kg/ha)
Financial Value (US $/ha)
Total Economic Value (US $ mill)
Source: Jansen and de Wit, 1996.
Figure 3.2: Changes in biodiversity as human use intensifies.
In forest and communal grazing areas, adjacent to mixed farming areas, plant and animal biodiversity is decreasing because of over-grazing. There are many examples quoted in the literature confirming this trend, for example, in Syria, Rajastan, and West Africa. It is not clear, though, whether these are irreversible, long term changes. For example, Thomas and Middleton (1994) report that no systematic pattern of vegetation change could be detected in a 27 year vegetation survey of 77 villages in the Sudan. However, wildlife biodiversity is disturbed if land is fragmented and river sides are cultivated. Finally, the mixed farming areas of the world contain the main centres of domestic animal genetic resources (local livestock breeds) of the world. Urgent steps to safeguard that future capital are proposed in Chapter 5.
<section>a</section>
Driving forces
Land. Human population pressure, poverty and infrastructure are, as in grazing systems, the most important fundamental driving forces affecting the environmental impact of mixed farming systems in the developing world. And in that respect, the mixed farming systems are entering a dynamic period of growth and change because they cover some of the countries with the highest birth rates in the world (e.g., Uganda, the Sahelian countries, Ethiopia, Nepal, Bangladesh). Human population pressure affects soil fertility. In many parts of Africa and in the mountainous areas of Asia and Latin America, farmers attempt to maintain soil nutrient balance with, at best, small inputs from outside. Poverty and poor infrastructure usually prevent them from buying commercial feed and fertilizer (Box 3.3). Nutrient balance depends, therefore, on the ratio between arable and non-arable land. This also varies widely according to the climatic conditions. For example, in West Africa, the ratio was
about 10 to 40 hectares of dry season grazing and 3 to 10 hectares of wet season grazing to provide adequate nutrients for one hectare of millet cropland (Williams, et al., 1995).
However, with increasing population pressure more and more grazing land is converted into cropland, the crop/grazing land ratio narrows, and the nutrient flow into cropland decreases. For example, cropland has increased in the Machakos area of Kenya from 35 percent of the higher potential area in 1948 to 81 percent (English, et al., 1993). In Northern Mali, the rate of increase of the arable cropping area was the same as the 2.6 percent rate of annual population growth over the last twenty years (Powell, 1995). This trend can lead to increased competition for cropland and grazing on the open rangelands, which in turn, can lead to privatization of crop residues and rangelands. For example, the common property lands in India, have decreased since 1960 by 50 percent, so that in 1992 they constituted only 15 percent of the total area (Jodha, 1992). Population pressure also causes farmers to push cultivation out into more resource limited areas, causing soil erosion. Mabbutt
(1980) reports, for example, that in Niger millet fields are appearing 100 km north of the recommended limit to cultivation, increasing the risk of crop failure and leaving soil exposed and at risk of erosion. Livestock are moved to the most marginal areas.
Unless nutrients are replenished from outside sources, soil fertility continues to decline as the ratio between crop and grazing land declines. This is typically the case of many mixed farming systems in the tropics. Reported losses range from about 15 kg N/ha/year in Mali, to more than 100 kg N/ha/year in the highlands of Ethiopia. Downward spirals of declining soil fertility, overgrazing, and increased erosion and losses in soil micro-flora and fauna are the result and will cause, ultimately, significant decreases in agricultural productivity and political stability. The Rwanda example clearly underscores the need for a balance between crop activities, animal inputs and human population pressure, to avoid the collapse of the farming systems, impoverishment and even civil war (Box 3.4).
In irrigated mixed farming, grazing is more likely to be contained within the system although the source of feed supply is likely to shift increasingly from non-arable. grazing to grazing of crop residues and the use of fallow land. Inorganic fertilizers are used to overcome soil nutrient deficiencies.
Box 3.3 Farmers balancing their systems.
GLOBALLY mixed farmers have a history of attempting to optimize manure use in an effort to maintain soil fertility. Such efforts, however, are dependent upon access to livestock, feed resources for livestock, and the ability to store and apply manure. The examples presented below detail how well such efforts work and the potential problems involved in attempting to balance soil nutrient levels.
In Nepal, farmers know livestock are essential for maintaining soil fertility. Quantities of 3 to 20 MT/ha of manure are applied, with irrigated fields receiving larger amounts. Yields of 1.6 and 1.3 MT/ha respectively for a crop of maize followed by wheat can be sustained with 21 MT/ha of manure application. In these areas total livestock densities range from 9.8 to 16.7 livestock units/ha of cultivated lands. Six livestock units are needed to provide sufficient farmyard manure for one year to grow one hectare of rice-maize-wheat. This quantity of manure is presently not available, due to partial collection and inefficient storage.
In Indonesia, upland farmers apply manure on vegetables, rice, maize and cassava. Inorganic fertilizer applications are low. Maize and cassava grown on valley bottoms show a negative N. P. and K balance. The average density of cattle in upland Java is 2 head/ha which yields 2.5 MT/ha per year of dry farmyard manure.
In Kenya, a typical subsistence farm would have a negative nitrogen balance of about 50 kg nitrogen/ha and is about self-sufficient in phosphorus. A move towards commercial dairy production would increase the outflow. But with the cash generated from the dairy cattle a nutrient balance can be achieved through a combination of manure and commercial fertilizer. Nutrient balance studies (Ransom et al., 1993) demonstrate how farmers strategically use commercial fertilizer on coffee and use manure on maize fields to achieve a nutrient balanced system. On sampled farms manure application ranged from 3,000 to 13,000 kg/ha/year. Commercial fertilizer use was not consistent as manure was used alone in 5 out of 7 years.
The main feature of the irrigated areas has been the dramatic intensification of crop production as a result of the Green Revolution. With the introduction of improved "dwarf'' varieties, the quality and quantity of crop residues decreased, but cereal production and total farm income increased. This has decreased the amount of feed available for ruminants, but increased the supply of cereals available for intensive production. Moreover, rising incomes as a result of the Green Revolution increased demand for livestock products. The two trends together promoted the development of intensive industrial units which, combined with the high fertilizer use in the Green Revolution areas, has led to increasing concerns about nutrient loading in regions such as the Punjab in India. In addition there are environmental concerns from the crop sector about salinization of soils, increased erosion rates around irrigation areas and increased use of pesticides.
The Green Revolution has also had an effect upon the use of draught power, one of the other major links between crops and livestock. Off-farm employment increases labour costs and, if the time available to prepare land becomes shorter, tractorization becomes more important, decreasing the use of buffalo and cattle for traction. For example, in India the number of bullocks used for animal power has decreased from 85 million in 1960 to 60 million while, over the same period, the number of tractors increased from 30,000 to 1.4 million. Only about 30 percent of the total arable land in India is still cultivated by animal power (World Bank, 1995).
Cattle-people ratio in Rwanda (1960-1993)
Box 3.4 Mixed farming in Rwanda.
PRIOR TO the colonial period, Tutsi and Hutu, mayor ethnic groups of Rwanda, had a working relationship which balanced the nutrient flows in the farming system. This was accomplished by the Hutu herding Tutsi cattle in return for receiving excess male offspring, manure and milk. As a result the Hutu farmland maintained or increased in soil fertility.
In the 1940's human and animal populations started increasing, and land previously reserved for grazing was converted into cropping lands. For example, from 1948 to 1991, population density in the Gikongoro province increased from 100 people/km^2 to 287 people/km^2. Farm size became smaller and livestock forage was reduced. Livestock ownership from 1967 to 1993 decreased from 1 in 2 households owning cattle to 1 in 4. These changes resulted in a reduction in nutritional quality and access to food since fewer animal products, pulses or cereals were being produced and people were relying more on tubers.
This led to continuous cultivation and increased vulnerability to soil erosion; reduced pastures resulted in fewer animals and less manure; and farmers were forced to try buying manure. Over 40% of survey respondents cited lack of manure as a major reason for declining soil fertility. This combination of poverty, population pressure and resource degradation fed to the eruption of one of the worst civil wars in modern times. Livestock provided an important and stabilizing component of the farming system by maintaining soil nutrients. Their increasing absence contributed to the destabilization of a previously balanced system. While it is certainly not clear whether this drama could have been avoided, one might assume from this analysis that improved incentives and technologies for small-holder development, including, for example the introduction of high yielding small ruminants, could have reduced the downward spiral in resource degradation.
Biodiversity, Increased pressure and intensification of livestock production can cause both positive and negative effects. When livestock are used to reduce dependence on chemical methods to control weeds and insect pests, biodiversity losses are reduced (Box 3.5). On the other hand, excessive grazing pressure on communal areas adjacent to mixed farms has a negative effect, causing losses in biodiversity. There are many documented examples of the effect of livestock grazing on plant and animal biodiversity, especially on open access grazing areas. Overgrazing leads to a change in the composition of plant species. Fewer perennial varieties survive but annuals, of less nutritive value as fodder, become more abundant. This can have a long term negative effect on the value of grazing land and may lead to soil erosion as well as loss of biodiversity. In addition, intensification of production, following increasing population pressure leads, especially in dairy production, to the
replacement of local livestock breeds by a small number of exotic breeds. The significant increase in tractorization, especially in Asia, has had the same effect, because the hardy, strong dual purpose traction/dairy breeds have been replaced with specialized dairy breeds (Chapter 5).
Box 3.5 Livestock and reduced chemical dependence in agriculture.
RUBBER PRODUCTION in South East Asia is practised both on plantations and small-holder farms (2 to 4 hectares in size). In both cases, weeds are controlled by spraying. Rubber producers in Malaysia. and Indonesia spend approximately US$ 150 million and US$ 38.8 million' respectively' trying to control the weeds which compete with rubber tree growth. Researchers in both countries have found 60 to 70 percent of the weeds that grow under rubber can be used to support profitable sheep enterprises. Sheep provide much-needed cash to rubber producing small-holders. Environmentally, by combining sheep and rubber production, herbicide use is reduced by 18 to 38 percent. Furthermore, by using sheep in this manner, fertilizer costs are also reduced.
Source: T. Ismail and C.D. Thai, 1990.
Policies have often limited the beneficial impact of crop-livestock integration and exacerbated its negative environmental effects. These policies have been instigate* in some countries by a desire to achieve self-sufficiency, especially in cereals, and in others by the desire to provide cheap food for urban areas. To achieve self-sufficiency, markets were protected and subsidies were provided on inputs such as fertilizer, feed, fuel, etc. in order to increase production. This created disincentives for the use of on-farm products such as crop-residues, animal draught power and manure and contributed to a decline in mixed farming, with subsequent negative effects on the environment. More specifically:
o subsidizing fertilizers, common in the oil-producing countries such as Nigeria, and many of the North African and Middle Eastern countries, hindered the integration of crops and livestock because it reduced the need for organic fertilizer;
o subsidizing mechanization and fuel, again common in the Middle East, North Africa and Asia, reduced the need for animal traction and, as mentioned before, made possible the expansion of arable farming into marginal areas;
o subsidizing concentrate feed, common in the Middle East and, indirectly through differential import duties on feeds in the KU, leads to the excessive use of concentrate feeds (for example cassava chips in Europe, Box 4.2). It also reduces the need for mixed farming. Globally, it contributes to a "feed nutrient trade deficit" in the developing world; and
o poor land tenure security, especially in the rainfed mixed farming systems of the developing world, has discouraged investment in long-term soil fertility improvements, such as the use of inorganic fertilizers and the use of green manure and leguminous fodder crops within the crop rotation.
The policy of providing cheap food to urban centres has at the same time discouraged intensification, in some cases to the detriment of agricultural production as a whole and livestock in particular:
o imposing high import duties to protect domestic cereal production, has had the effect of extending cropping into marginal areas and upsetting the equilibrium between crops and livestock;
o overvalued exchange rates in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America have favoured imports of cheap food from the industrialized world, thus competing against local production and providing no incentives for local producers to intensify into mixed crop/livestock systems nor to practice soil conservation.
Response: Technology and policy options
A fundamental requirement to achieve environmental sustainability of the natural resource base is to accept change and flexibility in the respective production systems and overall landscape (Levin, 1995). Agriculture, and crop agriculture in particular, seeks to stabilize production and limit environmental change thereby reducing the flexibility of the eco-system. But any ecosystem which supports the production of food, can be enhanced by the integration of livestock as a mechanism to promote system flexibility. Mixed farming, with careful attention to the nutrient balance, is therefore probably the most environmentally desirable system, and should be the prime focus of agricultural planners and decision makers. The challenge will be to identify the technologies and policies, which generate the sustained and accelerated growth needed to satisfy the world's booming demand for meat and milk. This challenge will be enormous. Past global growth of the meat and milk output of the
mixed system has remained behind the increase in global demand. Will the growth in demand levels continue to rise beyond the capacity of mixed farm systems to meet national demands and therefore result in an immediate transition to highly intensive industrial systems? This study argues that, for environmental reasons, it is important to promote mixed farming in order to satisfy, as far as possible, global demand for meat and milk.
The key enabling factor seems to be access to inputs and attractive markets, as illustrated by the Machakos case study in Kenya. Here, a dynamic market and access to inputs has led to a fully sustainable development of a resource poor area, in which the population had quintupled over the last six decades (Box 3.6). Use of livestock in such intensive situations includes a shift in species from cattle to sheep and/or goats. In such intensive situations, sheep and goats are kept where difficult access to markets and milk processing facilities make keeping cattle a less attractive option (Cleaver and Schreiber 1994). Integrated crop-livestock systems have an immense potential to contribute to the required growth in productivity in the highland areas of Latin America and the semi-arid areas and highlands of sub-Saharan Africa where the population density is already high.
In spite of all the advantages of mixed farming, current trends point to specialization in either crop or livestock production, whereby the rate of change in any particular situation will depend on existing infrastructure, relative price ratios between the different inputs and outputs, and economies of scale. The development path that has been followed in the developed world and east Asia confirms this trend.
Box 3.6 Positive effects of population pressure.
THE MACHAKOS case. Human pressure intensification can also work positively. Tiffen et al., (1992) showed clearly that despite a 500 percent population growth over the last 60 years in the semiarid Machakos district in Kenya, the natural resource base improved. The key factor leading to this success was dynamic market development making farming profitable, generating off-farm employment and supplying the capital for investmens in soil and water conservation. Horticulture and small-holder dairy production are the main activities generating the cash for resource conservation, such as terracing. The famine predicted in the 1930's for the Machakos district never occurred.
Technology. In mixed farming systems, there are exciting opportunities for technological change. Applied research and extension are of critical importance if the environmentally friendly factors of the system are to be maintained, although McIntire et al., (1992) make the point that African farmers are well aware of the technologies involved. The challenge will be to convince farmers about the value of technology. In the nutrient deficient systems of the developing world, the emphasis should be on control of soil erosion and improving nutrient recycling. Some examples are:
Improvement of soil cover through the use of alternative crops for mulching, and introduction soil management techniques such as conservation tillage, bench terracing, strip cropping, contour farming, etc.;
Improvement of feed production and quality to reduce the pressure on grazing areas and improve internal nutrient transfers. Technologies to do so include:
o introduction of fodder shrubs and trees to reduce soil erosion and improve soil fertility. Several mixed farming systems using fodder shrubs and trees have been developed. An example is the agroforestry system with three strata (grass, fodder shrubs, and tree crops, such as oil and coconut palms, cashew nuts, etc.) as successfully introduced in Indonesia (Devendra, 1994);
o improvement in feed quality, for example through urea treatment of feeds, as reportedly successfully used now by more than 5 million farmers in China (Li Biagen, pers. com.) and through increased efforts in plant breeding to correct the grain bias of the green revolution "dwarf' varieties and raise nutrient quality of the crop residues; and
o use of non-conventional feeds (sugarcane tops and sugar cane juice, fruit tree and bamboo leaves).
Reduction of nutrient losses from manure and improved efficiency of their application by:
o promotion of stall feeding which doubles the effective availability of nitrogen and phosphorus; and
o strategic supplementation for specific classes of animals (lactating animals) to improve the efficiency of limited amounts of available feed.
Increased production efficiency, and thereby farm income, resulting in improved purchasing power for soil improvement and conservation methods. They include:
o within breed improvement;
o where appropriate, changing to small ruminant production or to optimal combination of ruminant and non-ruminant species; and
o strategic supplementation of lactating and growing animals.
Policy. Clearly, for optimal development of mixed farm systems, a more open market economy is needed. In an open market there should be reduced subsidies for feed, fertilizer and mechanization. Phasing out of subsidies will promote a closer integration of crop and livestock systems in many parts of the world. It will enhance the use of home grown feeds, organic fertilizer and animal traction. To capitalize on free market transitions, better extension, improved financial institutions, security of tenure and, above all, better infrastructure are required.
The greater reliance on market forces needs to be accompanied by policies which seek to provide, for the most densely populated areas, the highest priority for employment generation outside the sector. This can be accompanied by market development for intensive crop and livestock production, such as horticulture and, in livestock, in industrial pig and poultry and possibly small ruminant production. This will enable adequate flows of nutrients in to the system and a rebuilding of environmental sustainability.
For the less critical, but still densely populated areas, markets and infrastructure are still important. For those systems, closer crop-livestock integration will help to reduce eventual nutrient deficits, but markets will always be required to supply external inputs. Technology and market policies should encourage rotations that maintain soil fertility and find synergies between crop and livestock activities.
Mixed farming systems in the developed world: Nutrient surpluses
Environmental challenges
State
Driving forces
Response: Technology and policy options
The mixed farming systems of the developed world cover about 17 percent of the world's pasture land and half of its arable land. They contain about one-fifth of both the world's cattle and small ruminant population. These systems generally show a much slower growth than mixed farming systems in the developing world. In some countries, mixed farming is contracting, reflecting the combination of stabilized demand in the OECD countries and the decline in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, because of restructuring following the transition to a market economy.
Environmental challenges
With increasing population pressure, growing incomes and improved infrastructure and market opportunities, more intensive forms of crop and livestock production, including integrated systems evolve. These integrated systems come into dis-equilibrium in several regions of the world as a consequence of large nutrient imports from. outside the region, causing an overloading of soil and water with pollutants. The environmental challenge in the industrial countries, and to a large extent also in the fast growing economies of east Asia, is thus to identify, before it is too late, the point where land and aquatic ecosystems become overloaded. This is better than trying to identify technologies and policies which mitigate the negative effects of nutrient overloads once they have occured. In other words, "prevention is better than cure".
A further environmental challenge is to maintain biodiversity and an aesthetic landscape in heavily populated and developed mixed farming areas. Although opportunities to conserve biodiversity will not be able to mimic exactly the diversity associated with mixed farming in less developed areas, it should be possible to achieve some level of conservation. The challenge is to put in place technologies and policies which encourage farmers to retain a mixed farming system instead of specializing in the production of one or two crops only.
State
In the developed world, the environmental effects of mixed farming systems may include a deterioration in land and water quality (through soil erosion and nutrient loading), and biodiversity loss, especially through habitat change.
Soil erosion in the temperate zones (for example in the United States and in Europe), with a loss rate of about 15 ton/ha/yr, is half that of the developing world. But even this lower erosion rate exceeds by far the average soil formation of about 1 ton/ha/yr. (Pimentel et al., 1995).
Soil fertility. Soils in north western Europe, (the Netherlands, Germany, Britanny in France) in the eastern and midwestern USA and in the fertile and densely populated, and increasingly affluent, areas of east and south Asia, often reveal a surplus of nutrients. There are also widespread areas of central and eastern Europe where, as a result of very large livestock production units, there is a serious surplus of soil nutrients. While the total area with surplus nutrients is probably still very small (less than one percent of global arable lands (Rabbinge, pers. com.), through runoff its effect on water quality is much more widespread. Often such areas are near ports and/or large urban areas so that the transport costs associated with imported fertilizers, and the subsequent sale of milk and meat, are low.
The excess nitrogen and phosphorus "leaks" through leaching or run-off in surface or groundwater, damage aquatic and land eco systems. In Pennsylvania about 40 percent of the soil samples taken from dairy-crop farms revealed excessive phosphorus and potassium levels. Soils are saturated and surplus nutrients leach into surface water, pollute the environment, in this case the Chesapeake Bay. A similar situation is found in Brittany, France where all eight counties report nitrate levels of more than 40 mg/litre whereas, in the 1980s, only one county reported levels this high (Jensen and de Wit, 1996).
Biodiversity. The intensification of mixed farming and the subsequent shift in production towards regional specialization puts pressure on plant and animal biodiversity. In addition, the move towards sown pastures coupled with high levels of organic and inorganic fertilizer use reduces the richness of flora and fauna. This problem can be exacerbated by the use of insecticides for the control of external parasites, especially in areas with high water tables.
Box 3.7 Feed imports and inorganic fertilizer create system imbalances.
IN THE Brittany region of France, farmers import at least 40 percent of their animal feed requirements from other regions, with the result that, on average, 134 kg nitrogen is available per hectare from manure. In addition 93 kg is purchased in the form of inorganic fertilizer, against a crop uptake of only 146 kg N/ha. This results in an excess of about 80 kg N/ha, causing high nitrate levels in drinking water, and eutrophication of inland surface waters and marine ecosystems. Nitrate concentration typically exceeds 40 mg per litre, compared with 25 mg/l as a guide level in drinking water. Eutrophication of marine ecosystems causes algae growth creating problems for shellfish producers. In some parts (Saint-Brieuc Bay), shellfish have been contaminated with bacteria and sales have been banned (Rainelli, 1991).
Source: Jansen and de Wit, 1996.
Driving forces
Soil erosion is strongly influenced by grazing pressure and cropping intensity. Reynolds et al., (1995) reported how variable soil erosion can be observed under different grazing pressures. Soil loss on lands with a good grass ground over has been estimated at 1 ton per hectare, this increased dramatically on overgrazed pastures to a level of 53 tons per hectare. If grazing pressure is in balance with the forage resource being produced, livestock's interaction can encourage more stable land use practices. Pimental et al., (1995) discussed how, in the United States, in order to increase farm size, grass strips and shelter belts were removed, thus increasing the erosion rate. In the past, livestock provided a rationale for grass strips and shelter belts but, with the separation of crop and livestock systems in OECD countries, the rationale for using land resources in this way has weakened.
Nutrient surpluses are the main cause of deteriorating land and water quality. These surpluses come from a combination of inorganic and organic fertilizers. Inorganic fertilizer is used, in spite of the fact that the system could be balanced using the nutrients supplied by the manure produced within the farming system. For example, in Brittany, organic manure produced by intensive industrial and mixed farms of the region could provide adequate nutrients but substantial surpluses emerge because of the additional import of large quantities (between 35 and 100 kg N/ha per year) of inorganic fertilizers. Inorganic fertilizer is said to be necessary because of the ready availability of its nutrients and its easy transport but, as in pure intensive grazing systems (Box 2.13), lower inputs might be adequate and even more economical. The preparation of nutrient balances (inorganic and organic) on a regional basis is therefore a critical element in identifying land conservation and
fertilizer policies.
Policies designed to protect domestic production of most animal products, especially beef and milk, against imports and a broad array of producer subsidies, especially on feed imports, have led to the wide use of feed concentrates and therefore to situations where nutrients are in surplus. Such situations occur most often on the many small-scale enterprises which tax advantages and quota systems usually favour and where regulations are more difficult to enforce. Smaller size enterprises tend to have more lenient standards and are able more easily to exploit loopholes in regulations designed to protect the environment. These intensive systems using concentrate feed demonstrate how policies designed for social objectives can misdirect technology development.
<section>b</section>
Response: Technology and policy options
Policy. In the developed world, regulations are being introduced to restrict the emission of nutrients in the case of point source pollution, and restrict stocking rate ("manure quota") in the case of non-point source polluters. A cross section of current legislation in some of the developed and developing world is provided in Table 3.3. Regulations include a variety of restrictions on stocking rate and use of fertilizer, manure storage and times and techniques of application, encouraged by government subsidies on manure processing and management.
A variety of measures may be introduced to reduce nutrient surpluses. These include:
o taxation of inorganic fertilizer, in order to discourage unnecessary use where a system is already in surplus;
o maximum application limits and regulation of times of application in order to reduce leaching and volatilization (Box 3.3);
o taxation on feed imports to reduce the significant transfer of nutrients from the already nutrient deficient developing world to the nutrient surplus areas of the industrialized world. Such taxation might be supplemented with, or used as, subsidies for a transfer of nutrients back to the developing world;
o incentives to achieve a more balanced distribution of crop and livestock activities.
Technology. Of particular importance are the following technologies to reduce nutrient surpluses:
o Improved nutrient formulation in terms of incorporating optimum levels of nitrogen into feed and adding enzymes to improve the utilization rate of plant phosphorus. Optimum nutrient ratio and composition management reduce loading the environment with these elements; and
o Improved manure handling and storage are key requirements (Chapter 4) for more efficient use in nutrient deficient areas, and to prevent leaching and pollution of surface water where there is a nutrient surplus. Box 3.8 gives an overview of some of the most common factors which determinine whether the effect of manure is minimal, moderate or severe.
In addition, over the last decade, there has been considerable interest in promoting low-input mixed farming systems, as sustainable and environmentally friendly systems. In the USA, the Rodale Institute in Pennsylvania, and the LISA (Low Input Sustainable Agriculture) movement, strongly promoted by USDA have been in the forefront. In Europe, the ILEIA (Institute for Low External Input Agriculture) has been one of the prime movers. Mixed farming systems are often especially suitable for low input production. Some of the main technologies which can be used in the livestock sector are:
o use of grass-legume mixtures as the basic feeding system for ruminants. The nitrogen fixation of legumes (such as clovers), can replace the nitrogen lost through milk and meat;
o mixed species grazing (cattle and small ruminants), which increases grass yield, botanic composition and reduces the parasite load;
o genetic improvement focusing on maximum capacity to digest roughage, rather than on concentrate feed consumption, and based on life-time production, rather than on short term lactation yield, to achieve optimum efficiency on the basis of renewable resources;
o housing, which allows adequate movement and is based in the animals' natural social behaviour, produces high quality manure using large quantities of straw;
o disease control based on good feeding and breeding practices, and preferably using organic medicines, to minimize environmental contamination.
Table 3.3: A cross of manure management regulations.
Country
N-Emissions
P-Emissions
European Union
Maximum stocking rate: 2.0 cows, equivalent to 170 kg N per year in manure
P[2]O[3] in drinking water: 5,000 microgram/l.
Nitrate level in drinking water: MAC: 50 mg NO[3]/l
Netherlands
Same water standards as KU. Reduction of NH[3] emission by 50-75 percent, through low ammonia emission techniques: injection, bans on autumn and winter applications, and covered manure storage. Cost sharing for manure drying and transport to manure deficient regions.
Max. amount of P[2]O[5] in animal manure allowed to be added to the soil to decline as follows:
Grassland
Maize
with levies for every kg of phosphate produced per hectare of farm-owned land in excess of a tax-free amount of 55 kg P per ha. The tax of US $ 0.40 per kg of P[2]O[5] is doubled for production over 87 kg. per ha.
Germany
Varies according to me State. Maximum fertilizer rate at 240 kg N per ha, and in some states maximum stocking rates of 3.5-4.5 cows (or manure equivalent) per ha. Manure application (winter) and storage restrictions. Mineral record keeping required.
Unlike Netherlands, most attention is on nitrogen
USA
Varies according to the State. Manure management plans required for all farms (with federal and state sharing cost in implementation) and permits required for concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFO's). Bans on the direct discharge on surface water.
/- Maximum Allowable Concentration
Source: This study.
On the crop side, this has to be accompanied by environmentally friendly low-input techniques, such as zero tillage, manuring and composting, integrated pest management (IPM) etc. Precise information about soil nutrient levels, coupled with economic incentives, not only helps to minimize production costs but also helps to maintain the soil nutrient balance as well as a landscape that is aesthetically pleasing.
The National Research Council of the United States (1989) has provided some excellent guidelines for low-input agriculture.
Low-input farming can have a special attraction to consumers who like to buy "environmentally safe" products under "green" labels and to support eco-farming, organic farming, etc. As for any other food product "green label", food must be subject to clear and strict quality standards (especially regarding residues) and be supervised by reliable quality control systems. Prices of such "organic" food products are between 20 and 50 percent higher than conventionally produced foods, mainly as a result of low volumes and stagnant market share (2 to 5 per cent of the EU market). Producers, who are therefore unable to practice economies of scale, nevertheless have to meet high distribution costs.
Box 3.8 Some parameters for the assessment of impact of manure in temperate environments.
Characteristic
Minimal impact
Moderate impact
Severe impact
Ratio of manure phosphate to crop phosphate
less than 0.9
Over 1.1
Distribution of manure over farmland
Homogeneous
Medium
Heterogeneous
Exposure of stored manure to air and soil
Low
Medium
High
Time lapse between manure application and planting date
1-7 days
1-4 weeks
More than 1 month
Time lapse between manure application and working-in
0-1 hr
1-12 hr
More than 12 hours
Use of water with manure application
Much
Some
None
Organic matter saved from waste
Much
Some
None
N working coefficient
High
Medium
Low
Source: Brandjes et al., 1995.
"Green label" eggs (free range production) are one of the most widespread products and now have a market share of 5 to 10 percent in the KU. By and large, low-input production has, until now, only proved viable where consumers are ready to pay a premium for "eco-products" and where there is market saturation.
Conclusions
Mixed farming systems, with crops and livestock on the same farm, are likely to be a dynamic element (although a potentially transient one) of the growing livestock sector. Across eco-regions the time frame, in which within-one-farm mixed systems will develop, flourish and recede, will be closely tied to overall economic growth and development.
In the future, mixed farming systems will be subjected to the pressures and opportunities of a more open market economy. Structural adjustment reforms will continue, resulting in less distortions in exchange rates and input pricing. The global trade reform initiated under GATT and the World Trade Agreements will lower import barriers. It will be necessary to establish where a particular system is located in terms of regional nutrient balance and infrastructure links. Strict regulations on manure production and emission are expected to be further strengthened in the OECD countries and should become increasingly important in the mid-income level countries of Latin America and East Asia.
Mixed farming systems have a capacity to absorb and mitigate negative environmental impacts provided that environmental costs are internalized. This capacity is likely to be improved when markets are liberalized. Furthermore, these systems have the largest capacity to benefit from technological innovation. These two factors combined should help mixed farming systems to grow in size and importance as environmental costs force restrictions on industrial systems.
Regional mixed farm
However, as explained in the next chapter, if significant industrial, land-detached systems are developed, opportunities will remain for production in a mixed farming context, by integrating industrial, land-detached units and arable farms in a giant "regional mixed farm".
<section>c</section>
Chapter 4: Industrial livestock systems & the environment
Environmental challenges
Conclusions
Industrial livestock systems & the environment
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION^1 of pork, poultry and (feedlot) beef and mutton is the fastest growing form of animal production. In 1996, it provided more than half the global pork and poultry meat (broiler) production and 10 percent of the beef and mutton production. This represented 43 percent of total global meat production, up from 37 percent in 1991-93. Moreover, it provided more than two-thirds of the global egg supply. Geographically, the industrialized countries dominate intensive industrial pig and poultry production accounting for 52 percent of the global industrial pork production and 58 percent of the poultry production. Asia contributes 31 percent of the world's pork production (Sere and Steinfeld, 1996 and Figure 4.1).
^1 Defined as production systems in which less than 10 percent of the feed is produced within the production unit.
Industrial ruminant production is concentrated in Eastern Europe, the ex-Soviet Union and in the OECD countries (Figure 4.1). Typical examples are large-scale feedlots in the USA and in the former centrally planned economies. Industrial sheep feedlots are found in the Near East, North Africa and the USA.
The industrial production system is open both in physical and economic terms. It depends on outside supply of feed, energy and other inputs. Technology, capital and infrastructure requirements are based on large economies of scale and, because of this, production efficiency is high in terms of output per unit of feed or per man-hour, although less so when measured in terms of energy units. Yet, as the world's main provider of eggs, poultry meat and pork at competitive prices, it meets most of the escalating demands for low cost animal products in rapidly growing urban centres of the developing world.
Figure 4.1: Industrial system livestock production by world region ('1000 tons).
Environmental challenges
State
Driving forces
Response: Technology and policy options
Because of its open nature and many interfaces with the natural resource base, the industrial "big-industry" system signifies for many the epitome of what is wrong with animal production. The industrial scale implies large herd/flock sizes, large volumes of wastes, high animal health risks, and less attention to animal welfare. It has multiple opportunities to dump its waste products without accounting for the environmental costs. There are, however, solutions which could substantially reduce the negative environmental effects, although at a cost. The biggest challenge that the sector faces over the next decade is to identify technologies and establish policies that will internalize the environmental costs.
State
The industrial system acts directly on land, water, air and biodiversity through the emission of animal waste, use of fossil fuels and substitution of animal genetic resources. In addition, it affects the global land base indirectly, through its effect on the arable land needed to satisfy its feed concentrate requirements. Ammonia emissions from manure storage and application lead to localized acid rain and ailing forests, for example in European countries. Also, the industrial system requires the use of uniform animals of similar genetic composition. This contributes to within-breed erosion of domestic animal diversity. The effects of each of the direct agents are described below and the indirect environmental effects of feed concentrate production and the pressure on domestic animal diversity, are described in Chapter 5.
Land, water and air. These are the environmental components mostly affected by the concentration of animals and waste production. Manure is the main agent having effect, mostly during storage and after application on the land. Pigs and poultry excrete some 65 and 70 percent, respectively, of their nitrogen and phosphate intake. Nitrogen, under aerobic conditions, can evaporate in the form of ammonia with toxic, eutrophic and acidifying effects on ecosystems (Wilson and Skeffington, 1994). A greenhouse gas, nitrous oxide (N[2]O), is formed as part of the denitrification process with particularly harmful effects on the environment. Nitrates are leached into the groundwater posing human health hazards and run-off and leaching of nitrogen directly lead to eutrophication and big-diversity loss of surface waters and connected ecosystems. Phosphorus, on the other hand, is rather stable in the soil, but, when P saturation is reached after long term high level application of manure,
leaching occurs and this also causes eutrophication (Fig. 4.2).
Figure 4.2: Possible losses from manure between excretion and crop uptake.
Source: Bos and de Wit, 1996.
Ammonia and other nitrogenous gases result from the digestion of protein, part of which is lost in manure and urine. Growing pigs, for example, excrete 70 percent of the protein in feed while beef cattle excrete 80 to 90 percent and broiler chickens 55 percent (Jongbloed and Lenis, 1992). Ammonia, in high concentrations in the air, can have a direct effect on plant growth, by damaging leaf absorption capacities but its indirect effect on soil chemistry is even more important. Ammonia acidifies the soil, interferes with the absorption of other essential plant elements, particularly in nitrogen-poor ecosystems such as forests. Livestock production is a major source of ammonia emissions in the industrial world. For example, of the 208,000 tons of ammonia emitted in the Netherlands in 1993, 181,000 tons was estimated to come from manure (Heij, 1995). This was about 55 percent of the total acid deposits in the Netherlands, industry and traffic being other important contributors.
In many developing countries, industrial pollution, especially from high sulphuric acid coal burning is the more important source of acid rains. Ammonia also constitutes a health threat for farm workers.
The various forms of nitrogen losses lead to much reduced levels available for crop nutrition. Plant uptake and use depend on a series of other factors such as species, climatic and soil conditions. According to Bos and de Wit (1996), 20,50 and 44 percent of the nitrogen excreted by pigs, broilers and laying hens respectively are lost to the atmosphere as NH[3], as shown in Table 4.1. Because of its different chemical properties, phosphorus losses are insignificant because phosphorus mainly remains in the soil.
Table 4.1: Annual global nitrogen production in manure and losses of industrial monogastric systems (in million tons).
Management system
Source of loss
Broilers
Pigs
In stable
excreted
various losses
for land application
On land
NH[3] losses
available for crop nutrition
Source: Estimated from data from Bos and de Wit, 1996.
The amount of N. P. K and other nutrients available to the crop within the soil determine the fertilizer value of manure. Further significant losses may occur depending on the type of stable and manure management system (Safely et al., 1992) and thus define the direct environmental impact (Table 4.2).
Table 4.2: The relative importance of different manure management systems (percentage for each animal type)
Animals
Lagoons
Liquid systems
Solid storage
Anaerobic digester
Burned for fuel
Deep pit stacks and litter
Directly discharged
Pigs
Broilers
Laying hens
Beef
Source: Compiled by Bos and de Wit, 1996.
Substantial nitrogen and phosphorus losses also occur when manure is applied on the land. Box 3.8 gives an overview of key factors affecting the environmental effects of manure spreading. The spreading of manure directly on the land can lead to nitrogen leaching into the water as nitrates and contamination of surface waters. This in turn leads to high algae growth, eutrophication and hence damages aquatic eco-systems. Not all soils are equally susceptible to nutrient loading and (ground) water contamination. Sandy soils with low cation exchange capacity, and therefore poor retention characteristics and high run-off, are particularly at risk.
Because of feed's high energy content and, for example, the direct use of fossil energy to heat stables, significant amounts of CO[2] are emitted. Anaerobic decomposition of manure also releases large amounts of methane into the atmosphere when it is stored in liquid form (Chapter 5).
Heavy metals. Copper and zinc, which are essential minerals for livestock diet, are deliberately added to concentrate feed whereas other heavy metals, in particular cadmium, are introduced involuntarily via feed phosphates. Only 5 to 15 percent of metal additives are absorbed by animals, the rest is excreted. Soils, on which pig and poultry manure are continuously applied at high rates, accumulate heavy metals, jeopardizing the good functioning of soil, contaminating crops and posing human health risks (Conway and Pretty, 1991).
Fossil fuels. The industrial system is a poor converter of fossil energy. Fossil energy is a major input of intensive livestock production systems, mainly indirectly for the production of feed. For example, Table 4.3 shows that feed accounts for 72 to 74 percent of the total energy input, except for veal production where it is almost 90 percent. Similar observations can be made for industrial pig and poultry production (Table 4.4).
Table 4.3: Energy input of some types of industrial meat production systems (in Mega Joule (MJ) per kg of liveweight).
Component
Beef
Veal
Mutton
Energy input feed^1)
Energy input animals^2)
Energy input fattening (buildings, equipment, fuel and other)
Total energy input
1) includes fossil energy requirements for production, transport and processing of feed
2) fossil energy for the production of the animals
Source: Brand and Melman, 1993.
Energy output for livestock products comprises food and non-food items. Southwell and Rothwell (1917) calculated output/input ratios of 0.38, 0.11 and 0.32 for pork, poultry meat and eggs respectively, while for milk it was 0.5. These calculations take into consideration fossil energy input only.
A large portion of non-food energy output is in the form of manure and the potential for recovery of this energy has greatly increased in recent years. Techniques for methane recovery are described in Chapter 5. The heavy concentration of animals in certain regions, particularly in the pig and poultry systems, has given rise to the development of large scale processing of manure for use elsewhere. Manure processing and transport further increases fossil fuel consumption, particularly if drying is involved. This extra energy expenditure may offset the energy savings made by concentrating livestock production.
Biodiversity. The industrial system has a threefold effect on species wealth through:
o its demand for concentrate feed, which changes land use and intensifies cropping. The production of feed grains, in particular, adds additional stress on biodiversity through habitat loss and damages in ecosystem functioning;
o waste production and its effects on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. These effects are often geographically confined to areas of high livestock densities. Eutrophication and destruction of habitats is a common phenomena in parts of north-eastern Europe and the USA as well as in the densely populated areas of the developing world, in particular Asia and to a lesser extent, Latin America. Ammonia emissions lead to acidification of particularly fragile habitats and so causes losses in biodiversity; and
o the requirement for extremely uniform animals of similar genetic composition. This contributes to within-breed erosion of domestic animal diversity, and is discussed in detail in Chapter 5.
Environmental benefits of industrial production systems. First, the rapid development of "modern" industrial pig and poultry systems helps to reduce total feed requirements of the global livestock sector to meet a given demand. It may therefore alleviate pressures for deforestation and degradation of rangelands, such as is happening in parts of Latin America and Asia, thus saving land and preserving biodiversity. Second, the feed-saving technologies developed for this system can be effective at any scale and therefore can be successfully transferred to mixed farming systems. The same holds true for waste prevention and treatment technologies which have been developed following regulations applied mainly to the industrial system. Therefore, the resource-saving and waste management technologies generated by the industrial systems bring benefits to the sector as a whole.
Table 4.4: Energy input for pigs and poultry systems (in MJ per kg of liveweight).
Component
Pork
Poultry meat
Eggs
Canada
Netherlands
Canada
Netherlands
Canada
Netherlands
Housing
-fuel, electricity
-building equipment
Total Housing
Feed
-transport
-production, processing
Total feed
Total energy input
Sources: Southwell and Rothwell, 1977, Leijen et al., and Brand and Melman, 1993.
Driving forces
Population growth, rising income and urbanization are the fundamental driving forces determining growth of industrial livestock production. Globally, industrial animal production is the fastest growing sector, with over 4 and 5 percent growth per year in pork and broiler production, respectively. Annual growth for eggs is 3.8 percent and for mutton and beef 2.5 percent. Driven by rising incomes and rapid urbanization (which in itself causes an increase in meat consumption), Asia experienced over the last decade a staggering growth of 9 percent per year in industrial pig and poultry production, and this trend can be expected to accelerate. Sub-Saharan Africa shows good growth in all monogastric products, while Latin America continues to exhibit significant growth in poultry products. In Western Europe and the USA, growth is levelling off, while in the former Soviet Union, after the transition, all intensive meat and egg production is shrinking.
Box 4.1 Feed imports and nutrient surpluses.
THE NETHERLANDS, France (Brittany) and Denmark depend, respectively, on 85, 40 and 20 percent on feed imports for their intensive pig and poultry industry. As a result, large quantities of manure have to be transported over long distances (up to 100 km in the Netherlands) to "manure deficit" areas. In Brittany, the distance over which manure is transported needs to cover, on average only 15 km, whereas in Denmark almost all manure can be applied in the immediate surrounding area.
Industrial animal production has become concentrated in certain areas because of a number of factors which usually interact:
o Transport costs and market opportunities are the main determinants. First, the industrial system, especially for pigs and poultry, is characterised by a significant, and often exclusive, use of feeds of high energy content (mainly cereals, oilseeds and their byproducts). This high energy density allows movement of feeds over longer distances at substantially lower costs than perishable animal products, even though the quantities are larger. For example, sea transport costs of grains is one-tenth per unit weight that of frozen meat Cunningham (1992). Thus, with an average feed conversion of 3:1 for pigs and 2:1 for poultry it is less costly to transport feed than meat. In addition, over short to medium distances, live animal transport costs are similar to those of grains. These relative costs encourage production, slaughter and meat processing facilities to be located near urban centres. The large number of industrial units being established around Beijing, Shanghai,
Mumbai and Calcutta demonstrate this incentive for close proximity to the consumer. Second, ruminants require fibrous feeds such as silage, hay or fresh chopped forages, in addition to concentrate feed, to maintain the rumen functions. This requirement increases the transport costs for feed significantly and explains why industrial ruminant production is generally more connected to the landbase (and less to the consumer market) than pigs or poultry. In addition, feed conversion of concentrate feed per kg of beef or mutton is substantially poorer than with pigs and poultry. Intensive beef production is therefore only competitive where consumers can afford to pay a substantial premium for quality beef over chicken or pork. Third, in net grain importing developed countries, with abundant road and cooling infrastructure, large-scale industrial operations are located close to ports, such as pig operations in the Netherlands and northern Germany.
o Agrarian structure has favoured high livestock densities and the evolution of industrial-type systems where shrinking farm size forced farmers to engage in value-adding activities without significant land requirements, such as in some southern parts of Germany and the Netherlands, or to abandon agriculture altogether. This move has been favoured by price subsidies with the main objective of supporting rural populations; and
o Different policy settings within a country or free-market zone through, for example, tax advantages, low energy costs or low environmental standards, may lead to concentration of the industrial system. An example is where intensive poultry, and more recently also pig production, moved from the corn belt of the USA to the southern States, and, in the KU, to Italy and Spain.
Policies. In the past, industrial and intensive mixed farming systems have benefited from policy distortions and the absence of regulations or their enforcement and, in many cases, this vacuum has given this system a competitive edge over land-based systems. Furthermore, some policies have misdirected resource use and encouraged the development of technologies which are inefficient outside the distorted context. For example:
o In the KU, high domestic prices for beef, pork and milk, together with cheap imports of cereal-substitutes, such as cassava (Box 4.2), have benefited industrial production. In addition, parts of the industrial ruminant system, for example, veal production, have greatly benefited from the subsidy policy on milk replacers. This policy originated from the surplus production of milk caused by milk quotas in excess of market requirements although these have also been reduced;
o In WANA, small ruminant feedlots were (and still are) heavily dependent on subsidized feed, and this has encouraged inefficient feed use;
o In the former centrally planned economies, the feedlot system was based on heavily subsidized feed grain and on subsidized fuel and transport; and
o ·Many developing countries not only have direct subsidies on feed but also on energy. As energy is a major direct and indirect cost item in industrial production systems, economy wide policies often tend to favour industrial production over grazing systems and mixed farming.
Box 4.2 The international transfer of nutrients: the cassava story.
DIFFERENTIAL IMPORT tariffs for cereals and cereal substitutes such as cassava and sweet potato meal, and improved feed formulation techniques strongly promoted the import of those cereal substitutes from the Far East, leading in the early '90s to an import of 7 million tons (15 percent of the EU's total consumption of energy feeds, mostly in the Netherlands). This implies an annual import of about 40,000 tons of nitrogen and 7,000 tons of phosphorus, or about 15 kg of N per hectare per year agricultural land there, which, as it is not evenly distributed, constitutes a considerable environmental burden.
Finally, in practically no country in the world, is the industrial system charged with the full environmental costs of production. It appears that societies prefer the cheap supply of animal products over the functions of concerned ecosystems. Self-sufficiency in animal products and supply of high-value food commodities to urban populations seem to be overriding policy objectives, particularly in developing countries.
<section>d</section>
Response: Technology and policy options
In the developed world, stagnating demand and increasing human health concerns have, to some extent, alleviated the pressure. For example, growth of industrial beef feedlots in North America, is still only driven by population growth, because per capita consumption of beef has remained constant. The importance of feedlots in the European Community is likely to decline as production becomes more extensive in response to policies that reduce support to agriculture and promote environmentally friendlier production systems. With the shift to a market economy in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, the importance of industrial ruminant production is declining and ruminant production is moving back to the land base and to smaller scales of operation.
In addition, and more importantly, the pollution of land, water and air has raised acute awareness in the developed world of the environmental problems associated with industrial production systems. This has, in many cases, triggered the establishment of policies and regulatory measures, removing many of the favouring factors, and inducing a series of technologies that are increasingly applied, wherever regulations are enforced. They are detailed below.
Policies and regulations. Regulatory instruments are imposed to control the distribution and concentration of livestock production and introduce technical control systems. Some of these regulations are relatively easy to enforce whereas others, for example the maximum permitted amount of manure per unit area, are more difficult. The regulatory approach is most efficient in situations of point source pollution (Box 4.3) and where there are strong enforcement institutions. In countries with weak institutions, the enforcement of regulations at reasonable social cost remains a major challenge and limits the validity of this approach. Compliance with regulations affects cost of production and may therefore influence regional distribution. Specific examples of regulations are given in Table 3.4. They include the limits on the number of animals in the KU, and most of the member states, taxes on surplus animals as in Belgium (Manale, 1991), taxes on surplus P (most EU countries), a
ban on direct discharge of manure into surface waters (USA, Malaysia), and the establishment of nutrient management plans (Indonesia, the USA and a number of European countries). Guidelines on manure storage and application methods, timing, crops and quantities are available in practically all countries with high animal densities.
Box 4.3 Point versus non-point source pollution.
POINT SOURCE pollution originates from a specific location and it is usually possible to determine how much of the pollution is entering the environment. Discharge of manure into surface waters, for example, is point source pollution. Non' point source pollution results from seepage of surface discharges, precipitation or atmospheric deposition. It spans a wide area of land, often depending on weather conditions, making both the occurrence and extent of pollution difficult to predict. Environmental damage through excess manure application to land is non-point source pollution.
Box 4.4 Livestock waste in Singapore.
BETWEEN 1967 and 1987, the densely populated island state: of Singapore went through a series of policy + changes and technology adaptation and developments. Initially food security policies and consumer preference for fresh meat resulted in an upgrading of technologies, including least cost feed formulations, improved animal husbandry and veterinary health. in the 1970s, Singapore achieved self-sufficiency in eggs, poultry meat and pork. Starting in the late '70s Singapore started to establish a network of waste discharge measures including a 95 percent reduction of Biological Oxygen Demand, BOD (see Chapter 5) and a sludge of at least 20 percent total solids content (Taiganides, 1992). Technologies for waste disposal were mainly imported from western developed countries and adapted to the specific conditions. In spite of having to incorporate a large part of the environmental costs in their prices, Singapore producers remained competitive vis-à-vis live animal imports. In
1984, environmental standards were raised, particularly with regard to odour control. In the same year, Singapore abandoned the national objective of self-sufficiency in monogastric products and pig farming was phased out in 1987.
Zoning can regulate regional distribution. Zoning is, and will remain, an important policy for controlling animal manure storage and processing, not only for environmental reasons but also for concerns of human health and rational regional development. Zoning has been important both in environmental and in regional development policies, as well as in successfully moving industrial production units away from urban centres in OECD countries. An important prerequisite for successful zoning is good infrastructure because animal products will have to be transported over larger distances. Marketing and processing infrastructure must therefore be taken into account when defining zones in order to make the best use of investment. The creation of confined "industrial parks", with prescribed and sometimes shared facilities for waste collection and treatment, offers opportunities to fully charge industrial production systems with environmental costs while still maintaining advantages
of market access and economies of scale. Governments have frequently established guidelines for the siting of production units, particularly to protect urban settlements from obnoxious smells. Zoning, when done within a comprehensive area development plan, also allows for common waste collection and treatment facilities to be shared by a number of producers. The ultimate zoning strategy has been introduced by Singapore, which completely prohibits animal production (Box 4.4).
A trend to rational zoning is not only fostered through environmental concerns but also by changes in overall policies, often triggered by the removal of government interventions and trade liberalization. In the Near East, for example, industrial small ruminant systems have been kept viable through subsidies on grains and are increasingly under pressure because of the financial requirements to maintain these subsidies.
Box 4.5 The effects of internalizing environmental costs on production costs and income.
NO SYSTEMATIC evaluation exists and data are scarce. Cost; are very site-specific and rarely are full environmental costs actually covered. However, regulations for intensive production systems in some countries are so strict that practically all environmental costs, at least for waste, are absorbed by the producer. Here are some examples
o In Malaysia, for cultural reasons swine production is kept out of sight and no pig manure can be applied to land. In certain prescribed areas, Industrial pig producers have to reduce BOD to less than 50 mg/l (95 percent reduction), through screening and aerobic treatment. For a 500 animal pig unit, investment costs are around 10 000 Ringgit Malaysia (RM) and operating costs are 24 RM per production place (Hassan, pers. com.) This implies an incremental production cost of 0.23 RM (approx. 9 US cents) per kilogram of live-weight produced, equivalent to a cost increase of around 6 percent.
o ·In Singapore, in 1986, the large-scale Ponggol Pigwaste plant turned wastewater into recycled water (7 mg/l BOD5), essentially removing all waste-related environmental effects. Total average annual costs were calculated at US$ 14.39 (Taiganides, 1992) per porker marketed or between 8 and 9 percent of total production costs.
o Australian beef feedlot regulations are the strictest in the world and contribute to construction costs of new feedlots being much higher than in the United States. Most feedlots am in the vicinity of grain producing areas. The regulatory frameworks differ between the States and costs of compliance with environmental regulations have been given at A$ 27 per head for feedlots in Queensland and A$ 41 for New South Wales (Ridley et al., 1994) or approximately 4 and 6 percent respectively of total production costs. Investment costs related to compliance with environmental regulations are 6 percent of total investment costs.
o While it appears that overall impact on production costs, even in extreme cases, do not exceed 10 percent incremental costs, investment requirements and effect on income can be prohibitive if such measures are applied unilaterally. Furthermore, unit costs for establishing and operating waste treatment facilities decrease with increasing size, so small producers are disadvantaged. However, the latter often face less severe regulations, such as dairies in the USA' or are exempted altogether.
The most efficient and direct financial instrument would be to internalize all environmental costs into the consumer price. This should certainly be the policy over the medium term. However, implementation of such policies is not easy. First, there is a lack of accurate economic evaluation of these costs, for example for biodiversity and some gaseous emissions and some indirect costs (soil erosion because of feed production, for example). Initial calculations point to an increase of 10-15 percent in cost price (Box 4.5). Second, unequal application of the inclusion of environmental costs in the product price puts some producers at a comparative disadvantage. A more global approach will therefore be required.
Current financial instruments therefore focus on reducing the emission of nitrogen and phosphates and other potential pollutants, particularly in susceptible and already burdened areas. The levies and taxes currently imposed on the intensive mixed and industrial systems in practically all developed countries fall into this category. This includes many of the measures listed above, such as levies on waste discharge, taxes on excess animals or phosphate-loads. Others are:
o removal of subsidies, or imposition of taxes on imported concentrates, to increase the cost of feed concentrate-intensive production and to favour land-based systems over the industrial system. This is the main cause that large-scale feedlots can no longer compete in the contracting market of the former centrally planned economies. Here, the general trend points to a more land-based livestock production, removing a large part of the waste problem in the medium term. In a more indirect way, removal of subsidies or taxes on fossil fuel may have a similar effect by raising the cost of feed. Government income from such sources could be used to alleviate environmental problems;
o removal of import restrictions on materials and equipment that improve feed efficiency, such as amino-acids to improve protein, enzymes to improve phosphate digestion and feeding equipment that restricts intake. These technologies lead, indirectly, to lower waste loads through better feed conversion;
o subsidies for investment or running costs to improve the adoption of emission control technologies. For example, subsidies for constructing manure storage facilities are given in many EU countries. In the USA, cost-sharing and state revolving funds have been established for manure storage sheds and dead bird composters; and
o a system of tradable manure emission quota to limit waste production and still create incentives for efficient resource use. Marketable permits and pollution trading would be based on the establishment of payment per unit of pollution or the use of pollution reduction credits.
Technologies. As can be expected according to the theory of induced technology (Chapter 1), these measures have led to the introduction of a wide range of new techniques. Because of the commercial and demand-driven nature of the industrial system, development and transfer of technologies are usually not a problem, although their impact can be expected to level off as high levels of technology are reached.
A whole range of technologies exists that could alleviate the environmental burden created by this system. The effectiveness of these technologies with regard to manure disposal can be measured with parameters as described in Boxes 4.6 & 3.8. These technologies seek improvement in two areas:
Reduction of nitrogen and phosphate excretion by improving feed utilization can be achieved through:
o introduction of multi-phase feeding in order to match feed composition to the needs of the individual animal classes. By better adjusting the nutrient supply to the needs of animals, less waste is produced and therefore less nitrogen and phosphates are released in waste and into the environment;
o improving the accuracy of determining nitrogen and phosphate requirements, followed by better balancing of feeds with these essential nutrients. In this respect, important gains have already been obtained in better balancing pig and poultry rations with essential amino-acids, the building blocks of feed proteins. For example, a combination of better balanced feed improved digestibility and the inclusion of synthetic amino acids, allows for a substantial reduction of the protein content in feed and, hence, a reduction of nitrogen excretion by 20 to 40 percent (Van der Zijpp, 1992). Concentrate conversion rates range between 2.5 to 3 kg feed dry matter/kg liveweight gain in pigs, 2.0 to 2.5 kg feed /kg of liveweight gain in broilers, and even less for eggs. They have been reduced by at least 30-50 percent since the '60s; for example, the average feed conversion of pigs in the Netherlands in 1957 was 3.5 kg feed per kg liveweight gain (Grashuis, 1958). Through selection
and better feed formulation, there is considerable potential for further improvement (Chapter 5). For ruminants, key production efficiency parameters are daily weight gains and feed conversion, which reflect the profitability of the use of capital for feed, lean animals and investments. Cattle weight gains are usually in the range of 1 to 1.5 kg/day and feed conversion rates are of about 8 to 10 kg of grains per kg of weight gain during their period in the feedlot. A more detailed discussion of concentrate to animal conversion is given in Chapter 5. Other options include the use of growth hormones (somatropine) or other stimulants (clenbuterol), frequently used in the USA, but banned in most of Europe;
o increasing diet digestibility. Spectacular improvements have been obtained with the addition of an enzyme (phytase) for catalysing the digesting of phosphates in feed. The same enzyme might also increase the availability of zinc in feed, reducing the need for feed additives; and
o promoting feeding systems which reduce intake and stop the buffet-style, ad libitum feeding which was popular in the 1980s.
Box 4.6 Indicators for manure management.
o distribution of manure over available land.
o exposure to air and contact with soil.
o time lapse between application and planting.
o time lapse between application and working-in.
o use of water with liquid manure.
o nitrogen losses.
o organic matter losses.
Source: Brandjes et al., 1996.
Reduction of the emission from manure storage and during application. Possible technologies are:
o a reduction of nutrient losses from manure in stables and during storage through improved collection and storage techniques. In animal buildings, manure is stored either under a solid floor, under a slatted floor, or within a housing system with litter. A large part of ammonia emissions comes from the manure surface in storage, either under the slatted floor or in open tanks. The main focus has to be on reducing nitrogen losses, most of which are in the form of ammonia from the manure surface. Possibilities are:
Solid storage systems, which collect the faeces only for storage in bulk (often for extended periods), and have low gaseous emissions;
Liquid or slurry systems where animals are kept on slatted floors and the manure and urine are collected and stored in large tanks. This system is particularly common in pig production, and part of the energy may be recovered through the use of anaerobic digesters;
Lagoon systems consist of flushing systems using large amounts water. Nitrogen losses and methane emissions are high;
Covered tanks and manure kept under solid floors in stables. Minimal amounts of ammonia are emitted when manure is stored under solid floors. Reductions in emissions of 80 to 90 percent can be achieved by covering storage tanks (Voorburg, 1994); and
Reducing odour and ammonia after emission from the source. In addition to natural or forced ventilation systems the air can be cleaned through big-filters or bio-washers that absorb odours and ammonia from polluted air. This is done by oxidizing ammonia into NO[2] and NO[3]. Up to half of the ammonia can be eliminated through such air washing systems. However they are costly in investment and operation. (Chiumenti et al., 1994).
o methods that efficiently re-use energy and nutrients in manure in cases where manure is not used directly for agriculture. Biogas plants of all sizes and different levels of sophistication exist. They not only recover the energy contained in manure but also eliminate most of the animal and human health problems associated with micro-biological contamination of waste by microorganisms. Other methods of controlling the waste load are purifying and drying the manure;
o reducing nutrient losses during and after application of manure on soils (Chapter 3). Injection or sward application of manure into the subsoil and appropriate timing significantly reduces nitrogen losses as shown by the Netherlands' experience since 1995. Nitrification inhibitors can be added to slurry to decrease leaching from the soil under wet conditions;
o large-scale manure processing is possible where intensive production is concentrated in certain zones but that is often not viable economically. The efficient use of manure for feed and energy production requires high capital investment which often cannot be borne by individual farmers (Box 4.7); and
o recycling manure by feeding it back to livestock, including fish (Muller, 1980) is practiced only on a limited scale. In addition to widespread reluctance to use manure as feed, mainly originating from fear of health hazards, most types of manure have a low nutritive value with the exception of poultry manure which is of reasonable quality, i.e. 55-60 percent Total Digestible Nutrients (TDN) and 20-30 percent Crude Protein (CP). Consequently, in intensive production systems with large amounts of collectable manure, cheaper feeds are also available, while in production systems where utilization of low quality feeds is common, high collection and opportunity costs (manure as fertilizer or fuel) prohibit the use of manure as feed. A recent overview of the possibilities is given by Sanchez (1995).
Box 4.7 Joint biogas plants in Denmark.
FOR THE: protection oft water resources, Denmark has established regulations that allow manure to be applied only during the growing season. Consequently, the manure has to be stored for up to nine months, creating immense storage problems and costs. This induced an initiative in 1988 by which a number of farmers are served by Joint Biogas Plants which are large common storage facilities. This overcomes the problem of economies of scale which individual farmers would be unable to overcome. In 1994 nine plants delivered more than 2 million m^3 monthly to public utilities. (Johansen, 1995)
Conclusions
The key policy challenge is to charge the industrial system with the environmental costs it creates, i.e. to fully apply the "polluter-pays" principle. Besides the difficulty of accurately measuring the costs, such a policy would raise consumer prices for livestock products, particularly affecting urban consumers who are an important policy group in many countries. Furthermore, a high degree of self-sufficiency in livestock products through the development of a modern livestock industry is a primary policy objective in many developing countries and this would most likely not be achieved, if the principle is strictly applied. By incorporating all environmental costs, many countries would lose their comparative advantage.
On the other hand, stricter environmental standards and corresponding incentives to better balance land and animal distribution could be a powerful tool to promote rural and agricultural development: prices for animal products would increase, providing land-based production incentives to intensify; and development would be more decentralised, creating employment and marketing opportunities outside the large urban centres. Such a process will have to be monitored carefully in order not to lose the technological edge by removing economies of scale and functioning infrastructure and needs to be seen in a regional development context. As has been shown, the industrial system obtains its advantage in efficiency through a combination of factors:
o the use of capital intensive and advanced technologies and resultant economies of scale;
o the exploitation of market opportunities, both at input and product level; and
o a shift to pigs and poultry as better feed converters.
This has important implications for the future. The analysis shows that most expansion and productivity growth in the livestock sector will have to be sustained through the provision of concentrate feed, which normally would require additional land. The establishment of proper controls for the industrial system would then lead to intensifying livestock production through better feed conversions, and intensifying crop production aiming at higher yields. Both will reduce the land requirements for given volumes of final product and alleviate pressures on habitats and biodiversity.
Following this line of argument, measures to foster biodiversity and protection of natural resources would encourage improvements in feed conversion by removing obstacles and providing incentives for more efficient feed use. Large opportunities lie in astute pricing of concentrate feed and in providing access to related technologies. A practical difficulty lies in the cross-country nature of measures and effects when feed is imported, traded and international agreements will need to be found.
In conclusion, the industrial system poses most of the environmental problems and offers most of the possible solutions. The world's human population will increase from today's 5.5 billion to around 10 billion by the year 2030, i.e. almost double. With increasing incomes, urbanization and ageing populations, the world demand for livestock products is likely to triple, perhaps quadruple. Neither the grazing system nor the mixed farming system, as we know it, will be able to satisfy this increase in demand. The greatest part of the additional demand will have to be supplied by the industrial type of production. For this to happen, two requirements must be met:
o Industrial systems and high potential cropping must be integrated in an area-wide crop-livestock integration. Mixed farming needs to be practiced in a wider land use concept, where crop and livestock production are specialized but maintain their big-physical links. This would allow for environmentally beneficial interaction, while giving enterprises the opportunity to specialize and to fully exploit economies of scale. It entails a new type of regional planning that takes into account nutrient balances and input and product markets, infrastructure and services. Ultimately, such concepts will find application, not only at the regional or watershed level, but also at country and international scales. Livestock production will increasingly need to be relocated to the resource base and, with a combination of efficient infrastructure, appropriate incentives and enforced regulations, this will be the mainstream "animal agriculture" on the horizon.
o The striving for increasing efficiencies must continue in order to alleviate the resource requirements for livestock production. Already, there could be a massive reduction of resource requirements, if appropriate technologies were applied, and if policies were conducive to higher efficiencies. New technologies, which promise continuous advances in efficiency are on the horizon.
<section>e</section>
Chapter 5: Beyond production systems
Concentrate feed production
Environmental challenges
Conclusion
Domestic animal diversity
Livestock and greenhouse gases
Processing of livestock products
The environmental impact of livestock
THIS CHAPTER assesses the environmental impact of those inputs and outputs of livestock production and processing, which affect the natural resource base beyond the confines of a particular production system. They are the effects of:
o concentrate feed production (which is used about equally by mixed and industrial farming systems) on global land and water quality;
o intensification of all types of animal production systems on domestic animal biodiversity;
o livestock production on air quality and global warming through the emission of greenhouse gases from all systems; and
o effluent from livestock processing on soil and water quality.
Concentrate feed production
For thirty years livestock production and productivity have grown by feeding ever greater amounts of high quality feed. This feed connection has been one of the most debated livestock-environment interactions, because it involves ethical issues of competition of human and animals for food, efficiency and food security. It is also the subject of generalizations based on ill-founded assumptions and might well have a positive effect on global food security (Box 5.1).
Box 5.1 Grain and animal production: the competition and efficiency arguments.
LIVESTOCK ARE often blamed as efficient user of feed- and energy. And indeed, in some systems and especially in some phases of the production (eg. the last phase in a beef feedlot) energy and nitrogen conversion is poor. However, it efficiency seen over the entire production chain. and expressed as input of edible human food/output in human edible food, the picture changes, as shown for example by the following estimates from California.
On a global scale, the picture is not much If it is assumed that all 966 million ton cereals, roots and tubers used for livestock are edible for humans fin effect they are not, as there are considerable preparation losses in milling etch then livestock gets 74 million ton edible protein. On the positive side, the 99 million ton meat' 532 million ton milk and 53 million ton eggs produced globally in 1996 contain 53 million ton protein. So while input is higher than output, If cereal preparation losses on the input side and improved protein quality on the output side is considered, a reasonable balance emerges.
A recent FAO study (1996) shows that the increasing use of feed grains has not had an adverse effect on the provision of cereals for human consumption. on times of food shortages such as in 1974/75, rapid adjustments are made In particular in feed use and food consumption of cereals remained largely unaffected. Indeed, many argue that the use of cereals for feed acts as a global buffer and therefore has a positive effect on global food security.
Energy
Protein
Milk
Beef
Pork
Poultry
Source: Baldwin et al., 1992 and FAO, 1996.
Pigs, poultry and intensive dairy and feedlot animals require diets with a high concentration of energy and protein. This is provided by concentrate feed. Concentrate feed is tradable, allowing farmers to separate decisions on feed production and use; and trading these concentrates means that their environmental impact is also traded. Worldwide, trading grain involves a massive transfer of nutrients, depleting production resources, and fertilizing and often polluting the location of final use (Box 4.2).
Environmental challenges
State
Driving forces
Response: Technology and policy options
Concentrate feed production has an impact upon the natural resource base at various stages of crop production, trade and processing. There are direct effects of cropping on soils, water and air; and indirect effects of the production and supply of inputs to agriculture such as machinery, fuels, fertilizers and pesticides. Crop production also has indirect effects on land use, particularly with regard to deforestation, change of habitats, biodiversity and the aesthetic aspects of the landscape. The challenge therefore is two-fold: first to reduce the environmental impact of the production of crops used for feeds; and second to optimize the use of concentrates so as to limit feed use and corresponding land requirements.
State
Roughly 21 percent of the 1.4 billion hectares of cropland used globally for cereal production is used for livestock feed production and an additional 10 percent is used to produce oilseeds (primarily grown for oil, the by-product being fed to livestock) and roots and tubers. For the rest, livestock feed is a by-product of agro-processing. For example, cottonseed meal is a high protein livestock feed, but is a by-product of cotton production and is not produced with the primary purpose of feed. Livestock use of the cotton seed may be simply an additional incentive to farmers to grow cotton.
Figure 5.1: Global total utilization of concentrate feed resources ('000 MT per year).
Cereals are a major component of livestock concentrate feed. Of the average global cereal production of 1,854 million tons in the period 19901992, 600 million tons (32 percent) was used for livestock feed; an additional 144 million tons comes from oilseeds and roots and tubers. Another 252 million tons are processing by-products (brans and oilcakes) for which there is little alternative use.
The environmental impacts of crop production are site-specific, depending on a whole range of natural and socio-economic conditions and technologies. Some specific characteristics of feed concentrate production are:
o Feed is generally produced in more intensive systems in agro-ecological zones of high potential than in erosion-prone marginal areas. This is shown by the fact that the 32 percent of the cereals used for feed is produced on only 21 percent of the total cereal cropland. In the high potential areas, feed can be produced at low costs, while the costs associated with the risks of producing crops under marginal conditions are usually prohibitive. This is reflected in the low grain to meat price ratios that prevail in, for example, the Sahelian countries; and
o Feed use most commonly represents the lowest opportunity cost, and it would therefore be incorrect to charge the full environmental cost to feed, because in many cases this was not the primary use of the produced commodity. Typically, feed concentrates are real surpluses, and feed production takes place in high potential areas.
By the mid 1980s concentrates accounted for about a quarter of all feeds for livestock; this proportion was growing at about 0.2 percent points annually. Concentrate feeds comprise about 40 percent of all feeds in the developed countries and 12 percent in the developing world.
Trends in global utilization of concentrate feeds
Figure 5.2 and Table 9 Annex 2 show concentrate feed use for different systems, world regions and species. Land-based production systems used more concentrate feeds than industrial production systems. The industrial systems combined consume 500 million tons or 44 percent of total feed concentrates; industrial pig and poultry systems are the largest single users accounting for almost one-third of the total.
Figure 5.2: Concentrate fees use.
North America, eastern Europe and CIS, and eastern Asia each consumed over 20 percent of the world's total concentrate feeds, and western Europe used an additional 16 percent. Africa and Latin America still have very low levels of consumption. Starting in the late eighties, growth in global consumption flattened due to recession and market saturation in the OECD countries and structural adjustments in the former centrally planned economies. The main growth, however, has occurred in China and in South East Asia and these will remain the main determinant for future growth (Box 5.3).
Driving forces
Increasing human populations, growing income and accelerated urbanization in the developing world are the prime driving forces for the rising demand for animal products and, hence, for concentrate feed production. Growing demand for concentrate feed leads to area expansion and intensification, and thus potentially exerts a wide range of pressures on the environment. Area expansion is the least important with 0.1 percent annually compared with growth in crop production of 1.9 percent per year (Alexandratos, 1996).
The small increase in the area of cropland is at the expense of other forms of land use, mainly grazing and forests. This, in turn, places potentially greater pressures on that land, with subsequent threats to habitats and biodiversity. The extent of this pressure needs to be put in the context of overall land use. In developing countries, land with potential for cropping, including marginal areas, represents some 40 percent of their total unused land surface, mainly in the humid and sub-humid zones of Africa and Latin America. Of this unused land, it is estimated that in the year 2010 less than one-third will have been brought under cultivation (Alexandratos, 1996). Thus, while changes in land use may look significant in some countries or locations, their extent will be limited at the overall level. The exception is deforestation where cropland development accounts for up to 60 percent of the annual deforestation rate, as shown in Chapter 2. But recently there has been
little net change in the area of grazing land in developing countries as a whole (WRI, 1994), although the conversion of grazing to crop land has been a significant component of increased pressures on grazing livestock in, for example, the dryland areas of India and Africa.
Table 5.1: Environmental pressures and components of the environment affected by feed concentrates demand.
Sources of environmental pressures
Impact on environmental components
Indirect
Direct
Demand for concentrate feeds
Land use
Habitats and biodiversity
1. Human population.
1. Expansion of crop area.
1. Loss of habitat diversity.
2. Incomes and demand for livestock products
2. Forest and grazing land loss.
2. Increased pressure on natural and crop and livestock species diversity although some reduction of pressure on fragile ecosystems.
3. Livestock production using concentrate feeds.
3. Use of marginal croplands.
Water use
1. Use of irrigated croplands for feed crops.
Landscape and amenity
Production of concentrate feeds
1. Loss of landscape diversity and countryside amenity value.
1. On-farm production of concentrate feed
2. Irrigation water utilization (rates, husbandry and drainage systems).
2. Export and import of concentrate feeds.
Air pollution
Fossil fuel use
3. Competition for food or feed uses.
1. Greenhouse gas emissions (CO[2])
1 Increased mechanization (risks of soil damage, effects of energy use).
Cropping systems and intensity
-from forest clearance.
1. Cropping systems (crops and rotations).
-from soil organic maker loss.
Soil condition
-from energy consumption.
1. Erosion and downstream impacts of crop area expansion.
2. Cropping frequency.
2. Salinization of irrigated areas.
3. Husbandry practices (soil conservation, manuring etch.
3. Decreasing fertility status (phi, N,P,K, micro-nutrients, organic matter).
Crop input utilization
4 Losses in physical status (water holding capacity, bulk density, compaction).
1. Fertilizer and pesticide use*
Water resources
2. Mechanization.
1. Reduction in availability of irrigation water.
3. Transport and trade.
2. Aquifer resources depletion.
Water quality
1. Contamination of water run-off and drainages with
N. P and pesticides
2. Eutrophication of aquatic life in water bodies.
3. Drinking water quality.
Source: compiled from Hendy et al., 1995.
Table 5.1 summarises the direct and indirect pressures on arable land and their effect on various components of the environment. First, all cultivation results in soil loss and invariably depletes soil nutrients and organic matter. Excessive soil losses result in land degradation and, off-farm, in siltation, reduced water holding and contamination of water supplies. Soil erosion and salinization in irrigated areas causes a loss of 6-7 million hectares per year or 0.5 percent of the global cultivated area (El Swaifi, 1991). On a pro rata basis, concentrate feed production would thus be responsible for the degradation of about 1 million hectares per year.
Second, increased crop production impacts upon the availability and quality of water. Irrigated areas are likely to grow by 23 million hectares or by 19 percent in net terms by 2010 (Alexandratos, 1996) although at a declining rate as increasing water scarcity constrains development. Asia currently uses about 54 percent of its stable water supplies while SSA uses less than 5 percent. Low recharge rates in many areas, such as in Central Asia (Aral Sea), western USA and parts of WANA show that irrigation is often not sustainable. The amount of water used for livestock production is, however, relatively minor. For example, Jordan uses about 8 percent of its usable water for feed and drinking water. Depletion of water resources affects surrounding and downstream habitats. Inappropriate management of irrigation has led to waterlogging and salinization. Suarez (1992) estimated that up to 50 percent of the global irrigated area may be affected to some extent. Water quality is also
affected by pesticide residues.
Third, increased crop production also entails a decline in biodiversity through habitat loss and alteration in land use, combined with the specific effects of crop production, such as pesticide use and some tillage practices. Intensive cropping practices can also lead to reduction in genetic diversity in the crops grown, for example through the loss of traditional varieties.
Fourth, concentrate feed production requires nonrenewable resources, such as fossil fuels. Its use varies widely, but can be substantial. In crop production, energy is consumed directly for all field crop operations, threshing, transport, irrigation and others, as well as indirectly to produce inputs such as machinery, fertilizers and pesticides. Energy consumption is generally higher per hectare of cropland in developed than in developing countries, because fertilizer and mechanization levels are greater. They require between 40 to 60 percent and 30 to 40 percent of total requirements, respectively.
Table 5.1 summarises the potential positive and negative impacts of changes in land use, cropped areas, cropping intensity and yields. The occurrence and effects of these impacts vary between locations. Negative impacts are not always important, depending on the management of crop production and soils.
Different crops exert different pressures on the environment. Crops differ in the degree of depletion of soil moisture and water resources, in their relative demands on soil nutrients and in their pesticide needs. In general, cereal crops, and in particular maize, cause greater environmental damage than other crops, because of heavy fertilizer and pesticide use, high water demand and poor ground-cover in the early stages of plant development. On the contrary, potential impacts are lowest for legume crops, such as soybeans and pulses. Environmental risks due to nitrate and phosphate losses are greatest from maize and wheat, while risks of soil nutrient depletion are greatest in cassava and sweet potato (Table 5.2).
Table 5.2: Relative contribution to sources of environmental impacts on soils and water of different crops providing livestock feed.
Relative magnitude of impacts of crops on different components of the environment
Crop
Erosion (risk and contribution)
Nutrient loss (leaching and run-off depletion)
Water use (soil moisture fertility status)
Nutrient demand (impact on soil
Pesticide use (impacts on biodiver biodiversity and pollution)
Maize
Wheat
Barley
Sorghum
Pulses
Soybean
Cassava
Sweet potato
*, ** and *** indicating low, moderate or high potential impact.
Source: Hendy et al., 1995.
<section>f</section>
Response: Technology and policy options
Most additional feed to fuel the future expansion of the world's livestock sector will have to be in the form of concentrates. The potential for increasing roughage production from natural grassland, improved pastures or fodder production is limited at a global level. The total pasture area is not growing on the contrary, high potential grassland areas are increasingly turned into arable land and urban areas. What is left is mostly marginal land without cropping potential, but also with low fodder production potential. Other human activities reduce the amount of grazing land available or limit access to it. While an increase in arable land could conceivably produce more crop residues, advances in crop technology are based on varieties with more grain and less straw, which again limits roughage production. Improved pasture and cultivated fodder are important in temperate and highland areas and in parts of the humid and sub-humid tropics, where impressive technological
progress has been made (see Box 5.2). However, while these advances may have significant impact on feed availability for growing livestock production in certain areas or countries, they are not significant enough to contribute a substantial share globally.
Box 5.2 Alternatives to cereal feeding.
TYPICALLY, COUNTRIES in the humid and sub-humid tropics are meal deficit countries. Livestock production, in particular monogastric production, is thus faced with high, often prohibitive paces far feed concentrates. This has spurred the development of sugarcane-based feeding systems (Preston and Leng, 1994) in a number of tropical countries (Colombia, Cuba, Vietnam, Philippines). Sugarcane is one of the highest yielders of biomass per writ of time and area. Its juice can be used for monogastrics while the tops can be used in ruminant nutrition. As a perennial crop, sugarcane production has very low rates of erosion and can be produced with low external input. In the past, the association of sugar cane and livestock production has been problematic since sugarcane was traditionally produced on large plantations, geographically separated from livestock production. Recent developments on the diversified use of sugarcane may lead to more village based intensive monogastric
production systems in the humid tropics.
Concentrate feed will therefore have to support the future rise in demand for animal products. However, concentrate feed production will not need to increase at the same rate as the demand for meat. This is already shown by past figures. While meat production has grown at 3.8 percent per year over the last ten years, feed concentrate use grew only at 2.5 percent per year because the remaining growth comes from a 1.3 percent per year improvement in feed efficiency. In effect, the rate of improvement in feed efficiency in China might well be one of the most important factors deciding future cereal prices (see Box 5.3).
The commercial nature of concentrate feed production, and the flexibility with which the sector can switch between a great variety of feeds, makes it highly susceptible to policy changes. For the same reason, research and development can generate technologies quickly if scientists receive appropriate and consistent market signals. Especially in this area there is a strong interaction between policy changes and the inducement of technology, as explained in Chapter 1. Some examples:
o The negative effects of crop production can be greatly reduced with appropriate cultivation (e.g. minimum tillage), IPM and targeted fertilizer inputs. Technologies are available for many different environments to conserve soil and water resources and to minimise the use and impact of inorganic fertilizers and pesticides. The adoption of these technologies is largely dependent on market pricing (or even taxation) of fertilizers and pesticides and environmental regulations. Such regulations can cover protection of habitat reserves, forests wetlands and landscape features, control of use of pesticides and other inputs, enforcement of soil conservation measures, limitation of soil nutrient effluents in water courses, control of crop residue disposal methods and others;
o Proper land use planning is important for minimizing land degradation. Ideally, feed production should take place in areas of high cropping potential and low susceptibility to erosion and other forms of land degradation. Zoning, after categorizing land according to these two criteria and imposing restrictions on its use, would support better land use planning. A successful example is the land targeting practiced in Minnesota (Larson et al., 1988). A strong institutional base is needed for its successful implementation, such as is available in the developed and advancing developing countries, where most of the feed grains are produced. Countries should introduce such targeting and strengthen the required institutional framework;
o Because of the high fuel cost component of concentrate feed production, subsidies on concentrates often indirectly damage the environment as they encourage the use of natural resources but discourage their efficient use in crop production, and, subsequently, in livestock production. Market pricing of fuel would improve feed efficiency; and
o Many developing countries facilitate the importation of feed grains and other concentrates, either through favourable tariffs or straight subsidies. The objective is usually a social one: to provide a reliable supply of cheap animal products. In addition, domestic meat products are often protected against imports. This discourages the efficient use of concentrate feed and has negative spill-over effects on the environment in the feed producing country and livestock producing countries, as unnecessary volumes of waste are produced. A case in point is the Near East, e.g. Syria, Morocco, Tunisia where the combination of subsidized feed grain imports, and high domestic prices for mutton, has led to the emergence of grain-based sheep production with poor feed conversion. Apart from the detrimental effects this has in the feed producing countries, it leads to degradation of the rangelands in these arid countries as stock numbers are no longer adjusted to natural vegetative
cycles (Chapter 2).
Box 5.3 China will determine the future feed grain markets.
CHINA MAY decisively influence the world market as this country accounts for 40 percent of the total mew consumption of developing countries. Currently, the feed use of cereals is roughly 75 million tons or about 18 percent of total supply. With a grain deficit of 2 percent, China teeters on self-sufficiency. Although the data base on China is particular weak and sometimes contradictory, its opportunities to increase domestic crop production appear to be limited in view of already high yield levels and land claims of some of the best cropland by industrial development. Should meat consumption, and subsequently feed grain consumption, continue to grow at current rates of 6 to 8 percent, China could develop a grain deficit of about 50 million tons by the year 2010. This corresponds to about 25 percent of the current world trade in cereals, and would require a substantial crop area increase. On top of this comes a move from household production systems, using left avers, to
grain based industrial production. The implications on world market prices and global food security would therefore be enormous. This scenario, however, may not develop if the potential for improving feed conversion in its industrial pig production systems is efficiently tapped. Assuming that half the production comes from industrial production, and that the productivity gap between China and OECD countries could be closed, more than 30 million tons of grain could be saved.
Efficiencies in feed utilization can be improved through optimal diet balancing and feeding regimes, and improving feed digestibility, because feeding systems may be manipulated in various ways to reduce the concentrate feed requirements. (Chapter 4).
Conclusion
Contrary to popular belief, intensive livestock production must grow, if millions of hectares of wildlife habitat are to be preserved. It is only through intensification of existing crop and livestock production systems that additional pressure on fragile and important environmental resources can be absorbed. The challenge is to support intensification in an environmentally balanced way by using technology that optimizes the use of natural resources by reflecting their social value.
As has been shown, policies can be directed at both ends: at the crop production level (which is outside the scope of this study) and at the feed utilization level. Price support to crop products has in many countries contributed to surplus production. Often this had the effect of subsidizing feed. In addition, a number of indirect and direct subsidies to agricultural production in the form of input subsidies, income support, tax exemption or deduction, or subsidized welfare schemes contribute to a cheaper supply of crop products. The alternative food or feed use of many commodities leads to mis-use of resources. For example, in many developing countries self-sufficiency and food security are still overriding national objectives. Staple foods are often subsidized to guarantee an accessible price for the poor.
In the Near East and, until recently, in the former centrally planned economies, this often led to inconsiderate use of valuable foods for feed and, in effect, to a waste of the natural resources employed in the production process.
Box 5.4 Cereal incentive policies and their effect on grain based livestock production.
OVER THE past 30 years, relatively low international grain prices have spurred an unparalleled growth in livestock production and use of grain as feed. In intensive production systems, feed typically accounts for 60 to 70 ,percent of the production costs. This pattern is now being upset by a sharp increase in world grain prices. In 1995, many countries have reacted to the surge in grain prices by reducing import farms and grains and other concentrates or by imposing restrictions on their exports. Grain area set aside programmes were cancelled or reduced by large exporters, such as the United States and the KU. Canada abolished the grain freight subsidy to benefit focal producers. China responded to feed grain shortages by allowing provincial governments to provide feed subsidies to farmers, who operate under a contract system with state agencies at guaranteed prices.
In 1995 the world experienced an increase in international prices of more than 20 percent for coarse grains. Similar increases were observed for the mayor food grains, wheat and rice. For several decades, the demand for cereals has been met at declining or stable real prices. With the global trend to market deregulation, it is expected that various types of market protection which have favoured grain production and livestock production will be removed. This wit! most likely lead to an increasing scarcity of feed grains and generally higher world market prices. Economic incentives for feed concentrate production and its use In intensive livestock production are being phased out in the EU and in North America. Additionally, there is the strongly growing demand for concentrate feed In Asia, particularly in China (Box 5.3) which will further drive up world market prices. To a certain extent the livestock industry will be capable of absorbing feed price increases and the
remainder will be passed on to the consumer of livestock products. It can be expected that less efficient users of concentrate, like those, for example in WANA and CSA, will have to reduce feed concentrate use substantially.
Domestic animal diversity
Environmental challenges
State
Driving forces
Response: Technology and policy options
Environmental challenges
Thoroughly modified and adjusted to meet society's needs, livestock genetic resources are a basic environmental input to animal production systems. The utilization of the genetic reservoir largely determines the type and level of animal production system employed. These resources also determine how animals, through man's manipulation, utilize the environment, because livestock utilization of natural plant communities is influenced by breed differences. Knowledge of animal genetic resources is essential for efficiently allocating land, labour and capital. It is therefore essential to monitor this vital resource. For example, it is projected that by 2015 the U.S. Holstein population will have an effective population size of 66 animals (Hanson, 1995). In other words, the genetic relationship between animals will be so high it will be as if there are only 66 animals which are not related. Such a reduction in genetic diversity places this breed and others at risk, if disease or
environmental changes (e.g., global warming) develop with which the remaining genotypes cannot cope.
Globally there are approximately 4,000 breeds or landraces of domesticated animals used by man. This number is about equal to the total number of mammalian species currently in existence. Given the number of breeds it is logical to ask how much of the world's animal genetic resources can we afford to lose or how much should we concern ourselves with saving? Currently there is no obvious answer to this question. Some might contend that we need to conserve all genetic resources in existence. Besides cost, this neglects the fact that some portion of the domestic animal population is not genetically different. To make a decision concerning the number of species to conserve requires a more complete assessment of genetic resources than is currently available. Therefore one of the greatest challenges will be to develop an institutional framework to maintain the minimum number of genotypes for optimal future genetic improvement.
State
FAO's Global Databank for Animal Genetic Resources records the status of 3,882 livestock breeds (Table 5.3). Of those breeds with adequate data for assessment, 19 percent were classified as endangered. In developed countries, where there are 1,892 breeds of the main eleven categories, 21 percent of the breeds are at risk (Table 5.4). Market forces are causing much of the diversity problems in the OECD countries. For example, dairy production is dominated by the Holstein breed. Holstein cattle in Europe and in North America account for 60 percent and 90 percent of the dairy cattle population, respectively. Such extreme specialization narrows the genetic base and in a recent study, U.S. Holsteins have a predicted inbreeding increase of 0.725 percent per year from 1990 to 2015, corresponding to the effective population size of 66 animals mentioned before.
In developing countries, where two-thirds of the world's livestock population is located, documentation of breed types is far from complete. Approximately 1,300 breeds have been described with population data and 2,000 have been partially categorized (Table 5.4). The data from both developed and developing countries show that erosion of biodiversity at the breed level is not simply a concern for the distant future, but of immediate concern.
Animal uses, genetic variance and abundance of genetic diversity change across production systems. As different production systems evolve varying pressures are being placed upon the existing breeds.
Grazing systems. Among the world's regions, these systems are relatively of greatest importance in Latin America. Of particular importance from the point of view of biodiversity are the populations of Andean Camelidae (alpaca, llama, vicuña and guanaco). In the humid and subhumid tropical grassland systems of Latin America, cattle predominate. The genetic resources have three origins: the original Criollo types, which are Bos taurus cattle with 500 years of adaptation to tropical conditions; Bos indicus breeds derived from Indian importations during the last century; and European and North American breeds, imported in recent times.
Table 5.3: Breeds of domestic animals at risk by species.
Species
On file
With population data
At risk^/-
Projected at risk
Ass
Buffalo
Baffle
Goat
Horse
Pig
Sheep
Yak
Dromedary
Camelid
Avian
Total
/- At risk based on breeds with population data having <1,000 breeding females or <20 males and for which there is Rio conservation programme in place.
Source: Hammond and Leitch, in press.
For arid and semi-arid grassland systems, the most important areas are sub-Sahara Africa for cattle and small ruminants, and the West Asia/North Africa region for sheep. Because the African systems are the latest to start intensification and development, these populations are likely to come under more rapid genetic pressure than those elsewhere. Because of the diversity of systems, and the shortage of objective information on the livestock resource, the documentation of African ruminant livestock populations must be considered a major challenge.
Table 5.4: Breeds of domestic animals at risk by region.
Species
Breeds on file
Breeds with population data
At risk^/-
Projected at risk
Africa
Asia & Pacific
Europe & NIS
Latin America
Near East
North America
World
/- At risk based on breeds with population data having <1,000 breeding females or <20 males and for which there is no conservation programme in place.
Source: Hammond and Leitch, in press.
Mixed farming systems. These are the dominant forms of livestock use in tropical countries. The largest challenge is likely to be in Asia. Among the major concerns are:
o the rapid genetic erosion of China's breed resources in pigs, which include over 100 separate breeds, many with distinct characteristics;
o how to guide and manage the transformation of dairy cattle populations in countries like India, where crossbreeding of local breeds with introduced strains is proceeding on a massive scale;
o how to conserve non-cattle bovid species (Yak, Gaur, Mithun, Banteng) and the region's unique buffalo resources;
o genetic planning appropriate to the expanding the use of small ruminants, rabbits and other species in mixed farming systems.
The genetic future of livestock populations in mixed farming systems is closely linked to crop integration. As human pressures increase, livestock's role for draft, feed utilization (most of which is crop waste) and the relatively high value of dung for fuel and manure, will be affected. If for example, subsidized mechanization is encouraged by governments this will lessen the number of draught animals kept and therefore reduce the genetic base.
Box 5.5 Key indicators of the state of animal genetic resources.
A NUMBER of indicators have been indicators for determining the status of genetic diversity animal populations. These include population size and inter-population gene flow. Risk assessment and monitoring for a breed should take into account the following factors and recommended threshold levels:
o a decreasing population, with a 100/0 per year decrease in females;
o breeding herds are decreasing and the herd number drops below 10;
o if effective population size drops below 50 animals; and
o proportion of matings to animals from outside the population exceeds 10%.
Additional information concerning breeding structure, which refers to the composition of the breezes population, include the following factors:
o replacement rates for males and females;
o ratio of breeding males to females,
o age structure of the population;
o extent of natural vs. artificial insemination; and
o pattern of acquisition of breeding material, i.e. from hatcheries or breeding companies.
For well documented populations, annual statistical reports normally include most of these factors.
Source: Simon and Buchenauer, 1993.
Industrial systems. The external inputs used in industrial systems allow them to relieve environmental constraints, so that an animal's full genetic potential can be expressed. Therefore, especially with monogastrics, there is a significant reduction in the genotypes used. In essence, resistance to environmental challenges become less of a concern. However, prudent management of genetic resources for use in such systems still requires attention to be focused upon existing and potential genetic stocks.
Driving forces
Animal genetic resources are under the same types of human population pressures as other natural resources. Pressures take the form of changing farming systems, market value attached to animal performance, and alteration in the physical environment. In general, these types of pressures affect animal genetic resources by decreasing the number of breeds and thereby losing between and within breed genetic diversity. Table 5.5 lists ways in which animal genetic resources are lost.
The pressure on domestic animal resources in developed and developing country alike goes in parallel with farming system intensification. Breed choice and selection within breeds occurs as part of this intensification process, spurred by economic pressure for ever increasing animal and feed productivity. Genetic change is both a result and a prerequisite for intensification. Genetic change has made possible livestock system intensification while the improvement of feeding systems (supply), management and health care has made possible the support of high producing genotypes. This type of feedback or interaction has been the driving force of the intensive highly productive livestock systems, which are found in OECD countries today. Almost inevitably, genetic resources are being lost as agriculture undergoes transition. For example, switching from draught to mechanical power causes a massive decrease in genetic variation as those types of animals used for draught are displaced.
The successes achieved through selecting animals for high production in the developed world has largely been a disincentive for producers and scientists in the developing countries to attempt similar efforts with their own indigenous genetic resources.
In many development activities the importation of breeds developed for use in high-input farming systems was favoured over long term development of indigenous genetic resources. Although imported breeds may have been productive in their relatively benign environment of origin, their productivity dramatically decreases when they are placed in more rigorous environments found in developing countries. As a result of this genetic environmental interaction the development strategy has been to alter the environment to accommodate these imported breeds.
Table 5.5: Causes for breed extinction or risk of loss.
Reason
Description
Development policy
Lack of incentives to develop and use breeds, giving preference to those few developed for use in high-input, high-output relatively benign environments Commercial interests in: donor communities promoted the use of a few temperate climate breeds and over expectations concerning "modern" breeds in developing countries.
Specialization
Undue emphasis placed on a specific product or trait leading to the rapid dissemination of one breed of animal to exclusion and loss of others.
Modern technologies
o Introduction of new machinery replaces animal draught and transport resulting in permanent change of farming system.
o Indiscriminate crossbreeding can quickly :lead to the loss of original breeds.
o Failure of the cryopreservation equipment and inadequate: supply of liquid nitrogen to store; samples of semen, ova or embryos.
o Artificial insemination and embryo transfer leading to rapid replacement of indigenous breeds.
Violence/disaster
Wars and other forms of socio-political instability. Natural disaster such as floods, drought or famine.
Source: Hammond and Leitch, in press.
Disaster and social insecurity can be very detrimental to the diversity of animal genetic resources. As a result of drought and political instability in Somalia, cattle and small ruminant populations decreased by 70 and 60 percent, respectively. Such reductions in herd size can significantly reduce genetic diversity. Not only does the decrease in animal numbers affect the food security and economic well being of the livestock owners and national economy but such decreases can create evolutionary bottlenecks.
<section>g</section>
Response: Technology and policy options
Society's response to utilization of domestic animal genetic resources ebbed and flowed over the past three decades. In most situations during the 1960s and 1970s, breed substitution through crossbreeding was the most common mechanism used to increase the genetic potential of livestock in developing countries for a specific character (e.g., milk production). During the mid to late 1980s, there was an increasing awareness that indigenous breeds were highly adapted to the rigorous environments in which they were expected to produce. With this realization came a series of initiatives to conserve animal genetic resources. In some countries, for example India, government and non-government agencies have well-developed programmes of support and conservation for local genetic resources. In many others, such infrastructure is absent. This underscores the need for research, documentation and education activities in this area.
The actors. To effectively conserve and utilize animal genetic resources requires a concerted effort by a number of actors (Table 5.6). These actors include individuals (breeders), breed associations, national governmental organizations, and international organizations.
o Livestock owners (breeders) bear the ultimate responsibility for managing the genetic future of livestock populations. Their actions are determined in large part by the expectations of economic returns.
o Breed associations are responsible for maintaining pedigree information, developing breed standards and collecting and analyzing animal performance information. In many cases, the development and functioning of these breed societies have been assisted from public funds.
o National governmental authorities have a central responsibility in the management of animal genetic resources. governments provide many services, including supervision of breed societies, regulation of imports and animal recording. The primary responsibility therefore, to ensure the conservation of the national animal genetic resources rests with governments. In many countries, local zoos are a public enterprise and therefore could play an important official role.
o Government institutions provide a forum for the development of international accords and conventions. They play a crucial role in planning at the international level for the compilation and management of genetic resource databases. They will also be instrumental in the transfer of technology in cryopreservation, DNA techniques and standardization of procedures.
Box 5.6 Breed population size - a critical balancing point.
There are two ways in which population reduction affects genetic diversity: First, certain genes combinations are lost from the population. Second with limited animal numbers in a breed there is an increased probability that parents of any new individual are relate to each other, which increases the inbreeding of the offspring and decreases genetic variability. The impact of small population size on genetic diversity within a population Is also affected by the following:
o Generation turnover: Long generation intervals, as In horses, can delay the negative effects of small population size and inbreeding.
o Current and prospective changes in population size: If effective population numbers have been declining and are likely to continue downward, then calculations based on current size will underestimate the risk.
o Changes in herd structure: the smaller the herd number, the higher the risk to the breed from the termination of any one here.
o The extent of crossbreeding: this can remedy the effects of inbreeding but it can also result In a reduction of genetic diversity.
Source: Cunningham, 1995.
As the various actors initiate conservation assessments and efforts, there is a need for a clearly charted course. The first step is a complete inventory of existing breeds and their status in terms of numbers and genetic diversity. To a large extent FAO's programme in domestic animal genetic resources is accomplishing this goal. An evaluation based upon genetic distancing is important for understanding how unique a breed is and for determining how different various breeds are from one another. Using techniques such as genetic distancing also reduces long term conservation costs, because only the most diverse and endangered breeds will be conserved. This type of assessment is only taking from at this point in time and should be encouraged.
Costs of conservation. The preferred path to conserving a breed is to use it in an economically viable fashion. In some countries it may be possible to provide modest subsidies in order to make conservation of key genetic resources possible. In other environments it may be possible to alter technological components of the farming system, which will enhance the performance of the conserved breed and thereby make it economically competitive. In addition to these approaches it must be remembered that zoos have played a critical role in preserving diverse animal genetic resources. They may continue to provide a suitable means for maintaining live animals and also frozen semen and embryos.
The amount of animal genetic resources which can be preserved via in situ or ex situ methods is determined by the costs of preservation and the expected current value of the preserved resources. The biggest problems are long time horizons and uncertainties about current and future values and uses. The financial resources are lacking to assess and preserve all breeds. However, by using DNA techniques, it is possible to assess the genetic differences between breeds and thereby determine which breeds are truly unique and scarce. Although taking such an approach may have a high initial cost, in the long run it requires fewer financial resources as well as allows greatest attention and efforts to be placed upon those breeds which are in critical need of preservation.
Costs associated with the development of databases, DNA analysis, and international protocols and accords fall into the category of protecting or enhancing public goods. However, the maintenance costs of databases could be shared with livestock owners, breed associations, national authorities and international agencies. On a per head basis the costs involved are modest. For example, long term costs for semen and embryos preservation are in the order of one US dollar per unit per year, depending on scale. One-time genotyping the DNA of a breed within a country for across breed comparison costs approximately US$ 1,000 to US$ 3,000 (US$ 5 to US$ 10/head) and does not have to be repeated. To recover these costs fairly modest incremental benefits are required. For example, (Cunningham, 1995) at a discount rate of 7.5 percent, an incremental benefit of 80 times the annual cost could repay a 25 year investment in the conservation of a breed. Thus, a return of US$ 800,000 would be
required to recover the costs of a breed conservation programme covering 10,000 animals over 25 years. If we assume that such benefits would impact on ten million animals the incremental yields per animal required to repay the investment would be less than US$ 0.10. This is an estimate of the initial returns to conservation. As the genotype continues to be productive there would be additional returns, which would continue to lower the cost of conservation.
Table 5.6 Relative importance of different actions for different participants in animal genetic resource conservation.
ACTIONS
Breeder/ Farmer
Breeders organization
National authority
International agencies
In situ conservation
Ex situ conservation
DNA characterization
Databases
Box 5.7 Tools for conservation.
1. In situ conservation: Manipulations of animals with a viable population size. To be accomplished by enhancing the economic value of the animals in the rimming system. (For example, selection within populations).
2. Ex situ conservation: Maintain animals by freezing semen and embryos. However, this technology is not adequately developed for at species. Although Sour and animal facility costs are saved the approach requires the continual use of frozen nitrogen and a secure facility.
3. DNA technology: Currently this technology has the ability to provide important information concerning the evolutionary history of a breed or species.
4. Thorough documentation of aft breeds and landraces currently in existence will provide a basis for evaluating breed differences.
5. Development of international accords to provide a framework for global animal genetic resources.
Bread improvement goals. Past attempts at improving livestock productivity in developing countries have focused largely on importation of exotic breeds. This approach was taken, instead of within breed selection, because crossbreeding appeared to be a faster means of achieving increased production. The imported breeds were then crossed with existing genetic stocks and, as a result, in many instances replaced indigenous breeds.
Selection of imported breeds was based upon a partial analysis, which indicated that they could produce higher quantities of milk, meat or wool. However, the analysis lacked a full appreciation for genetic-environmental interactions and lifetime productivity. This practice of selecting for individual production characteristics (growth rates, meat production and/or milk production) versus lifetime productivity and/or biological efficiency, has carried over to selective breeding of indigenous populations. The result is a partial analysis of how indigenous breed types perform. Because the entire process of animal production has not been evaluated these actions have also contributed to the displacement and loss of biodiversity. Furthermore, over the long term most exotic breeds have not been able to maintain high levels of productivity. The result is not only a loss in biodiversity but also a loss in economic returns.
Compounding the problems of partial analysis has been a disregard for genetic traits for fitness associated with the adaptation complex. Animals in a specific environment have developed resistance or adaptation to a full range of environmental challenges; e.g., ticks, internal parasites and temperature (Hammond and Leitch, in press). These characteristics have not been fully accounted for in planning and executing breeding and selection schemes in developed or developing countries.
Figure 5.3 demonstrates how different genotypes respond to different types of environments. By removing environmental stresses the genotype of highly selected breeds can more fully express itself. By viewing breeds in the context of composite productivity, it becomes much more apparent how indigenous breeds (or those breeds which have been selected for a different set of characteristics) can have the potential for higher levels of productivity.
An alternative approach to breeding animals for perceived economic returns and conserving genetic resources is to match genotypes to environments (Box 5.8). Instead of importing a genotype and attempting to modify the environment through increased input levels, indigenous breeds should be used and, where appropriate, pre-evaluated with exotic breeds. The basis for comparing performance should be lifetime productivity (number of offspring per female), economic returns for the herd or flock (vs. individual performance) and biological efficiency (output/input). In essence, such a strategy implies that there can be no general recommendations about breeds without accounting for the specific environment in which they are expected to perform. Furthermore, such an approach would weigh the costs of altering environmental conditions to maintain modern breed productivity levels with minimal costs of environmental change and improving the productivity levels of indigenous breeds.
Studies to characterize this re-ranking of genetic types in differing environments are not easy to design or conduct. However, simulation models have been developed which allow a screening of breed types in different environments (Blackburn, 1995).
Policy. To stem the dangerous erosion of domestic animal genetic resources, the following policy options are recommended:
o support implementation of the Biodiversity Convention, which includes development of national and regional infrastructures;
o assess roles of indigenous and non-indigenous breeds in meeting future domestic and export needs for food and other animal products;
o facilitate regional cooperation among countries to achieve economies of scale;
o support international exchange and utilization of animal genetic resources;
o foster public-private sector linkages which enable economically viable gene conservation (e.g., AI companies and zoos);
o eliminate subsidies on, and foreign aid which subsidizes, artificial insemination and breed importation schemes; and
o eliminate all subsidies, which inappropriately favour modern production technologies over traditional ones (subsidized concentrate feed and drugs, credit etc.) as they distort breed choices.
Figure 5.3: Relative breed performance of selected and indigenous genotypes across environments.
Research needs. Using the above example as a basis for determining conservation and better animal breeding practices the following research initiatives are required:
o to shift research focus from individual traits to lifetime and herd productivity using deterministic simulation models and live animal experimentation where feasible;
o to determine, using DNA analysis of genetic variation (genetic distancing), the number of breeds which should be conserved as a priority;
o to develop appropriate selection goals based upon the environmental capacity for animal production;
o to improve understanding of genetic components of adaptation (e.g., tick resistance, utilization of body stores); and
o to develop methodologies to determine the economic value of animal genetic resources.
Improving competitiveness of indigenous breeds.
Box 5.8 Improving competitiveness of indigenous breeds.
AN IMPORTANT tactic for conserving indigenous genetic resources is to make those breeds more beneficial. Combining existing breed attributes with traits that increase the economic value of the breed is such a mechanism. The N'Dama cattle of southern Senegal have traditionally been the most important element in the farming system in the Casamance. In this area, the trypanosomiasis challenge is high, and other breeds cannot survive in that environment. Although the N'Dama is able to withstand the trypanosome challenge their productivity is low: two year calving intervals, low growth rates and milk production averaging about 700 kg per cow. A research programme has been initiated to improve the performance of the N'Dama using feed products which are readily available (groundnut hay, cotton seed meal). By improving the N'Dama's nutrition, performance has been doubled.
Source: Philipsson and Wilson, 1995.
Livestock and greenhouse gases
Environmental challenges
State
Driving forces
Response: Technology and policy options
Environmental challenges
"Global warming" or global climate change have recently become a major concern. There is increasing evidence that global temperatures are rising (0.3°C to 0.6°C over the last century). This is caused by so-called "greenhouse-gases" trapping radiant heat reflected from the Earth's surface before it is released into space. Global warming has a double effect on agriculture. Agriculture, including livestock, contributes to global warming and, in turn, it is directly affected by the resulting changing climatic patterns. This specific livestock-environment interaction offers, however, considerable scope for mitigating adverse effects on the environment with improved technology, and the development of" win-win" scenarios. The challenge is to identify these win-win scenarios and to develop corresponding sets of action.
State
The greenhouse gases include carbon dioxide (CO[2]), methane (CH[4]), ozone (O[3]), nitrous oxide (N[2]O) and other trace gases (Bouwman, 1995). Their potential to global warming is greatly different, as shown in Table 5.7, which shows that methane is about 20 times more aggressive and nitrous oxide even 300 times more damaging that carbon dioxide.
Carbon dioxide emissions. Burning biomass is the main agricultural source of CO[2] emission. Destruction of global forests produces about 1 to 2 billion tons of CO[2] per year. Burning of savanna vegetation, sometimes initiated by traditional herders to get high quality new grass shoots during the dry season, but also practiced by hunters and croppers to clear the land or chase the game, is another important contribution to CO[2] emissions.. Although exact estimates are lacking, one estimate (Menault, 1993) puts the annual emission of the savannas at 18 percent of the global agricultural emissions of CO[2]. Of this, the African continent would produce 43 percent whereas Asia and South America combined produce 39 percent. However, this release of CO[2] is usually reabsorbed the next season by the new growth. In addition, increased atmospheric CO[2] levels (from 250 to 350 ppm over the last 150 years), mainly as a result of the industrial and automotive revolution, present a
specific environmental challenge in that they favour especially the so-called C[3] herbs and trees over grasses (Mayeux, 1993). These contribute to bush encroachment and reduce biodiversity in the grassland areas. The increased CO[2] level will probably contribute to changes in the structure of the livestock industry. Eckert et al., (1995) estimate that the shift from C[4] to C[3] plants would result, in the USA, in a shift of livestock production to the north because rangelands in the southern states would become less productive. Mixed species grazing can, however, slow down or possibly halt this shift in vegetation.
Methane emissions. The global average methane concentration is about 1.7 ppmv and is increasing at about 0.8 percent per year (World Bank, 1992). It is a result of human activities such as animal production and manure management, rice cultivation, production and distribution of oil and gas (pipelines) and coal mining and landfills. As shown, livestock and manure management contribute about 16 percent of total annual production of 550 million tons. Increasing methane emissions affect human and ecological health and, because methane has a high capacity to absorb infrared radiation, it is an aggressive greenhouse gas.
Methane emission by livestock is a direct result of the capacity of ruminants to utilize large amounts of fibrous grasses, which cannot be used as human food. Ruminant livestock, such as cattle, sheep and goats have a large anaerobic digestion vessel "the rumen", which contains a large microbial fauna. which ferment and digest roughages. This digestion results in relatively large methane emissions per unit of feed energy consumed. Pigs and poultry cannot digest these fibrous feeds and have therefore relatively low emissions. Thus, ruminant animals, when fed low quality feed, have higher methane emissions per unit of product than better fed animals, although the latter - as has been shown before - often leave other heavy environmental loads in soil and water pollution.
Table 5.7: Global warming potential (GWP) and other properties of CO[2], CH[4], and N[2]O.
Gas
Concentration*
Annual increase*
Lifetime (years)
Relative absorption capacity ^/-
GWP ^¨^ ^¨^
CO[2]
355 ppmv
1.8 ppmv
CH[4]
1.72 ppmv
10-13 ppbv
24.5 q *
N[2]O
310 ppbv
0.8 ppbv
* ppmv = parts per million by volume; ppbv = parts per billion by volume
^/- Per unit mass change from present concentrations, relative to CO[2].
^¨^ ^¨^ Global Warming Potential following addition of 1 kg of each gas, relative to CO[2] for a 100 year time horizon
* Including the direct effect of CH[4] and indirect effects due to the production of tropospheric ozone and stratospheric water vapour.
Source: Bouwman, 1995.
Methane production is determined by two animal production parameters. First, ruminant animals with low levels of productivity use a large fraction of their feed intake for maintenance and, consequently, the emissions are spread over a relatively small output, resulting in a high level of emission per unit of product. More productive animals emit less methane per unit of product. Second, feed quality has an important impact on the level of methane emissions. Very low quality feeds, such as straw and poor forages of sub-humid savannas, have low levels of digestibility, and therefore higher emissions per unit of feed intake.
Low productivity and poor feed quality are characteristic for most of the land-based production systems in arid regions, and to an even greater degree in the humid tropics and sub-tropics, where emissions per unit of product are therefore comparatively high. Grazing and mixed systems in the tropics and subtropics are thus the main contributors to high methane emission levels. Generally, temperate and highland zones have the best quality grazing and other forage resources for ruminants, and therefore lower emission levels. In irrigated areas, fodder is usually of better quality resulting in lower emissions. Annually, livestock produce a total of 86.6 million tons methane of which more than 80 percent (74.5 million tons) comes from digestive fermentation.
Figure 5.4: Sources of methane emission.
Stored liquid manure, produces the remaining 13.1 million tons. Liquid manure management facilities are most commonly used where there is a large concentration of animals at a single facility, such as large dairy or pig farms. Manure that is handled in dry form, spread on fields, dried for fuel, or deposited by grazing animals produces much less methane. Thus, intensive mixed farming and industrial production systems are the main contributors to methane emissions from manure. Because of their large ruminant populations, USA and OECD countries, and the rainfed mixed farming systems and the grazing systems, have the highest methane emissions.
Figure 5.5: Methane production by system.
Nitrous oxide emissions. Nitrous oxide is another greenhouse gas contributing to global warming. Total N[2]O emissions have been estimated by Bouwman (1995) at 13.6 TG N[2]O per year, which exceeds the stratospheric loss of 10.5 TG N[2]O per year by an atmospheric increase of 3.1 TG N[2]O per year. Animal manure contributes about 1.0 TG N[2]O per year to total emissions. Indirectly, livestock is associated with N[2]O emissions from grasslands and, through their concentrate feed requirements, with emissions from arable land and N-fertilizer use.
Figure 5.6: Methane production by species.
Driving forces
Carbon dioxide. In discussing carbon dioxide a clear distinction should be made between temporary and permanent emissions. Many CO[2] emissions related to livestock production are part of a normal ecological cycle, with CO[2] being released at the end of a growing season, but immediately recaptured again in the next growing season. The emissions from savanna burning fall into this category. Most temperate grasslands therefore have also a neutral balance. Livestock-induced deforestation in grazing systems, driven by road construction, land speculation and inappropriate incentives (Chapter 2), and fossil fuel use in the industrial system, driven by increased demand (Chapter 4) are thus the main sources of permanent carbon release.
Methane. Methane emissions from livestock have been stagnant, despite a growing livestock population. The reasons for this stagnation are twofold. First, increases in productivity lowers emission levels per animal and per unit of product. Advances in feed resources and nutrition, and breed development are contributing factors. Second, monogastric production is growing at a much faster pace than ruminant production. About 80 percent of the total growth of the livestock sector is attributable to pigs and poultry, which emit comparatively small amounts of methane. The growth in meat production is therefore not accompanied by a proportional rise in methane emissions. While methane emission from digestion processes in the rumen is stable, methane emission from manure management is likely to grow fast as production units grow in size and productivity in many countries. This implies that there will be an increased reliance on confined animal production systems and on liquid-based
manure management systems which have higher emissions per head and per unit of product.
<section>h</section>
Response: Technology and policy options
Technologies. Most technologies that reduce greenhouse gas emission are typical examples of win-win situations. They are being used because they make economic sense and their benefit is an added benefit.
Savanna improvement, as well as forestation, can lead to substantial permanent CO[2] sequestration. Recent findings by CIAT scientists (Fisher, et al., 1995) show that, by introducing improved pastures (Andropogon) with a much larger root system in the Colombian savannas can fix up to 50 tons of CO[2] per hectare, which is comparable with the 50 to 100 tons per hectare that forest plantations can store. Increased production thus leads also to lower CO[2] levels, and provides a "win-win" situation.
To reduce methane emissions, improved breeding, veterinary care, better feeds and improved feeding technologies are the main weapons, although these technologies are usually not employed for their environmental benefits but for increasing profitability. Improvements in animal productivity have two beneficial effects. They direct a greater proportion of feed energy to the production of useful products (milk, meat, draft power, offspring), and thus reduce methane emissions per unit of product. In addition, they lead to reductions in the herd size required to meet a given production level.
More specifically, improvements in nutrition through mechanical and chemical feed processing, or through strategic supplementation, can drastically reduce methane emissions. Chopping, and alkali and urea treatment of low digestible straws, improve digestibility. When fed to ruminants, these options may decrease methane emissions in the order of 10 to 25 percent in normally poorly fed animals. Strategic supplementation is another option. Critical nutrients, such as nitrogen and essential minerals can be provided, through molasses/urea multi-nutrient blocks and bypass protein techniques (Box 5.9). Substantial increases in animal productivity can be achieved in tropical areas with chronic feed constraints. Here, methane emissions can be reduced by 25 to 75 percent per unit or product. Productivity may also be enhanced through the use of production enhancing agents such as bovine somatrotropin and anabolic steroids, for which emission reductions of 5 to 15 percent have been
demonstrated.
There are promising techniques for recovering methane from manure, thereby not only reducing emissions but providing a source of energy, for example for generating on-farm electricity. Large, confined animal operations make such techniques profitable. The slurry effluent can be used as animal feed, as aquaculture supplements, and as crop fertilizer. In addition, managed anaerobic decomposition reduces the environmental and human health problems often associated with manure management. The controlled bacterial decomposition of the volatile solids in manure reduces the potential for contamination from run-off, significantly reduces pathogen levels, removes most noxious odours and retains the organic nitrogen content of the manure.
Box 5.9 Reducing methane emissions from fermentation through strategic supplementation in South Asian countries.
FOR EFFICIENT digestion, the rumen requires a diet that contains essential foments for the fermentative micro-organisms. Lack of these Rents lowers animal productivity and roses methane emissions per unit of product. For animals on low quality feed, the primary limitation to efficient digestion is the concentration of ammonia in the rumen. Supplying ammonia can therefore greatly enhance digestive efficiency and utilization of available feed enemy. Ammonia can be supplied by urea, chicken manure or soluble protein that degrades in the rumen. Urea is broken down in the rumen to form ammonia, and adding urea to the diet has been the most effective method of boosting rumen ammonia levels.
Urea and other supplemental nutrients are mixed with molasses to make it palatable to livestock. In addition, molasses provides the energy needed to realize the improved microbial growth that can result from enhanced ammonia levels. These Multi-Nutrient Blocks have been used In many countries including India, Pakistan, Indonesia and Bangladesh, Habib et al. (1991), Hendratno et al. (1991) and Leng (1991). Typical results have been: milk yield Increases of 20 to 30 percent; growth roe Increase of 80 to 200 percent and Increased reproductive efficiency. Based on these results, methane emissions per unit product went down by up to 40 percent. Bouwman et al., (1992), estimated that strategic supplementation of dairy animals will reduce methane emissions by 25 percent while increasing milk production by 35 percent.
The primary approaches for recovering this methane include the following:
o Covered lagoons. Manure solids are washed out of the livestock housing facilities with large quantities of water, and the resulting slurry flows into an anaerobic primary lagoon. The anaerobic conditions result in significant methane emissions, particularly in warm climates. Placing an impermeable floating cover over the lagoon and applying negative pressure recovers the methane which can be used as fuel or to generate electricity. This is specially interesting for developed countries (Box 5.10).
o Digesters. Large and small scale designs exist. Large scale digesters are engineered vessels into which a mixture of manure and water is placed. The retention time of the manure is about 20 days. The digester is heated to about 60 °C and the gas drawn off and used for energy. Large dairy and pig farms, with high energy requirements, typically find these systems to be cost effective. Small scale digesters typically do not include heating and are therefore only appropriate for warm climates. They are relatively simple to build and operate, require little capital investment, and the recovery of high quality fertilizer from digesters can be an important benefit where cost of commercial fertilizers are high.
o Policies. The identification of specific policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions are complex. Ideally, they are part of an overall development process driven by the need to improve productivity. Technologies which enhance productivity, improve root biomass for carbon sequestration and nutrition, and for recycling methane for energy, are likely to be the most effective and should be promoted through education and training. While some of these technologies are profitable and improve the environment at the same time, others, such as urea treatment, are not always adopted by farmers because of high input costs, which are often not off-set by increases in productivity alone.
Box 5.10 Gas recovery from covered lagoons.
IN CALIFORNIA (USA) a 1,400 sow farrow-to-finish pig fang has successfully demonstrated the covered lagoon technology for over 10 years. Royal Farms has a 4,000 m^2 primary lagoon covered with industrial fabric. A small gas pump draws the biogas trapped under the cover through a series of perforated pipes. Gas recovery currently ranges from about 1,400 m^3/day in winter to about 2,000 m^3/day in summer. The gas is used to operate two generators with a combined capacity of 175 kW. The costs of installing the entire system, including the engines, was about US$ 220,000 In the early 1980s. Annual operating costs are about US$ 8,000. Annual energy savings, including electricity and heating, are about US$ 84,000. Overall' the system paid for itself in four years.
An important issue is how to reward the adoption of techniques which reduce greenhouse gases. If the additional benefit of greenhouse gas reductions could be captured by farmers, adoption rates could be much higher. For example, while valuation mechanisms for CO[2] are still in an early stage of development, Brown et al., (1993), estimating the damage from a doubling of atmospheric CO[2] in terms of global warming at 1 percent of Gross World Product, arrive at a price of US$ 10 per ton of CO[2] trapped. This would mean that the above mentioned improvement of South American savannas with Andropogon could be valued at US$ 500 per hectare. International arrangements are required beyond those of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to achieve such transfer mechanisms.
A number of donor agencies are implementing projects, where reduction of methane emission is an explicit objective and its degree of achievement has an impact on project approval. Policies may be directed to establish regulations to limit, or ban, lagoon manure storage, or to impose methane recovery. In some countries governments favour the establishment of facilities to recover methane through direct subsidies on the construction of such facilities (California, Denmark). However, the most important determinants for the adoption of these technologies are the price and availability of energy, which largely influence the profitability of these systems. For large-scale facilities, energy requirements for heating, for example, may be high and the high costs of commercial energy may induce investment into methane recovery, whereas for small-scale operations it is often lack of infrastructure and energy supply that make its establishment profitable, as in, for example, remote
areas with no electricity. The use of methane as a regenerative source of agriculture is thus determined by the larger picture of fossil energy supply and national policies in that regard. Some OECD countries have started favouring the use of regenerative energy vis-à-vis fossil sources and create corresponding price incentives.
The emission of greenhouse gases is subject to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. The agreement, now signed by more than 150 countries, became legally binding in March 1994, and many signatories have voluntarily agreed to stabilize their carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by 2000. The agreement is targeted at the other trace gases with which livestock production can be associated, i.e. methane and nitrous oxide. However, to minimize climate change from greenhouse gases, much more specific international agreements are required and efforts must be made to respect them.
Processing of livestock products
Environmental challenges
State and driving forces
Technology and policy options
Environmental challenges
Global market integration and commercialization greatly increases the volume of animal waste. Waste products from subsistence consumption are spread so thinly through the environment that the absorptive capacity of the natural resources is hardly reached. However, with increasing income, an increasing proportion of animals and animal products go through market and processing channels before consumption. So an increased level of processing comes on top of an increased demand, causing even greater levels of waste production. Milk is processed in relatively small quantities, because of its highly perishable nature and its relative high share of consumption for subsistence.
Slaughterhouses and meat processing plants, dairies and tanneries all have polluting potential. This pollution is usually confined to limited geographic areas not directly attributable to any specific production systems. The most important environmental impact of animal product processing results from the discharge of wastewater. Discharge of waste-water into surface waters leads to a reduction of dissolved oxygen, which reduces or destroys aquatic life, while nitrogen and phosphates may cause eutrophication and result in oxygen depletion. Furthermore, effluents from tanneries may contain toxic compounds, such as chromium (Verheijen, et al., 1996). There is a negative impact of waste discharge on biodiversity. In addition, there are a number of serious human health hazards involved.
The environmental challenge is thus threefold:
o to raise technology levels and increase knowledge on waste prevention, use of by-products and waste treatment;
o to strengthen institutions to establish and enforce environmental regulations; and
o to develop infrastructure to linking rural-based production and processing to growing urban markets.
State and driving forces
Growing population pressure and urbanization, rising incomes and changing consumer habits are the main underlying causes for increasing environmental degradation resulting from processing activities. In the developed countries, processing plants have been pushed away from the large cities and enforcement of regulations on effluent discharge have greatly reduced the environmental problems. In developing countries insufficient infrastructure and weak institutions prevent this. On the other hand, there are fewer by-product because a higher proportion of the animal is usually consumed.
Table 5.8: Potential waste emissions of a red meat slaughterhouse.
Source
kg BOD per ton LW
Remarks
Stockyard and pens
solid contaminants are removed
Blood
sewer disposal of blood
Cleanup hide removal
Scalding, dehairing
washing of removed hair
Paunch
sewer disposal
Intestine handling
Rendering
General cleanup
Meat packing
Total polluting potential
Source: Verheijen et al., 1996.
Slaughterhouses. Concentration of waste production in one given area is the main problem, rather than waste production as such. Small-scale home processing usually does not lead to excessive waste loads, if units are geographically distributed. In large-scale production considerably more effort is needed to keep waste production at an acceptable level, to use by-products efficiently and to treat waste.
In most developed countries, the slaughter activity is centralized. Consumers prefer lean meat and only a few selected offals such as brain, kidney, sweetbread, and tongue are eaten. For this reason, the carcass is often deponed at the slaughterhouse and cooled before being sent to retail outlets. As a result of this, large quantities of by-products such as bones, lungs, spleen, and other organs are left behind at the slaughterhouse, as inedible offal. Generally, the clean fatty material is processed separately into edible fat. Other parts may be used to produce composite bone-cum-protein meal or individual products like bonemeal, meatmeal and bloodmeal. Modern abattoirs are well equipped with facilities such as running water, steam, power, refrigeration, transport, etc. by which to process and put to further use all edible and non-edible by-products (e.g. for human consumption, pet food, feed industry or fertilizer).
In developing countries a large variety of slaughter sites and levels of technology exist. Slaughter sites can vary from simple slaughter slabs to modern slaughterhouses. Large-scale industrial processing units import complete sets of technologies from developed countries, although often without the respective rendering or waste treatment facilities. Slaughterhouses, especially those around urban centres, often discharge blood and untreated wastewater, and destruction of sick animals is inadequate (Kaasschieter, 1991). Fresh blood coagulates in drains, where it becomes putrefied, causing bad odours as well as sanitary and environmental problems. Edible and inedible by-products are frequently wasted during the process due to insufficient skills and discipline in slaughtering, poor equipment, low incentives for recouping by-products, and lack of regulations and their enforcement. Most slaughterhouses in the developing world are public enterprises, lacking the funds to maintain
quality operations. Slaughter fees need to be kept low to prevent illegal slaughter, and these meagre revenues are often used for other purposes than the operation and maintenance of the abattoir.
In processing technologies, there are important economies of scale in waste treatment and by-product utilization. Large-scale industrial processing usually facilitates a high utilization of by-products such as blood or bones and good waste management. Enforcement of regulations is easier than with small-scale processing.
Slaughtering requires large amounts of hot water and steam for sterilization and cleaning. Therefore, the main polluting component is waste water. In waste water, there is a huge concentration of agricultural compounds, including fat, oil, protein and carbohydrates, which are biodegradable compounds, but require a high BOD to bio-degrade. In addition waste water usually contains insoluble organic and inorganic particles which are called suspended solids. Slaughterhouses typically produce solid wastes of 100 kg paunch manure per ton of product and 6 kg of fat (RIVM, 1994). The main polluting agent in wastewater is blood which has a high BOD (150,000 to 200,000 mg/l). Table 5.8 gives an overview of the potential waste water emissions of a typical red meat slaughterhouse, where environmental concerns are not built in. Poultry slaughterhouse have much lower potential BODs, usually not exceeding 10 kg BOD per ton of liveweight.
Tanneries. Globally, 78 percent of the total processed hides are cattle and buffalo, 15 percent sheep and 7 percent goat skin (FAO, 1995). The tanning process can be divided between beam-house operations, tanning and finishing. Hides are usually tanned twice. For the first step, mineral or vegetable tanning is practiced. Mineral tanning is the most popular method for large-scale tanning today. For the second step, retanning, a combination of agents is used, mostly vegetable compounds. In traditional vegetable tanning, barks and nuts are used throughout the entire tanning process instead of chromium. Verheijen et al. (1996) estimate that worldwide 60 percent tanning is based on chromium, while 40 percent is vegetable tanning (including aniline). In the United States, a little over 20,000 hides are tanned per day; 4,700 (23.5 percent) with vegetable tannins and 15,300 (76.5 percent) with chromium (Hemingway and Karchey, 1989). Although vegetable tannins are big-degradable,
they still constitute a considerable burden on the environment.
In most developing countries tannery effluent is disposed of by sewer, discharging to inland surface waters and/or irrigating land. High concentrations of salt and hydrogen sulphide present in tannery waste water affect water quality and can cause bad taste and odour. The suspended matter, such as lime, hair, fleshings, etc. make the surface water turbid and settle to the bottom, thereby affecting fisheries. Chromium tannin is toxic to fish and other aquatic life. When mineral tannery waste water is applied on the land, the soil productivity is adversely affected and some of the land may become completely infertile. Due to infiltration, groundwaters are also adversely affected. Discharge of untreated tannery effluent to a sewer causes deposition of calcium carbonate and choking of the sewer.
Dairies. Worldwide, cattle contribute 87 percent of total milk production, whereas buffalo, sheep and goats contribute 9, 2 and 2 percent, respectively. In the developed countries, the bulk of milk is factory-processed. In the developing countries, home or village processing or consumption of processed is much more common. In Africa, it is estimated that 80 to 90 percent is home processed or consumed raw whereas for Latin America, this share averages about 50 percent (FAO, 1990). Coagulated milk and cheese curd are solid wastes of minor importance.
The level of processing milk varies greatly. It ranges from simple pasteurization to sophisticated cheese products. Waste water production is the major environmental concern, mainly resulting from cleaning operations. In addition, fossil fuel is consumed and CO[2] emitted during pasteurization and sterilization of fresh milk and during the production of milk powder or condensed milk. CFC and NH[3] emissions from chilling machines are of some importance.
General. All processing results in the production of waste water, mostly in large quantities, and its discharge is the biggest environmental problem. Waste water is polluted with biodegradable organic compounds, suspended solids, nutrients and toxic compounds (particularly chromium and tannins from tanneries). This results, directly or indirectly, via a reduction of dissolved oxygen, into a deterioration or destruction of aquatic ecosystems. It also damages potable water quality. Typical values of the waste water are given in Table 5.9. However, huge variations have been found, due to large differences in scale and management practices of each factory or plant. The quantity of water used during the process is of major importance, with high water use related to high emission values.
In theory the production of waste water does not necessarily lead to environmental problems if the density of animal product processing is low enough to guarantee low concentration of pollutants in the receiving water bodies. However, if compared to European target values for urban waste water discharge (e.g. 25 mg BOD, 10-15 mg N and 1-2 mg P per litre), waste loads are excessive at even low quantities of animal products processed. For example, the 5 kg BOD per ton Liveweight Killed would require the enormous amount of 200,000 litres of water (5,000,000 mg divided by 25 mg/l) to get it down to EU standards.
Air pollution and solid waste result in minor problems compared to waste water production. Air pollution is mainly related to fossil energy use in all three types of processing. Significant amounts of volatile organic compounds are emitted by the leather industry. Solid waste may result in hygiene problems, particularly with slaughterhouses but, in principle, these are relatively easy to solve. An exception is chromium containing leather waste, which must be disposed in special dumping grounds.
Table 5.9: Typical values of waste characteristics produced by different animal processing industries.
Operation
Expressed per:
BOO
SS
Nkj-N
P
Red meat slaughterhouses
ton LWK
Red meat packinghouses
ton LWK
Poultry slaughterhouses
ton LWK
Tanneries
ton raw hide
Dairies (consumption milk)
ton milk
<section>i</section>
Technology and policy options
Technology. Technologies exist to significantly reduce emissions from processing plants. The problem is one of cost and corresponding incentive and regulatory framework. Because of the high BOD-load in the waste water of tanneries, dairies and slaughterhouses, anaerobic systems are the most suitable waste water purification systems. Simple anaerobic systems could cut the BOD contents by half, while more sophisticated anaerobic systems reach 90 percent BOD-purification. Waste water treatment usually first separates solids from the liquid, followed biological treatment under anaerobic conditions (lagoons). Then, nutrients such as phosphorus are removed by chemical or physical processes such as adsorption, stripping or coagulation. The same process serves to remove the remaining BOD as well as pathogens. In a few developed countries environmental problems have already led to high quality standards being required for discharge water. To meet these standards, a combination of
anaerobic and aerobic treatment is required, often coupled with nutrient removal systems.
As most of the air pollution is related to fossil energy consumption, prevention to reduce environmental pollution, is even more important for air pollutants than for waste water. There are methods to treat polluted air, although generally at high cost.
Slaughterhouses. In slaughterhouses, the environmental impact can often be greatly reduced by employing simple technology:
o Waste prevention. Dry rendering of offals reduces the amount of waste water produced, and therefore processing costs. Cutting down on water use is probably the most important factor in reducing the environmental burden of slaughterhouses. Wastes should, as far as possible, be collected as solids because blood and paunch, and other solids, contribute enormously to the waste water load and should not be washed away;
o Use of by-products. Slaughterhouse wastes can be composted and used as fertilizer. Anaerobic treatment results in a slurry that can be used as animal feed the liquid part can be used as irrigation water, or for fish or algae production, although more recently and following the mad cow disease outbreaks in the KU, the recycling of animal waste products for animal feed is seriously questioned.
Tanneries. Pollution through waste water can be reduced by cutting down on total water use, for example, by reusing waste water, by introducing new technologies to minimize water use and by reducing the use of chemicals such as lime, salt, sulphide etc. and chromium. Higham (1991) gives more details:
o Water conservation. As with slaughter, reduction of water use leads to a reduction in the total waste load. To a certain extent, waste water can be reused;
o Curing hides and skins. The use of salt for preservation may be reduced and, where possible, be replaced by biodegradable preservatives. Other preservation methods such as chilling or radiation by electron beam or gamma rays may be used;
o Beamhouse processes. Hair saving methods are recommended to prevent degraded keratin from entering waste streams. Unhairing/liming fluids can be recycled after recharging. It is also recommended to separate the unhairing and liming stages. Both liquids can be recharged and hair screened out. The intermediate wash can be re-used as a soak liquid;
o Tanning. Low chrome pretannage, possibly of an aluminum salt, can be used. Alternative mineral salts with less toxicity, such as aluminum, zirconium, titanium and iron, may be used as possible substitutes for chromium salts. Re-use of chromium is another option. In countries where discharge of chromium is strictly prohibited, much effort is put into chrome recovery and re-use. Precipitation of chromium is an easy process which also results in large reductions of SS and BOD emissions. Alternative vegetable tanning methods can replace chrome tanning to a high degree. The "Liritan" process developed in South Africa has a high chemical uptake, low pollution load, uniform penetration of the tan and is a shorter process (Higham, 1991); and
o Finishing. A reduction of volatile organic compounds can be accomplished by using aqueous finishes for base and middle finish coats.
Dairies. Waste can be prevented to a considerable extent by good management practices and use of adequate equipment. While poor management results in waste loads of 3 kg BOD per ton of milk, good management can reduce this to 1 kg. Again, this can be achieved by optimizing the use of water, resulting in lower volumes of waste water, and by recovering solids from the waste water.
Box 5.11 Regulations induce search for innovative solutions; the case of Tyson Food Inc.
IN THE state of Arkansas, USA, Tyson Food Inc. was sued by more and than 100 Green Forest residents who contended that their water supply had been fouled by a lack of adequate sewage treatment from chicken processing plants in 1989. Tyson was ordered to pay for property damage, for overloading of the city's water treatment system and for violating the Clean Water Act. Furthermore, the use of burial pits for dead bird dispose by growers was banned. This resulted in Tyson Fobs investing in research and development to remedy the problem.
Tyson Foods subsequently developed a recovery technology that allowed them to recycle proteins, fat and carbohydrates recovered in their water treatment process into nutrients for animal feed. This enabled the company to recycle not only venous solids (primarily proteins, carbohydrates, and fats) from its water treatment plants in Arkansas, Oklahoma and Missouri, but also the inedible animal parts from its poultry treatment and pretreatment centres attached to its processing plants. Further, it also enabled the recycling of dead birds from the forms. In order to facilitate the use of this technique, Tyson Foods distributed some 2,000 custom freezers to its growers to aid them in the disposal of dead birds, which were collected and transposed to the rendering plant.
Thus, the refinement of the rendering process resulted in a win-win solution, i.e. an improvement of the environment and a profitable solution for Tyson. The ability to recycle by-products is becoming more of a concern as consumers are demanding more processed meat and pet food companies, among others, purchase the processed protein meal and other products for use as high-quality ingredients in various animal rations. The feathers can also be hydrolyzed into a feather meal that can be used as another high protein animal feed ingredient.
Source: Narrod, 1994.
Policies. In contrast to many other impacts of livestock production, processing is usually point source pollution and therefore easier to quantify and to control.
Regulations are an essential component in dealing with the environmental impact of processing plants. They may limit or prohibit the use of chromium in tanneries, control the use of CFCs in chilling processes and limit the total BOD output in waste water. In addition, odour and gaseous emission control may be prescribed.
Zoning. For small processing units, a policy of encouraging an even geographical distribution is probably the best approach. Similarly to the industrial livestock production system, specific sites should be identified for industrial processing operations. Because of its bulkiness and perishable nature, milk processing has always been sited close to producers and is less concentrated. A similar trend is starting in the developing countries. However, zoning is dependent on a functioning infrastructure and adequate enforcement of pollution control regulations.
Incentives. Use and processing of by-products depends to a great extent on whether there is a market for a given commodity, on the availability of a practical commercial process for converting the animal byproduct into a usable commodity, and on storage facilities for the perishable product and on whether there will be a sufficiently large volume for it to be financially viable. Also here, win-win situations can be found, as shown in Box 5.11. Increasing the prices for water and energy can make the use of these resources more efficient and thus reduce the waste load and emissions. Incentive policies may help to stimulate a market, creating selective advantages for by-product use and waste recovery but, as with public incentives in general, should be of short duration and well-targeted.
Institutional instruments. Finally, there is an urgent need to strengthen pollution control and enforcement mechanisms and to establish financial independence of slaughterhouses in the developing world which now, frequently, see all their income going back to the public coffers, without re-investment in maintenance and infrastructure improvements.
Processing of Livestock products
Animals
<section>j</section>
Chapter 6: Conclusion
From analysis to action
Driving forces
Response: Policy and technology options
Critical actions
The potential implications of these measures
From analysis to action
From analysis to action
THE PICTURE that emerges from the above analysis is clearly one of urgency and at the same time of complexity. The urgency stems from the dramatically increasing demand for livestock products and, as a result, the far-reaching changes in the structure of global livestock production. The complexity stems from livestock's use by society for multiple needs, producing in the process multiple environmental benefits and costs. Moreover, livestock-environment interactions are typically second level problems, because it is not livestock per se, but the way in which livestock are used by growing human populations that governs their impact on the environment. The purpose of livestock is determined by human needs, and technology translates these into different levels of natural resource use and sustainability. Quite clearly, livestock do not set out to destroy the environment, it is the socio-economic-political context, defined by humans, which determine livestock's effect upon their
surroundings (Box 6.1).
While the analysis has focused on problem areas, let us not forget that there are large areas where livestock have remained in equilibrium with natural resources and, even more importantly, are helping to maintain ecosystem health, diversity, flexibility and societal cohesion. Livestock and the environment can achieve a balance while at the same time fulfilling humanity's food needs and contributing to sustainable economic growth.
Thus, within the complexities of livestock-environment interactions, this study shatters widely held perceptions about livestock playing only a negative role in any particular ecosystem. However, this study highlights also that there are important situations, where livestock are out of balance with the absorptive capacity of soil, water and air. Land degradation, deforestation, water pollution, greenhouse gas emission and loss of plant and animal genetic resources are the result. And in these areas urgent action is required. Following the conceptual models described in Chapter I, this chapter will summarize the analysis from the preceding chapters and recommend courses of action.
Box 6.1 Scapegoats and missed opportunities
PERHAPS IT is no coincidence that the scapegoat is an animal. From statements like: "Livestock have been criticised for damaging the environment in a number of ways (FAO, 1995) and Livestock have been charged with wholesale devastation African rangelands and irreversible destruction of soils desertification" (Winrock International Institute, 1992), it would appear that livestock themselves go out and decide to destroy or not to destroy our environment. Two centuries after the age of enlightenment we are still in need of a scapegoat, literally. Livestock do not move, produce or reproduce without us wanting them to do so. They are completely dependent upon us. Livestock do not degrade - humans do by their management of livestock. As a result of these misconceptions about livestock development institutions and governments continue to miss opportunities which would permit the livestock sector to make its full contribution to human welfare and economic growth.
Driving forces
Underlying a complex network of links between livestock and the environment, there are some strong fundamental pressures that will persist over the next decades. They are:
o Strong population growth, increases in per capita income and urbanization are fueling demand for livestock products, while at the same time limiting resources for livestock production. For example, while population is expected to double by the year 2020 in Asia and Africa, demand for meat and milk is expected to triple. Livestock products have a very high incomes elasticity and, under equal income levels, urban dwellers consume more meat than rural populations (IFPRI, 1995). This dramatic increase in demand will change the structure of the global livestock sector, as the amount of grazing area is not expected to increase, and the possibilities for increased production per unit area are also limited. These forces will change the geographical distribution of production, essentially breaking its traditional links with land, as livestock production will become more industrial and crop based and, in the tropics, will move towards the more humid zones; and
o Poverty and social inequality also leads to degradation of natural resources. Different levels of income, between and within countries, lead to a different valuation of environmental resources and willingness to pay for their conservation. The desperation of the poor limits what can be achieved. The situation of abject and mounting poverty because of decreasing per capita land resources in some tropical highlands, and declining cattle-people ratios in pastoral systems, simply does not allow indigenous investments in labour and capital for resource conservation or improvement.
These fundamental pressures have already disrupted, and will continue to disrupt the balance between people, livestock and natural resources. They are exacerbated by additional man-made pressures:
o Inappropriate price policies and incentives. Economy-wide and sector price policies often pursue social or economic objectives outside the sector and often fail to address the environmental dimension. For the livestock sector, this often means a policy to promote the provision of cheap livestock products for the urban population, without accounting for the environmental costs involved in their production. In addition, this has led to subsidies on inputs and products, thus inducing wasteful use of natural resources, and constraining beneficial livestock-environment synergies. Subsidized concentrate feed, fuel, fertilizer and free AI-services, are some prominent examples. Protected markets and subsidies on milk and meat are others;
o Institutional weaknesses. Missing or inadequate institutions result in ill-defined property rights and deny access to essential resources in many extensive grazing systems. Ecologically un-adapted systems are the result. In addition, institutions fail to develop and enforce regulations to protect environmental resources, such as wildlife and forest areas, surface waters or cropland, both in the developed and developing world. Furthermore, weak institutions allow uncontrolled growth of, and pollution by, urban animal production and processing. As a result, the strengthening of institutions, particularly at the local level, as well as empowerment of poor livestock holders should be a priority responsibility for governments;
o Inadequate level of infrastructure. Insufficient infrastructure limits the opportunities to develop land-based livestock production and encourages the establishment of industrial systems and the concentration of large amounts of waste. It also constrains rapid destocking and restocking of arid ecosystems, and so stifles these systems' ecological optimal adaptation to prevailing erratic climatic conditions. Infrastructure development can, however, pave the way for reckless exploitation and destruction of valuable ecosystems in humid forest areas, with livestock being used to claim land titles. However, except for the humid tropics, infrastructure development and, in particular, marketing infrastructure, will be a powerful instrument to mitigate environmental impact;
o Widespread ignorance and lack of know how. The public perception still is that major natural resource degradation processes are related to livestock activities, as shown by the use of terms such as "the Hamburger connection". The reality is more complex and, only now is the scientific community starting to understand the importance of ecosystem dynamics such as those of the arid lands. But much more is required. The full dynamics of crop-livestock interactions are far from well understood and this leads to poor decision making. For example, the lack of understanding of wildlife-livestock dynamics has resulted in unnecessary killing of wildlife. The persistence of the concept of desertification, as advancing deserts induced by overgrazing, has led to badly directed, and even counterproductive investments in forced settlements of pastoral peoples. Finally, the perception that farmers in the industrialized world have no concern for their environment, has led to
authoritative, top-down regulation, whereas there is increasing evidence in all OECD countries that considerable reduction in land and water pollution can be obtained through grass-root education and motivation. Re-invigorated research, training, extension and public education efforts are required;
o Policy void in the sector. Livestock producers, especially in South America, the EU and USA have established powerful political lobbies, which have sought to maintain subsidies and minimize environmental regulation. They have often done so under the argument that the introduction of environmental regulations puts them at a competitive disadvantage. This, in turn, has often induced them to demand import protection through either tariff or non-tariff barriers, notably exaggerating sanitary and phyto-sanitary standards, in order to "level the playing field" with their competitors in lower regulation countries. Although their influence has diminished over the last decade, especially in the EU and the USA, livestock lobbies are still influential. They found themselves often at the side of powerful urban voters, who do not wish to pay the price for all environmental costs. On the other hand, some of the pastoral groups in Africa and Asia are among the most marginalized groups
in their countries, with almost no influence in reversing those policies that limit their access to key resources and hence the sustainability of their ecosystem and livelihood;
o Lack of information by consumers. This also plays a role in explaining why certain modes of production continue and why more stable systems are placed at an economic disadvantage in the developed countries. In the developed world, the health dangers of excessive meat and milk consumption have been extensively disseminated, whereas the links between diet and the environment have been less well covered. Those links which have been made, often departed from strong anti-livestock assumptions (Goodland, 1996).
Response: Policy and technology options
Guiding principles. To meet the food requirements of future generations and preserve the future resource base, urgent action is required of the livestock development community. As described in Chapter 1, these actions need to combine education and motivation, financial, property, zoning and regulatory instruments. First, a few general principles need to be established (Young 1996).
o As said before, policies that address the underlying causes of environmental degradation are generally more effective than those that address the symptoms. When an underlying cause can be removed, the incentive to cause the problem disappears and little monitoring or enforcement is required. For example, the removal of special tariffs on cassava meal will reduce nutrient surpluses, and hence water pollution and, in turn, the need for costly water quality monitoring.
o Policies may need to be combined to maximize effectiveness and they must be adjusted when necessary. The heterogeneity of land-based livestock systems operating in different production environments, and the varying responsiveness of people to each instrument according to their wealth, age, family needs and status, requires policies that complement and enhance each other. For example, to make arid range-livestock systems more sustainable, market pricing for livestock products needs to be accompanied by, among others, institutional changes in access to key resources and employment generation outside the sector; and
o Policies and programmes that have perverse or unintended effects on the environment should be replaced by those more precisely targeted to the prime policy objective. For example, a targeted incomes subsidy for the European farmer, especially if linked with environmental and landscape objectives, is environmentally much friendlier than the current price support practices.
The choice of policies should carefully consider the quality of local institutions, infrastructure and the level of income. Where institutions are weak, and/or the polluter or degrader is difficult to identify (i.e. non-point source pollution), regulations are difficult to enforce and more reliance has to be placed on financial instruments. Zoning and regulatory instruments fit better where the polluter or degrader can be unmistakably identified (point source pollution) and government has the financial resources to establish the infrastructure and reliable institutions to enforce environmental regulations.
Critical actions
Get the decision making right
Get a correct and consistent policy framework
Get the regulations and access to resources right
Get the financial incentives right
Get the technology generation and transfer right
Get the infrastructure right
The above analysis, and the urgent need for action in redressing the policies leading to degradation or inhibiting positive synergies to take place, in turns leads to a set of recommendations for the different actors in the sector, both in the developing and industrialized world.
Get the decision making right
Current decision-making regarding the role of livestock in sustainable agriculture is hampered by lack of, or sometimes wrong, information on the type, extent and causes of current negative and positive impacts on the environment. Even more importantly, policy makers are often not aware of the expected outcome of changes in policies. And, in their defense, the complexity of livestock's interaction with other sectors imposes a formidable task at any level of decision-making. Better information to provide the basis for decision-making is therefore an urgent prerequisite. Production systems and ecosystems need to be documented with emphasis on current hot spots, future environmental hazards, and potential positive contributions. In addition, consumers should be informed on health effects of high levels of consumption of animal products. For that, there is a need to:
o monitor resource use, using geographic information systems (GIS), and low cost monitoring tools to provide more accurate information on current resource degradation and the environmental impact of technologies and policy changes. In this context, a concerted effort to document the extent and causes of environmental degradation in the arid and semi-arid systems deserves a high priority. This would eliminate some of the myths about desertification, and arrive at better policies to improve the social and environmental sustainability of some of the most marginalized peoples in one of the most diverse ecosystems of the world;
o take stock of resource endowments, technologies and policies and increase analytical skills at farming level, schools and universities, government and non-governmental institutions for environmental impact assessment and related policy analyses. The global overview and broad analysis in this study needs to be followed-up by regional and country-wide assessments of the extent and causes of degradation and the role that livestock play in these processes;
o increase awareness among decision-makers, producers and consumers of the environmental effects of different modes of production. Consumer education about environmental and health consequences of dietary choices needs to be strengthened, in particular in the industrialized world; and
o further develop economic valuation techniques for environmental resources at farming, project and national levels. This study revealed the almost total absence of any economic valuation at ecosystems level of the positive or negative effects of livestock-environment interactions. The preliminary analysis provided in Chapter III of the positive effects of livestock production in irrigated systems, was carried out in the framework of this study. No data could be found in the literature on such effects for any production system. Proper economic valuations of the environmental effects of livestock production, say in a mixed farming system, can lead to environment enhancing policies. In addition, better valuation figures on the environmental costs of industrial production systems would establish the crucial database needed, if policies of incorporating environmental costs in industrially produced meat are introduced.
Get a correct and consistent policy framework
Any sustainable livestock development strategy has to take full account of producer and consumer objectives. In many instances, environmental objectives are not the highest priority. For many livestock producers in the developing world, the first priority is household food security and family welfare. Less tangible future sustainability of resource use is often traded off against immediate food needs. On a national scale, social and economic objectives may be in conflict with environmental objectives or have different time scales. It is therefore conceptually useful to bring these different objectives, with different implications for environmental sustainability, social development and economic growth together in one "national wealth" indicator. The national wealth of any nation is composed of the natural capital (to which the sector would contribute in particular with the value of rangelands and genetic resources), the human capital (the collective of human skills and
values) and produced-assets or economic capital (World Bank, 1995b). At particular stages of development, growth in any component of the total capital might be reduced to enable greater growth in another.
In addition, within the environmental objectives, policies need to be consistent. Too often, a particular policy has different effects on the different components of the natural resource base. For example, policies to provide concentrate feed to pastoral stock, under the frequently used argument that it is necessary to reduce the impact of drought, might save domestic animal genetic resources, but has a negative effect on rangelands. The devaluation of the CFA franc in West Africa reduced grazing pressure, but might have increased firewood collection because it caused cooking kerosene prices to rise. Different environmental policies might also conflict in their effect on the same environmental component, or do not go far enough. The policy to encourage pastoral settlement and individual land ownership to reduce overstocking, directly conflicts with efforts to promote livestock-wildlife integration through benefit sharing mechanisms of the income from tourism and wildlife. In
this same domain, too little benefit trickles down. Finally, too often policies are changed before they can bear fruit. Specific actions in this domain are therefore:
o to set objectives - environmental, economic, social and decide on balances between these objectives over the short and the longer run. The nature of these objectives will, to a large extent, define the balance attained between different production systems (grazing, mixed and industrial), and different agro-climates; and
o to identify conflict areas between broad social and economic objectives and environmental goals, and to identify possible mitigation measures.
Once the objectives have been set, it is necessary to assess how current policies and operational measures support or act against these objectives. Three categories of policies can be identified.
In the first category are those which make neither economic nor environmental sense (what may be called a lose-lose situation). These are poorly informed, formulated or simply misguided policies, or the result of the domination of certain interest groups. Examples are land titling through ranching in South America or the beef and milk tariff policies under the Common Agricultural Policy in the KU, after the initial post-war justification of food security became irrelevant. With growing trade liberalization and reduced public expenditure these are, in many cases, being corrected. Political will must exist to accept possible negative public reaction from the beneficiaries of those policies. This political will is particularly important in countries with strong livestock interest groups.
The second category are those, which make economic sense mainly in the short term, but have negative environmental effects in the long term. They may be called win-lose policies. An example is road construction in tropical forest areas, where land requirements and development needs may be in direct conflict with conservation objectives. Here, it is necessary to formulate local and specific complementary measures (i.e. protected areas, institutional developments) to minimize the trade-off. As has been shown, the majority of negative livestock impacts on the environment falls into this category.
A third set of policies are those that make both economic and environmental sense, but often do not pay off in the short term. These win-win situations are, for example, the reduction of methane emissions through increased animal productivity, livestock-wildlife integration and the use of slaughter waste for alternative feed or energy sources. Two, often inter-related, problems usually emerge: time frame and initial investment costs. Further problems often occur because benefits that accrue to common goods are only slightly or not at all of tangible interest to the farmer producing these benefits. A new set of mechanisms with novel financing approaches needs to be designed for the protection of these global commons. There is, therefore, an urgent need to:
o target policies carefully and as directly as possible, avoiding blanket coverage arrangements, for cost-effectiveness and better effect. The subsidy for conserving unique habitats, and other income subsidies, which have replaced price subsidies for milk and meat in the EU and USA fall in this category;
o correct policies which are misguiding resource use or which have perverse effects. Many examples have been given in this study; and
o look for support to finance accelerated adoption of win-win solutions such as benefit sharing through national and international arrangements. The Global Environmental Facility (GEF) provides such mechanisms, but other sources (for example, levies on international trade in meat, milk and especially semen and embryo trade to preserve domestic animal genetic resources), could, and probably need to be identified.
Get the regulations and access to resources right
To optimize livestock's role in development, there must be an appropriate legal basis for resource use, with well-defined and enforceable rules, and institutions to implement them. In fact, a major underlying cause for important externalities is the insufficiently defined access to resources, such as open access grazing land for pastoral systems or the use of surface water for the uncontrolled discharge of waste of industrial production systems or processing units. To a certain extent this restricts private behaviour, sometimes resulting in pressure against which the political will has to resist. Institutional development requires:
The establishment of regulatory frameworks:
o to establish clear access rights to land. Clear rights of access to land, adapted to the agro-ecological conditions, is a necessary, although not always sufficient, condition to provide the economic and social incentives for people to protect and improve resources. It becomes more important as the pressure on land increases, especially in mixed farming systems. In the pastoral system, access to "key resources" is a condition for the survival of those systems. For other arid rangelands, flexibility, with "fuzzy" boundaries is required;
o to establish protected areas for fragile ecosystems, with due attention to local capacity to enforce the protection. The policy here should be less but better, and the enforcement should be entrusted to independent agencies. Line-agencies, depending on ministries are politically too sensitive;
o to establish zoning for industrial production systems;
o to bring animal densities in line with the absorptive capacity of land and water, through quota systems, as already imposed in many parts of the world; and
o to prescribe regulations for waste control from processing and industrial production units, and use of noxious substances, management practices, labelling;
Empowerment of formal and informal institutions:
Where the regulatory framework is available but insufficiently respected or enforced, mandates and support to formal and informal institutions can be provided. For pastoral grazing systems, this study advocates the principles of "subsidiarity", whereby land rights are established in a participatory fashion within the local administrative capability, delegating to local groups, those public administrative powers that undermine or duplicate traditional governance structures (Swift, 1995). For more intensive systems, regulation is clearly a public sector function although, here also, interesting results have been obtained with grassroots level environmental cooperatives;
Use of participatory approaches in strategy formulation and planning. Grassroots participation has been shown to be an essential element in strategic planning. Many techniques are available (World Bank, 1995c and IIED, 1994).
Get the financial incentives right
Ideally, commodity prices should include all direct and indirect environmental costs in order to give market signals that embody the proper valuation of environmental goods. Prices should encourage efficient resource use and guide technologies to anticipated future scarcities. They should promote waste recycling and resource enhancing technologies. This study argues that environmentally the most appropriate balance between different areas and different needs would be established, if all environmental costs were internalized, and adequate benefit sharing mechanisms introduced for common goods. Astute pricing is an especially powerful tool and the instrument of choice where institutions are weak and where the financial or social costs of control become unreasonable, as is the case in many developing countries. In particular, intensive production depends on inputs that often contain a high component of natural resources not reflected in their market price. These should be
priced higher by abolishing subsidies or, in some situations, introducing taxation. This, in addition to a quantitative effect, will induce a more efficient use of natural resources, with both environmental and economic gains. Correspondingly, subsidies or tax relief can be provided where natural resources are saved or tutored, such as renewable energy, greenhouse gas sequestration or biodiversity management. Incentive policies are the instrument of choice in a situation of non-point source pollution and weak institutions. Drawbacks are that the internalization of environmental costs, if implemented unilaterally in one country, places national producers at disadvantage vis-à-vis foreign competitors where such policies are not in place. Furthermore, there exists a high level of uncertainty associated with valuing important environmental resources such as biodiversity and, hence, immense difficulties to internalize these costs in market prices. However, for the well-being of
future generations, this is the direction to move in, and therefore, this study argues to:
o eliminate subsidies or even to tax inputs such as water, concentrate feed, fossil fuel, fertilizer;
o introduce cost recovery for communal water and grazing for livestock, and charge cost-prices for "private goods" such as AI, and clinical treatments through public services provided to the producers (Umali et al., 1992);
o abolish price support for livestock products (and directly support farmers' incomes if that is socially or economically desirable);
o introduce levies or taxes for waste disposal;
o create price incentives for methane use and other nonrenewable resource saving technologies;
o remove advantages for commodities or types of enterprise where this is not warranted by public food concerns;
o introduce equitable benefit sharing mechanisms for social and environmental goods; and
o move towards a full internalization of all environmental costs and benefits into product prices.
Get the technology generation and transfer right
First, as seen in several systems, much more is now known about how to manage livestock in an environmentally benign way. This study demonstrates that currently available technologies can already significantly increase efficiencies, enhance resources in use and recycle waste at various stages of the production process. The case histories on intensive, temperate grazing and mixed farming systems, and the enormous impact that improvements in feed efficiency can have on grain needs and nutrient emissions in the industrial system, clearly demonstrate this point. Livestock production is still an inefficient process in terms of converting nitrogen and energy into food, with overall only 10-30 percent retained. Increased efficiency will reduce resource requirements and waste emission. Second, "leveling the playing field" often leads to the need for a different set of technologies. This new set will respond, to a higher degree, to true scarcities as they incorporate the value of
environmental goods. This process needs to be facilitated and accelerated. Technology adoption can be facilitated by:
Research, training, education and extension:
Many research gaps have been already provided in this study. The debate on livestock-environment interactions is seriously handicapped by two obvious gaps. First the lack of proper economic valuation data of livestock-environment interactions and second the rather timid attempts to move research from a pure incremental focus, i.e. more product, to the primary focus which should be on the sustainability of production. It is important to design technologies that anticipate future resource constraints based on current intrinsic scarcities. There is, however, an apparent lack of institutional capacity in the livestock research community to do so. Multi-disciplinary research teams, which include natural resource economists and environmentalists need to be created, and the result transmitted through education, training and extension to all different actors in the sector. This could be assisted by:
o the provision of credit where high investment costs constitute an impediment, for example, methane digesters or waste treatment facilities; and
o financial support for accelerated adoption of win-win solutions, through direct subsidies or more equitable benefit sharing arrangements.
Get the infrastructure right
Often infrastructure is the key, in particular for establishing a better balance between livestock and land resources. Infrastructure development is often a prerequisite for technology uptake and resource access but it is a two edged sword in that not only does it alleviate pressure on natural resources, but it may also make them accessible to uncontrolled exploitation and destruction of ecosystems as in the case of some tropical rainforests. It is therefore necessary to:
o construct, or facilitate the construction of slaughterhouses, dairies and cold chain facilities in the vicinity of producing areas in order to avoid waste accumulation in sensitive and urban areas. Some concentration may still be necessary, in order to capture economies of scale in treatment. Infrastructure is also particularly important for rapid de-stocking when drought threatens in arid and semi-arid grazing systems; and
o facilitate the establishment of markets, transport and communication while nevertheless considering the balance between increased road and transport infrastructure and biodiversity conservation.
<section>k</section>
The potential implications of these measures
The above recommendations would bring about important changes in the relative share and orientation of the main production systems. Some trends and changes in focus are to be expected.
The grazing systems would remain a source of extensively produced animal products. However, these systems can intensify production, especially in the higher potential areas, by incorporating new technologies. This can be facilitated by stronger organizations. They can also intensify by diversifying, opening up other uses for these grazing systems (tourism, etc.). In these systems, livestock's role, in addition to providing a livelihood to pastoral people and market production, is to protect the natural resource base, in particular land and biodiversity. In future, with growing pressures on natural resources, there is little scope for protecting the environment in its own right. In one way or another, the chances of preserving the environment are best where largely intact natural ecosystems provide a diversified basket of current or future goods and services for which there is effective demand and cost and benefit sharing. This will only happen if all those involved in the
decision-making and use of those resources develop from single commodity producers (beef, tourism) to stewards of this diversified resource. The future of this resource will depend on its caretakers and stewards.
Mixed farming systems will see continued intensification and important growth. Most growth will come from a better spatial distribution of industrial production units in a "regional mixed farm" whereby the nutrient inputs and outputs are in balance with the carrying capacity of the land. However, smallholder and family mixed farming will remain predominant for some time to come, with livestock production driven by byproducts and surplus products of crop agriculture. Important productivity gains will be achieved by further enhancing nutrient and energy cycles between the two components. The environmental and economic stability that this system provides make it the prime focus for continuing technology generation, transfer and expansion. Livestock's role, in addition to production, is to enhance and substitute natural resources.
In the industrial systems, the internalization of environmental costs would mean that production costs would increase, although it is not clear whether that would remove totally the competitive edge that industrial production has over land based production. Approximate calculations show an increase of about 10 percent. However, environmental impact is site-specific and avoidance costs vary considerably. The somewhat higher prices would mean that demand would contract. Higher prices would provide incentives for the land-based systems to intensify. The share of the land-based production systems would grow at the expense of the industrial system, although new technologies and economies of scale for waste treatment might off-set this balance again. This system's purpose must be to produce efficiently at minimal environmental cost.
Ideally, the advanced resource-saving technologies and the absorptive capacities of extended rural areas should be integrated. Thus, the motto for most of the developed world and the densely populated parts of the developing world is: Intensify, but do not concentrate animal production. This study advocates decentralized industrial systems, particularly for pig and poultry production. These would blend resource saving technologies with the absorptive capacities of the surrounding land. These new mixed-industrial systems must be based upon the resource endowments of a region if nutrient balances are to be maintained and the environment's ability to absorb pollutants respected. This is not a nostalgic desire to revive the old mixed farming systems. New organizational arrangements will have to be found to allow specialized units to capitalize on economies of scale. This, to a certain extent, would also allow processing to move into these areas.
The final recommendation: the need for greater impartiality and cooperation
All these changes will be brought about only if policy makers, livestock producers and scientists and environmentalist groups and consumers:
o remove the emotional conjecture, lack of objectivity and over-simplification from the debate on livestock-environment relationships;
o acknowledge the need to correct unsustainable livestock production systems and act accordingly. In the developing world, where environmental pressure will grow most strongly over the next decades, policy makers must heed the strong warning signs and learn from the errors of the industrialized world;
o accept the ample evidence that the contribution of livestock to sustainable development can be greatly enhanced, provided that the appropriate enabling environment is created, and act accordingly;
o take full account in future policy planning of the dramatic changes transforming the global livestock sector. The shift towards grain crops for feed use may turn animal production into the single most important agricultural activity on the planet. Selecting the right land and water resources, the efficient generation of feed, transporting feed to farm animals, the conversion of feed into animal protein, the marketing of products as well as the adoption of healthy consumer habits particularly by wealthier individuals, plus the potential synergism between efficient resource use and socioeconomic prospects: all of these factors need to become part of the livestock-environment equation.
Only then can we expect to feed future generations with the type and quality of food they desire without depleting natural resources. This is one of the greatest challenges that the world, and especially all those involved in the livestock sector, is facing.
<section>l</section>
Annexes
Annex 1: The driving force-state-response (DSR) model
Annex 2: Statistical tables
Annex 3: Environmental indicators in livestock production systems
Lists of abbreviations and acronyms
References
Annex 1: The driving force-state-response (DSR) model
The DSR model (OECD, 1996) basically helps to identify and understand the processes involved in livestock environment interactions. It focuses first on the human activities that create pressures (the earlier name was Pressure-State-Response Model), which are animal and crop agriculture, and related processing. These activities create positive or negative forces (for example methane emission, soil compaction, or improvement of soil structure through nutrient recycling), which change the quality and quantity of the natural resource base of air, water, soil, flora and fauna, and non-renewable resources. Information on the state of that resource base, reinforced or weakened by the valuation of the society of environmental values, leads to a societal response. Society responds to this information through environmental, general economic and sectoral policies. Changes in these policies will generally change the incentives to use certain technologies, for example, pollution
mitigation, reduction of methane emission or positive synergies between livestock and wild-life. The model is especially suitable to guide the identification of the critical parameters to be used in an environmental impact assessment of proposed livestock projects and policies.
Pressure State Response Framework for Interactions Livestock Systems and the Global and Local Environment
Linking these three major components of the DSR model are information linkages between pressures and responses, between the state and the pressures, and from the state to the response. These feedback mechanisms allow us the opportunity to better understand the consequences of policy and technology interventions. Therefore the PSR model blends well with the induced innovation model which is the second basic model used in conducting this study. More recently the OECD (OECD 1996) has introduced a more explicit conceptual model based on the same principles.
Revised DSR model
Source: OECD, 1996.
<section>m</section>
Annex 2: Statistical tables
Table 1. Grazing systems in different ecozones.
Grazing system
Area (million km^2)
People living in systems area (millions)
Cattle (millions)
Sheep and goats (millions)
Arid and semi-arid rangelands
Temperate and Tropical Highlands
Sub-humid and Humid savannas
Table 2. Total meat production of grazing systems by world region.
World Region
Beef
Mutton & goat meat
Milk
'000 MT
in % of total
'000 MT
in % of total
'000 MT
in % of total
SSA
Asia
CSA
WANA
EE & CIS
OECD & other developed
Total
Table 3. Annual growth rates of production in grazing systems by commodity and eco-zone (1981/83-1993/1994).
Beef & buffalo meat
Sheep & goat meat
Milk
Arid & semi-arid sub-tropics
Humid & sub-humid tropics & sub-tropics
Temperate & highlands
Table 4. Livestock inventory of mixed farming systems.
Species
Number (millions)
Percent global population
Of which in developing world
Of which in OECD & other developed countries
Cattle
Buffalo
Sheep & goats
Dairy cattle
Table 5. Livestock production of mixed farming systems by world region and share of the system in total commodity production
World Region
Beef & mutton
Poultry pork
Milk
'000 MT
in % of total
'000 MT
in % of total
'000 MT
in % of total
SSA
Asia
CSA
WANA
EE & CIS
OECD & other developed
Total
Table 6. Annual growth rates of production in mixed farming systems by commodity and world region (1981/83-1993/1994).
Beef
Buffalo meat
Sheep & goat meat
Dairy milk
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Poultry eggs
Rainfed
Temperate
Rainfed
Humid
Rainfed
Arid
Irrigated
Temperate
Irrigated
Humid
Irrigated
Arid
Table 7. Livestock production of industrial systems by world region and share of the system in total commodity production.
World Region
Beef & mutton
Poultry & pork
Eggs
'000 MT
in % of total
'000 MT
in % of total
'000 MT
in % of total
SSA
Asia
CSA
WANA
EE & CIS
OECD & other developed
Total
Table 8 Annual growth rates of production in industrial production systems by commodity and world region (1981/83-1993/1994).
Region
Beef & mutton
Pork
Poultry meat
Eggs
SSA
n.a.
ASIA
n.a.
CSA
n.a.
WANA
EE & CIS
OECD & Other devoped
WORLD
Table 9 Global total utilization of concentrate feed resources 1965/67 to 1990/92.
Global total utilization for feeds (1000 MT per year)
Commodity
Cereals
Brans
Oilseeds)
Oilmeals and cakes
Roots and tubers
Total
Source: Analysis of FAO Agrostat data.
Table 10 Average annual growth rates in regional utilization of total concentrate feed resources 1965/67 to 1990/92
Average annual growth rates in utilization of feeds (% per year)
Region
Developed regions
North America
Western Europe
E Europe & CIS
Oceania
Developing regions
C & S America
W Asia & N Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
S Asia
SE Asia
E Asia
World
Source: Analysis of FAO Agrostat data, see Table 3 for details
Table 11. Global production and consumption as feed of cereals, oilseeds and oilmeals in 1993.
Commodity
Total production (million tons)
'000 ha
Feed consumption (million tons)
Feed use
(% production)
(% commodity group)
Cereals
Rice
Wheat
Maize
Millet
Sorghum
Barley
Oats
Rye
Total cereals
Oilseeds
Copra
Cotton seed
Groundnut
Palm kernel
Rapeseed
Soya bean
Sunflower
Tom oilseeds
Oilmeals
Copra meal
Cotton seed
Groundnut
Palm kernel
Rapeseed
Soya bean
Sunflower
Fishmeal
Total oilmeals
Overall total
Source: USDA 1994; data generally agreed with FAO commodity reports (FAO 1994)
Table 12. Estimated utilization of concentrate feeds for different production purposes by production system ('000 MT dry matter).
Production system
Beef
Milk
Small ruminant meet
Pig meat
Poultry meat
Poultry eggs
Grazing temp.
Grazing humid
Grazing arid
Mixed temp.
Mixed humid
Mixed arid
Irrigated temp.
Irrigated humid
Irrigated arid
Ind.pigs/poultry
Ind. ruminants
Overall
Table 13 Areas cropped with coarse grains, wheat, oilseeds and roots and tubers used for livestock feed as percent of total cropped areas by world regions in 1990/92.
Region
Total arable land
% total arable land providing livestock feed from different crops
(million ha)
Coarse grains
Wheat
Oilseeds
Roots & haters
Overall (less oilseeds)
Developed regions
North America
Western Europe
E Europe and CIS
Oceania
Developing regions
C and S America
W Asia and America
Sub-Saharan-Africa
S Asia
SE Asia
E Asia
World
Source: Analysis of USDA PS&D data for coarse grams, wheat and oilseeds and FAO Agrostat data for roots and tubers
Table 14 Land with rainfed crop production potential, developing countries (excluding China).
Class
Name
Moisture regime (LGP days)
Land quality
Million ha
Potential
In use
Balance
AT1
Dry semi-arid
VS, S. MS
AT2
Moist semi arid
VS, S
AT3
Sub-humid
VS, S
AT4
Humid
VS, S
AT5
Marginally suitable land in the moist semi-arid, sub-humid, humid class
MS
AT6
Fluvisols/gleysols
Naturally flooded
VS, S
AT7
Marginally suitable fluvisols/gleysols
Naturally flooded
MS
Total with rainfed potential
Irrigated not suitable (arid and hyper-arid land)
Grand total
VS - Very suitable (at least 80 percent); S - Suitable (40 to 80 percent); MS - Marginally suitable (20 to 40 percent) Source: World Agriculture: AT 2010
Source: FAO 1995.
Table 15 Methane emission by species and system.
Dairy cows
Other cattle
Buffalo
Sheep/goats
Total
Emissions by region
SSA
ASIA
CSA
WANA
OECD
EE+CIS
OTH DVP
Emissions by production system
Gazing temp.
Grazing humid
Grazing arid
Mixed temp.
Mixed humid
Mixed arid
Irrigated temp.
Irrigated humid
irrigated aria
Ind. Ruminants
Total emissions.
<section>n</section>
Annex 3: Environmental indicators in livestock production systems
Detailed sets of indicators will be developed as a follow. up (and in parallel) with this study. Some examples, categorized by environmental factor (soil, water, etc.) and whether the indicator is a measurement taken from the natural resource base, the livestock present, or the human component. They are in general response indicators, because these can be most easily defined.
Grazing systems
Category
Natural resource base
Livestock
Socio-economic
Soil/land
Erosion - Universal Soil Loss Equation
Presence and use of legumes Manure collection & application practices
Arid: Herd mobility
Sub-humid, and humid:
Stocking rate and productivity trends
Arid: Human carrying capacity of the land
Land tenure and recent trends in fencing and crop-encroachment in key areas:
Vulnerability to drought (reliance on food aid) Infrastructure
Cohesion of users groups
Diversity of land use
Vegetation
Proportion of ground cover
Plant species composition and mosaics, rate between, rate of fire wood collections
Presence and use of leguminous plants
Utilization of crop aftermath, tame pastures and native rangelands
Rate of deforestation
Forage demand
Diet preferences
Animal productivity & species composition
Water
Water turbidity
Number of boreholes
Number of new surface watering points
Water quality (nitrate, pesticide content)
Use requirements
Air
Greenhouse gas balance
Greenhouse gas balance
Category
Natural resource base
-Livestock
Socio-economic
Soil
Erosion - Universal Soil Loss Equation
Nutrient Levels - Nitrogen, Phosphorus Copper, Zinc Organic Matter - Cation Exchange Capacity
Farmgate and regional nutrient balances
Presence and use of legumes
Access to animal traction,
Manure storage and utilization, Quantity of concentrates brought into the system
Rate of integration and degree of reliance on outside inputs;
Community cohesion in watershed and regional landscape
Vegetation
Proportion of ground cover
Plant species composition and mosaics
Presence and use of leguminous plants
Forage demand
Diet preferences
Farm income
Water
Water turbidity,
N. P in runoff and ground water insecticide levels
Use requirements
Air
Manure application techniques
Quality of animal diets
Number of animals
Indicators for industrial livestock production systems
Input-related
Production-related
Output-related
Land use changes and land requirements for feed production
Conversion efficiencies for N and P by animal species
Manure discharge Nutrient balances
Percentage of grains in concentrates and diet
Farmgate N and P balance
Fertilizing value of manure
Rangeland requirements for young stock
Ammonia emissions
Methane emissions
Livestock breeds used
Methane emissions
Tons of liveweight slaughtered
Inputs to feed production (fuel, fertilizer)
Fossil energy consumption
Tons raw milk
Animal welfare index
Tons of raw hides processed
Chemical use
Manure storage
Processing industry
Direct Indicators
Indirect indicators
amount of solid waste
portion of industrial, and traditional processing
BOD output in wastewater (total, and not as a percentage of effluent r, as this would provide incentives to just increase water use)
portion of byproduct utilization
CO[2], CO and Nitrous Oxide Emissions
Lists of abbreviations and acronyms
AEZ
Agro-ecological zone
AGROSTAT
FAO Information System for Agricultural Statistics
ASIA
Asia (excl. Near East)
CGIAR
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CIS
Commonwealth of Independent States
CSA
Central and South America
DM
Dry Matter
E. EUROPE
Eastern Europe
EU
European Union
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GATT
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
LDC
Least Developed Countries
LGA
Livestock Grassland Arid Semi-Arid Tropics and Sub-Tropics
LGH
Livestock Grassland Humid/Sub-humid Tropics
LOP
Length of Growing Period
LGT
Livestock Grassland Temperate and Tropical Highlands
LLM
Livestock Landless Monogastric
LLR
Livestock Landless Ruminant
LPS
Livestock Production System
LU
Livestock Unit
MIA
Mixed Farm Irrigated Arid Semi-Arid Tropics and Sub-Tropics
MIH
Mixed Farm Irrigated Humid/Sub-humid Tropics
MRA
Mixed Farm Rainfed Arid Semi-Arid Tropics and Subtropics
MRH
Mixed Farm Rainfed Humid/Sub-humid Tropics
MRT
Mixed Farm Rainfed Temperate and Tropical Highlands
MT
Metric Tonnes
OECD
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development - member countries (excluding Turkey)
OTHER DEVELOPED
Other Developed Countries (Israel and Republic of South Africa)
SSA
Sub-Saharan Africa
TAC
Technical Advisory Committee
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
WANA
West Asia and North Africa
<section>o</section>
References
Aarts, H.F.M. (1996). Efficient Nutrient Management in Dairy Farming on Sandy Soils. Report "De Marke" no 18, AB-DLO Report 67, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Alexandratos, N. (ed.) (1995). World Agriculture: Towards 2010. FAO and John Wiley & Sons, Rome and Chichester.
Armour, C., Duff, D. and Elmore, W. (1994). The Effects of Livestock Grazing on Western Riparian and Streams Eco-systems. Am. Fisheries Soc. 19 (9): 9-12.
Audru, J. (1995). Elevages sur parcours en zones tropicales humides and sub-humides d'Afrique. CIRAD-EMVT, Montpellier.
Baldwin, R.L., Donovan, K.C. and Becket, J.L. (1992). California Animal Nutrition Conference, May 1992, University of California, Davis, CA.
Barnes, D., Forster, C.F. and Hrudey, S.E. (1984). Surveys in Industrial Wastewater Treatment: Food and Allied Industries. Pittman Publishing Limited, London, U.K.
Bauer, S., Steinbach, J., Willeke-Wetstein, C., Abresch, J.-P. and Schmidt, A. (1995). Review and Development of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Tools for Livestock Production Systems. FAO/GTZ Consultancy Report, University of Giessen, Germany.
Behnke, R.H., Scoones, I. and Kerven, C. (1993). Range Ecology in Disequilibrium. Overseas Development Institute/International Institute for Environment and Development Commonwealth Secretariat, London, U.K.
Behnke, R.H. and Kerven, C. (1994). Redesigning for Risk: Tracking and Buffering Environmental Variability in Africa's Rangelands. Natural Resource Perspectives, Number 1. ODI, London, U.K.
Blackburn, H.D. (1995). Comparison of Performance of Boer and Spanish Goats in two U.S. Locations. Journal of Animal Science 73:302-09.
Blackburn, W.H., Knight, R.W. and Wood, M.K. (1982). Impact of Grazing on Watersheds; a state of knowledge. Tex. Agr. Exp. Sta MP 1496.32 pp.
Bojo, J. and Casells, D. (1995). Land Degradation and Rehabilitation in Ethiopia; a reassessment. AFTES Working Paper 17. World Bank, Washington D.C.
Bojo, J. (1996). The Economics of Wildlife: Case Studies from Ghana, Kenya, Namibia and Zimbabwe. AFTES Working Paper No. 19. World Bank, Washington D.C.
Bonny, S. (1993).Is Agriculture using more and more Energy? A French case study. Agricultural Systems, 43, 51-66.
Bos, J.F.F.P. and de Wit, J. (1996). Environmental Impact Assessment of Landless Monogastric Livestock Production Systems. In: Livestock and the Environment: Finding a Balance. FAO/World Bank/USAID. Rome.
Bourne, D. and Wint, W. (1994). Livestock, Land use and Agricultural Intensification in Sub-Saharan Africa. Pastoral Development Network (paper 37a). ODI, London, U.K.
Bouwman, A.F, Batjes, N.H. (ed.) and Bridges, E.M. (1992). Methodology and data used to estimate natural N[2]O emissions. Paper presented at World Inventory of Soil Emissions Potentials: Proceedings of an international workshop, 24-27 August 1992, Wise Report 2, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Bouwman, A.F. (1995). Compilation of a Global Inventory of Nitrous Oxide. PhD Thesis, Wageningen International University. Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Brand, R.A. and Melman, A.G. (1993). Energie inhoudnormen van de veehouderij; deel 2 proceskaarten. (Energy values of inputs of animal husbandry). TNO, Instituut voor milieu-en energietechnologie, Apeldoorn, The Netherlands.
Brandjes, P., de Wit, J., van Keulen, H. and van de Meer H.B. (1995). Environmental Impact of Manure Management. Impact domain study for the FAO/WB Study on Livestock and the Environment, Final draft, International Agricultural Centre, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Breman, H., and de Wit, C.T. (1983). Rangeland Productivity in the Sahel. Science, 221 (4618): 134147.
Brown, K., Pearce, D., Chewings, V.H. and Swanson, T. (1993). Economics and the Conservation of Global Biological Diversity. Working Paper # 2 GEF, Washington D.C.
Bruenig, J. (1991). Tropical Forest Report. Government of the Federal Republic. Bonn, Germany, 118 pp.
Bureau of Land Management. (1994). Noxious Weed Action Plan for the Bureau of Land Management Fiscal 1995 and beyond. 29 pp. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.
Carrera, M. and Tourain, B. (1996). Impact de l'Elevage sur les terres de parcours. Working Document, Livestock Environment Study, CIRAD-EMVT, Montpellier, France.
Ceasar, J. (1992). La Production biologique des Savanes de Côte d'Ivoire et son utilization par l'homme. Maissons Alforts CIRAD-EMVT.
Chartier, P. (1996). La relance du Secteur Elevage dans les pays de la zone Franc après la dévaluation. Rapport d'étude. Ministère de la Coopération, Paris.
Chiumenti, R., da Borso, F. and Donanton L. (1994). Dust and Ammonia Reduction in Exhaust Air from Piggeries Using a Mechanical Wet Separation System. In: Proceeding of 7th Technical Consultation of the European Cooperative Research Network on Animal Waste Utilization, Bad Zwischenahn, Germany, 17-20 May 1994.
Christiaensen, L., Tollens, E. and Ezedinma, C. (1995). Development Patterns under Population Pressure: Agricultural development and the cassava-livestock interaction in smallholder farming systems in sub-Saharan Africa. Agricultural Systems 48:51-72.
CIAT (1994). Annual Report (1993). Centro International de la Agricultura International. Cali, Colombia.
Cleaver, K. and Schreiber, G. (1994). The Population, Agriculture and Environment Nexus in Sub-Saharan Africa, (Revised). Agriculture and Rural Development Series No.9. Technical Department Africa Region. World Bank. Washington D.C.
Conway, G.R. and Pretty, J.N. (1991). Unwelcome Harvest - Agriculture and Pollution. Earthscan Publications Ltd. London.
Coppock, D. Layne. (1996). Dynamics of Semi-Arid Pastoral System under Induced Change in Southern Ethiopia. In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Rangeland Congress. Society for Range Management, Denver, Colorado.
Council on Agriculture Science and Technology (CAST) (1996). Grazing on Public Lands. Ames, Iowa. pp. 70.
Cunningham, E.P. (1992). Selected Issues in Livestock Industry Development, EDI Technical Materials. World Bank, Washington D.C.
Cunningham, E.P. (1995). Global Impact Domain - Animal Genetic Resources. Consultancy Report on Livestock and the Environment.
de Haan, C. (1996). Rangeland Development in a Developing World. In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Rangeland Congress. Society for Range Management, Denver, Colorado.
de Ridder, N. and Wagenaar, K.T. (1984). A Comparison between the Productivity of Traditional Livestock Systems and Ranching in Eastern Botswana. ILCA Newletter 3(3):5-7. International Livestock Centre for Africa, Addis Ababa.
De Vries, C. (1996). Lessons Learned in the Regulation of Nutrient Management in Europe. Babcock Institute Technical Workshop: Nutrient Management, Manure and the Dairy Industry.
De Wit J., Westra, P.T.. and Nell, A.J. (1996). Environmental Assessment of Landless Ruminant Production Systems. Working Document Livestock and the Environment: Finding a Balance. FAO/World Bank/USAID. Rome.
Devendra, C. (1994). Mixed Farming Systems in Asia. Consultant's Report. FAO.
Dregne H., Kassas M. and Rozanov, B. (1991). Status of Desertification and Implementation of the United Nations Plan to combat Desertification. Desertification Control Bulletin 20, 6.
Eckert J.B., Baker, B.B. and Hanson, J.D. (1995). The Impact of Global Warming on Local Incomes from Range Livestock Systems Agricultural Systems 48: 87-100.
Edelman, M. (1992). The Logic of the Latifundio: The large estates of northwestern Costa Rica since the late nineteenth century. Stanford University Press. 478 p. Stanford, California.
El-Swaify, S.A. (1991). Land-based Limitations and Threats to World Food Production. Outlook on Agriculture, 20 (4), p. 235-242.
Engelbrecht, W. and van der Walt, P. (1993). Notes on the Economic Use of the Kruger National Park Koedoe 36 (2) 113-119.
English, J., Tiffen, M. and Mortimore, M. (1993). Land Resource Management in the Machakos District, Kenya 1930-1990. World Bank Environment Paper 5. Washington D.C.
FAO/UNEP (1984). Provisional Methodology for Assessment and Mapping of Desertification. FAO. Rome.
FAO (1990). The Technology of Traditional Milk Products in Developing Countries. FAO Animal Production and Health Paper No. 85. Rome.
FAO (1993). Agriculture: Towards 2010 Document C93/24, Presented at 27th Session of the FAO Conference, Rome.
FAO (1993a). Forests Resources Assessment (1990). FAO Forestry Paper 112. FAO, Rome.
FAO (1994). Commodity Review and Outlook (1993/94). FAO, Rome.
FAO (1994). State of Food and Agriculture (1994). FAO, Rome.
FAO (1994) Livestock; Recognizing their role in sustainable agriculture, Rome.
FAO (1995). Production Yearbook (1994). Vol 47. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
Fisher, M., Rao, I.M., Ayarza, M.A., Lascano, C.E. and Sanz, J.I. (1995). Carbon Storage by Introduced Deep-rooted Grasses in the South American Savannas. Science September 15 1995.
General Accounting Office (1988). Rangeland Management: More emphasis needed on declining and overstocked grazing allotments. GAO, Washington D.C.
Gilmanov, T.G. (1996). The State of Rangeland Resources in the Newly Independent States of Former USSR. Fifth International Rangeland Congress, Society for Range Management, Denver Colorado.
Goodland, R. (1996). Environmental Sustainability and Eating Better. The Case against Grain-Fed Meat. Mimeograph, Arlington.
Grashuis, J. and van Vliet, N. (1958). Doelmatige Varkensvoeding Hoogland, The Netherlands.
Grootenhuis, J.G., Njuguna, S.G. and Kat, P.W. (Eds) (1991). Wildlife Research for Sustainable Development: Proceedings of an International Conference held by the Kenya Agricultural Institute. Nairobi.
Habib, G., Basit Ali Shah, S., Wahidullah, Jabbar, G., Ghufranullah (1991). Importance of Urea Molasses Blocks on Animal Production (Pakistan), International Atomic Energy Agency, International Symposium on Nuclear and Related Techniques in Animal Production and Health, Vienna, Austria, 15-19 April 1991.
Hammond, K. and Leitch, H.W. (in press). The FAO Global Program for Management of Farm Animal Genetic Resources. Journal of Animal Science.
Hanson, L.B. (1995). Breeding Schemes. In: Proceedings of the National Dairy Genetics Workshop. Orlando: American Dairy Science Association.
Hayami, Y. and Ruttan, V.W. (1985). Agricultural Development; An International perspective. Baltimore, The John Hopkins University Press. Revised Edition.
Hecht, S.B. (1992). Logics of Livestock and Deforestation: The case of Amazonia. In: Development or Destruction, The Conversion of Tropical Forest to Pasture in Latin America, Bolder: Westview Press. 7-25.
Heij, G.J. (ed.) (1995). Additioneel Programma Verzurings Onderzoek. Eind rapport derde phase. Rijks Instituut voor Volksgezonheid en Milieu (RIVM). Bilthoven.
Hemingway, R.W. and Karchey, J.J. (1989). Chemistry and Significance of Condensed Tannins. Plenum Press. New York.
Hendratno, C., Nolan, J.V. and Leng, R.A. (1991). Importance of Urea Molasses Multinutrient Blocks for Ruminant Production in Indonesia. International Atomic Energy Agency, International Symposium on Nuclear and Related Techniques in Animal Production and Health, Vienna, Austria, 15-19 April (1991).
Hendy, C.R.C., Kleih, U., Crawshaw, R., and Phillips, M. (1995). Interactions between Livestock Production Systems and the Environment: Impact Domain: Concentrate Feed Demand. FAO Consultancy Report for Livestock and Environment Study.
Henglian, X. (1995). The Production of Rural family Biogas in China. In: Proceedings of the Workshop of Peri-Urban Livestock Wastes in China, Beijing, China. FAO, Rome.
Higham, R. (1991). Leather Industry, Case Study No. 3. Conference on Ecologically Sustainable Industrial Development. United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). Geneva.
Holling, C.S. (1995). Sustainability: The Cross-scale Dimension. In: M. Munasinghe and W. Shearer (eds). Defining and Measuring Sustainability, The Biogeophysical Foundations. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank, Washington D.C. Ch 4 pg 65-76.
Houghton, R.A. (1991). Tropical Deforestation and Atmospheric CO[2] Climate Change 19 (1-2) 99-118.
IFAD (1995). Common Property Resources and the Rural Poor in Sub-Saharan Africa. Rome.
IFPRI (1995). Global Food Projections to 2020. Implications for Investment. Food, Agriculture and Environment Discussion Paper 5 International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington D.C.
IIED (1994). RRA Notes, Number 20. IIED, London.
ILCA (International Livestock Centre for Africa) (1994). Improving Livestock Production in Africa: Evolution of ILCA's programme 1974-94. ILCA, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
IPPC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). (1990). Climate Change: The IPPC Response Strategies. World Meteorological Organization. United Nations Environment Programme, Geneva.
Ismail, T. and Thai, C.D. (1990). Report of the Small Ruminant Collaborative Research Support Project (SR-CRSP) Indonesia Workshop. US Agency for International Development, Washington D.C.
Jansen, J.C.M. and de Wit, J. (1996). Environmental Impact Assessment of Livestock Production in Mixed Irrigated Systems in the (sub) Humid Zones. Consultancy Report. International Agriculture Centre, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Jodha, N.S. (1992). Common property resources, A Missing Dimension in Development Strategies. World Bank Discussion Paper 169. Washington D.C.
Johansen, K. (1995). Anaerobic Digestion of Combined Waste. In: Proceedings of the Workshop of Peri-Urban Livestock Wastes in China. Beijing. FAO, Rome.
Jones, J.R. (1990). Colonization and Environment, Land settlement projects in Central America. Tokyo. United Nations University Press.
Jonghloed, A.W. and Lenis, N.P. (1992). Excretion of Nitrogen and Some Minerals of Livestock in Nitrogen Flow. In: Pig Production and Environmental Consequences, Wageningen, The Netherlands. EAAP, Publication no. 69.
Kaasschieter, G.A. (1991). Slachterij projecten in ontwikkelingslanden, ervaringen en richtlijnen. Directorate General International Cooperation, The Hague, The Netherlands.
Kaimonitz, D. (1995). Livestock and Deforestation in Central America. EPTD Discussion Paper no 9. IFPRI Washington D.C. and IICA Coronado, Costa Rica.
Kay, C.E. and Walker, J.W. (in press 1997). A Comparison of Sheep and Wildlife Grazed Willow Communities in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem. SID Sheep Research Journal.
King, M.K. (1983). Livestock and Water Needs in Pastoral Africa in Relation to Water and Forage ILCA Research Report 7:94 pp. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
Kiss, A. (1990). Living with Wildlife. World Bank Technical Paper Number 130, Washington D.C.
Kitazawa, Y. and Kitazawa, T. (1980). Influence of Application of a Fungicide, an Insecticide, and Compost upon Soil Biotic Community. In: Soil Biology as Related to Land Use Practices. D.L. Dinal (ed.). Environmental Protection Agency. Washington D.C.
Kjekshus, H. (1977). Ecology Control and Economic Development in East African History University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA pp 215.
Knudsen, O. and Nash, J.D. (1990). Redefining the Role of Government for the 1990s. World Bank Discussion Paper 105, Washington D.C.
Larson, G.A., Roloff, G. and Larson, W.E. (1988). A New Approach to Marginal Agricultural Land Classification. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation. Vol. 40. No: 1. P. 103-106.
Ledec, G. (1992). The Role of Bank Credit for Cattle Raising in Financing Tropical Forestation. A case study of Panama. Ph.D. Thesis, University of California, Berkeley.
Le Houerou, H.N. (1989). The Shrublands of Africa. In: "The biology and utilization of shrubs". Academic Press: 119-143.
Leijen, C., Beukeboom J. and Venneboer, H. Jansen. (1993). Energie in de intensieve veehouderij. Informatie en Kennis Centrum Veehouderij, Ede, The Netherlands.
Leng, R.A. (1991). Improving Ruminant Production and Reducing Methane Emissions from Ruminants by Strategic Supplementation. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. EPA/400/1-91/004.
Levin, S.A. (1995). Scale and Sustainability: A Population and community perspective. Ch 7 p 103-116.
Mabbutt, J.A. and Floret, C. (1980). Case Studies in Desertification. UNESCO 279 pp.
Mabbutt, J.A. (1985). Desertification of the World's Rangelands. Desertification Control Bulletin 12: 1-11.
Mainguet, M., Guyot, L., Chemin, M.-C. and Braunstein, A. (1992). Modifications to the Sahelian and Sudanian ecosystems in Western Mali. In: Dregne, H.E: (1992). Degradation and Restoration of Arid Lands. Texas.
Maldidier, C. (1993). Tendencias actuates de la frontera agricola en Nicaragua. Managua. Nitlapan-UCA.
Manale, A.P. (1991). European Community Programmes to Control Nitrate Emissions from Agricultural Activities: An Evaluation of Their State of Implementation and Effectiveness. Washington D.C. Environmental Protection Agency.
Mayeux, H.S., Johnson, H.B. and Polley, H.W. (1993). Global Change and Vegetation Dynamics. Chap 7. In: James, L.F, Evans, J.O., Ralphs, M.H. and Childs, R.D. (ed.) Noxious Range Weeds. Westview Press, Boulder CO. p.p. 62-74.
McIntire, J., Bourzat, D. and Pingali, P. (1992). Crop-Livestock Interaction in sub-Saharan Africa. World Bank, Washington D.C. pp 246.
McNeely, J.A., Miller, K.R., Reid, W.V., Mittermeier, R.A. and Werner, T.B. (1990). Conserving the World's Biological Diversity. IUCN, WRI, CI, WWF-US, World Bank. Gland, Switzerland and Washington D.C.
Mearns, R. (1996). When Livestock are Good for the Environment: Benefit-sharing of environmental goods and services. Invited paper for the World Bank/FAO Workshop, "Balancing Livestock and the Environment". Washington, D.C., an associated event to the Fourth World Bank Conference on Environmentally Sustainable Development.
Menault, J.C. (1993). Effets des feux de savanes sur le stockage et l'emission du carbone et des elements-trace. Secheresse, 4: 251-63.
Milchunas, D.G. and Lauenroth, W.K. (1993). Quantitative Effects of Grazing on Vegetation and Soils over a Global Range on Environments Ecological Monograph 63 (4) 327-66.
Msellati. (1995). Rangeland Management in the North Africa and Iran, A World Bank Sector Study, World Bank, Washington D.C.
Muller, P. (1985). The Environmental Impact of Tsetse Control in the Adamaoua Plateau of Cameroon. Report to the World Bank University of Saarbrucken, Germany.
Muller, Z.O. (1980). Feed from Animal Wastes: State of knowledge. Animal Production and Health Paper No. 18. FAO. Rome.
Mwangi, Z.J. and Zulberti, C.A. (1985). Optimization Wildlife and Livestock Production. Wildlife/Livestock Interfaces on Rangelands. Inter-African Bureau of Animal Resources, Nairobi.
Myers, N. (1981). The Hamburger Connection: How Central America's Forests became North America's Hamburgers. Ambio 10 (1):3-8.
Nagel, P. (1993). L'Incidence de la lutte contre la Tse-tse sur les resources naturelles. Réunion sur les aspects techniques et de développement du programmes de la lutte contre la Trypanosomiase Tropicale. FAO, Rome 15 pp.
Narjisse, H. (1996). The Range Livestock Industry in Developing Countries: Current assessment and prospects. Fifth International Rangeland Congress, Society for Range Management, Denver, Colorado.
Narrod, C., Reynnells, R. and Wells, H. (1994). Potential Options for Poultry Waste Utilization: A focus on the Delmarva Peninsula. Washington D.C.: United States Department of Agriculture and the Environmental Protection Agency.
National Research Council (1989). Alternative Agriculture. National Academy Press. Washington D.C.
Nelson, R. (1990). Dryland Management, the "Desertification problem". World Bank Technical paper 116, World Bank, Washington D.C.
Norton-Griffiths, M. and Southey, C. (1995). The Opportunity Costs of Biodiversity Conservation in Kenya. Ecological Economics 12: 125-139.
OECD (1996). Developing OECD Agri-Environmental Indicators. Mimeograph. duly 30, 1996. Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Paris, France.
Oldeman, L.R., Hakkeling, R.T.A. and Sombroek, W.G. (1991). World Map of the Status of Human Induced Soil Degradation. An explanatory note. ISRIC/UNEP, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Ottichilo, W.K. (1996). Wildlife-Livestock Interactions in Kenya. Invited paper for the World Bank/FAO Workshop, "Balancing Livestock and the Environment", Washington D.C., an associated event to the Fourth World Bank Conference on Environmentally Sustainable Development.
Parton, W.J. Impact of Global Change on Grassland production and Soil Carbon Worldwide. Global Change Biology 1:13-22.
Pearce, D. (1996). An Economic Overview of Wildlife and Alternative Land Uses. In: African Wildlife Policy Consultation. ODA, London.
Philipsson, J. and Wilson, R.T (1995). Interactions between Livestock Production Systems and the Environment: Global perspectives and prospects. The Animal Genetics Domain. Working Document Livestock and the Environment: Finding a Balance. FAO/World Bank/USAID. Rome.
Pimentel, D. (1992). Energy Inputs in Production Agriculture. In: Pert, R.M. (ed.) Analysis of Agricultural Energy Systems: Energy in World Agriculture. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Pimental, D., Stachow, U., Takacs, D.A., Brubaker, H.W., Dumas, A.R., Meaney, J.J. O'Neil, J.A.S., Onsi, D.E. and Corzilius (1992). Conserving Biological Diversity in Agricultural/Forestry Systems. Bioscience 42:354-362.
Pimental, D., Harvey, C., Resosudarmo, P. Sinclair, K., Kurz, D., McNair, M., Gist, S., Shpritz, L., Fitton, L., Saffouri, R. and Blair, R. (1995). Environmental and Economic Costs of Soil Erosion and Conservation Benefits. Science. 267:1117-1122.
Powell, J.M., Fernandez-Rivera, S., Hiernaux, P. and Turner, M.D. (1996). Nutrient Cycling in Integrated Rangeland/Cropland Systems of the Sahel. Fifth International Rangeland Congress, Society for Range Management, Denver, Colorado.
Pratt, D., le Gall, F. and de Haan, C. (in press). Investing in Pastoralism World Bank Technical Paper. World Bank, Washington D.C.
Preston, T.R. and Leng, R.A. (1994). Agricultural Technology Transfer; Perspectives and Case Studies Involving Livestock In: J. Andeson (ed.) Agricultural Technology: Policy Issues for the International Community. CAB International, Oxon, UK.
Rainelli, P. (1991). Intensive Livestock Production in France and its Effects on Water Quality in Brittany. In: Young, M.D. (ed.). Towards sustainable agricultural development. Bellhaven Press, London and New York.
Ransom, J.K., Ojiem, J. and Kanampiu (1993). Nutrient Flux Between Maize and Livestock in a Maize-Coffee-Livestock System in Central Kenya. In: Livestock and sustainable nutrient cycling in mixed farming systems of sub-Saharan Africa. Proceedings of an International Conference International Livestock Centre for Africa. J.M. Powell, S. Fernandez-Rivera, T.O. Williams and C. Renard (eds.). Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. pp 411-418.
Reid, R., Wilson, C. and Kruska, R. (1995). The Influence of Human Use on Rangeland Biodiversity in Ghibe, Ethiopia, as affected by natural resource use changes and livestock disease control. 5th International Rangeland Congress, Salt Lake City, Utah. 1:469-469.
Reynolds, L., Wilson, R.T, Phillips, M.; Conroy, M.A. end Barton, D. (1995). Environmental Impact Assessment of Livestock Production in Rainfed Arid and Semi-arid Mixed Farming Systems. Natural Resources Institute, Chatham, Kent, U.K. pp. 129. Consultancy report for FAO/WB Livestock and Environment Study.
Ridley, E.J.H., Morison, J.B. and Griffith, G.R. (1994). Interstate Differences in the Cost of Complying with Feedlot Environmental Regulations. An initial investigation. Review of Marketing and Agricultural Economics. 62:1.
RIVM (1994). Slachterijen en vleeswarenindustrie. Samenwerkingsproject Procesbeschrijvingen Industrie Nederland (SPIN) rapport nr. 7730061173, National Institute of Public Health and Environmental Protection. Bilthoven, The Netherlands.
Runge, C.F. (1987). Induced Agricultural Innovation and Environmental Quality: The case of groundwater regulation. Land Economics 63:3.
Runge, C.F., Ortalo-Magné, E and Vande Kamp, P. (1994). Freer Trade, Protected Environment: Balancing trade liberalization and environmental interests. New York. Council on Foreign Relations Press.
Safeley, L.M., Casada, M.E., Woodbury, J.W. and Roos, K.E (1992). Global Methane Emissions from Livestock and Poultry Manure. United States Environmental Protection Agency, EPA/4001/1-91/048.
Sánchez, M. (1995). Use of Animal Excreta as Feed. In: Proceedings of the Workshop of Peri-Urban Livestock Wastes in China. Beijing. 19-22 September 1994. FAO. Rome.
Sandford, S. (1985). Management of Pastoral Development in the Third World. Wiley, New York.
Sapelli, C. (1993). Inflation, Capital Markets and the Supply of Beef. Agricultural-Economics. The Netherlands v. 9(2) p. 145-154.
Schillhorn van Veen, Tj (1995). The Kyrgyz Sheep Herders at a Crossroads, Pastoral Development Network, Network Paper 38d, ODI, London.
Schwartz, C.C. and Ellis J.E. (1981). Feeding Ecology and Niche Separation in Some Native and Domestic Ungulates on the Short Grass Prairie. J. Applied Ecology 18: 343-353.
Scoones, I. (1994). Living with Uncertainty. Intermediate Technology Publications. London.
Shanmugaratnam, N., Vedeld, T., Mossige, A. and Bovin, M. (1992). Resource Management and Pastoral Institution Building in the West African Sahel. World Bank Discussion Papers Number 175. Washington D.C.
Sharma, N.S., Rietbergen, S., Heimo, C.R. and Patel, J. (1994). A Strategy for the Forest Sector in Sub-Saharan Africa. Technical Paper 251 Washington D.C.
Sere, C. and Steinfeld, H. (1996). World Livestock Production Systems: Current status, issues and trends. Animal Production and Health Paper No. 127. FAO. Rome.
Shearer, E., Lastarria, S. and Mesbah, D. (1993). The Reform of Rural Land Markets in Latin America and the Caribbean: Research, Theory and Policy Implications. Land Tenure Center Paper 141, University of Wisconsin, Madison WI.
Sheehy, D.P., Hamilton, W.T, Kreuter, W.P., Simpson, J.R., Stuth, J.W. and Conner, J.R. (1996). Environmental Impact Assessment of Livestock Production in Grassland and Mixed Rainfed Systems in Temperate Zones and Grassland and Mixed Rainfed Systems in Humid and Subhumid Tropic and Subtropic Zones (except Africa). Consultancy Report for the Livestock and the Environment Study. Grazingland Management Systems Inc., Bryan TX.
Sidahmed, A.E. (1996). The Rangelands of the Arid/semi-arid Areas: Challenges and hopes. For the 2000's keynote address to the Symposium on Range Management, The International Conference on Desert Development in the Arab Gulf States. KISR, Kuwait, March 1996.
Simon, D., and Buchenauer, D. (1993). Genetic Diversity of European Livestock Breeds. Wageningen Press, The Netherlands.
Southwell, P. and Rothwell, T.M. (1977). Analysis of Output/Input Energy Ratios of Food Production in Ontario. School of Engineering, University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada.
Steeds, D. and Gore, J.E. (1985). Desertification in the Sahelian and Sudanian Zones of West Africa. World Bank Technical Paper 19. Washington D.C.
Steenvoorden, J.H.A.M. (1989). Agricultural Practices to Reduce Nitrogen Losses via Leaching and Surface Runoff. Elsevier Applied Science. P. 72-84. Barking, U.K.
Stoorvogel, J.J., Smaling, E.M.A. and Janssen, B.S. (1993). Calculating Soil Nutrient Balances in Africa at Different Scales: I. Supra-national scale. Fertilizer Research 35, p. 227-235.
Swift, J. (1995). Dynamic Ecological Systems and the Administration of Pastoral Development. In: Scoones, I. (ed.), Living with Uncertainty. IT Publications, London.
Suarez, D. (1992). Perspective on Irrigation Management and Salinity. Outlook on Agriculture 21(4). p. 287-291.
Taiganides, E.P. (1992). Pig Waste Management and Recycling; The Singapore experience. International Development Research Centre, Ottawa.
Thomas, D.S.G. and Middleton, N.J. (1994). Desertification: Exploding the Myth. Wiley and Son, West Sussex. U.K.
Thebaud, B., Grell, H. and Miehe, S. (1995). Recognizing the Effectiveness of Traditional Pastoral Practices: Lessons from a controlled grazing experiment in Northern Senegal. Paper No. 55, Drylands Programme, International Institute for Environment and Development, London.
Tucker, C.J., Dregne, H.E., and Newcomb, W.W. (1991). Expansion and Contraction of the Sahara Desert from 1980-1990. Science 253; 299.
Umali, D.L., Feder, G. and Haan, C. (1992). The Balance between Public and Private Sector Activities in the Delivery of Livestock Services. World Bank Discussion Paper. Washington D.C.
UN (1997c). World map of desertification. UN Conference on Desertification, Nairobi. 29 August-9 September 1997.
USDA. (1988). Natural Resource Conservation Service: Second RCA Appraisal: Soil, water and related resources on non federal land in the US. Analysis of condition and trends. Washington D.C.
USEPA. (1993). Options for Reducing Methane Emissions Internationally. Volume I: Technological Options for Reducing Methane Emissions. Draft Report to Congress.
USEPA. (1995). Global Impact Domain - Methane Emissions. Consultant report for the Livestock and the Environment Study. USEPA, Washington D.C.
Van der Pol, E (1992). Soil Mining: An unseen contributor to farm income in southern Mali. Bulletin 325. Royal Tropical Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. P 48. (Ch2-3).
van der Zijpp, A.J. (1992). Sustainable Animal Production: A response to environmental problems. In: Boyazoglu, J. and Renaud, J. (eds.) The livestock production sector in eastern Europe as affected by current changes. EAAP Publication No. 57, Wageningen. p. 191-197.
Vedeld, T. (1994). Commentary in Recent Trends in World Bank Pastoral Development Projects: A Review of 13 Bank Projects in light of the "New Pastoral Ecology". Gilles, J.L. and de Haan, C. Pastoral Development Network. Network Paper 36b. ODI, London.
Vergriette, B. and Rolland, J.P. (1994). International Livestock Markets and Impact of Devaluation of CFA on West African Pastoral Economies. Solagral. Paris.
Verheijen, L.A.H.M., Wiersema, D., Hulshoff, P. and de Wit, J. (1996). Management of Waste from Animal Product Processing. FAO/WB Consultancy Report for Livestock and Environment Study. International Agricultural Centre, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Voorburg, J.H. (1994). Farmers Options to reduce Odour and Ammonia Emissions from Animal Buildings and Storage. In: Proceedings of 7th Technical Consultation of the European Cooperative Research Network on Animal Waste Utilization, Bad Zwischenahn, Germany, 17-20 May 1994.
Walker, J.W., Kronberg, S.L., Al-Rowaily, S.L. and West, N.E. (1994). Comparison of Sheep and Goat Preferences for Leafy Spurge. Journal of Range Management 47:429-34.
Western, D. and Pearl, M.C. (1989). Conservation for the twenty-first Century. Oxford University Press, New York.
Williams, T.O., Powell, J.M. and Fernandez-Rivera, S. (1995). Manure Utilization, Drought Cycles and Herd Dynamics in the Sahel: Implication for cropland productivity. In: Powell, J.M., Fernandez-Rivera, S., Williams, T.O. and Renard, C. (eds.) Livestock and Sustainable Nutrient Cycles in Mixed-Farming Systems of Sub-Sahara Africa. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
Wilson, E.J. and Skeffington, R.A. (1994). The Effects of Excess Nitrogen Deposition on young Norway Spruce Trees. Part I: The soil. In: Environmental Pollution 86: 141-152.
Winrock International Institute (1992). Assessment of Animal Agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa. Winrock, Morrilton, Arkansas.
World Bank (1992). World Development Report. Development and the environment. Oxford University Press, New York.
World Bank (1993). China Animal Feed Sector Study, Report 10922-CHA World Bank, Washington D.C.
World Bank (1994). The World Development Report. World Bank, Washington D.C.
World Bank (1995). Potential and Constraints of the Indian Livestock Sector Internal Report. World Bank, Washington D.C.
World Bank (1995a). Simple Animal Health Technologies. Agricultural Technology Note 9. World Bank, Washington D.C.
World Bank (1995b). Monitoring Environmental Progress. Environmentally Sustainable Development. World Bank, Washington D.C.
World Bank (1995c). Participation Sourcebook. World Bank, Washington D.C.
World Commission on Environment and Development (1987). Our Common Future, Oxford University Press, Oxford, U.K. World Bank (1992). Environment and Development. A Report from the World Bank. Washington D.C.
World Resources Institute (1994). World Resources 1994-95. A Guide to Global Environment. World Resources Institute. Oxford University Press. New York, USA and Oxford, U.K.
Young, M.D. (1996). Maintaining Harmony: Equitable and efficient means to minimize adverse impact of livestock on the environment. Paper presented at the Workshop on Livestock Environment Interactions September 1995. World Bank, Washington D.C.
Zhong, M. (1993). Inner Mongolia Grassland Resources and its Management. p 132 In: Proceedings of International Symposium on Grassland Res. Huhehot, China.
Zonn, I.S. (1995). Desertification in Russia: Problems and solutions (an example in the Republic of Kalmykia-Khalmg Tangch). Environmental-Monitoring-and-Assessment. 37: 1-3, 347-363; 11 ref.
Sponsors:
Commission of the European Communities
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
World Bank
and the governments of:
Denmark:
International Development Agency
France:
Ministère de la Cooperation
Germany:
BMZ, German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development via GTZ (Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit)
Netherlands:
Directorate General of International Cooperation
United Kingdom:
Overseas Development Administration
United States:
Environmental Protection Agency and the Agency for International Development
