<title>Use of fallout radionuclide measurements in soil erosion investigations</title>
<section>1</section>
Abstract
Back to contents - Next file
USE OF FALLOUT RADIONUCLIDE MEASUREMENTS IN SOIL EROSION INVESTIGATIONS.
Accelerated erosion and associated soil degradation currently represent a serious global problem. Against this background, there is an increasing need to assemble reliable information on the rates of soil loss. Existing techniques for monitoring soil loss possess many limitations and a number of workers have explored the potential for using fallout radionuclides, and particularly ^137Cs, to obtain estimates of the rates of soil erosion and deposition on agricultural land. In essence, the caesium technique provides a means of assembling retrospective information on medium term (about 35 year) rates of soil loss for an area and the spatial pattern of erosion and deposition involved, based on a single site visit. An example of the application of this approach to a cultivated field at Rufford Forest Farm, Nottinghamshire, United Kingdom, is provided to illustrate its value, and its potential for wider application is discussed. Further developments of the approach are also
considered. Although, to date, few attempts have been made to exploit the potential for using other fallout radionuclides in soil erosion investigations, unsupported ^210Pb and ^7Be would appear to offer considerable promise. An example of the use of unsupported ^210Pb measurements in a study of soil redistribution within a small field at Butsford Barton, Devon, UK, is presented and possible applications of ^7Be measurements are considered.
1. Background
Although much of the recent concern for the problems facing the global environment has focused on global warming and climatic change, there is also increasing evidence that accelerated erosion and associated soil degradation represent a major problem for the sustainable development of agricultural production in a world characterized by a rapidly expanding population. Brown [1], for example, has estimated that the world's croplands are currently losing 23 x 109 tonnes of soil in excess of new soil formation each year. This is equivalent to a depletion of
the global soil resource by 7 % each decade. Buringh [2] has also estimated that the global loss of agricultural land due to soil erosion amounts to 3 x 10(6) ha/a, and the recent International Soil Reference and Information Centre (ISRIC)/United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) global survey of human induced soil degradation [31 indicates that nearly 10% of the total land surface of the globe is currently adversely affected by water erosion. Soil erosion has serious implications for agricultural productivity, but there are also many other important off-farm or downstream problems associated with increased sediment loads in rivers, including reservoir sedimentation and siltation of irrigation networks, waterways and harbours [4].
Against this background, there is an increasing need to assemble reliable information on recent rates of soil loss. Such data are required to assess the magnitude of the problem in particular areas, to obtain a better understanding of the environmental controls involved, to validate existing and new prediction models and to provide a basis for developing conservation measures and improved land management strategies. Existing techniques for monitoring soil erosion do, however, possess a number of important limitations in terms of the representativeness of the data obtained, their spatial resolution, their potential for providing information on longer term rates of soil loss and associated spatial patterns over extended areas, and the costs involved [5, 6]. Furthermore, it is something of a paradox that the data availability is frequently most limited in those countries, particularly developing countries, where the need is greatest. Because of these limitations and
deficiencies, a number of workers have explored the potential for using fallout radionuclides, and more particularly ^137Cs to obtain estimates of the rates of soil erosion and deposition on agricultural land. In essence, the ^137Cs technique provides a means of assembling retrospective information on long term (about 35 year) rates of soil loss for an area and the spatial pattern of erosion and deposition involved, based on a single site visit [7]. This contribution attempts to provide an assessment of the potential for wider application of this approach in soil erosion investigations, including the use of other fallout radionuclides in addition to ^137Cs.
<section>2</section>
2. The ^137Cs technique
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
2.1. The basis
2.2. An example
2.1. The basis
Caesium-137 is an artificial radionuclide with a half-life of 30.17 years which was produced as a by-product of past atmospheric testing of thermonuclear weapons. The radiocaesium was released into the stratosphere, distributed globally and deposited as fallout, usually in association with precipitation. Its value as a sediment tracer lies in its rapid and strong adsorption by soil particles, particularly the clay fraction [8-10], so that in most agricultural environments its subsequent redistribution is a direct reflection of the erosion, transport and deposition of soil particles
occurring during the period extending from the main phase of atmospheric deposition (late 1950s and early 1960s) to the time of sampling. Where cultivation occurs, the radiocaesium will be distributed throughout the plough layer, and soil redistribution will generally involve a relatively small proportion of the original total fallout inventory. Where, however, soils are essentially undisturbed, as in the case of permanent pasture and rangeland, radiocaesium will be preferentially concentrated near the surface, and a given rate of soil redistribution will involve a substantially greater proportion of the original inventory. Assessment of ^137Cs redistribution is commonly based on comparison of the measured inventories (total activity per unit area) at individual sampling points, with an equivalent estimate of the inventory representing the cumulative atmospheric fallout at the site, taking due account of the different behaviour of cultivated and non-cultivated soils. Because
direct long term measurements of atmospheric fallout are rarely available, the cumulative input or reference inventory is usually established by sampling adjacent undisturbed, uneroded locations, generally under permanent pasture, which can provide an estimate of total fallout inputs. Where sample inventories are lower than the local reference inventory, loss of caesium labelled soil and therefore erosion may be inferred. Similarly, sample inventories in excess of the reference level are indicative of the addition of caesium labelled soil by deposition. The magnitude and direction of measured deviations from the local reference level provide a qualitative assessment of sediment redistribution.
To derive quantitative estimates of the rates of soil erosion and aggradation from ^137Cs measurements, it is necessary to establish a relationship between the magnitude of the deviation from the reference inventory and the extent of soil loss or gain [11]. Because empirical calibration data are rarely available, many workers have favoured the use of theoretical relationships or models to provide the necessary calibration function. Such models can be used to simulate the effect of a range of long term erosion and aggradation rates upon the ^137Cs inventory of soil profiles, and the resultant data can be used to derive the calibration relationship [11].
2.2. An example
Figure 1 provides an example of the potential for ^137Cs measurements to assemble detailed information on the medium term (i.e. about 35 year) pattern of soil redistribution within a 3.8 ha agricultural field at Rufford Forest Farm, Nottinghamshire, United Kingdom, reported by Walling and Quine [7]. This area, which is underlain by brown sand soils of Cuckney I association, is primarily used for arable cultivation. Sugar beet is widely grown and soil erosion has frequently been observed in the area [12]. A 20 m x 20 m grid was used as a basis for collecting soil cores from the field and a total of 117 cores was obtained using a motorized percussion corer (38 cm²) inserted to a depth of 60 cm. The reference cores were obtained from an area of uneroded, undisturbed grassland located 1.7 km from the study field. After collection, all the cores were air dried and lightly ground and the ^137Cs content of the material passing through a 2 mm sieve was determined by gamma
spectrometry using an HpGe coaxial detector. All the values were converted to areal inventories (mBq/cm²) and a value of 320 mBq/cm² was obtained for the local reference inventory. Deviations of the inventories associated with the individual sampling points within the field, from the reference value, were subsequently established, and estimates of the medium term rates of erosion and deposition occurring within the field over the past 35 years were derived using a calibration model. The resultant pattern of soil redistribution documented for the field, which is presented in Fig. 1, reflects the action of a range of erosion processes, including both water erosion and the effects of soil tillage.
Medium term (35 year) erosion and deposition rates within a field at Rufford Forest Farm, Nottinghamshire, UK, estimated using ^137Cs measurements 171
TABLE I. SPATIALLY INTEGRATED ESTIMATES OF SOIL REDISTRIBUTION IN THE FIELD AT RUFFORD FOREST FARM, AS ILLUSTRATED IN FIG. 1
Gross erosion rate (t ha^(-1) a^(-1)) 12.2
Eroding zone 
Mean erosion rate (t ha^(-1) a^(-1)) 13.8
% of total area 89
% of area with erosion rates: 
>2 t ha^(-1) a^(-1)) 81
>4 t ha^(-1) a^(-1)) 72
Aggrading zone 
Mean aggradation rate (t ha^(-1)a^(-1)) 16.1
% of total area 11
Net erosion rate (t ha^(-1) a^(-1)) 10.5
Sediment delivery ratio (%) 86
In addition to providing an assessment of the spatial pattern of soil redistribution within the study field, the individual point estimates of the erosion and deposition rates based on the ^137Cs measurements can be spatially integrated to produce a range of measures of the overall status of erosion and deposition in the field (Table I). The values of both the gross erosion rate and the mean erosion rate for the eroding sites permit clear assessment of the severity and potential on-site impact of erosion within the area under investigation. Furthermore, assessment of both the net soil loss and the sediment delivery ratio permits evaluation of the offsite threat posed by sediment leaving the field and potentially entering local watercourses.
The example outlined above is based on measurements of the total inventory of individual soil cores, since this minimizes the number of samples requiring gamma assay and therefore reduces the costs involved. Further development and refinement of the approach could involve consideration of the depth distribution of caesium in the soil profile, since information on both the maximum depth to which radiocaesium occurs relative to the plough depth or the original undisturbed profile, and the shape of the radiocaesium profile, can provide the basis for improved interpretation of the erosional history of the study site, particularly in areas of intensive land use [13].
The information generated for the field at Rufford Forest Farm on the basis of ^137Cs measurements (Fig. 1 and Table 1) represents essentially unique data which are effectively impossible to obtain by any other means. Use of erosion plots would, for example, only provide information on the net soil flux at the lower end of the bounded plot and would be unable to document the spatial pattern of erosion and deposition within the field. Equally, they would be unable to provide information on the effects of soil redistribution by tillage. Furthermore, although the medium term, temporally lumped, nature of the erosion rate estimates could be seen as a limitation, it must be recognized that short term measurements could be unrepresentative and that intensive long term monitoring is likely to be both costly and labour intensive, and in many cases impractical. In addition, the ^137Cs approach affords a unique opportunity to obtain retrospective information for a particular site and
to acquire the spatially distributed data required to develop and validate the new generation of distributed soil loss models currently being developed. These and other key advantages of the use of ^137Cs to monitor the rates and patterns of soil loss are summarized in Table II.
TABLE 11. KEY ADVANTAGES OF THE USE OF ^137Cs MEASUREMENTS TO MONITOR THE RATES AND PATTERNS OF SOIL LOSS
(1) The estimated erosion rate represents the sum of all the erosive processes, includingboth water erosion and tillage
(2) The whole field may be studied without disturbance to the slope environment
(3) The technique is capable of providing a quantitative measure of both the spatial distribution and the rate of soil erosion, and the proportion of eroded soil that is transported beyond the field
(4) The erosion rate estimates obtained represent the average values for the past 30-35 years and are therefore less influenced by the timing of extreme events relative to the period of measurement
(5) The information obtained is retrospective
(6) Only a single site visit to each study site is required
<section>3</section>
3. The wider context
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
3.1. Spatial distribution of ^137Cs fallout
3.2. Adsorption of ^137Cs
3.3. Sediment associated redistribution of ^137Cs
3.4. Estimation of the rates of soil loss from ^137CS measurements
Although the potential for using ^137Cs as a tracer in soil erosion investigations was recognized at a relatively early stage in the United States of America [14, 15], it is only in more recent years that this potential has been exploited more widely in a variety of environments. Its successful use has now been reported in a wide range of locations throughout the world, ranging from glacierized mountain areas in Greenland [16] and mountain areas in Sweden [17], through the prairie and steppe regions of Canada and the Russian Federation [18, 19] and semi-arid areas of Spain [20], to the southern Sahel in Africa [21 ] and tropical areas of Thailand [22] (Fig. 2). The approach must thus clearly be seen as being of global relevance [23]. The magnitude and temporal pattern of bomb derived ^137Cs fallout has varied across the globe and it is well known that inventories measured in the Southern hemisphere are commonly significantly lower than those reported in the Northern
hemisphere (Fig. 2). Nevertheless, there are many reports of the successful application of ^137Cs measurements in Australia and Southern Africa [24-26].
In view of the positive relationship between the magnitude of fallout receipt and mean annual precipitation, some uncertainty remains over the potential for using the approach in arid regions, and there have also been several reports of low levels of ^137Cs activity in the soils of equatorial areas. Existing estimates of the global fallout of 90Sr, another fission product of atmospheric weapons testing, compiled by Larsen [27], can, however, provide a meaningful surrogate for the global pattern of ^137Cs fallout. The information presented in Table III [27] indicates that fallout inventories in equatorial areas are likely to be of the same order as those in Australia, where radiocaesium has been widely used in soil erosion investigations. A carefully designed global programme of soil sampling is, nevertheless, urgently required to resolve these uncertainties and to provide an improved indication of the magnitude of the reference inventories that can be expected in different
areas of the world.
FIG. 2. Locations where 135Cs has been used successfully in soil erosion and related studies and typical fallout records for the Northern (New York, USA/Milford Haven, UK) and Southern (Adelaide/Brisbane, Australia) hemispheres.
TABLE III. LATITUDINAL VARIATION OF MEAN BOMB DERIVED 90Sr INVENTORIES AT THE END OF 1993, BASED ON DATA PRESENTED BY LARSEN [27](a)
Latitude band
Mean Sr-90 inventory (Bq/m²)
Northern hemisphere Southern hemisphere
^a Inventory values have been estimated from the cumulative 90Sr deposition on the land and ocean surface of individual latitudinal belts.
The additional inputs of ^137Cs fallout to many areas of Europe that were associated with the Chernobyl accident in April 1986 have clearly complicated the interpretation of radiocaesium inventories and may indeed render the approach of limited value in such areas. The existence of two major periods of fallout input, separated by more than 20 years and for which the inputs cannot now be separated, and the increased spatial variability of Chernobyl derived inputs, introduce important problems, and further work is undoubtedly required to explore the possibilities of both minimizing these problems and exploiting any additional potential offered by the two phases of input [28].
Although the basis for use of ^137Cs to document the rates and patterns of soil loss is attractive in its simplicity, it is founded on several key assumptions and a number of potential criticisms and limitations must be recognized and addressed in any application. Further discussion of these assumptions and potential criticisms can usefully consider the following:
1. Uniform local fallout distribution;
2. Rapid and strong adsorption of ^137Cs fallout on to soil particles;
3. Subsequent redistribution of ^137Cs, reflecting sediment movement;
4. Estimates of the rates of soil loss or accretion can be derived from measurements of loss or gain in radiocaesium inventories relative to the reference level.
3.1. Spatial distribution of ^137Cs fallout
The assumption of a locally uniform fallout distribution and the establishment of a reference fallout inventory for a study site is central to the assessment of ^137Cs redistribution, which provides the starting point for estimating the rates of erosion and deposition. The question of local variability is therefore critical. Although it is well known that precipitation may exhibit marked local variability at the level of the individual storm, it is generally assumed that over a period of several years the superimposition of individual storm event patterns will result in an essentially uniform pattern of total fallout. This assumption of spatial uniformity of local fallout inputs was questioned after the Chernobyl accident, when surveys demonstrated marked spatial variability in fallout levels. However, since the Chernobyl plume did not reach the stratosphere and the major period of fallout was short lived and associated with a small number of precipitation events, such
findings are not unexpected and it is inappropriate to make direct comparisons with weapons testing fallout. It is, however, difficult, if not impossible, to test this assumption of the uniform distribution of fallout inputs some 30 years after the event. It is therefore essential that considerable care is exercised in establishing local reference fallout levels and that the potential causes of variability such as snow drifting are taken into account [29]. The number of samples required to derive a reliable estimate of the local reference inventory will, for example, vary according to the local variability of the measured inventories, and in many cases it may be more appropriate to represent the reference fallout inventory as a mean value with prescribed confidence limits, rather than as a unique value. In this context, erosion and deposition would only be assumed to have occurred if the inventory measured for a sampling point fell outside these confidence limits.
3.2. Adsorption of ^137Cs
In contrast to the lack of data relating to local patterns of &flout receipt, there have been many laboratory and field investigations of the adsorption of radiocaesium by soil particles. Livens and Loveland [30] cite the work of several investigators as demonstrating highly efficient extraction of radiocaesium from dilute (0.001M) solutions by clay minerals. The radiocaesium concentrations in these solutions are several orders of magnitude greater than those associated with rainfall during the peak period of weapons testing fallout and therefore suggest that fallout radiocaesium would have been rapidly fixed by clay particles in the upper horizons of the soil. The effects of soil texture and the magnitude of the clay fraction must also be considered, but other studies indicate that the proportions of fine particles commonly found in mineral soils do not limit radiocaesium adsorption. Livens and Baxter [10] examined a range of soil types and found that radiocaesium had been
adsorbed by all the mineral soils investigated. Strong adsorption is also reflected by the low rate of vertical migration of ^137Cs evident for many soil types in both field and laboratory experiments [9, 31] and in the depth distributions of the weapons testing ^137Cs characteristic of undisturbed soil profiles.
FIG. 3. Typical ^137Cs profiles associated with undisturbed soils: (a) to (e): soil textural variation in the UK; (f) to (i): environmental variation worldwide.
Figure 3 illustrates typical ^137Cs depth distributions for a selection of soils investigated by the authors. These encompass a textural range from clay to sand in the UK (Figs 3(a) to (e)) and an environmental range from semi-arid to subtropical worldwide (Figs 3(f) to (i)). All exhibit a sharp decline in ^137CS activity with increasing depth and in all cases more than 75% of the total inventory occurs in the top 15 cm, indicating that downward translocation is minimal. Furthermore, the total inventories of the UK soils are in close agreement with existing evidence regarding total fallout amounts [32]. These profile characteristics support the assumption that in most environments the majority of mineral soils have the capacity to adsorb and immobilize fallout ^137Cs Several recent studies of the fate of Chernobyl derived radiocaesium have suggested that adsorption and fixation may be less efficient than suggested above, but these instances invariably relate to acid organic
soils in upland locations which could be expected to be characterized by slower and weaker fixing of radiocaesium, particularly at the relatively high concentrations found in the Chernobyl fallout. In such circumstances, it is not unexpected that a significant proportion of the fallout input may be transported beyond the initial point of receipt. This situation is, however, most unlikely to pertain to the majority of agricultural soils.
3.3. Sediment associated redistribution of ^137Cs
A further critical assumption of the ^137Cs technique is that after the initial fixing of fallout within the upper horizons of the soil, all subsequent redistribution of radiocaesium will take place in association with the movement of soil and sediment particles. Some of the earliest studies of ^137Cs mobility provided evidence to support this assumption. Rogowski and Tamura 114], for example, observed that 99% of the loss of ^137Cs, from a bare soil plot in Tennessee, USA, could be attributed to soil erosion, and other subsequent studies have confirmed these findings.
The close equivalence between the ^137Cs inventories from undisturbed locations and independent assessments of the cumulative fallout input and the evidence provided by the profile distributions reported above support the proposition of minimal loss of radiocaesium in the absence of erosion. Additional indirect evidence of the close relationship between movement of ^137CS and soil particles is afforded by profile distributions from cultivated sites. In the absence of significant vertical or lateral translocation of ^137Cs, it would be expected that the majority of the ^137Cs found in cultivated soils would be evenly distributed throughout the plough layer and that stable, eroding and aggrading sites would be clearly distinguishable in terms of both their total inventory and the vertical profile distribution. At eroding sites, loss of ^137Cs labelled soil from the surface would lead to a reduction in the overall inventory and a depletion in the radiocaesium concentrations in
the plough layer by incorporation of soil containing no ^137Cs derived from below the original plough depth. In contrast, at aggrading sites addition of ^137Cs labelled soil at the surface will lead to an increased inventory and burial of ^137Cs bearing soil below the plough depth. Over an extended period of time this will lead to a 'stretched' profile, with elevated levels of ^137Cs, occurring well below the depth of ploughing. If lateral translocaton of ^137Cs had occurred in the absence of sediment redistribution, the receiving sites would be characterized by increased ^137Cs inventories, with no extension of the depth distribution. All the ^137Cs, profile distributions from cultivated sites investigated by the authors in a wide variety of environments are consistent with the sediment associated transport of radiocaesium and the absence of significant lateral redistribution not associated with sediment movement. Figure 4 provides examples of typical ^137Cs profile
distributions from a range of soil types in the UK and from a range of environmental conditions worldwide which support this proposition.
FIG. 4. Typical ^137Cs profiles associated with cultivated soils: (a) to (d): stable or eroding sites; (e) to (i): aggrading sites (plough depth: (a), (b), (f), (g) = 25 cm; (c) to (e), (h), /i! = 20 cm).
3.4. Estimation of the rates of soil loss from ^137CS measurements
Use of ^137Cs measurements to estimate the rates of soil loss and accretion is commonly based on assessment of the radiocaesium inventories of bulk cores collected at different locations across the study site and the assumption that a meaningful relationship can be established between the degree of increase or depletion of the soil ^137Cs inventory relative to the reference inventory and the total depth of soil loss or accretion. Walling and Quine [11] have reviewed many of the uncertainties surrounding this assumption and the many inconsistencies introduced by past practice. Further attempts to make use of available long term erosion plot experiments in validating and developing empirical calibration relationships [33, 34] and to refine the theoretical modelling and accounting procedures which have been used as an alternative means of deriving calibration relationships [35], for example, by incorporating the particle size selectivity of erosion and deposition processes and
by experimental investigations, are undoubtedly required. Nevertheless, provided that care and critical appraisal are exercised, calibration problems should not be seen as a major impediment to the wider application of the ^137Cs technique. Furthermore, their nature and importance should be viewed in the context of the many uncertainties and problems which inevitably surround other methods of assessing the rates and patterns of soil loss. The authors have favoured the application of theoretical accounting procedures that are able to represent the aggregate effect of all the redistribution processes operating over the period since the initiation of atmospheric fallout and to take account of any known history of land management at the site, to establish site specific calibration relationships [11, 26]. Where independent evidence of longer term erosion rates exists, use of these procedures has resulted in close agreement of the estimates produced [36].
<section>4</section>
4. Future directions for the ^137CS, approach
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Although the ^137Cs approach towards assessing the rates and patterns of soil erosion has been applied in an increasing number of studies in recent years, considerable scope remains to refine the technique employed and to exploit its potential more fully. To date, most of the studies employing this approach have been concerned with soil erosion by water and tillage, but there is clearly potential for extending its application to wind erosion [37]. Where it is possible to envisage longer term investigations, it should also be feasible to extend the approach to include resampling of soil inventories to permit comparison of values for known dates and thus estimate the erosion rates for the associated intervening periods. Care would, however, be needed to ensure that the period between measurements was sufficiently long to produce significant differences in recorded inventories, bearing in mind the precision errors typically associated with gamma assays. This strategy has the
attraction of removing the need to establish the reference inventory for a site, but it no longer exploits the potential for the approach to provide retrospective estimates. Several other areas worthy of further investigation, including a global scale assessment of reference inventories, experimental investigations of radiocaesium behaviour in agricultural soils, and improvement of calibration relationships, have been highlighted above. Additional aspects meriting further attention include improvement of sampling strategies to optimize the return from sample analysis, and incorporation of more rigorously defined precision confidence limits into the establishment of reference inventories and into calibration procedures. Most work to date has focused on applying radiocaesium measurements within small areas, commonly individual fields, since the approach is well suited to generating detailed information on spatial patterns of erosion and deposition at this scale, but scope
clearly exists for using caesium measurements to provide a number of individual point estimates of erosion rates within a larger area to serve as ground truth for the calibration and verification of deterministic and statistical prediction procedures capable of synthesizing the general pattern of soil loss across the area. The potential for coupling ^137Cs measurements with information derived from satellite remote sensing imagery to provide a basis for erosion hazard assessment over larger areas has also been demonstrated by several workers [23, 38].
Considerable potential also exists to exploit the essentially unique nature of the data provided by the caesium technique. It affords one of the few viable means of assessing the impact of tillage on soil redistribution [39, 40] and the spatially distributed data generated are ideally suited to coupling with GIS and spatial statistics [41] and for use in verifying distributed erosion and soil loss models [42]. Scope also clearly exists for using radiocaesium derived estimates of soil loss as a basis for investigating medium term soil loss/crop productivity relationships. In addition, there is considerable potential for extending the use of ^137Cs, as a sediment tracer from consideration of soil redistribution within individual fields to investigation of the movement and storage of sediment within a drainage basin. Walling and Bradley [43] have, for example, shown how ^137Cs measurements can provide the basis for establishing the sediment budget for a small drainage basin,
and the successful application of ^137Cs measurements in fingerprinting suspended sediment sources and in estimating the rates of overbank floodplain accretion has been demonstrated by a number of studies [44-48].
FIG. 5. Vertical distribution of ^137Cs, unsupported ^210Pb and^ 7Be in soil profiles from representative pasture and cultivated sites near Exeter, Devon, UK 1451.
<section>5</section>
5. Application of other fallout radionuclides
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
5.1. Use of unsupported ^210210Pb to estimate soil redistribution
5.2. Use of ^7Be to investigate soil erosion dynamics
As one of only a number of fallout radionuclides, ^137Cs has attracted particular attention for application in soil erosion investigations by virtue of its high affinity for sediment particles, its relatively long half-life, its ease of measurement and the well defined temporal pattern of fallout input. As such, it has effectively 'monopolized' most, if not nearly all, recent work and there have been very few attempts to use other fallout radionuclides that might offer similar or complementary opportunities. Thus, for example, the possibility of combining measurements of a natural (as distinct from man made) fallout radionuclide characterized by an essentially constant fallout input with those of ^137Cs whose input was primarily restricted to the period extending from the late 1950s into the early 1970s, could offer considerable scope for interpreting the erosional history of the study site. Furthermore, such a tracer could prove invaluable in areas where Chernobyl fallout
has seriously complicated the interpretation of radiocaesium inventories. Equally, the availability of a fallout radionuclide with a short half-life could offer potential for investigating the short term behaviour and dynamics of erosional processes. Any fallout radionuclide used in this manner as a sediment tracer would clearly need to be rapidly and strongly fixed on reaching the soil surface; two which would appear to offer potential are ^210Pb and^ 7Be. Figure 5, based on the work of Walling and Woodward [45], illustrates a typical example of the distribution of ^137Cs ^210Pb and^ 7Be in soils from both cultivated and pasture areas near Exeter, Devon, UK, which emphasizes the similar behaviour of these three fallout radionuclides in terms of their fixation by the surface horizons of the soils involved. Some variations in their depth distributions are, however, evident and these reflect the different half-lives and the different fallout histories of the individual
radionuclides. Further discussion of the potential for using ^210Pb and^ 7Be in soil erosion investigations can usefully consider each of these radionuclides in turn.
5.1. Use of unsupported ^210Pb to estimate soil redistribution
Lead-^210 is a natural product of the 238U decay series, with a half-life of 22.26 years. It is derived from the decay of gaseous 222Rn, the daughter of ^226Ra. Radium-226 occurs naturally in soils and rocks and will generate ^210Pb which will be in equilibrium with its parent. Diffusion of a small quantity of the 222Rn from the soil introduces ^210Pb into the atmosphere, and its subsequent fallout provides an input of this radionuclide to surface soils and sediments which is not in equilibrium with its parent ^226Ra. This fallout component is termed 'unsupported' or 'excess' ^210Pb since it cannot be accounted for (or supported) by decay of the in situ parent. The amount of unsupported or atmospherically derived ^210Pb in a sediment sample can be calculated by measuring both ^210Pb and ^226Ra and subtracting the supported or in situ component. Recent developments in the use of low background, low energy gamma spectrometry [49, 50] make such measurements relatively easy to
undertake.
Although ^210Pb has been widely used for dating lake sediment cores [51, 52], its potential for estimating soil erosion rates has been essentially ignored to date. As a fallout radionuclide that is rapidly and strongly adsorbed by the surface soil, unsupported ^210Pb will behave in a similar manner to ^137Cs except that its fallout input is essentially constant through time and the supply to the soil surface is being continuously replenished. This explains the slight differences in the depth distributions of the two radionuclides evident in Fig. 5. Because of the continuous surface replenishment, unsupported ^210Pb concentrations are greatest at the surface, whereas in the case of ^137Cs the lack of significant replenishment over the past 20 years, coupled with biological activity within the soil and some downward diffusion, have caused the level of maximum concentration to be displaced a few centimetres below the surface. Soil inventories associated with unsupported ^210Pb
are generally somewhat greater than those of ^137Cs
FIG. 6. Spatial pattern of (a) ^137Cs and (b) unsupported ^210Pb inventories in a field at Butsford Barton, near Colebrooke, Devon, UK
FIG. 7 Long term soil redistribution rates within a field at Butsford Barton, near Colebrooke, Devon, UK, estimated from the unsupported ^210Pb inventory data presented in Fig. 6.
Figure 6 emphasizes the similar response of ^137Cs and unsupported ^210Pb to erosional redistribution within a small field at Butsford Barton near Colebrooke, Devon, UK. The maps presented are based on data assembled for a grid of > 200 soil cores and in this location the reference inventories for ^137Cs and unsupported ^210Pb were estimated to be about 275 mBq/cm² and about 600 mBq/cm², respectively. Considering the field as a whole, the loss of ^137Cs and unsupported ^210Pb relative to their respective reference inventories amounts to 12.7 and 16.7%, respectively. The increased loss and the slightly greater range of inventory values associated with the unsupported ^210Pb measurements reflect the continuous input of this radionuclide and thus the annual potential for erosion of newly accumulated ^210Pb from the soil surface prior to cultivation, and the longer period available for removal of this radionuclide. The unsupported ^210Pb inventory values depicted in Fig. 6(b)
have been converted to estimates of the long term soil redistribution rate by using a theoretically derived calibration relationship, similar to that employed by Walling and Quine [11] to convert measured ^137Cs inventories to estimates of erosion and deposition rates. In this case, the model employed incorporated values for the annual ^210Pb deposition flux derived from the reference inventory, the plough depth, and the initial depth distribution of fresh fallout prior to incorporation into the profile by tillage, and assumed that cultivation had been continuous for > 100 years. The result is presented in Fig. 7, which shows clear evidence of sediment accumulation in the central depression that traverses the field and against the field boundaries. In addition, the influence of tillage in displacing soil from the slope convexities is also clearly evident. Further scope undoubtedly exists for interpreting the relative magnitude of the unsupported ^210Pb and ^137Cs inventories
for individual sites to provide information on the erosional history of the site. Whereas the former will have been influenced by soil redistribution over the past 100 years or more, the latter will reflect only soil redistribution that has occurred since the late 1950s.
5.2. Use of^ 7Be to investigate soil erosion dynamics
Beryllium-7 is a cosmogenic radionuclide produced in the upper atmosphere by cosmic ray spallation of nitrogen and oxygen. In this case, the radionuclide is extremely short lived (half-life of 53.3 days) relative to ^137Cs and ^210Pb and it offers potential for investigating soil erosion dynamics over much shorter timescales. Figure 5 indicates that^ 7Be is typically concentrated in the upper 5 mm of the soil profile and it is therefore capable of providing good discrimination between sediment derived from the immediate soil surface and that derived from depths > 10 mm, where concentrations will be effectively zero. Burch et al. 153] and Wallbrink and Murray [54] working in Australia were, for example, able to use this radionuclide to distinguish sediment mobilized by sheet erosion and rill erosion in erosion plot experiments and to demonstrate the progressive development of rills during the course of a single simulated runoff event. Scope clearly also exists for coupling
measurements of^ 7Be activity with equivalent measurements of ^137Cs and unsupported ^210Pb to provide increased capacity for sediment source discrimination [45]. Monitoring of the spatial distribution of^ 7Be activity across small plots, immediately after storm events, could also provide a basis for investigating local erosion patterns in response to microtopographical control.
<section>6</section>
6. Perspective
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Although fallout radionuclides, and more particularly ^137Cs and unsupported ^210Pb have been widely used for establishing the chronology of recent sediments, their potential for use in soil erosion investigations has attracted much less attention. However, the growing need for information on the intensity of soil erosion in many areas of the world in recent years has stimulated increasing interest in the use of ^137Cs measurements to estimate the rates and patterns of soil redistribution. The validity and value of this approach has now been demonstrated by numerous studies in a wide variety of environments, but scope clearly exists for refining, developing and standardizing the procedures used, and for exploring additional applications. Other fallout radionuclides, including unsupported ^210Pb and^ 7Be, have attracted much less attention, but there is increasing evidence that they again offer considerable potential for use in soil erosion investigations, both in their own
right and as a complement to ^137Cs Further work to explore and exploit this potential is clearly required.
Acknowledgements
The assistance of a number of colleagues, including Qingping He, J. Grapes and Yusheng Zhang, in the studies described in this paper and the support of the UK Natural Environment Research Council and Overseas Development Administration for work on the application of fallout radionuclides in soil erosion studies are gratefully acknowledged.
<section>7</section>
References
Back to contents - Previous file
[1] BROWN, L.R., "Conserving soils", State of the World, 1984 (BROWN, L.R., Ed.), Norton, New York (1984).
[2] BURINGH, P., An Assessment of Losses and Degradation of Productive Agricultural Land in the World, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome (1981).
[3] OLDEMAN, L.R., et al., "The extent of human-induced soil degradation", World Map of the Status of Human-Induced Soil Degradation, International Soil Reference and Information Centre, Wageningen/United Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi (1991) 27-33.
[4] CLARK, E.H., et al., Eroding Soils: The Off-Farm Impacts, The Conservation Foundation, Washington, DC (1985).
[5] LOUGHRAN, R.J., The measurement of soil erosion, Prog. Phys. Geogr. 13 (1990)^ 216-233.
[6] HIGGITT, D.L., Soil erosion and soil problems, Prog. Phys. Geogr. 15 (1991)^ 91-100.
[7] WALLING, D.E., QUINE, T.A., The use of caesium-137 measurements to investigate soil erosion on arable fields in the UK: Potential applications and limitations, J. Soil Sci. 42 (1991) 147-165.
[8] TAMURA, T., Selective sorption reactions of caesium-137 with soil minerals, Nucl. Saf. 5 (1964) 262-268.
[9] BACHHUBER, H., et al., The migration of ^137Cs and 90Sr in multilayered soils: Results from batch, column and fallout investigations, Nucl. Technol. 59 (1982) 291 -301.
[10] LIVENS, F.R., BAXTER, M.S., Chemical associations of artificial radionuclides in
Cumbrian soils, Environ. Radioact. 7 (1988) 75-86.
[11] WALLING, D.E., QUINE, T.A., Calibration of caesium-137 measurements to provide quantitative erosion rate data, Land Degrad. Rehabilitat. 2 (1990) 161-175.
[12] EVANS, R., COOK, S., Soil erosion in Britain, Seesoil 3 (1986) 28-59.
[13] QUINE, T.A., et al., "Investigation of soil erosion on terraced fields near Yanting, Sichuan Province, China, using caesium-137", Erosion, Debris Flows and Environment in Mountain Regions (Proc. Symp. Chengdu, 1992), International Association of Hydrological Sciences Publication No. 209, IAHS Press, Wallingford, UK (1992) 155-168.
[14] ROGOWSKI, A.S., TAMURA, T., Erosional behaviour of caesium-137, Health Phys. 18 (1970) 467-477.
[15] RITCHIE, J.C., et al., Estimating soil erosion from the redistribution of fallout ^137Cs Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 38 (1974) 137-139.
[16] HASHOLT, B., WALLING, D.E., "Use of caesium-137 to investigate sediment sources and sediment delivery in a small glacierized mountain drainage basin in eastern Greenland", Erosion, Debris Flows and Environment in Mountain Regions (Proc. Symp. Chengdu, 1992), International Association of Hydrological Sciences Publication No. 209, IAHS Press, Wallingford, UK (1992) 87-100.
[17] STROMQUIST, L., et al., Testing ^137Cs as an indicator of slope process activity in periglacial environments, Stud. Geomorphol. Carpatho-Balcanica 23 (1989) 93-104.
[18] SUTHERLAND, R.A., DE JONG, E., Estimation of sediment redistribution within agricultural fields using caesium-137, Crystal Springs, Saskatchewan, Canada, Appl. Geogr. 10 (1990) 205-221.
[19] OSTROVA, I.V., et al., Assessing the intensity of erosional accumulation processes by the content of caesium-137 in soils, Geografiya S (1990) 79-85 (in Russian).
[20] NAVAS, A., WALLING, D.E., "Using caesium-137 to assess sediment movement on slopes in a semiarid upland environment in Spain", Erosion, Debris Flows and Environment in Mountain Regions (Proc. Symp. Chengdu, 1992), International Association of Hydrological Sciences Publication No. 209, IAHS Press, Wallingford, UK (1992) 129-138.
[21] CHAPPELL, A., Department of Geography, University College of London, London, Personal communication, 1993.
[22] FORSYTH, T.J., The use of caesium-137 measurements of soil erosion and farmers' perceptions to indicate land degradation amongst shifting cultivators in Northern Thailand, Mt. Res. Develop. (in press).
[23] WALLING, D.E., QUINE, T.A., Use of Caesium-137 as a Tracer of Erosion and Sedimentation: Handbook for the Application of the Caesium-137 Technique, Report to the UK Overseas Development Administration (1993).
[24] LOUGHRAN, R.J., et al., "A reconnaissance survey of soil erosion in Australia", Proc. 7th ISCO Conf., Sydney, Sep. 1992, Vol. I (1992) 52-63.
[25] WALLING, D.E., QUINE, T.A., "The use of caesium-137 measurements in soil erosion surveys", Erosion and Sediment Transport Monitoring Programmes in River Basins (Proc. Symp. Oslo, 1992), International Association of Hydrological Sciences Publication No. 210, IAHS Press, Wallingford, UK (1992) 143-152.
[26] QUINE, T.A., et al., "An investigation of the influence of edaphic, topographic and land-use controls on soil erosion on agricultural land in the Borrowdale and Chinamora areas, Zimbabwe, based on caesium-137 measurements", Sediment Problems: Strategies for Monitoring, Prediction and Control (Proc. Symp. Yokohama, 1993), International Association of Hydrological Sciences Publication No. 217, IAHS Press, Wallingford, UK (1993) 185-196.
[27] LARSEN, R.J., Worldwide Deposition of 90Sr through 1983, United States Department of Energy, New York (1985) 160 pp.
[28] HIGGITT, D.L., et al., Applications and limitations of Chernobyl radiocaesium measurements in a Carpathian erosion investigation, Poland, Land Degrad. Rehabilit. 3 (1992) 15-26.
[29] SUTHERLAND, R.A., Estimation of caesium-137 areal activities in control (uneroded) locations, Soil Technol. 4 (1991) 33-50.
[30] LIVENS, F.R., LOVELAND, P.J., The influence of soil properties on the environmental mobility of caesium in Cumbria, Soil Use Manage. 4 (1988) 69-75.
[31] FRISSEL, M.J., PENNDERS, R., "Models for the accumulation and migration of 90Sr, ^137Cs 239 240Pu and 241Am in the upper layer of soils", Ecological Aspects of Radionuclide Release (COUGHTREY, P.J., Ed.), British Ecological Society Special Publication No. 3 (1983) 63-72.
[32] CAWSE, P.A., HORRILL, A.D., A Survey of Caesium-137 and Plutonium in British Soils in 1977, Rep. R-10155, UKAEA Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Harwell (1977).
[33] ELLIOTT, G.L., et al., Correlation of erosion measurements and soil caesium-137 content, Appl. Radiat. Isot. 39 (1990) 1153-1157.
[34] McINTYRE, S.C., et al., "Long-term Cs-137 and soil loss from field plots", Proc. 5th Federal Interagency Sedimentation Conf., 1991 (1991) 5.33-5.39.
[35] QUINE, T.A., Use of a simple model to estimate rates of soil erosion from caesium-137 data, J. Water Resour. (Iraq) 8 (1989) 54-81.
[36] QUINE, T.A., WALLING, D.E., "Assessing recent rates of soil loss from areas of arable cultivation in the UK", Farm Land Erosion in Temperate Plains Environment and Hills (WICHEREK, S., Ed.), Elsevier, Amsterdam (1993) 357-371.
[37] SUTHERLAND, R.A., et al., Cesium-137 estimates of sediment redistribution by wind, Soil Sci. 151 (1991) 387-396.
[38] LUNDEN, B., et al., "An evaluation of soil erosion intensity mapping from SPOT satellite imagery by studies of colour air-photos and top-soil content of 137-cesium", Monitoring Soil Loss at Different Observation Levels: Case Studies of Soil Erosion in the Lesotho Lowlands (STROMQUIST, L., Ed.), UNGI Rep. No. 74, Naturgeografiska Institutionen, Uppsala Universitet (1991) 89 pp.
[39] QUINE, T.A., et al., "The role of tillage in soil redistribution within terraced fields on the loess plateau, China: An investigation using caesium-137", Proc. Int. Symp. on Runoff and Sediment Yield Modelling (BANASIK, K., ZBIKOWSKI, A., Eds), Warsaw Agricultural University Press, Warsaw (1993) 149-155.
[40] QUINE, T.A., et al., "A comparison of the roles of tillage and water erosion in land-form development on agricultural land near Leuven, Belgium", Proc. Int. Symp. on Variability in Stream Erosion and Sediment Transport, Canberra, ACT, Dec. 1994 (in press).
[41] DE ROO, A.P.J., Modelling Surface Runoff and Soil Erosion in Catchments Using Geographical Information Systems, Netherlands Geographical Studies No. 157, University of Utrecht, Utrecht (1993) 295 pp.
[42] DE ROO, A.P.J., WALLING, D.E., Validating the 'ANSWERS' soil erosion model using '^137Cs in the Yendacott catchment, Devon (UK), Soil Technol. (in press).
[43] WALLING, D.E., BRADLEY, S.B., ''The use of caesium-137 measurements to investigate sediment delivery from cultivated areas in Devon, UK", Sediment Budgets (Proc. Symp. Porto Alegre, 1988), International Association of Hydrological Sciences Publication No. 174, IAHS Press, Wallingford, UK (1988) 325-335.
[44] WALLING, D.E., BRADLEY, S.B., "Some applications of caesium-137 measurements in the study of fluvial erosion, transport and deposition", ibid., pp. 337-350.
[45] WALLING, D.E., WOODWARD, J.C., "Use of radiometric fingerprints to derive information on suspended sediment sources", Erosion and Sediment Transport Monitoring Programmes in River Basins (Proc. Symp. Oslo, 1992), International Association of Hydrological Sciences Publication No. 210, IAHS Press, Wallingford, UK (1992) 153164.
[46] WALLING, D.E., et al., "A multi-parameter approach to fingerprinting suspended-sediment sources", Tracers in Hydrology (Proc. Symp. Yokohama, 1993), International Association of Hydrological Sciences Publication No. 215, IAHS Press, Wallingford, UK (1993) 329338.
[47] WALLING, D.E., et al., "Rates and patterns of contemporary floodplain sedimentation", Lowland Floodplain Rivers: Geomorphological Perspectives (CARLING, P.A., PETTS, G.E., Eds), Wiley, Chichester (1992) 185-202.
[48] FRÖHLICH, W., WALLING, D.E., "The use of fallout radionuclides in investigations of erosion and sediment delivery in the Polish Flysh Carpathians", Erosion, Debris Flows and Environment in Mountain Regions (Proc. Symp. Chengdu, 1992), International Association of Hydrological Sciences Publication No. 209, IAHS Press, Wallingford, UK (1992) 6176.
[49] APPLEBY, P.G., et al., ^210Pb dating by low background gamma counting, Hydrobiologia 142 (1986) 21-27.
[50] JOSHI, S.R., Nondestructive determination of lead-210 and radium-226 in sediments by direct photon analysis, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem. 116 (1987) 169-182.
[51] KRISHNASWAMI, S., et al., Geochronology of lake sediments, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 11 (1971) 407-414.
[52] ROBBINS, J.A., et al., Comparative ^210Pb, ^137Cs and pollen geochronologies of sediments from Lakes Ontario and Erie, Quat. Res. 10 (1978) 256-278.
[53] BURCH, G.J., et al., "Detection and prediction of sediment sources in catchments: Use of^ 7Be and ^137Cs", Proc. Symp. on Hydrology and Water Resources, Canberra, ACT, Feb. 1988, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT (1988) 146-151.
[54] WALLBRINK, P.J., MURRAY, A.S., "The use of fallout radionuclides as indicators of surface and subsoils", Paper presented at the Workshop on Environmental Radioactivity and Radionuclide Measurement, Adelaide, Australia, 1990.
