<title>Fuelwood supplies in the developing countries</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
On the occasion of the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, Nairobi, August 1981, FAO was anxious to draw attention to the other energy crisis: that of fuelwood., which affects the daily energy supplies of a great many rural people in the Third World. A study was therefore undertaken for the purpose of demonstrating, the dependence of Third World populations on fuelwood as a source of energy and identifying more precisely the mergence of ever more marked deficits, on the basis of up-to-date information. The results of this study were presented in the form of a map¹ published as a contribution to the Nairobi Conference. The present report sets out in more detail the methodology followed in the study and the main results, in particular with respect to each of the major regions concerned.
¹ Map of the Fuelwood Situation in the Developing Countries, FAO, Rome, 1981.
There is no need to insist on the dramatic nature of the problem of fuelwood supplies for people who have little or no access to any other source of energy. What is probably shown in a new and striking way is the dimension of the problem, the order of magnitude of the populations affected and the size of the deficits, and also the accelerating degradation of the situations identified. It seems clear, in fact, that the deficits are expanding and increasing rapidly under the combined effects of population growth, deterioration of the natural forest resources and the absence of possibilities for replacement by other sources of energy. Unless there is a radical change in present trends, the people affected by an energy shortage due to the scarcity of fuelwood will have more than doubled by the year 2000, exceeding 2 thousand million: the deficit might then correspond to half their energy needs. Such an energy gap can hardly be accepted sociologically, economically or
politically, concerning as it does the most elementary needs, such as cooking food and heating the home. To this is added the fact that the great majority of the people concerned are among the poorest. It can thus be imagined what a burden the necessity to organize emergency actions to guarantee a minimum energy supply and distribute it to people scattered over vast areas would represent for developing economies. But together with this energy gap, and even more serious, would be the often irreparable damage that the total destruction of the woody vegetation would wreak on the natural resources of vast areas with a usually fragile ecology; the desperate search for any and every kind of plant fuel to cook food might well endanger agricultural and food production capacity, owing to erosion and desertification.
The primary objective of the present report is to draw the attention of the governments concerned and of the international community to the seriousness of the problem before present trends become largely irreversible. Given the extent and diversity of the situations covered, this study is inevitably of a comparatively general nature, but it should serve to sound the alarm wherever symptoms of deficit have been detected. In many countries this should lead to governments and the public in general becoming alive to the problem of fuelwood supplies, a problem whose seriousness is often masked by its everyday and diffuse nature until the point of no return has been reached. The methodology devised for this study can be refined and used for sub - regional studies, such as the one carried out by FAO for the Sahelian region in 1982² or for national studies. In any event it will enable the specific characteristics of the problem to be more clearly identified and more concrete
indications obtained on the order of magnitude and the nature of the measures to be undertaken.
² "Les disponibilités de bois de feu an région sahélienne de l'Afrique occidentale - Situation et perspectives", par M.N. Keita, FAO, Rome 1982.
In the second place this report aims at promoting a realistic view of the energy problem of most of the people of the Third World: large resources are often mobilized to conduct research into substitute energies whose novelty may be attractive, but whose stage of technological and economic development puts them quite simply out of reach for many years to come of those who are suffering from a scarcity of their daily energy supplies. All too often there is a flagrant imbalance between the resources devoted to energies which it will take a long time to develop and those devoted to sources such as wood, where the technical solutions are known and tested and which require only adaptation to specific local conditions and popularization.
The final purpose of this study is to prompt a rapid mobilization of efforts and resources with a view to immediate and large-scale action. Technical forestry solutions exist, and can provide many benefits in addition to solving the problem of fuelwood supplies: stabilization of the environment, provision of fodder, food and other products useful to domestic and rural economies. The success of these technical solutions depends, however, on the ability to adapt them to the specific needs of the people concerned, to get the people actively involved, and to make these efforts an integral part of the management of the natural resources and of the land for the benefit of the people. This illustrates the development potential of forestry programmes, whose energy role constitutes an important, but not the only, aspect.
The development potential of the solutions to the fuelwood problem constitutes the most crucial aspect, on which FAO insists and to which it devotes prior attention in its assistance to the countries concerned. The role of the forest resources in supplying energy is, in fact, an important catalyst in reorienting forestry action more directly towards rural development and the needs of the people. The multiple and direct benefits that the people can derive from these actions, and the mobilization of collectively organized efforts to achieve self-sufficiency, constitute the basis for a dynamic development which does not accentuate dependence on abroad. The productive, protective and social functions of the forest vegetation, including even isolated trees, are thus integrated in a system in which advantages for the subsistence and development of the people concerned are evident to them. Recent successes are not limited to those in the Republic of Korea mentioned in this study;
but success is dependent on massive support for the diffusion of information, training and the strengthening of institutions in order to mobilize the people for actions which they realize are conducive to their own development. Mobilization of this essential support is the primary aim of the FAO Forestry and Rural Energy Programme, for which this study constitutes an important point of reference.
The study has been prepared essentially at the regional level, by the teams of the Preinvestment Survey of Forest Resources, Dehra Dun, India, and the Departamento de Manejo Forestal, Universidad Nacional Agraria, Lima, Peru, and by the following consultants: M. Baumer, J. Brookman Amissah and T. Gnrofoun. The work was devised and organized by M.R. de Montalembert, Coordinator of the study, and J. Clement, technical consultant, who prepared the final report.
M.A. Flores Rodas
Assistant Director-General
Forestry Department
Units and abbreviations commonly used in the text
GJ
= gigajoule = 10^9 joules
TJ
= térajoule = 10^12 joules
GJ/inhab./yr
= gigajoule/inhabitant/year
m³/inhab./yr
= cubic metre per inhabitant and per year
m³/yr
= cubic metre per year
m³/ha/yr
= cubic metre per hectare and per year
<section>2</section>
Chapter I - Introduction
1.1 Objectives of the study
1.2 Implementation of the study
Recent developments in the overall energy situation have not only highlighted the essential role played by fossil fuels in today's world, but have also led to a sudden awareness of the fact that the greater part of the population in Third World countries is not really concerned by the problem of sources of energy to which it has no access. The importance of the traditional fuels, foremost among them fuelwood and charcoal, and the serious consequences of shortage of these fuels in terms of energy supply and the over-cutting of wood resources, made it necessary to assess the fuelwood situation in the developing countries. When preparations were being made for the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, Nairobi, 1981, FAO took the initiative of carrying out this survey in order to make the international community and the countries concerned aware of how acute the problem is and how dangerous it would be to allow present trends to continue. The results
of the survey are set out in this report and also shown in a Map of the Fuelwood Situation in the Developing Countries.¹
¹ This Map was published by FAO, Home, in 1981 and distributed as a contribution to the Nairobi Conference
Fuelwood and charcoal have been the subject of continuous attention by FAO for more than thirty years. The Organization regularly publishes statistical information on production, in the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products, and technical studies. The three editions of the World Forest Inventory, of 1953, 1958 and 1963, contained information on the amount of fuelwood extracted, and that of 1958 underlined how much was gathered outside the forest. But no attempt, had yet been made to examine to what extent the volume of woody material available for energy and accessible to the people was sufficient to cover their requirements. In 1980 FAO assumed responsibility for the secretariat of the Technical Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal for the preparation of the Nairobi Conference: it was this' Panel which recommended that the survey proposed by FAO lead to the preparation of a map which would show where the fuelwood deficit, and hence the problem, was most acute.
Most of the studies carried out to date have dealt with the consumption of wood fuels, sometimes comparing this, fairly briefly, with the potential yield of the forest formations. In addition, most of the studies on forest resources undertaken recently deal only with fairly dense formations suitable for commercial utilization for industrial purposes Even the FAO/UNEP project for the evaluation of tropical forest resources, the results of which were published recently, while covering all woody formations, both natural and planted, uses a concept of productivity relating to industrial wood. The present study has, therefore, consisted of analysing, zone by zone, the situation as regards fuelwood needs and supplies accessible to the people, covering all resources, both natural and planted formations, whether dense or scattered throughout the rural area, and the by-products of agriculture and industry. The information assembled makes it possible to pinpoint the problem better and
above all to discern the seriousness of the degradation under way, bearing in mind the growth in the populations which continue to depend on fuel-wood, and the impact of shortages in zones with a fragile ecology: it demonstrates the order of magnitude of the deficits to be made up, and the relative importance of the various types of resources in the total supplies.
1.1 Objectives of the study
On the basis of the existing information, in particular the most recent data available from the FAO/UNEP project for the evaluation of tropical forest resources, supplemented by the authors of the study, the following objectives were set:
- to present an overall view of the situation as regards fuelwood in each of the main developing regions, and of the relative degree of dependence on this fuel in energy consumption;
- to assess the fuelwood supplies to which the populations have access and identify areas with a marked dependence where there existed in 1980 a noticeable imbalance between the populations' requirements and these supplies, i.e. to classify these deficit situations;
- to analyse present trends in order to show how the situations identified will develop if there is no change in trends between now and the year 2000; and to identify the zones which, although they have no apparent problem in 1980, will have a more or less marked deficit by the year 2000.
The results are given in this document on the basis of an analysis, the methodology of which is described in Chapter II. An overview of the fuelwood situation in the developing countries, together with a summary of the overall results of the study, is given in Chapter III. The regional situations in Africa south of the Sahara, North Africa and the Middle East, Asia, and Latin America, are each the subject of a special section in Chapters 17, V, VI and VII respectively. Chapter VIII discusses how to improve the situations, giving possible solutions and guidelines for strategies. A summary of the conclusions is given in Chapter IX.
A list and classification of fuelwood deficit situations is given in the annex.
1.2 Implementation of the study
The main work of analysis was carried out at regional level by teams of consultants or by regional institutions; FAO Headquarters was responsible for preparation, coordination and synthesis. The survey itself was conducted from February 1980 to July 1981 and the Map of the Fuelwood Situation was published in August 1981.
The following procedure was used in carrying out the study:
1) Preparatory phase: This entailed definition and preparation of a methodology of work and analysis, and rapid checking in tropical African countries of the validity and applicability of the methodology. At the same time the regional bodies or consultants were identified and their role as executants defined. The preparatory phase was completed by a meeting organized in May 1980 at FAO Headquarters between the central coordinating team and the regional teams in order to exchange views, effect an overall check of work procedures, and make available to the regional teams the information available at Headquarters.
2) Compilation and analysis of information at regional level: The regional teams collected and analyzed the information available country by country. They visited some countries selected as typical, for which case studies were conducted in order to improve understanding of the situations studied. On the basis of their experience and of these visits, the regional teams completed their analyses and prepared a preliminary regional report. During this phase the regional teams received constant backstopping from the central coordinating team.
3) Checking and harmonizing the presentation of the regional analyses: The preliminary drafts of these reports were examined at Headquarters. Certain clarifications and corrections were requested from the regional teams, together with some modifications in the presentation, in order to make possible an overall analysis based on a homogeneous approach. Regional maps were prepared.
4) Preparation of the overall analysis, the first results of which were presented to the Technical Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal at its final meeting in December 1980. These results were incorporated in the Panel's report to the Preparatory Committee for the Nairobi Conference.
5) Preparation of the Map of the Fuelwood Situation in the Developing Countries and the accompanying explanatory note.
6) Preparation of this report synthesizing the results obtained.
The following institutions and consultants carried out the regional studies, an essential component of this report:
Africa south of the Sahara: Tosseh Gnrofoun and Joseph Brookman Amissah
North Africa and Middle East: Michel Baumer
Asia: The "Preinvestment Survey of Forest Resources" (now called "Forest Survey of India") Institute, Dehra Dun, India
Latin America: Universidad Nacional Agraria, Departamento de Manejo Forestal, Lima, Peru.
The preliminary attempt at classifying African tropical countries from the point of view of their fuelwood resources and consumption was carried out by the Centre Technique Forestier Tropical, Nogent-sur-Marne, France.
<section>3</section>
Chapter II - Methodology
2.1 Introduction
2.2 Definitions
2.3 Classification of resources
2.4 Study procedure
2.5 Presentation of results
2.1 Introduction
The methodology worked out for this study is based on two fundamental considerations: the geographical specificity of fuelwood supply and consumption situations, and the very varied nature of the supplies. The aim is-to assess the level of supplies compatible with sustained production and to which a population can have access, and then to compare this level with that of the requirements. It is this comparison which provides an indication of the fuelwood situation and makes it possible to detect indices of incipient acute scarcity or deficit.
The geographical specificity of fuelwood situations is a well-known characteristic. The limited possibilities for transporting and having access to fuelwood mean that in studying a situation it is necessary to take into consideration relatively limited areas; otherwise there is a great risk that considerable local variations will be ignored in presenting an overall picture of the situation. The abundance of forest resources available in a relatively large region may eclipse local situations of acute scarcity, the resources obviously being where there is no demand; the reverse is also possible. There are, however, rapidly attained limits to the amount of disaggregation that is reasonably possible in sue a study. One of the first problems that the methodology had to resolve, therefore, was that of defining the parameters to be used in identifying fuelwood situations while endeavouring to go beyond the appearance of the situations at national level in order to show up the
variations that this may conceal.
The second characteristic is connected with the heterogeneity of what is covered by the term "fuelwood" and the variety of the sources from which populations obtain their supplies, although it is not usually possible to ascertain their relative importance accurately except in very detailed studies Fuelwood sources consist not only of forests properly so-called but also of other types of woody vegetations trees and shrubs, in closed or open formations, woodlots and even isolated trees scattered throughout the countryside, and wood waste from agriculture and industry. All these heterogeneous resources are utilized to produce warmth for domestic or artisanal purposes through direct combustion or after carbonization. Within the framework of this study it is particularly important to emphasize that the more difficult a fuelwood situation, the more probable it is that resources not directly connected with forests play an important supporting role, even a principal one in extreme
cases The methodology, therefore, had also to define approaches that would make it possible to include the different fuelwood resources in assessing supplies.
Finally, the methodology was worked out so as to use relatively homogeneous criteria in handling the great diversity of existing and available information, checked and supplemented by the knowledge and experience of those participating in the study. Here the regional teams played a particularly important role in checking and completing the analyses. It must be emphasized, however, that owing in particular to the need for global coherence, the overall presentation masks, over and above regional differences, considerable variations in the coverage and quality of the information; this is symptomatic of the varying degrees of awareness of the importance of fuelwood in energy balances and of the degradation in supplies under way in many places. Cases in which information was lacking were studies by reference to similar situations.
2.2 Definitions
In order to assess the situation as regards fuelwood supply and demand, it was necessary to define from the outset, precisely and unambiguously, the concepts necessary for achieving the objectives of the study. These definitions must be completed by referring to the classification of woody vegetation as used in evaluating the resources: potential yield of fuelwood.
The following definitions apply to the main terms used in the study:
Fuelwood; Wood and pulp material obtained from the trunks, branches and other parts of trees and shrubs to be used as fuel for cooking, heating or generating energy through direct combustion, not only in households but also in rural industries (curing, smoking, etc.). Included in this definition are charcoal and agricultural and industrial wood and pulp residues. The large-scale use of wood fuel for industrial purposes, for example in metal - working, is not covered.
This definition may cover a wide variety of material used as fuelwood, comprising even roots, bark and the leaves of woody plants, or crop residues such as straw, husks and the products from the pruning of fruit trees. Fuelwood hence covers a very varied range of plant material used more or less indiscriminately for the same purpose, depending on how scarce real fuelwood is.
Fuelwood needs; Minimum amount of fuelwood necessary in view of the minimum energy estimated to be indispensable for household consumption, artisanal purposes and rural industries, in line with local conditions and the share of fuelwood in their energy supplies. In some cases actual fuelwood consumption may be lower than estimated needs, owing to the existence of acute shortages, or higher, owing to the abundance of supplies. Fuelwood needs here exclude large-scale industrial use - for metallurgy, cement - making, etc. They are estimated on the basis of current conversion technologies in the energy systems that exist in the rural areas and in urban concentrations of limited size where energy consumption patterns remain very similar to those in the neighbouring rural areas.
Populations dependent on fuelwood or rural populations; For the purposes of this study it has been assumed that the populations dependent on fuelwood are populations with a rural type of energy consumption in which traditional fuels such as fuelwood play a major role.
It has been arbitrarily assumed that populations dependent on fuelwood consist of rural people properly so-called and the inhabitants of towns with a population of less than 100 000, who have usually kept a similar type of energy consumption. It is assumed that the proportion of the population of these towns which depends essentially on conventional commercial fuels is made up for by the proportion in the larger towns which continues to depend on traditional fuels.
Unless otherwise stated, it is to this definition of populations dependent on fuel-wood that reference is made in this study.
The population statistics used in this study, in particular as regards population trends to the year 2000, are those published by FAO ¹.
¹ World Population Estimates and Projections, 1950-2000.
Fuelwood supplies: Quantities of fuelwood which are, or can be made available for energy use on the basis of the mean annual productivity of all potential resources on a sustainable production basis. The mean annual fuelwood productivity is calculated by deducting from the mean total annual productivity the amount of wood destined for industry - which usually has priority. The potential resources comprise natural woody vegetation, plantations, the wooded elements scattered throughout cultivated zones, and the wood waste from industry and agriculture} these resources are defined more in detail in the following paragraph, which explains their classification.
Accessible fuelwood supplies! A distinction should be made between these supplies and the total apparent supplies. Accessibility, a correcting factor based on physical and economic considerations, makes it possible to take into account dispersion of the resources, lack of infrastructure for their utilization, their use for other purposes, such as the use of agricultural waste to fertilize the land, and various other parameters. The accessible fuelwood supplies represent the proportion of the quantities available for energy purposes that can actually be used under normal conditions of supply and demand.
Fuelwood balance; The difference between needs and accessible supplies shows whether there is balance or imbalance in the fuelwood situation at .present. A positive balance denotes an excess of supply over needs, and a negative balance a deficit. In the latter case, requirements are met either by over-utilization of the existing supplies, or by shifting to other types of fuel, if there are any. In the last analysis, consumption may be well below needs Since fuelwood situations are markedly location-specific, the fuel - wood balance for a fairly wide area may conceal considerable localized gaps between supplies and needs, particularly in the vicinity of large towns.
The balance between accessible supplies and needs, the end result of analysis, is the main indicator of the fuelwood situation in a given zone. When the balance is positive, it shows that the use of wood for energy purposes can be further expanded. When it is negative, it indicates the extent of the deficit between the level of accessible supplies on the basis of sustained yield and the minimum requirements of the populations dependent on fuelwood. The balance per inhabitant is particularly significant and will be constantly used in this study.
2.3 Classification of resources
2.3.1 Natural woody vegetation
2.3.2 Plantations
2.3.3 Other natural woody resources
2.3.4 Agricultural and industrial residues
2.3.5 Concept of fuelwood volume
The classification of resources for the purpose of assessing fuelwood supplies covers mainly natural woody vegetation, plantations, rural woodlots, and agricultural and industrial residues. The classification of natural woody vegetation and plantations, taken from the FAO/UNEP project on the evaluation of tropical forest resources, is briefly summarized below as regards the elements directly connected with fuelwood.
2.3.1 Natural woody vegetation
These are formations in which woody elements cover more than 10 percent of the ground. Though it is often difficult, if not impossible, to estimate this percentage from the descriptions given, and this percentage is not always used in information, it has been selected as the limit between formations in which the woody elements actually constitute a community and those in which they are scattered (or in lines) in landscapes with a non-woody vegetation or without any other vegetation".
"The word 'woody' is used although the trees of some monocotyledons do not contain 'wood' in the usual meaning of the word".
"The adjective 'natural' is used only in relation to plantations which can be considered as a purely artificial vegetation (see section 2.3.2 below). It does not mean at all that there is no human or, more generally, biotic interference. On the contrary a significant proportion, varying with countries, of 'natural vegetation' corresponds to degradation stages (after fires, clearings by shifting cultivation, over-exploitation for wood, grazing) or reconstitution stages after degradation, or to forests disturbed by logging, with or without management".
The following different types of natural formations are distinguished (see also the attached diagram):
- "N stands for any vegetation type of which the dominant woody element is the tree,... viz a woody perennial plant typically large and with a single, well-defined stem carrying a more or less definite crown (height more than 7 metres for mature trees) .
- "n corresponds to any vegetation type the main wood elements of which are shrubs of more than 50 cm and less than 7 metres high".¹
¹ These limits must be interpreted with flexibility, particularly the minimum tree height (and maximum shrub height), which may vary between 5 and 8 metres approximately.
- "NH corresponds to types with predominance of trees of broadleaved species (angiosperms), dicotyledons or monocotyledons (e.g. palms, raphias). Premodimance is characterized by a proportion of more than 50 percent of the crown cover".
- "NS corresponds to types with predominance of trees of coniferous species (gymnosperms). Coniferous species (for instance of genus Podocarpus), are often present in mixed tropical forests of medium and high mountains, without being predominant. As a result, no significant forest area has been classified as NS in some countries in spite of the occurrence of coniferous species".
- "NHC stands for closed broadleaved forests, i.e. those which, when not recently cleared by shifting agriculture or heavily exploited, cover with their various storeys and undergrowth a high proportion of the ground and do not have a continuous dense grass layer allowing grazing and spreading of fires".
- "NHO corresponds to mixed, broadleaved forest - grassland formations with a continuous dense grass layer in which the tree synusia cover more than 10 percent (e.g. various forms of "cerrado" and "chaco" in America, tree and wooded savannas and woodlands in Africa). This division between closed forests and mixed formations is more of ecological than physiognomic type and is not necessarily characterized by a crown cover percentage, since, for instance, trees of some woodlands cover the ground completely like closed forests".
A distinction has been introduced between mixed, broadleaved forest - grassland formations covering more than 40 percent of the ground (NH01), corresponding to wooded savanna, and those which cover 10 to 40 percent (NH02), or savanna with trees, this distinction corresponding to noticeable differences in the level of wood production and hence in fuelwood supplies.
Stretches of closed forests and mixed forest - grassland formations are sometimes rendered unproductive of fuelwood, either by legal prohibition of cutting, (in national parks, reserves, etc.) or by the terrain, which makes them almost impossible to utilize. These stretches have usually been excluded from the assessment of fuelwood resources.
- "NHCa (or NSa). or 'forest fallow', stands for all complexes of woody vegetation deriving from the clearing by shifting cultivation of closed, broadleaved forests or coniferous forests and consisting of a mosaic of various reconsitution facies ('secondary bush', 'young secondary forests', stands of Musanga or becropia. 'secondary growth'). Patches of uncleared forest and of agricultural fields are generally included in these areas, as it is impossible to account for them separately within the shifting cultivation areas (in particular in the visual interpretation of satellite imagery). When site conditions are unfavourable (e.g. broken terrain) or when the fallow period is reduced to a very short period, clearing by agriculture leads to such a degradation of the site that reconstitution of the forest is not possible within the foreseeable future; the resulting degraded vegetation is not included in the NHCa (or NSa) category, but in shrub formations (n) or outside woody
vegetation".
- "nH stands for formations in which the woody element consists essentially of deciduous shrubs and bushes (thickets, shrub savanna). In the absence of precise information, no attempt has been made in most cases to introduce a classification of these formations. For many mixed, deciduous forest - grassland formations, the separation between those in which the dominant woody elements are trees (MHO) and those in which they are shrubs (nH) is often approximate".
2.3.2 Plantations
The term 'plantation' corresponds to:
- forest stands established artificially by afforestation on land which previously did not carry forest;
- forest stands established artificially by reforestation on land which carried forest within the previous fifty years or within living memory, and involving replacement of the previous crop by a new and essentially different crop
Plantations in the sense used in this study do not include stands established by artificial regeneration and essentially similar to those they are replacing
A distinction is made between industrial plantations established totally or partly for production wood for industry (mainly sawlogs and veneer logs, pulpwood, pitprope) or as an industrial source of energy and non-industrial plantations (or 'other plantations') established mainly for the production of fuelwood and wood for charcoal, or small wood for rural populations
In the case of industrial plantations, fuelwood productivity is calculated on the basis of the products from thinning and the residues not used industrially.
2.3.3 Other natural woody resources
These other resources important for fuelwood supplies consist of row plantations, hedges, village and family woodlots, orchards and trees scattered over agricultural areas. The term rural woodlots is applied to small woods with an area of less than 10 hectares scattered over rural areas. In the absence of precise information on the other woody resources and their effective contribution to fuelwood supplies, we have been forced in the study to put forward estimates usually obtained from agricultural production statistics or localized studies whose results have been extrapolated} specific estimates have been included on the extent of these resources and their fuelwood yield.
2.3.4 Agricultural and industrial residues
There are many kinds of agricultural residues that can be used as fuel to complement or replace fuelwood. Wherever these residues are known to constitute a fuel used by the rural people, estimates of the amount available have been made. These estimates are based on agricultural production statistics, using a conversion factor between the residues derived from a product unit and their equivalent in fuelwood. In order to take into account the important role that such residues should play in maintaining productivity by being dug into the soil, it has been generally assumed that only 50 percent of the total amount of residue derived from a crop is actually available for supplying energy through direct combustion.
The residues from wood industries that can be used as fuelwood consist of the waste from logging, saw-mills and the panel industries. It has been estimated that this waste amounts to about 30 percent of the volume of industrial wood extracted from the forests for processing. It has been assumed, however, that only 50 percent of the estimated amount of waste is available for use as fuelwood, the rest either being recycled in the production process or used for industrial energy purposes, including coverage of at least part of the production unit's requirements.
It will be noted that animal waste used for energy purposes is excluded from this study and that account has bean taken of this exclusion in defining minimum fuelwood needs.
2.3.5 Concept of fuelwood volume
For the various types of resources thus classified and assessed, an average fuel-wood productivity has been estimated. This corresponds to the gross volume of woody material utilizable as fuelwood after removal of the volume suitable for an industrial use or for purposes to which more value is attached than energy, such as construction. It has thus been clearly admitted as a principle that any use as industrial timber when the material is suitable for this is preferable to use as fuelwood. In addition, the volume of fuelwood used in this study corresponds to an average definition of fuelwood and can obviously not be confused with the volume of biomass utilizable for energy.
After analysing the information available and discussing it with the regional teams, the following figures were adopted as the average levels of fuelwood productivity per hectare and per year for the various types of natural woody vegetation:
Closed broadleaved forests (NHC)
3 m³/ha/year
Formations with predominance of trees of coniferous species (NS)
2 m³/ha/year
Wooded savanna (NHO1)
1 m³/ha/year
Savanna with trees (MHO2)
0.5 m^/ha/year
Shrub formations (nH)
0.1 m³/ha/year
Forest fallow (NHCa, NSa)
1 m³/ha/year
This represents a prudent average which may be modified, increased or decreased locally in order to take into account existing knowledge on the real yield capacity of the natural woody formations.
2.4 Study procedure
2.4.1 Stratification of situations
2.4.2 Classification of situations
2.4.3 Analysis of situation categories
2.4.4 Classification of deficit or potentially deficit situations
The procedure followed for this study consisted essentially of identifying zones where the fuelwood situation was relatively homogeneous and analysing supplies as compared with needs in order to work out the balance as the main indicator of the nature of the situation. The procedure adopted, therefore, called for a special effort to stratify situations and analyse The resources, One of the essential aspects consisted, of identifying as far as possible the major differences in situations that may exist within a country and referring them to distinct geographical zones. The approach followed, is, therefore, not national. Another important aspect is the flexibility used in analysing fuelwood resources within a given situation: only where fuelwood supplies from traditional forest resources appeared insufficient to cover needs was the analysis taken further and extended to other less conventional resources such as rural woodlots or residues, in order to work out as complete an
overall balance as possible.
The study, therefore, comprised the following stages:
a) stratification of situations and identification of "homogeneous" zones;
b) classification of situations into categories;
c) analysis of situations in 1980;
d) study of trends up to 2000;
e) classification of crisis situations and feasibility of forestry solutions.
These various stages are described below.
2.4.1 Stratification of situations
National information on fuelwood was first studied in order to identify the geographical zones corresponding to more or less homogeneous situations. These zones might correspond either to a country as a whole or, when this appeared necessary and possible, to a portion of the national territory: for obvious reasons, in order to avoid additional difficulties the geographical boundaries of these zones were chosen to correspond to known and mapped administrative units (State, province, department, etc.).
The purpose of identifying relatively homogeneous zones was to enable situations to be stratified in accordance with two categories of parameters linked to fuelwood supply and demand.
- Fuelwood supply;
a) extent and nature of the various types of forest formations as defined in section 2.3.1;
b) average annual fuelwood productivity of these resources, in accordance with the average levels indicated in section 2.3.5;
- Fuelwood demand:
a) size of the populations dependent on fuelwood, as defined in section 2.2 compared with the area covered by wooded formation: urban centres with more than 100 000 inhabitants are treated separately;
b) level of individual fuelwood needs calculated on the basis of available information on energy consumption in the zones concerned.
The relative homogeneity of the levels of fuelwood resources and needs made it possible to check the identity of a zone
2.4.2 Classification of situations
The fuelwood situation zones were then grouped into categories with similar conditions of fuelwood supply and demand and relatively similar geographical, and particularly ecological, conditions insofar as these are a decisive factor in the growth and productivity of forest vegetation. Every effort was made to group the zones identified into approximately six categories, a number which seemed sufficient to be able to convey the diversity of situation without excessively increasing the complexity of the study. The classing of a zone in a particular category is the result of consideration of all the parameters that characterize it, and cannot possibly be absolute, far less definitive.
2.4.3 Analysis of situation categories
Bach situation category was analysed in order to assess the various components of fuelwood supplies in 1980 and the conditions of access to these supplies, making the analysis more detailed where supplies appeared insufficient to cover needs. The fuelwood supply levels of the natural formations were corrected by the accessibility factor in order to take into account terrain, dispersal of the formations and density of the population as compared with the extent of the resources. Comparison between realistic levels of supply compatible with the maintenance of sustained production, and the minimum need levels, provided the balance defined in section 2.2. In order to be really significant, this balance must be expressed by inhabitant as well as in overall terms.
An analysis of the situations in 1980 led to a distinction being made between two groups of categories; those in which the balance was positive, indicating a surplus of supplies, and those in which it was negative, indicating a deficit. Since the purpose of the study was to concentrate attention on zones with problems, a distinction was introduced into the deficit situations in order to underline more clearly the seriousness of the problem in 1980. the deficit zones were, therefore, classified into:
- Acute scarcity situations; zones or countries with a very negative balance where the fuelwood supply level is so notoriously inadequate that even overcutting of the resources does not provide the people with a sufficient supply and fuelwood consumption is, therefore, clearly below minimum requirements. These situations of acute scarcity result mainly either from particularly difficult ecological conditions or from continuous overcutting of the resources owing to high population density.
- Deficit situations; zones or countries where the people are still able to meet their minimum fuelwood needs, but only by overcutting the existing resources: the present level of supplies is insufficient to ensure provisioning on a sustained yield basis, and overcutting leads to degradation or even progressive destruction of the resources.
It is particularly important to be able not only to identify fuelwood situations in 1980, but also to place them within the perspective of the dynamic evolution of the problem. The analysis by situation category was, therefore, taken up again to see how the situations would evolve over the next twenty years if population growth, exhaustion of the forest resources and plantation programmes continued at their present rates. In making these projections the study relied mainly on the analysis of trends in forest resources carried out within the framework of the FAO/UNEP project on the evaluation of tropical forest resources. As regards developments in fuelwood needs, it was assumed, in agreement with the regional study teams, that there would be little change in the minimum needs estimated for 1980 - a decrease of only 5 percent - because it was considered improbable that substitute energy sources, whose technical and economic acceptability to the rural populations remains to be
shown, would have any great impact on the level of requirements. It goes without saying that very often the situations such as they appear in 2000 are improbable, since the marked decrease in wood supplies and its repercussions on the energy supply and the environment will force people and governments to take remedial measures. Extrapolation of present trends to the year 2000 nevertheless provides a useful indicative basis for examining prospects and determining the size of the problem posed by fuelwood. It made it possible not only to see what would happen where there was already a deficit in 1980, but also to identify two other groups of situations:
- Prospective deficit situations; zones or countries in which supplies still exceeded demand in 1980, hut which in 2000 will be in a deficit situation if present trends continue, This group of situations is added to the acute scarcity and deficit situations already identified in 1980, which will have worsened in the meantime, owing mainly to the population growth and continued dependence on fuelwood;
- Satisfactory situations; zones which on the whole will still have sufficient supplies by the year 2000. Two types of situations may occur: either the resources will continue to satisfy present and future needs; or else they will dwindle, but at a rate which will still make it possible to meet requirements in the foreseeable future, although acute scarcities may occur at certain points, particularly in and around urban centres.
It is important to stress that, just as the classing of a zone in a category is based on a judgement whose value is only relative, the identification of a category with a situation type cannot be interpreted as an absolute evaluation applicable to all situations. The overall balance of a zone or a category, in fact, necessarily disguises variations and gradations in the intensity of the problems. Zones classed as having a prospective deficit may mask local situations in which there is no fuelwood problem; and satisfactory zones may experience localized critical problems, particularly in the vicinity of large urban agglomerations or heavy population .concentrations. Similarly situations classed in different groups may present certain similarities.
The large towns pose a particularly difficult problem. Owing to their special characteristics and their complexity, they really need to be treated case by case, but this would have gone well beyond the possibilities of the present study. As part of the preparatory work some case studies were effected in large towns in order to improve understanding of regional situations, and whenever the information available permitted, urban situations were taken into account in the overall analysis.
2.4.4 Classification of deficit or potentially deficit situations
When analysis of the fuelwood situations had been completed, more careful study was made of deficit or potentially deficit situations in order to identify the specific characteristics of the various types of situation identified. The purpose of this classification was also to underline the obstacles which might render any forestry solution more difficult and the socio-economic and ecological implications of an aggravation of the deficit. This classification and the identification of obstacles are important because they provide indications on the potential and the possible impact of purely forestry solutions to the fuelwood crisis. It would have been out of place to embark in this study on a detailed analysis of the possible and desirable forestry solutions and of the extent to which they could reverse present trends or even make up existing deficits. It did seem important, however, after analyzing the situations, to express an opinion regarding the feasibility of forestry
solutions and the eventual need to supplement them with other measures in order to ensure coverage of the minimum energy needs of populations which to date have depended almost exclusively on traditional fuels. This opinion is of a purely technical nature and obviously does not touch on countries' capacity to operate substantially enlarged programmes or the financial and institutional constraints with which such programmes might find themselves faced.
2.5 Presentation of results
The fundamental principle of This study is to analyse fuelwood situations within the framework of a geographical entity in which the parameters of supply and demand present a certain homogeneity. This geographical entity may correspond to part of a country or to the whole country, if the latter is of limited size. The study is not 'based, therefore, on an analysis of national situations, and a country may find itself sub-divided into several zones, themselves then broken down between several categories of situation. The procedure followed in the study leads, in fact, to a regional approach: the identification and classification of fuelwood situations into major characteristic groups makes it possible to demonstrate the scale and special nature of the problem at regional level while at the same time localizing it. There are many reasons for adopting this regional approach: the "cross-frontier" nature of fuelwood situations, the common characteristics at regional level, the
use of a regional team to conduct and interpret the analysis, the usefulness of regional presentations as a basis for consideration of the actions to be undertaken, etc.
The regional study teams played a leading role in the active phase of identifying and grouping zones and analysing the situations, and in assembling and interpreting a large amount of information of various kinds. Final presentation of the results of the study was undertaken at Headquarters in order to ensure overall coherence and to prepare the overall map.
The results of the study are given in two complementary documents:
a) the Map of the Fuelwood Situation in Developing Countries, with explanatory note, immediately prepared and published for the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy:
b) the present publication, which contains a detailed summary of the results and conclusions of the study.
An overall picture of the fuelwood situation in developing countries is given in Chapter III, while the four following chapters are devoted to regional presentations: Africa south of the Sahara, Asia, Latin America, North Africa and the Middle East.
The regional presentations follow the same plan and the results are presented in a certain number of basic tables. The presentation is as follows:
1. An introduction containing a list of the countries concerned
2. The regional situation in 1980:
2.1 the populations concerned and their energy needs;
2.2 the woody resources utilizable as sources of energy;
2.3 identification and nature of the various categories of situation, comprising an analysis category by category:
2.4 regional summary, presentation of balances, identification of deficit zones.
3. Possible evolution of the situation up to 2000:
3.1 Populations and their needs;
3.2 wood energy resources;
3.3 regional summary, probable balance in 2000, identification of critical situations
4. Classification of deficit situations, crisis levels and feasibility of forestry solutions.
In each case a special annex makes it possible to locate easily the zones identified and the administrative divisions composing them.
TABLE 1 - CLASSIFICATION OF NATURAL WOODY VEGETATION
<section>4</section>
Chapter III - Overall picture of the fuelwood situation in the developing countries
3.1 Fuelwood production
3.2 Fuelwood in rural energy systems
3.3 Evolution of the overall fuelwood situation
3.4 Special regional characteristics
Before describing specific regional situations, the aim of this chapter is to sketch an overall picture and call attention to the general characteristics of the importance of fuelwood and its derivative, charcoal, as a source of energy in the developing countries. Is there any need to point out that only during the last two centuries has wood gradually ceased to be the fuel most used throughout the world? The replacement of wood by fossil fuels with a high energy content and easier to manipulate played an important role in the industrial revolution. Wood, therefore, plays only a marginal role in the energy supplies of the industrial countries, except in certain rural areas. But this is not the case in developing countries, where the vast majority of the people continue to depend on the fuel to which they traditionally have access: fuelwood. Up to the middle of the seventies it was possible to believe that fuelwood, particularly if it became scarce, would be more or less
automatically replaced by fossil fuels. Since then, however, owing to the increase in the price of the latter, the conditions for such a substitution have become much more difficult and the fuelwood shortages which are occurring in many parts of the Third World have thus become much more serious. When wood becomes scarce, agricultural and animal waste is used as a supplement or substitute. When all the immediately accessible traditional fuels become scarcer, minimum energy needs for such essential purposes as cooking food and heating the home can no longer be covered; and those who suffer most directly from such situations are the poorest, and the weakest of the poor: the children, the old and the women.
This study is the first attempt to ascertain the seriousness and extent of this other energy crisis, that of fuelwood. The shortage of fuelwood is not linked to the growing scarcity of other sources of energy and its impact, as will be seen, goes far beyond the single problem of energy supplies. In order to put the fuelwood crisis in its real perspective, we shall analyse in this chapter the importance of fuelwood through official statistics for both forestry and energy, the place of fuelwood in rural energy systems, and finally the trends in situations in the developing world as they emerge from an analysis of the results of the work carried out in connection with this study.
3.1 Fuelwood production
According to the data available to FAO, which have recently been subjected to critical review, fuelwood production represented. 5.4% of world energy consumption in 1978: 15 x 10- TJ as against a total energy consumption of 257 x 106 TJ. At world level, therefore, wood is by far the most used renewable source of energy, coming just after oil, coal and gas. As regards the volume extracted, fuelwood is the most important product of the world's forest resources, because in 1978 it represented almost 60 percent of the total volume extracted for the world as a whole. And this refers only to fuelwood properly so-called, i.e. excluding industrial residues recycled in the industry itself for the production of energy, such as recycling of the waste from the manufacture of paper pulp.
In the developing countries the biomass in its traditional solid form (fuelwood and agricultural residues) represents a considerable, and often insufficiently recognized proportion of the total energy supply. In 1978 fuelwood alone accounted for more than a fifth of the total energy consumption of the developing countries, although consumption by country varied widely according to the extent of the forest resources available and existence or otherwise of fossil energy sources; and fuelwood production reached 1 421 million m³, or 85 percent of the total amount of roundwood used in the developing countries. Since international trade in fuelwood is negligible or circumscribed to geographically very limited transfers, national fuelwood consumption is held to be equivalent to production. Some countries, particularly in Africa, are almost entirely dependent on fuelwood as a source of energy: a total of 21 countries, of which 16 belong to the group of least developed countries,
depend for more than three-quarters of their energy consumption on fuelwood.
For some ten years now, energy consumption in the developing countries has been increasing at an annual rate of about 7 percent, and fuelwood consumption at about 2 percent, according to estimates. Bat although total energy consumption has continued to increase at a rate slightly below 7 percent since 1974, there has been a considerable slowing down in several countries and regions: in Africa, for example, with the exception of Algeria, Egypt, Libya and Nigeria, the growth in energy consumption has been only 3.5 percent a year. In conclusion, it is probable that the relative dependence on fuelwood of the developing countries as a whole is decreasing owing to greater use of commercial fuels: but this dependence remains considerable, particularly, as will be seen, in the rural areas. The more rapid increase in world energy consumption is essentially linked, in fact, to the growth of the transport and industry sectors, while domestic energy consumption continues to depend
mainly on traditional fuels.
In national statistics, the fuelwood and charcoal production is assessed on the basis of the forestry data available, supplemented if necessary by estimates. But considerable amounts of fuelwood are also collected outside the actual forest lands, on uncultivated land or in rural areas, and are not accurately assessed. In many countries the data available are at best estimates or extrapolations based on partial consumption studies. In few cases do systematic surveys make it possible to know the present consumption of fuelwood and its trends, the importance of the various sources of supply, the respective share of the various sectors in consumption, and the relationship between consumption and economic and social level. Fuelwood is essentially used locally, without being transported over long distances and without passing through the commercial channels which form the object of official statistical inquiries. Despite its obvious importance, fuelwood rarely appears in national
energy statistics, which usually mention only the conventional commercial fuels. Despite considerable recent progress, considerable gaps remain in information on fuelwood production. It is essential that systematic efforts be made to improve the quality and coverage of this information in a way that corresponds to the real importance of this source of energy and in order to incorporate this information in national energy balances.
There is a particular shortage of information on supplies and consumption of agricultural residues, the other fuel widely used as an addition to or direct substitute for fuelwood, particularly in Asia. In most countries only estimates based on agricultural production data are possible. But in a few countries, such as India, detailed studies have made it possible to determine precisely the importance of agricultural residues and dung in energy consumption.
3.2 Fuelwood in rural energy systems
Fuelwood plays a major role in supplying energy to the rural masses and the poorest groups in the towns. Fuelwood occupies a special place in rural energy systems owing to the importance of the domestic consumption for which it is mainly used and the fact that it is produced within the system itself. This reflects the extent of the demand for warmth in the traditional rural energy system as compared with that for propulsive energy. Wood is the fuel customarily preferred by rural people both because its decentralized method of production is suited to the scattered nature of rural habitation and usually makes it possible to obtain the fuel without added cost, and because production can be maintained on the basis of sustained yield and in combination with other goods and services. Fuel-wood is thus pre-eminently a renewable source of energy whose decentralized nature is particularly suited to the characteristics of rural energy systems. In a rural community, the energy system
reflects an integrated structure of relationships between resources and activities, and the role of fuelwood must be seen. as a complex function with many connections with the land tenure and land use systems, agricultural practices, the machinery for allocating resources, social structures, etc. The main characteristics of fuelwood in rural energy systems are outlined below.
Domestic requirements, essentially for cooking food and heating the homes, usually account for the biggest percentage of overall energy consumption in the developing countries. This is even more marked for rural populations and poor households. Fuelwood is usually the fuel preferred by rural people, who have very little access to other forms of energy. Wood, therefore, plays an essential role in meeting elementary energy requirements connected with the very subsistence of these people. In addition to its renewable and decentralized nature, fuelwood can be gathered and used by simple techniques, without recourse to expensive equipment and is, therefore, particularly suited to the requirements and possibilities of its users. Minimum energy requirements for cooking and heating may be estimated at 6 - 10 GJ, or 0.5 - 1 m³ of fuelwood per person per year, under present conditions; considerable variations are possible according to cooking habits, climate, way of life and social
structure, and also the efficiency of the cooking equipment. If account is taken of the amount of heating necessary in cold mountain climates, total energy requirements for domestic purposes may reach 25 to 30 GJ, the equivalent of about 3 m^3 of wood, per person per year. Seasonal climatic variations, the nature of the wood and its availability may considerably modify effective consumption levels.
In addition to its main role in satisfying domestic energy requirements, fuelwood is also an important fuel for many rural industries: drying tea and tobacco, smoking fish, brick - making, lime kilns, smithies, potteries and various village handicrafts. Consumption levels may vary greatly: in Tanzania, for example, it is estimated that 50 m³ of fuelwood are necessary to dry the yield of one hectare of tobacco ; elsewhere, it is estimated that 2 kg of wood are necessary to produce 1 kg of cane sugar. Industries may consume considerable amounts of fuelwood, thus adding to domestic demand in these same rural areas. Recent developments and the difficulty of obtaining commercial fuel supplies have prompted rural industries in some countries to turn to wood, or to retain it as their main, if not sole fuel, where encouraged by local supply possibilities or induced by government efforts to limit the effects of energy consumption on the trade balance.
The use of fuelwood in rural areas for domestic purposes or village industries often still forms part of traditional subsistence economy systems. The wood is usually gathered by the women and children for the family's own needs in the immediate vicinity of the home, Gathering the family's energy supply is an essential chore which may occupy a considerable part of the working day. In many cases, owing precisely to the presence of the rural population, there are no real forest resources in the immediate vicinity. Fuelwood is then collected from the woody vegetation scattered throughout the area: isolated trees, shrubs, the yield from pruning fruit trees, etc. When demand increases and resources become less accessible, a current of activity usually develops that generates employment and income: some of the country people devote themselves to collecting, transporting and distributing fuelwood to the villages and towns. This current of activity may reach considerable proportions.
It has been calculated that millions of work-days are invested in supplying towns and villages in the Sahel: for example, just to supply the town of Bamako in 1978 involved 500 000 work - days simply to cut the wood, and a cash movement of US$7 million. This shows both the importance that fuelwood provisioning may have for employment in rural areas, and the conversion of fuelwood from a material available to everyone free of charges to a product with a cash value and price. This latter aspect is symptomatic of growing supply problems, but also of a change of attitude of which advantage could be taken in seeking solutions and in using fuelwood in a process of development.
The contribution of fuelwood as a source of energy is not limited to rural energy systems or to subsistence sectors. In many countries urban areas account for an increasing share of fuelwood consumption, owing both to the migration of country people who conserve a rural way of life, and to the dependence of the poorest families, who continue to rely on wood for their domestic needs. Fuelwood then often tends to be replaced by its derivative, charcoal, which is easy to transport, store and use, but the production of which entails considerable loss of the energy contained in the raw material. In the absence of control, urban demand signifies a concentration of consumption leading not only to localized over - cutting of resources around the town, but also to diversion to the town of supplies indispensable for the people living in rural areas; the effects are felt for more than 100 km around the towns, and the distance is constantly increasing. Urban demand for fuelwood,
therefore, may also constitute an important factor in disrupting rural energy supplies.
Since rural energy systems form part of a complex whole, the growing difficulty of obtaining sufficient fuelwood has serious repercussions of all kinds. First, it results in people who do not have access to any other sources of energy having to devote an increasing proportion of their limited time and money to obtaining the supply they need. This results in accelerated over-cutting of the remaining woody vegetation, which may even lead to its complete disappearance, and adds to all the other factors contributing to its degradation: bush fires, grazing, clearing for the introduction of new crops, periods of adverse climatic conditions. In extreme cases the consequences for the environment may be irreparable and endanger people's very existence{ it is known what effect deforestation has on fragile ecological areas, such as arid zones and mountains, as a result of desertification or erosion. Deforestation itself is often the result of clearing the land for new crops, even
modern monocultural systems. When trees disappear from the countryside, and with them the possibility of obtaining fuelwood, the people have recourse to agricultural residues and animal waste, the only fuel to which it still has access. In some cases it has been calculated that the amounts annually burnt instead of being dug into the soil are equivalent to considerable amounts of fertilizer needed to maintain soil fertility. If loss of agricultural productivity is to be aboided, recourse to mineral fertilizers is necessary, but this increases dependence on fossil fuels for energy. The alternative is to use oil or gas as a fuel; and this, assuming that the rural user is able to procure them, will add to national requirements for fossil fuels. Ultimately the shortage of fuelwood has two consequences throughout the rural energy system: dependence on substitute fuels imported from outside the system, and greater recourse to fertilizers to compensate for the fertilizing elements
not returned to the soil. Should the situation be left to deteriorate without intervention, it has a direct effect on nutrition, owing to the impossibility of cooking food properly, and an indirect effect on the food supply, owing to the decrease in agricultural productivity. The impact is all the more marked in the more fragile ecological areas and on the poorest sectors of the population.
When the situation has not reached an irreversible state, it is technically and economically feasible at least to preserve or restore fuelwood's contribution to the basic energy supply necessary for the subsistence of the rural population. It may even be possible to increase this contribution and thus help to provide the extra energy needed for this population's development. The various possibilities are covered in the last chapter of this document.
In concluding this section on the importance of fuelwood in rural energy systems, attention must be drawn to the role played by this fuel in meeting such essential energy needs as cooking, heating and rural industries in the developing countries. Its growing scarcity is making it more difficult for a great many people to subsist and is breaking up their energy system; in extreme cases it is upsetting the balance of the environment as a result of deforestation and the cutting of all woody vegetation. The problem of fuelwood thus has three important dimensions: forestry, energy and environment. That is why its role in rural energy systems must be clearly perceived as a problem not only of subsistence but also of development.
3.3 Evolution of the overall fuelwood situation
3.3.1 Acute scarcity situations
3.3.2 Deficit situations
3.3.3 Prospective deficit situations
3.3.4 Recapitulation
The survey showed that in 1980 some 2 thousand million people, or three-quarters of the population of the developing countries, had a traditional-type energy consumption and hence depended on fuelwood and other solid components of the biomass to meet their daily domestic energy requirements. Bat of these people dependent on traditional fuels, 1 160 million, or more than half, were unable to meet their minimum energy requirements from available fuelwood resources without compromising future supplies: demand has grown faster than supply and in certain cases even over-cutting of the resources does not suffice to guarantee the minimum amounts needed. Table 2 gives a regional synthesis of. the analysis of populations in a deficit situation.
3.3.1 Acute scarcity situations
It is estimated that in 1980 more than 96 million in the three continents were living in a situation of acute energy shortage: over-cutting of the woody vegetation, or what remains of it, and where possible the use of agricultural residues, did not suffice to meet minimum requirements and consumption was, therefore, inevitably below the minimum required. The most serious situations were identified in: the arid and semi-arid zones south of the Sahara, the eastern and south-eastern parts of the continent, the mountainous areas and the islands in Africa; the Himalaya region in Asia, and the Andean plateau, the arid zones along the Pacific coast and the densely populated areas of Central America and the Caribbean in Latin America, These situations are characterized either by high levels of demand owing to severe climatic conditions, or by relatively high population density in rural areas in difficult ecological zones where the productivity of the fuelwood resources is low. The
total annual deficit of fuelwood has been estimated at 95 million m³, or 1 m³ per inhabitant per year; only a small proportion of the minimum needs is covered. In all these situations the fuelwood crisis endangers the development potential; incidence on the nutrition and health of populations who are not able to cook their food and protect themselves from the cold; disproportionate amount of time and money devoted to procuring fuel; maximum use of residues for combustion and consequence of this, added to erosion caused by deforestation, on soil productivity} resulting tendency to clear more land for cultivation in zones usually even more fragile. It may therefore be stated without exaggeration that the areas identified really are in an emergency situation, the acute scarcity of fuelwood generating an energy shortage whose extent and consequences necessitate immediate and massive interventions. Forestry solutions are indispensable both to resolve the energy problem and to
restore and protect a productive environment, but they will be insufficient, at least in the short term, to make up the deficits and restore energy supplies to the level of minimum needs. Any strategy for these acute scarcity situations must therefore necessarily include complementary emergency measures to ensure minimum energy supplies in the short term, including even the subsidized provision of additional fuel throughout the period required for the introduction of lasting solutions.
Analysis of the evolution of these situations produces an even more disturbing picture: it is estimated that by 2000 population growth will have brought the numbers dependent on fuelwood in these areas up to more than 150 million. On the basis of recent trends observed in deforestation and of plantation programmes foreseen for the coming years, extrapolated to the year 2000, it is to be feared that the annual fuelwood deficit will reach 160 million m³, resulting in aggravation of the deficit per inhabitant. The actions planned at present are, therefore, insufficient even to avoid further deterioration of the situation identified in 1980.
3.3.2 Deficit situations
The number of people in a deficit situation in 1980 is estimated at 1 052 million. These populations are able to meet their minimum needs only by over-cutting and thus endangering their future supplies; renewal of the resource is not ensured. Such situations have been identified in North Africa and the Middle Bast, in the savanna areas in West, Central and Bast Africa, in the Ganges and Indus plains, in certain plains and islands of South-Bast Asia, and in the semi-arid populated areas and the Andean zones in Latin America. In Asia alone more than 700 million people are involved. These situations are characterized by great diversity, but usually concern relatively populated zones where the ecological conditions are fairly favourable to forest resources but where the relative density of the rural populations subjects these resources to pressures which considerably exceed the available supply, resulting in deficit situations. The overall deficit in 1980 is evaluated at about
350 million m³, or 0.3 m³ per inhabitant per year: almost two-thirds of this deficit is connected with situations identified in Asia.
Owing to the big population growth in most of these zones, and to clearing of land for cultivation, the situation is deteriorating rapidly. But forestry solutions are possible in view of the relatively favourable ecological conditions. These solutions should form an integral part of rural development and be based on active participation by the people in protecting and managing their fuelwood resources. They must give priority to mixed agricultural-forestry system, intercropping, rural woodlots, community forests, etc.
Analysis of present trends, though, arouses fear that the deficit situations may worsen, and that some may end in acute scarcity before the year 2000. Taking into account the number of people dependent on fuelwood in 1980, the zones in a deficit situation might involve 1 782 million people in 2000, 1 149 million in Asia alone. It is difficult to identify the specific situations which may develop into acute scarcity, but the overall deficit might rise from 350 million m³ in 1980 to 710 million m³, i.e. double in twenty years. The average deficit per inhabitant may grow by 0.4 m³/year. This calculation is based on present trends in deforestation and probable rates of plantation. For this category of situations too, the action projected at the moment is insufficient even to prevent further deterioration and at least make up for the growth in population.
Table 2 - POPULATIONS EXPERIENCING A FUELWOOD DEFICIT ¹ (millions)
Region
Acute scarcity
Deficit
Prospective deficit
Acute scarcity or deficit
Total Population
Rural Population
Total Population
Rural Population
Total Population
Rural Population
Total Population
Rural Population
Africa
Near East and North Africa
Asia and Pacific
Latin America
Total
¹ Total population and population with predominantly rural type of energy consumption (total population less that of towns with more than 100 000 inhabitants) in zones whose fuelwood situation has been classified.
N.B.: This table is a revised version of Table 2 in the Report of the Technical panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal.
3.3.3 Prospective deficit situations
Among the zones which had an excess of supply over demand, in 1980, a category of situations has been identified which on The basis of present trends might have to face more or less marked deficits in the year 2000. This category of situations, defined as prospective deficit, concerns some 280 million people dependent on fuelwood in 1980, who might become 464 million by the year 2000 owing to high population growth. From a surplus of supplies over needs of 108 million m³ in 1980, this category might drop to a deficit of about 100 million m³ in the year 2000. This category covers both the appearance of a deficit instead of a surplus, and the rapid degradation of surplus situations; therefore, certain Latin American situations which by the year 2000 will be very close to deficit, without having actually reached it yet, have been grouped under this category.
A number of these prospective deficit situations were marked in 1980 by still relatively abundant forest resources, but also by rapid growth of the rural populations linked particularly to large population movements and hence the clearing and cultivation of new land, leading to a rapid decrease in fuelwood supplies for which penetration and access to new forest resources does not compensate. Appropriate programmes for maintaining fuelwood supplies within the framework of the rural development programmes themselves should make it possible to control these situations; but the action must be undertaken sufficiently far in advance to prevent these situations degenerating to the point where more intensive solutions, more difficult to put into effect, are required.
3.3.4 Recapitulation
The dimensions of the problem and the prospects which emerge from an analysis of fuelwood supplies and requirements in the developing countries show that the concern expressed on this subject in recent years is fully justified.
Out of an approximate total of 2 thousand million people dependent on fuelwood in the developing countries in 1980, 1 148 million, or 57.5 percent, do not have. access to sufficient supplies and of these, 96 million cannot even cover their minimum needs and live in situations marked by acute energy scarcity, with serious social, economic and ecological consequences. For this set of situations, the deficit is estimated at 445 million m³, more than half in Asia alone.
Ertrapolation of present trends in population, deforestation and plantation work produces a picture of a gigantic problem by the year 2000: of some 2.7 thousand million people dependent on traditional fuels for their energy supply, situations of acute scarcity or deficit would involve 2.4 thousand million, or 89%. The deficit might reach nearly one thousand million m³ of fuelwood, equivalent to 9 million GJ per year. In a growing number of situations fuelwood will probably no longer play more than a marginal role unless actions are rapidly intensified on a scale consonant with the size of the problem. Governments might have to organize large-scale emergency programmes in order to helpmeet the minimum energy needs of the populations - needs as essential for their survival as are food and shelter. The cost of such programmes might well endanger the development potential of the countries concerned.
The only zones to escape such a process will be the sparsely inhabited areas which still have immense forest resources, such as the Amazon basin, the basin of the Zaire River, the major islands of South-East Asia, and a small number of zones located in the three continents. Supplies there will remain greatly in excess of local requirements, to the point where the feasibility might be considered of using this potential to supply the neighbouring deficit zones.
The analysis and results presented here as regards the year 2000 are of a purely indicative nature, aimed at prompting reflection on what may happen if no major effort is undertaken. It is probable that the extent and the seriousness of the scarcity in developing countries will force governments and populations to act and to adopt solutions whose impact will have to be monitored. What emerges particularly from this analysis is the magnitude of the task that has to be carried out in order to resolve the energy problem of the populations dependent on fuelwood, whose supplies will henceforth have to be ensured by deliberate action and no longer left to the people to gather as and where they can, thus making it possible for the problem to be ignored.
3.4 Special regional characteristics
It is necessary to complete this overall picture of the fuelwood situation in the developing countries by a few indications of the main characteristics of The regional situations which will be analysed in detail in the following chapters. The survey showed in fact, that there are noticeable differences between the regions with regard to such things as the relative importance of fuelwood, ways of using resources, distribution of population in relation to resources, etc.
Africa south of the Sahara is the region in which dependence on fuelwood is the most marked: between 90 and 98 percent of energy needs in the rural areas are met by fuel - wood, which may also account for more than 90 percent of national energy supplies. Natural woody formations, which provide most of the supplies, seem to be used in a relatively inefficient way, perhaps because they have remained abundant until recent years. Populations are usually concentrated in savanna areas where the ecological conditions are not very favourable to forests. There is often a marked contrast between savanna zones with a big deficit and neighbouring forest zones with a surplus, clearly connected with accessibility and lack of infrastructure. Even in relatively populated zones, fuelwood sources other than the conventional forest ones play only an accessory role: trees seem , in general, to form a less integral part of the rural landscape and cultivation practices than in other regions; the
type of farming or of plants grown seems, too, to make available smaller amounts of residue for energy. All these characteristics lead to situations of considerable deficit, particularly in arid and semi-arid zones and mountainous areas, without the number of people involved being very high: big deficits often appear where there are more than 20 inhabitants per km . This reveals the severity of the ecological conditions, but also means that there is scope for forestry solutions by family groups and villagers, of which so far there have been very few. The importance of solutions which combine trees' role as a source of energy and their role as an important factor in rural economy and the stability of the environment must be emphasized.
North Africa and the Middle East present a great diversity of geographical, ecological and economic situations, and hence dependence on fuelwood reflects the existence or absence of a source of supply rather than whether or not the country has fossil fuels. In countries where the ecological conditions make possible a minimum of forest productivity, fuelwood consumption is growing at the same time as the consumption of other sources of energy. This is attributable to the continued dependence of the poorest sectors of the population on fuelwood, and also to a certain preference for this traditional fuel. Despite everything, fuelwood consumption is, with some exceptions, usually limited and wood is not the main fuel: the outstanding fact is the poverty of the groups using fuelwood, who do not have the possibility of acceding to other fuels. Only a few countries with relatively big forest resources are characterized by a marked dependence on wood fuel, and here the deficit as
compared with requirements is often considerable. Another characteristic peculiar to this region is the existence of marketing channels, in particular for charcoal, where financial possibilities permit importation of this traditional fuel preferred for certain domestic uses.
Asia is marked above all by two specific characteristics: the size of the populations which are dependent on traditional fuels, and the very complementary role usually played by fuelwood, agricultural residues and animal waste, to the extent that it is difficult to dissociate them. Human settlements have existed here for so long that the people dependent on fuelwood are often concentrated in densely-populated zones far from the forest resources. This makes it difficult to transfer supplies. In this region, therefore, fuelwood supplies from resources other than natural woody formations particularly farm woodlots, are particularly important: trees are often closely associated with cultivation systems and make an appreciable contributions. The diversity of the fuel's used makes it difficult to evaluate the real minimum requirements for fuelwood. In some oases energy consumption is traditionally based on the use of agricultural and animal waste, which cannot, therefore, be
considered as an indication of acute scarcity of fuel-wood. The Indian sub-continent, together with certain areas in South-East Asia, is the main problem area as regards fuelwood; a population density of several hundred inhabitants per km², which continues to grow, gives rise to particularly complex rural energy supply problems, difficult to resolve owing to the possible repercussions on closely intertwined systems of energy and agricultural production and on the fragile equilibrium. It is therefore in Asia that the deficit situations appear to be most serious, owing both to the size of the populations concerned and the extent of the deficits, and to the consequences of these deficits on the environment and on the natural resources both in the area concerned and even in the plains downstream.
In Latin America the situations seem more heterogeneous owing to the diversity of ways of life and customs and of physical and human conditions. A considerable proportion of the rural populations no longer uses wood fuel, but this is compensated for by a greater proportion of urban users. Dependence on fuelwood, therefore, remains high over extensive areas. The diversity of situations makes it difficult to estimate and apply parameters of fuelwood supplies and needs. Natural formations obviously play an important role in providing supplies, but the contribution of farm woodlots is more difficult to assess. The region is also marked by the fact that zones of acute scarcity generally coincide with difficult ecological conditions, and are so cut off that it is difficult to transfer supplies from surplus zones. Mention must also be made of the extent of population movements towards newly settled areas and of deforestation in these zones. Finally, it must be added that in Latin
America there are big industries using fuelwood and charcoal: it is in this region that the widest use is made of wood fuel for industrial purposes and this often has negative implications for the domestic fuel supply of the rural populations, particularly in Brasil.
This overall picture of the fuelwood situation in the developing countries shows the full extent and seriousness of the problem. Fuelwood plays an essential role in the energy supplies of some 2 thousand million people, who use it mainly for cooking their food; of these some 100 million people cannot procure enough fuel for this elementary energy requirement and more than one thousand million are faced with increasingly acute scarcity. Extrapolation of present trends shows that the populations dependent on fuel-wood who will be facing marked deficits in the year 2000 may double; at the same time the global deficit may reach one thousand million m³. The already serious fuelwood crisis is worsening and very few developing countries will be totally unaffected at the end of the century.
In all regions the impact of the fuelwood problem is particularly severe on low-income groups and within these groups on the most vulnerable members: the children, the old and the women in general: it jeopardizes economic and social development prospects insofar as energy supplies are not covered and the ecological consequences of deforestation affect agricultural productivity. This study aims at arousing sufficient awareness of the problem to prompt the general mobilization of efforts called for by the scale of the problem,
<section>5</section>
Chapter IV - Africa south of the Sahara (including the Indian Ocean Islands)
4.1 Introduction
4.2 Regional situation in 1980
4.3 Prospects for the year 2000
4.4 Typology of deficit situations and feasibility of forestry solutions
4.1 Introduction
In all the countries of Africa and the Indian Ocean wood as a fuel occupies a very important place in the various activities that consume energy and. constitutes almost the only domestic fuel for the vast majority of the inhabitants. The woody cover of these countries varies greatly according to the climatic zones and it often happens that the most inhabited areas are the tree or shrub savanna zones in which farming and grazing are progressively degrading the forest cover, creating critical situations from the ecological point of view and leading to difficulties in supplying rural, and above all urban, populations with woody material.
The increase in population combined with the progressive degradation of the woody vegetation cannot but worsen these critical situations and create new ones.
The countries¹ concerned are;
- the West African countries situated south of the Sahara;
- the East African countries (including Sudan);
- the Central African countries;
- the countries of Southern Africa, with the exception of the Republic of South Africa;
- the Indian Ocean islands; Madagascar, the Comoros, Mauritius, Reunion.
¹ In this study the word country is used for convenience, although one - Réunion - is not a country in the strict sense of the term but a French department.
4.2 Regional situation in 1980
4.2.1 Populations concerned and their energy needs
4.2.2 Woody resources utilizable as a source of energy
4.2.3 Identification and nature of the various categories of situation
4.2.4 Regional summary
4.2.1 Populations concerned and their energy needs
In 1980 the total number of inhabitants in this region of the world could be estimated at 319.5 million. The greater part of the population (288 million, or 90 percent) lives in rural areas or urban centres with less than 100 000 inhabitants which are concentrations of people of rural origin with practically the same customs and ways of life as rural dwellers; 31.6 million, or only 10 percent, live in large towns. The minimum energy needs are estimated at 10 to 18 GJ/person/year, according to the area.
According to statistics, in 1980 the output of fuelwood and wood for charcoal-making in this region reached 375.8 million m³. This represents about 87 percent of the total forest output and more than 60 percent of the total energy consumption. In some countries, such as Ethiopia and Mali, wood represents more than 90 percent of the energy consumption. In thirteen of the sixteen least developed countries in the region, wood represents more than three-quarters of the energy supply.
In rural areas fuelwood represents almost all the energy resources consumed, except in certain limited regions where there may be some recuperation of agricultural residues (central Upper Volta, northern Nigeria, Rwanda, Burundi), but these are zones where the situation is one of acute scarcity. Minute quantities of oil (0.5 to 2 litres per person per month), resin and various vegetable oils produced locally are also used for lighting, representing 2 to 5 percent of total energy consumption. In rural areas supplies are usually obtained by direct gathering organized by each woman and her children, rarely by the entire household. "The distance to be covered may be as much as 3.5 to 4 km. For towns more than 10 000 inhabitants, needs are met by buying from sellers. The cooking methods used and the food habits largely account for the high consumption of fuelwood and explain why energy consumption is usually greater than in Asia. In rural centres, considerable amounts of fuelwood
are also consumed for artisanal and semi-industrial purposes - processing of agricultural and fishery products (smoking of fish, processing os shea nuts etc.), small-scale catering, bakeries, smithies, pottery and ceramic works, tanneries, brick-works, laundries. An amount equivalent to 20 - 40 % of domestic consumption may be consumed for these purposes.
In the towns considerable use is usually made of charcoal, because it is more convenient. It is appreciated by home-makers and its consumption increases with the appearance of ways of life different from that in rural communities, Fuelwood still retains a certain place, however. Commercial fuels, particularly oil products, are more widely used the larger the town and the higher the purchasing power (20 to 50 percent).
In the towns, in addition to handicraft and semi-industrial requirements, fuelwood and charcoal are also used by public and private groups. In the case of land-locked countries without other resources (e.g. Mali, Burundi, Rwanda, Chad), wood is required for certain industrial activities: cigarette and match-making, large-scale bakeries, tanneries, breweries, tea factories.
There is an intensive trade in wood and charcoal, often characterized by the size of the profits made by the middlemen in complex and obscure distribution systems, to the detriment of the small consumers.
To sum up, energy requirements in rural areas may be schematically shown as follows:
Table 3 - ENERGY REQUIREMENTS IN RURAL AREAS IN AFRICA SOUTH OF THE SAHARA
Country
Energy requirements per inhabitant GJ/person/year
Percentage of the different sources of energy used
Minimum fuelwood needs, including charcoal m³/person/year
Fuelwood and charcoal
Others
Lowland or tableland countries in dry regions
10 to 14
95 to 98%
2 to % (oil)
1 to 1.5
Lowland or tableland countries in humid regions
12 to 14
95 to 98%
2 to 5% (oil)
1.2 to 1.5
Mountainous or upland countries (above 1 500 m)
14 to 18
90 to 95%
5 to 10% (oil, animal waste)
1.4 to 1.9
In towns, fuelwood requirements, including charcoal, should be considered as being, on average three-quarters of rural consumption, or 0.75 to 1.2 m³/person/year in lowland and tableland countries and 1.15 to 1.4 m³ in mountainous areas.
Subdesert and desert countries in which the nomad populations have a very different subsistence economy, and which, therefore, consume much less energy materials, will be considered separately, as will the nomadic peoples of the Arab countries (Libya, Egypt, Jordan, Syria). A consumption of 0.5 m³ per person per year will, therefore, be assumed.
4.2.2 Woody resources utilizable as a source of energy
a) Natural formations - Three main physiognomic types of forest vegetation cover tropical Africa:
(1) closed, usually moist, multi-storeyed forests consisting of a mixture of hardwood species, in which the density of the upper cover and the size of the trees varies greatly. The standing volume per hectare, therefore, varies from 250 to 600 m³ (volume of trees with a diameter of more than 10 cm, including large branches) and fuelwood output (after extraction of industrial wood) may be estimated at between 2 and 4 m3/ha/year. The areas classified as productive (as defined in the UNEP/FAO study which served as a source of information) amount to 162 million hectares.
(2) open forest and wooded savanna in which the "forest cover" ¹ is more than 40 percent and the bottom layer is grass-covered, enabling fire to pass. The fuelwood output of these formations is 0.8 to 1.2 m³/ha/year. These formations correspond, to the mixed forest-grassland. formations called productive in the UNEP/FAO study, and cover a total area of 170.7 million hectares.
¹ Forest covert area occupied by the crowns of the trees.
(3) tree savanna in which the forest cover is between 10 and 40 percent of the area and fuelwood production is 0.2 to 0.8 m³/ha/year. These formations correspond in the UNEP/FAO study to the mixed forest-grassland formations called unproductive for physical reasons. The total area is 282 million hectares.
To these three types of forests must be added bush and shrub formations, the density of which varies greatly, (the total area is estimated at 444.6 million hectares) and whose fuelwood yield may be estimated at between 0.05 and 0.2 m³/ha/year. Finally, many areas are covered by forest fallow, which does not represent an inconsiderable source of woody material. The estimated area in 1980 was 61.6 million hectares of closed forest fallow and 104.8 million hectares of wooded savanna fallow, with a fuelwood yield varying between 0.5 and 2 m³/ha/year.
(b) Forest plantations
(1) Plantations for industrial purposes
These plantations set up in order to produce either lumber and timber for sawing and peeling, or wood for paper pulp plants, can constitute a source of fuelwood either when thinnings are carried out (for plantations with a long rotation) or during final harvesting. The total area of industrial plantations set up in 1980 in the African countries covered by this study is estimated at about 1 108 000 ha, broken down as follows:
- hardwood species with a long rotation (not quick-growing): 300 000 ha
- hardwood species with a short rotation (quick growing); 181 000 ha
- coniferous species: 627 000 ha
The situation varies greatly from country to country. Some countries have little or no industrial plantations (Sahel countries, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Somalia, Central African Republic, Liberia, Sierra Leone), others, on the contrary, have more than 50 000 ha of plantations (Nigeria, Angola, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zimbabwe). Many of these plantations are already old (20 years and over); their condition varies, depending particularly on the size of the Forest Service and the means at its disposal, because these plantations almost always belong to the State.
It is fairly difficult to estimate their productivity, and particularly their potential fuelwood output. Many of them are not, really managed and thinning programmes are, therefore, unforeseable. It has, therefore, been arbitrarily assumed that the potential fuelwood yield equals 40 percent of the final output in hardwood plantations for lumber (or 2 to 4 m³/ha/year according to the zone) and 15 percent of the final output in coniferous plantations for lumber (or 1.5 to 2 m³/ha year) and in plantations of both hardwood and softwood species for paper pulp (or 1 to 3 m³/ha/year).
(2) Plantations for non-industrial purposes
These plantations are usually set up to produce fuelwood and rural building timber, or fruit (cashew trees), or rubber, resin or tannin (Acacia), The areas planted in Africa are slight as compared with those in Latin America and above all in Asia. Only a few countries had relatively large areas in 1980: Ghana 49 000 ha, Angola 89 000 ha (40 000 ha of which were intended essentially to fuel railway steam engines), Ethiopia 97 000 ha, Madagascar 154 000 ha, Sudan 130 000 ha (two-thirds intended mainly for rubber production (Acacia africana). Tanzania and Uganda 30 000 ha each, Zimbabwe 28 000 ha, Rwanda 25 000 ha, Kenya 24 000, Nigeria 17 000, and finally Burundi 13 000 ha. All the other countries had less than 12 000 ha of non-industrial plantations. Altogether, the African countries covered by the study have about 785 000 ha of non-industrial plantations ¹, of which about 640 000 ha are specifically intended, in principle, for the production of fuel-wood. The main species
planted ares Acacia spp., Prosopis juliflora, Azadirachta indica, Cassia siamea, Gmelina arborea, Dalbergia sissoo, Casuarina equisetifolia.
¹ Source: FAO/UNEP Project on the Evaluation of Tropical Forest Resources.
It seems that many of these plantations are unfortunately badly tended, or degraded by excessive (often illegal) cutting. This is because they have often been established in rural areas without any precise management plan having been drawn up and in the absence of any well-established managing authority. The estimates made by FAO take these factors into account and, therefore, include only plantations considered to be really productive in 1980. It is necessary, however, to be prudent regarding future developments. The output of these plantations varies from 2 to 10 m³/ha/year according to the region.
(c) Other natural woody resources; row plantations, hedges, village woodlots, orchards, trees scattered over cultivated land
It is extremely difficult to assess the amount of woody material that can be used as fuelwood obtainable from this type of woody vegetation. Consideration of the extent of cultivated land and the average number of trees per hectare makes it possible to put forward estimates which must be considered as probable orders of magnitude but certainly not amounts actually available. Trees are usually considered as an important element in the environment, but no active and dynamic efforts are made to preserve, far less to increase, them, and tree-planting in rural areas, therefore, remains limited.
(d) Agricultural and industrial residues
In section 2.3.4 it has been mentioned that in the majority of African countries these residues are only very occasionally used for energy purposes, although in many countries they represent a potential that could be used with profit. But with the exception of cases of acute scarcity which make it necessary to resort to all available resources, it seems very improbable that the people will change their habits. It is, therefore, not realistic to take this resource into account in the overall balance of existing supplies.
The case of the mountainous countries and the small Indian Ocean islands deserves to be considered separately, and an estimate of the agricultural residues available can be given on the basis of the agricultural production statistics.
Since these countries are already in a situation of acute scarcity, domestic and artisanal energy requirements are partly met from substitute fuels such as maize stalks, banana leaves, bagasse, groundnut and bean husks and pods, the straw of various cereals and remnants not buried when cutting is carried out. This also applies to the Mossi lands (in Upper Volta) and Haoussa land (in Niger), where the acute scarcity of woody matter has led the inhabitants to use everything possible: millet, sorghum and maize chaff, rice straw, groundnut shells and even cow-dung.
Industrial residues (sawdust, shavings, fragments from sawing and peeling) offer few possibilities, because the wood industry is very little developed in most of the tropical African countries.
4.2.3 Identification and nature of the various categories of situation
The zone-by-zone analysis showed that the situations could be classified into six categories relatively homogeneous as regards natural woody vegetation (area and productivity) and population (density and level of requirements for woody energy material).
Category 1) Desert and subdesert zones with little or no forest resources and usually few inhabitants;
Category 2) Zones of wooded savanna and savanna with trees, heavily populated;
Category 3) Zones of wooded savanna and savanna with trees, sparsely populated;
Category 4) Dense forest zones where the forest stands have been and continue to be under heavy pressure from food-crop cultivation and plantations, carried out by a relatively dense population;
Category 5) Dense forest zones with immense forest resources and usually small population;
Category 6) Very heavily populated zones where the forest vegetation is either severely degraded or inaccessible.
(a) Category 1 - This comprises:
- in West Africa, the following desert and subdesert zones: Mauritania, northern Mali, northern Niger, northern Chad;
- in East and Southern Africa: northern Sudan, Djibouti, north-east Kenya, eastern Ethiopia (Ogaden), Somalia, Botswana, Namibia.
These zones cover an area of 605.2 million hectares inhabited by only 14.6 million people, most of them nomadic shepherds. The areas covered by woody vegetation are almost exclusively shrub or tree formations with very low productivity (0.1 to 0.2 m³/ha/year on average). Overall, in view of the considerable area covered, the amount of woody material theoretically available seems relatively great (0.9 m³/person/year), but this figure masks the real situation, because despite the itinerant way of life which enables the populations to cover large areas, the very low yield of the shrubby vegetation is insufficient to meet their needs for wood fuel. The average amount of woody material really accessible may be estimated at 5 percent of the apparent supplies, or only 0.06 m³/person/year.
Plantations cover only 20 000 hectares - 9 000 in Ogaden and 11 000 in Somalia (irrigated plantations) - and there are no other woody resources available.
As a result there is a fuelwood deficit of some 0.4 m³/person/year, leading to over-cutting of the existing vegetation and desertification.
This is aggravated by grazing: the rate of stocking very often exceeds the carrying capacity of the grassy vegetation, which is, therefore, supplemented by drawing on the woody vegetation. Finally, the unfavourable climatic conditions of the seventies have increased desertification, limiting the possibilities for regeneration of the grassy and woody rangelands and causing the vegetation physiologically weakened by over-cutting of its leafy branches to die. The situation is, therefore, particularly serious for all the desert and subdesert areas south of the Sahara which have very few woody resources.
(b) Category 2 - This comprises wooded savanna and savanna with trees where the forest resources are low as compared with a sizable population.
These zones are spread throughout Africa and coincide with zones with a considerable population. They are:
- In North - west Africa;
Northern Senegal, western Senegal, Gambia, northern Guinea, Sierra Leone, southern Togo, southern Benin, central Upper Volta, southern Niger, northern Nigeria.
- in Central Africa;
Northern Cameroon, western Cameroon, central Congo, western Zaire, eastern and western Angola, southern Zaire.
- In Southern and Eastern Africa and Madagascar;
Eastern Zambia, Malawi, southern Mozambique, western and south-eastern Kenya, Uganda, northern Tanzania, Eritrea, central and south-western Madagascar.
These zones cover a total area of 533 million hectares inhabited by 146 million people, 90 percent of whom live in rural areas (including villages and towns with less than 100 000 inhabitants).
Closed forests cover only a very small area: 2.1 million hectares; the other formations comprise 45.4 million ha of open forest and wooded savanna, 88.6 million hectares of tree savanna and 89 million hectares of shrub formations. To these natural formations should be added about 48.5 million hectares of forest fallow, a considerable source of wood fuel.
Extensive though these areas are as compared with the population, the way in which the latter is distributed makes it probable that at least 40 percent of the fuelwood sources are not really accessible to the populations, thus reducing total accessible supplies to 78.1 million m³ per year.
The average accessible amount per inhabitant is, therefore, only 0.54 m³/person/ year, which is decidedly inadequate as compared with needs (which are more or less double).
The plantations existing in 1980 comprised 540 000 ha of industrial plantations (80 000 ha hardwood and 460 000 ha softwood, situated mainly in Kenya (150 000 ha), Madagascar (112 000 ha) and Malawi (69 000 ha). Their fuelwood yield varies from 1 to 2 m³/ha/year. There are also 350 000 ha of fuelwood plantations, with an average yield of 4 m³/ha/year. Al together, the amount of fuelwood available from plantations is some 2 200 000 m³ a year, or only 0.015 m³/person/year.
The other woody resources (woodlots and scattered trees) are, for these countries with a large agricultural area, a type of resource all the more important in that they lie near the places of consumption. The following estimates can be given on the basis of the regional surveys:
Total amount available
Amount available per inhabitant
1 000 m³/year
m³/year
West Africa
Central Africa
Southern and Eastern Africa
Madagascar
or an average of 0.04 m³/person/year.
In conclusion, altogether these zones have a total accessible wood supply of material of some 87 million m³ per year, or 0.66 m³/inhabitant. This is insufficient to cover requirements, which are between 1 and 1.5 m³/person/year. The deficit is, therefore, about 0.2 to 0.9 m³/person/year.
The existing woody formations are, therefore, either totally destroyed or over-cut to meet needs, in a process which aggravates the situation in these zones.
In some of these zones the situation is alarming owing to the increasing scarcity of woody formations and/or their degradation. They are rapidly proceeding towards a situation of acute scarcity already perceptible in large and medium-size urban centres (more than 20 000 inhabitants). This is the case in Senegal, Cape Verde, Sine Saloum, the river region in Gambia, central Upper Volta (Mossi plateau), north-western Nigeria (Haoussa-land), southern Togo and southern Benin, western Cameroon (Bamiléké land), the zone around Lake Victoria (Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania), southern Malawi and the zone where Shaba (Zaire) and Zambia touch. Wherever population density exceeds 50 inhabitants per km , there is a situation of potential deficit, and when the density exceeds 100 inhabitants per km-, the situation evolves rapidly towards acute scarcity, which affects the urban centres first but spreads to the rural areas.
The relatively large urban centres (more than 50 000 inhabitants) in these countries are already in a deficit situation as regards domestic energy, because the people can no longer find fuelwood and charcoal in sufficient quantities and at acceptable prices owing to the distance from sources of supply and the almost universal absence of price control.
(c) Category 3
This comprises zones composed essentially of 'wooded savanna or savanna with trees, sometimes including closed forest stands, where the population is relatively small as compared with the total supplies of woody material.
- In North-West Africa
South-eastern Senegal, Guinea-Bissau, southern Mali, southern Upper Volta, northern Ivory Coast, northern Ghana, northern Togo, northern Benin, south-eastern Niger, eastern Upper Volta, central and southern Chad.
- In Central Africa
Northern and central Central African Republic, southern Angola and central Zaire.
- In Southern and Eastern Africa
Eastern Botswana, Zimbabwe, western Zambia, northern Mozambique, southern Tanzania, central and southern Sudan.
This group of zones and countries covers an area of 736.3 million ha, with a total population of only 67.8 million, 96 percent rural. In rural areas the average density of 9 inhabitants/km^2 is markedly below that of the countries and zones in Category 2 (25 inhabitants/km^2).
Productive forest formations cover a much larger area than in the countries and zones in Category 2: 8.4 million ha of closed forest, 101.2 million ha of wooded savanna and open forest, 149.4 million ha of savanna with trees and 175 million ha of shrub vegetation, to which must be added 59 million ha of fallow. The apparent total annual supply of woody material is 260 million m^3. However, the size of the areas and the uneven distribution of the populations leads to a reduction of this supply by about 50 percent, whence an annual accessible supply of 130 million m³, or an average of 1.9 m³/person/year. Requirements for energy-producing woody material are, therefore, usually met from the natural formations alone.
Only a limited amount of plantations have been established in these countries: 209 000 ha of industrial plantations (55 000 ha in Sudan), and 135 000 ha of fuelwood plantations (49 000 in Ghana and 40 000 in Sudan). Total annual supplies of fuelwood are around 867 000 m³.
The annual amount available per inhabitant is, therefore, 0,013 m³ , comparable to that of the countries in Category 2. In conclusion, taking into account average requirements, which are between 1 and 1.5 m³/person/year, and not counting other woody resources (not very abundant) such as woodlots and agricultural and industrial residues, the balance between needs and resources is positive (0.3 to 1.1 m³/person/year). However, this should not mask the difficulties that certain large urban centres, such as Bamako and Ndjamena, have in obtaining enough fuelwood.
(d) Category 4
This consists of zones of closed forest in which the forest stands have been and continue to be subjected to great pressure from food-crop cultivation and plantations. It comprises essentially the forest zones of West Africa along the Gulf of Guinea; Ivory Coast, south-eastern Guinea, Liberia, south-western Ghana, southern Nigeria, southern and north-eastern Madagascar. In West Africa these zones cover a limited area of 70 million ha, but the population is quite big - 42.2 million in 1980. Big urban concentration exist: Monrovia, Abidjan, Accra and above all the towns in southern Nigeria, including Lagos and Ibadan. Altogether some 8 million people, or 19 percent of the total population, live in towns with more than 100 000 inhabitants.
Productive closed forests covered no more than 11.1 million hectares in 1980, i.e. between a quarter and a fifth of the area covered by these forest stands at the beginning of the century. The rate of deforestation has increased during the last thirty years, and although it is slowing down a little now, it still remains worrying. Considerable areas -about 29.7 million hectares - are covered by forest fallows, which must be considered as potential producers of fuelwood. The apparent total annual amount of wood fuel available is 92.7 million m³. If the proportion of this resource accessible to the people is estimated at 80 percent, this gives an annual accessible supply of 74.1 million m³, or 1.76 m³/person/year in terms of the total population, and more than 2 m³ in terms of the rural population alone.
In Madagascar, the north-eastern part of the island (districts of Diego Suarez and Tamatave) has 7 million ha of closed forest for a population of 2.2 million. The theoretical annual fuelwood supply is 28 million m³. However, the population is practically confined to the coastal plains and the greater part of the forests (85 percent) situated in the mountainous parts is inaccessible to them. The accessible annual supply is, therefore, about 4.2 million m³, or 1.9 m³/person/year, as compared with needs of 1.2 to 1.7 m³/person/year.
The plantations established in these countries are essentially industrial plantations of broadleaved species, 113 000 ha with a long rotation and 67 000 ha with a short rotation. The total annual fuelwood supply may be estimated at 650 000 m³ , or an average amount per. inhabitant of 0.014 m³, which is very little. The concentration of these plantations does, however, confer considerable interest on them, particularly for supplying the large urban centres. Taking just the inhabitants of towns with a population of more than 100 000 (7.9 million), the supply is in fact 0.11 m³/person/year.
In conclusion, the present positive balance between resources and needs (0.3 to 0.8 m³/person conceals a trend towards imbalance, at a point in the future varying according to the country, and even current difficulties in supplying large towns such as Abidjan, Accra, Lagos and Ibadan.
(e) Category 5
This consists of zones of closed forest with large resources and usually fairly sparsely populated, situated in central Africa; the southern part of the Central African Republic, southern Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, northern Zaire, northern Angola, southern Congo, northern Congo. The total area of these zones is 201 million ha and the population only 8.4 million, of whom 2.2 million live in towns with more than 100 000 inhabitants. The rural population is, therefore, sparse (average 3 per km^2), even rare in certain zones. The natural formations comprise 133.6 million ha of closed forest and 19.5 million ha of open forest. The total amount of fuelwood theoretically available is considerable: 461 million m³ per year. Even if it is agreed that in fact only 10 percent of the wooded areas are accessible to the populations, the annual supply is 5 to 7 m³/ inhabitant, which is a considerable amount.
The area of plantations established is very small: 52 000 ha of broadleaved species for industrial purposes, potentially able to produce about 200 000 m³ of fuelwood per year, which is very little. The average amount provided per inhabitant taking only the large towns, however, is 0.075 m³/year.
In conclusion, these zones have a very positive balance which makes them safe from any difficulty and even places them in a potential situation of exporters of woody material or of energy manufactured from this biomass.
(f) Category 6
This consists of countries with a very dense population and a forest vegetation extremely degraded and/or inaccessible to the people: the mountainous countries of East Africa and the small islands in the Indian Ocean.
The mountainous zones in Bast Africa (Burundi, Rwanda, central Ethiopia, Lesotho, Swaziland) have an extremely degraded forest cover; in the case of Burundi and Lesotho it is even almost entirely destroyed. The forest formations that survive are often inaccessible because they are at a high altitude (the Zaire-Nile ridge in Burundi, the mountains of Ethiopia).
For the whole of these zones, which contain the densest rural populations in Africa, the apparent total annual supply of fuelwood is only 10.8 million m³, or 0.26 m³/person/ year. Leaving aside central Ethiopia, the four small countries of Burundi, Rwanda, Lesotho and Swaziland together have 11.8 million inhabitants over a total area of 10.1 million ha and with an apparent total annual supply of 1.2 million m³ , or 0.1 m³/person/year, which is extremely low and places these countries in a situation of very acute scarcity.
Mauritius, Reunion and the Comoros, which have a total of 1 850 000 inhabitants, are in a situation of acute scarcity that is extremely serious in the Comoros and Mauritius, where the annual supply per inhabitant is 0.03 to 0.05 m³/person/year. The situation of this group of islands with a rapidly growing population resembles in many respects that of the small mountainous countries of Africa (Burundi, Rwanda, Lesotho, Swaziland).
Relatively large plantations have been established in certain zones - 72 000 ha of conifers in Swaziland, fuelwood plantations in Ethiopia, Rwanda and Mauritius - and their. productivity is excellent owing to the fertility of the soil.
Altogether, the total area of plantations was estimated in 1980 at 247 000 ha, of which 125 000 ha are for the production of fuelwood (average yield 10 m³/ha/year, 96000 ha industrial plantations of conifers, and 26 000 ha industrial plantations of broadleaved species. The total annual amount of fuelwood available is estimated at 1.5 million m³. But this gives only an average supply per inhabitant of 0.038 m³/year.
The other sources of woody material can be estimated at 1.72 million m³/year from farm woodlots and 8 million m³ from agricultural residues, or a total of 0.24 m³/person/ year.
The total annual supply of woody material per inhabitant in the mountainous countries is, therefore, 0.54 m³/person/year.
Bearing in mind the needs, which are between 1.4 and 1.9 m³/person/year, these countries are already in a situation of acute scarcity: they are short of the equivalent of 0,85 to 1.35 m³/person to satisfy domestic and artisanal requirements. Despite the big use made of dried dung and agricultural residues, to the detriment of soil fertility, the woody vegetation that remains is exploited beyond its yield capacity, whence ever more pronounced degradation. In the small islands supplies are notoriously inadequate, and even though requirements are in fact lower, they are faced with a situation of acute scarsity similar to that in the mountainous zones.
4.2.4 Regional summary
The following tables show respectively:
- the amount of woody material available
- the present overall balance.
They demonstrate the seriousness of the situation in the subdesert countries (countries south of the Sahara in particular) and in the heavily populated zones (mountainous countries of East Africa, small Indian Ocean islands, heavily populated savanna in West Africa).
They also show the considerable importance of the forest reserves of central Africa, the total annual yield from which is more than 35 times greater than the annual consumption of the populations inhabiting these zones.
TABLE 4 - WOODY RESOURCES FROM NATURAL FORMATIONS
Zone Category
Productive closed forests
(NC1)
Productive open forests and wooded savanna
(NHO1)
Savanna with trees
(NHO2)
Shrub formations
(nH)
Closed forest fallow
(NHCa)
Savanna fallow
(NHOa)
volume of fuelwood
Weighted average
Annual supply
Amount accessible per inhabitant
Apparent total
Accessible total
million hectares
m³/ha/year
million m³
m³/year
e
e
e
e
e
E
TOTAL
TABLE 5 - WOODY RESOURCES FROM PLANTATIONS EXISTING IN 1980
Zone
Industrial plantation
Fuelwood plantations
Annual fuelwood supply
Annual fuelwood supply per inhabitant
Area 1 000 ha
Volume of fuelwood 1 000 m³/year
Area 1 000 ha
Volume of fuelwood 1 000 m³/year
1 000 m^3
m³/person/year
e
e
e
e
TOTAL
TABLE 6 - WOODY RESOURCES AVAILABLE IN 1980
Categories
Population 1980
Total annual accessible supplies
Supplies per inhabitant
Total
Rural
Natural, formations¹
Plantations
Farm woodlots
Wood waste
Total
m³/ Total
Total
Rural
NE
NE
NE
NE
NE
(Ethiopia)
¹ In the broad sense, i.e. including closed forests, open forests, and wooded savanna and savanna with trees, shrub formations and forest fallows, but excluding the zones legally unproductive or physically inaccessible (mountains, swamps).
TABLE 7 - OVERALL BALANCE 1980
Countries and zones
Level of needs¹
m³/inhab./yr.
Level of supplies
m³/inhab./yr.
Balance
m³/inhab./yr.
Order of magnitude of total surpluses and deficits
million m³
Order of magnitude of reserves not yet accessible
million m³
Category 1
0.05 to 0.1
Category 2
1 to 1.5
0.8 to 0.9
- 0.2 to - 0.9
Category 3
1 to 1.5
1.8 to 2.1
+0.25 to + 1.10
Category 4
1.2 to 1.7
1.8 to 2.1
+ 0.3 to + 0.8
Category 5
1.2 to 1.7
5 to 10
Category 6
1.4 to 1.9
0.5 to 0.7
- 0.7 to - 1.4
¹ The level of needs taken into account are those of the rural populations.
4.3 Prospects for the year 2000
4.3.1 Growth in population and needs
4.3.2 Changes in wood energy resources
4.3.1 Growth in population and needs
The division of countries makes it difficult to make population forecasts for the year 2000 by zone. These estimates are, therefore, based on average figures for population increase as they emerge from the FAO's statistical forecasts. We thus have the following results:
TABLE 8 POPULATION FORECASTS FOR 2000
Country
Populations in 2000 (millions)
Rural
Urban centres > 100 000 inhabitants
Total
Category 1
Category 2
Category 3
Category 4
Category 5
Category 6
(of which central Ethiopia)
Unless special and widespread action is undertaken, the populations' fuelwood requirements will probably remain at their present level, because at present there are no a priori grounds for assuming that consumption will be decreased either through substitution by other sources of energy, or through improvements in the energy yield from domestic uses.
It is, therefore, assumed that the present level of consumption in rural areas will persist and there will be a slight decrease in the level of consumption in the large towns: overall a decrease of about 5 percent in the average per capita consumption.
4.3.2 Changes in wood energy resources
(a) Natural formations
1. Subdesert steppe and savanna vegetation Account is taken both of the increase in population and of the amounts effectively removed by these populations from the existing wood capital.
2. Closed forest vegetation The figure for destruction of the forest formations as they emerge from the estimates made by FAO in 1978. and 1980 are used. The following figures are obtained:
TABLE 9 - NATURAL FOREST FORMATIONS; FUELWOOD SUPPLIES IN 2000
Category of country and zone
Area Closed, forest wooded savanna and savanna with tree s, including fallow
Area shrub formations
Average weighted yield of woody formations
Total annual supplies in the year 2000
Accessible supply per inhabitant/year
Apparent
Accessible
million hectares
m³/ha/year
million m³
m³/person/year
Category 2
Category 3
Category 4
e
Category 6
¹ Equal to 100% of total supplies (60% in 1980)
² Equal to 70% of total supplies (50% in 1980)
³ Equal to 90% of total supplies (80% in 1980)
No precise figures are given for the zones in the first category (desert and sub-desert), because the mobility of the populations makes it difficult to assess what changes will occur in the supplies of wood resources. Although it is certain that the deficit ascertained in 1980 will lead through over-use of the grazing areas to progressive (and irreversible) degradation of the vegetation, particularly around the watering points, it may also be supposed that the populations will modify their itineraries in order to look for more favourable zones. In any event the situation is bound to worsen, but the present situation is so serious that there is not really any need for additional figures to confirm it.
Similarly, no figures have been given for the zones in category 5, because the immensity of the forest areas and hence of the resources will make it possible, to satisfy the populations* needs without any problem.
(b) Plantations
(1) Industrial plantations
It is extremely difficult to make projections in this field. The study conducted by FAO in 1978¹ foresaw the establishment between 1975 and 2000 of 1.2 million hectares of industrial plantations in Africa (excluding the Republic of South Africa), consisting of 0.65 million ha of conifers and 0.55 million ha of broadleaved species, with an almost equal distribution within the two categories between plantations for timber and plantations for paper pulp. These forecasts, based on countries' official programmes, seem fairly probable, since the 1980 forecasts were 1.25 million ha and the new estimates are for 1,24 million ha actually planted. If one examines the short-term forecasts (1980-85 period) made by FAO in 1980, it will even be seen that the rate of reforestation forecast is tending to accelerate for some countries - Ivory Coast, Nigeria, Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi, Congo, Madagascar, Zambia - even though for others - Liberia, Cameroon, Zaire - the forecasts seem to have been
too optimistic. These 1980-85 forecasts will, therefore, be used, extrapolated to 2000 without modifying the rate of increase.
¹ "Present and Future Forest and Plantation Areas in the Tropics", Lanly, J.P. and Clement, J., Rome, 1979.
This makes it possible to draw up the following table:
TABLE 10 - AREA OF INDUSTRIAL PLANTATIONS IN 2000
Category of country
Forecast of areas planted by 2000 (thousands of ha)
Average annual rate of reforestation (ha)
Broadleaved Long rotation
Broadleaved Short rotation
Coniferous
Total
Per 1 000 inhabitants
This gives the following supplies of fuelwood, based on 40 percent of the total volume produced for the broadleaved lumber plantations and 15 percent of the volume for broadleaved pulp plantations and coniferous plantations.
TABLE 11 - INDUSTRIAL PLANTATIONS IN 2000: FUELWOOD SUPPLIES (thousand m³^5)
Category of country
Broadleaved plantations Long rotation
Broadleaved plantations Short rotation
Coniferous plantations
TOTAL
TOTALS
The total annual supply from industrial plantations, which was 2.3 million m³ in 1980, will rise to 6 million m^3 in 2000.
(2) Fuelwood plantations
Forecasting is even more difficult here than for the industrial plantations. However, a projection to the year 2000 of present rates of reforestation gives the following results:
TABLE 12 - NON-INDUSTRIAL PLANTATIONS IN 2000
Category of country
Area planted between 1980 and 2000
Area planted annually
Total area in 2000
Fuelwood supply
hectares
hectares
hectares
thousands of m³
Totals
Note It has been assumed that the areas cut were immediately replaced by new plantations.
TABLE 13 - TOTAL FUELWOOD SUPPLIES FROM PLANTATIONS IN THE YEAR 2000
Category of country
Total supplies
Supplies per inhabitant
Industrial plantations
Non-industrial plantations
Total
(millions of m³)
(millions of m³)
(millions of m³)
(m³/person/year)
Totals
(c) Other woody resources
It is assumed that the 1980 level of resources is stable, i.e. about 0.05 m³/ person/year, for Category 2, and the same figure is applied, to Category 3. In order to take into account the fact that the zones of Category 4 are situated in areas of closed forest with a higher yield, a level of resources equal to 0.15 m³/person/year is adopted for this category.
For Category 6 the same total level of supplies is adopted, assuming that the increase in population will lead to more complete use of existing space rather than to the settlement of new land, of which there is already almost none. The supply per inhabitant will, therefore, be lower than in 1980.
Supplies from other woody resources, therefore, appear as follows:
Categories
Per capita supply from various woody resources (m³/person/year)
none
(d) Summary of supplies of woody material per inhabitant usable in the year 2000
TABLE 14 - FUELWOOD SUPPLIES IN 2000 (m³/inhab./yr.)
Country
Natural woody formations
Plantations
Others
Total
Category 2
Category 3
Category 4
Category 6
If this table is compared with Table 6 indicating resources in 1980, the following changes will be noticed:
- category 1: no quantitative change, but situation of increasingly acute scarcity owing to degradation of the vegetation;
- category '2: drop of more than 20 percent in annual supplies per inhabitant resulting from increase in population and degradation of the woody vegetation. Slight contribution of forest plantations, representing only about 4 percent supplies;
- category 3: drop of 20 percent in annual supplies per inhabitant, it being assumed that 30 percent of the forest areas will remain inaccessible;
- category 4: drop of more than 30 percent in annual supplies per inhabitant owing to intensive clearing of the natural vegetation added to an increase in the population;
- category 6: drop of 35 percent in supplies despite considerable reforestation, which represents for the small countries (the whole category less central Ethiopia) about two - thirds of the supply.
TABLE 15 - BALANCE FORESEEABLE IN THE YEAR 2000 (m³/inhab./yr.)
Country
Level of needs¹
Supply
Balance
Category 1
in the order of 0.1
Category 2
1 to 1.45
0.35 to 0.55
- 0.50 to - 1.1
Category 3
1 to 1.45
1.05 to 1.95
- 0.3 to + 0.8
Category 4
1.1 to 1.6
1.1 to 1.4
-0.5 to + 0.3'
Category 5
1.1 to 1.6
Category 6
1.4 to 1.9
- 1 to - 1.6
¹ Needs reduced by 5 percent as compared with 1980c,
This balance makes it possible to establish the following:
Category 1 - Situation of acute scarcity apparently unchanged, but in fact aggravated by degradation of the vegetation, making it more and more difficult to obtain enough woody material,
Category 2 - Situation worse than in 1980, only 25 to 50 percent of needs being met from available resources, even assuming that all the areas covered by woody vegetation are accessible; the areas of acute scarcity detected in 1980 have now expanded to cover the entire zone in which they lie, and new zones are in a situation of acute scarcity; northern Cameroon, central Congo, western Zaire, central Angola, southern Mozambique, Eritrea.
The rural populations can cope with these situations by continuing to remove material in excess of the yield capacity of the woody vegetation, but the "urban" populations (towns with more than 20 000 inhabitants) are in a situation of increasingly acute scarcity which affects more than 80 million people.
This situation seriously mortgages the future, because the degradation of the natural woody vegetation caused by the clearing and over-cutting of stands is taking place in zones that are fragile from the point of view of both climate and soil and their vulnerability often renders ecological degradation irreversible. Over and above the woody vegetation is the entire ecosystem, including the possibility of human habitation, that is threatened.
Category 3 - Some zones belonging to this category reach the 1980 situation of zones in Category 2. This refers particularly to zones situated in West Africa: southern Mali, northern Benin, northern Togo, northern Ivory Coast, northern Ghana, south-eastern Niger, eastern and western Upper Volta, central and southern Chad; and in last Africa: central and northern Mozambique and southern Tanzania. In these zones the rural populations meet their requirements by over-cutting (or destroying) the existing vegetation. The urban populations have great difficulty in meeting their requirements and situations of acute scarcity already exist in the large towns. On the other hand, some zones in this category are already in a fairly satisfactory situation (northern and central Central African Republic, southern and south-eastern Senegal, Guinea-Bissau, central Zaire, south-eastern Angola, western Zambia, eastern Botswana, Zimbabwe).
Category 4 - Radical reversal of situation; these zones in an overall situation of abundance in 1980 are partly in a deficit situation in 2000. This is due to the rapid increase in population and continuance of the practice of clearing already noted in 1980, even though allowance has been made for a certain slowing down in the extent of these clearings. In reality the rural populations are far from a situation of acute scarcity, in view of the productivity of the surviving woody vegetation and the possibility of using all kinds of wood waste which have not been taken into account in the estimates; but this situation of apparent overall deficit takes into account situations of prospective deficit in the large and medium-sized towns such as Abidjan, Daloa, Gagnoa, Man, Abeogourou, Bouaké in Ivory Coast; Accra, Kumasi, Sekondi, Rakoradi, Dunkiva, Oda au Ghana; Lagos, Ibadan, Abeokuta, Ijebu, Ode, Iwo, Oyo, Ogbomosho and Enugu in Nigeria; Monrovia and Buchanan in Liberia.
Altogether more than 30 million people are affected.
Category 5 - Situation of abundance unchanged and no reversal in trend.
Category 6 - No noticeable worsening of the situation of acute scarcity existing in 1980, despite the increase in population, thanks to considerable reforestation (particularly in the small countries), but no improvement either. This means, to put it clearly, that the reforestation work undertaken is not enough and that it is necessary to supplement domestic and artisanal energy in other ways: local peat or imported commercial fuels?
4.4 Typology of deficit situations and feasibility of forestry solutions
Three main types of critical situations have been identified:
(1) Situations of acute scarcity
These concern four groups of populations
(i) The inhabitants of desert or sub-desert zones (Category 1). The situation is extremely serious in all the countries immediately south of the Sahara (northern Senegal, northern Mali, northern Niger, northern Chad and northern Sudan). In 1980 5 million people, mostly nomadic shepherds, were living spread over an immense stretch of 357 million ha.
The rangelands and the areas around the watering points are over-used, despite the relatively limited level of needs consequent on the mode of existence: 0.5 m³/person/ year. The accessible supply of existing vegetation is very small (less than 0.1 m³/ person/year. No large-scale forestry solution to redress this situation is possible. Locally, reforestation around watering points with drought - resistant species (various Acacias in particular) can provide both feed for the animals and wood for the people, but the low yield of these plantations (less than 3 m³/ha/year) limits their scope considerably.
In East Africa (Ogaden, Somalia, north-eastern Kenya) and southern Africa (western Botswana and Namibia), the existence of a relatively vigorous natural vegetation attenuates the average deficits noted and makes the overall situation less serious.
(ii) The inhabitants of heavily-populated mountainous zones (Ethiopia, Rwanda, Burundi, Lesotho, Swaziland). In 1980 there were 36 million people in this group living in rural areas; population density exceeded 100 per km , and the accessible forest areas are very limited. Only 20 to 30 percent of fuelwood needs (1.4 to 1.9 m³/ person/year) are covered by the resources. In Ethiopia 24 million rural inhabitants overcut all the accessible land and have ever greater difficulty in procuring fuelwood. In the small mountainous countries, 11.8 million people inhabit a total area of 10.1 million ha, with an annual average supply equal to 0.1 m³/person/year, or less than 7 percent of needs. Despite the over-cutting of all woody and plant resources there is an acute scarcity of fuelwood.
Although the soil, which is often of volcanic origin is very fertile, reforestation cannot be regarded as the only solution to this problem. To take the small countries alone, the existence of an additional 1 million ha of plantations producing 20 m³/ha/year would be required in 2000 to meet the people's minimum needs (about 1.5 m³/ha/year). This is absolutely impossible, not only because of the size of the programme, but even more owing to the unavailability of land. Forestry solutions can, therefore, be only partial and local, and the emphasis must be put more on the establishment of small communal or private woodlots and the planting and propagation of trees on agricultural land than on large-scale reforestation work.
(iii) The inhabitants of the small Indian Ocean islands. Some 2 million people are affected and find themselves in conditions fairly similar to those in the small mountainous countries. The problem will have to be solved in a number of different ways, since the amount of land available for plantations is limited.
(iv) The inhabitants of towns either in the zones referred to below or in the relatively heavily - populated savanna zones. This concerns some 15 million people. Their fuelwood needs are between 0.5 and 1 m³/person/year and they are experiencing difficulty in meeting these needs. There are two main reasons for this:
- a growing scarcity of resources at a distance compatible with economic transport conditions;
- a constant rise in the prices of wood and charcoal, forcing the poorest to reduce their consumption.
Although the establishment of fuelwood plantations could help to make up the deficit for certain towns, owing to their relatively favourable geographical situation (Brazzaville, Lomé, Cotonou, Kinshasa, Nairobi, etc.), for many other towns (Dakar, Bamako, Niamey, Kano, Garoua, Njamena, etc.) the shortage of favourable land and the inevitably low productivity of plantations owing to harsh climatic conditions make it unrealistic to expect that fuelwood plantations could make more than a modest contribution to meeting domestic energy needs. Depending on the existing transport infrastructure, particularly railways, it might be more feasible in certain cases to transport woody material (in charcoal form or, better still, in briquettes) from the nearest natural forest zones to these urban centres.
(2) Deficit situations
These concern the great majority of the rural population (131.4 million people) living in the wooded and shrub savanna of the Category 2 zones. Supplies are between 0.7 and 1 m³/person/year and needs are estimated at 1 to 1.5 m³/person/year. In the majority of cases supplies do not cover needs, whence over-cutting of the existing vegetation. Until recently this over-cutting had not caused any obvious modification of the landscape, but with the population increasing and the effects of over-cutting accumulating, an ever more marked decrease is noticeable in the area of natural woody vegetation around villages, and little by little this vegetation is disappearing completely.
In many zones soil and climate conditions are hardly favourable to re-establishment of the forest and there are many obstacles to the success of forestry plantations. However, it is absolutely essential that maximum efforts be made to help the rural people reintroduce trees into the countryside, not only in the form of plantations managed by the State, but also in the form of private or community plantations managed by the inhabitants themselves with the technical assistance of the forest services. Assuming that a tree can yield oh average 0.1 m³ at 15 years, it would be enough for each family (10 to 15 people) to plant about one hundred trees a year to cover its minimum fuelwood needs. This would also result in an improvement in the environmental conditions and stabilization of the natural resources propitious to the maintenance or increase of agricultural productivity.
(3) Potential deficit situations (evolving towards a deficit situation), This concerns a part of the rural populations living in savanna zones where the population is increasing heavily (certain zones in Category 3), and the urban populations in forest zones with rapidly increasing populations (zones in Category 4).
In the savanna zones the populations involved are at present meeting their needs, estimated at 1 to 1.5 m³/person/year, by removing from the natural woody formations an amount which is often at the maximum limit compatible with sustained yield. In view of the very rapid growth in population, which will have increased by more than 50 percent by the year 2000, the present balance will disappear and be replaced by a deficit situation similar to that of the zones in Category 2. In 2000 only two-thirds of needs will be covered by supplies, leading the populations to over-cut the forest formations. In order to avoid this situation arising, it is necessary to take action immediately to ensure rational use of the existing resources and increase their yields. In effect, any measure aimed at protecting the natural formations against fire, over-grazing and over-cutting will eventually have a considerable effect on fuelwood production. Management of the forest formations should,
therefore, be considered a priority. But it should not be imposed by a forestry service acting whether or not the population is willing. In many places it would be best to delimit forest areas for which rural communities will be given full responsibility and from which they will reach the full benefits, but whose technical management will be ensured by the forestry service. In addition to this action concerned with the natural formations, steps should also be taken to integrate trees in the agricultural land in the same way as is proposed for the zones already in a deficit situation.
In the closed forest zones of Category 4, situated essentially in West Africa, the rural populations should not really find themselves in a deficit situation, except around the large towns. The urban inhabitants ¹ (30 million in 2000), on the other hand, will no longer be able to count on fuelwood (and charcoal) to meet their basic domestic energy needs. The poorest social categories will, therefore, find themselves in a situation of deficit and or acute scarcity. In order to prevent or remedy this type of situation, it is necessary, while there is still time, that a municipal natural forest to provide fuel-wood be reserved for each of these towns, or that high-yielding plantations be established around them. For a town with 20 000 inhabitants consuming an average of 0.5 m³ per inhabitant per year, it would be enough to establish 400 ha of plantation producing 25 m³/ha/year after 10 years, or 40 ha per year. This implies, of course, the implementation of a policy attentive
to the present and foreseeable needs of the people.
¹ Comprising those in large towns (more than 100 000 inhabitants) and medium-sized ones (10 000 to 100 000 inhabitants).
<section>6</section>
Chapter V - North Africa and the Middle East
5.1 Introduction
5.2 Regional situation in 1980
5.3 Prospects for the year 2000
5.1 Introduction
The countries of North Africa and the Middle Bast form a heterogeneous group. Although all have some access to the sea, the extent of this varies greatly: the islands (Cyprus and Malta), Tunisia and Turkey, for example, have an extensive coastline; others, such as Iraq and Jordan, very little. There is also great geographical diversity: some countries have extensive mountainous zones which constitute the backbone of the country and are usually under forest (e.g. Algeria, Morocco, Lebanon and Turkey), while others have little hilly terrain. Even the climate is not homogeneous; it is not of a Mediterranean type everywhere (Turko-Iranian plateau, almost the whole of the Arabian peninsula, the Iran-deccanian zone), and where it is Mediterranean there are considerable variations, from Saharan to very humid; it can be said, however, that everywhere the rains, very variable from one region to another, are concentrated in the cool season with short days.
From the economic point of view, there are considerable differences between the petroleum-producing countries - some of which are among the largest producers and exporters: and the non-producers, and although all the countries covered by the present study are considered as developing, there is great economic inequality both between countries (Libya has a GNP of about US$8 400/year) but also sometimes within countries (Saudi Arabia, Iran, Morocco). The only common features are the presence of Islam and the great diversity of the human settlements.
Production
Exportation¹
(million tonnes)
Algeria
Saudi Arabia
Arab Emirates
Iran
Iraq
Kuwait
Libya
Qatar
¹ The quantities of crude oil produced and exported in 1980, according to the United Nations Yearbook of World Energy Statistics.
The problem of wood fuel is of great importance in the countries in this region, at least in those which would not be able to count on their own oil resources should delivery be suspended or slowed down through any cause. It is difficult to see how the inhabitants of Syria, Egypt, Jordan, Morocco or Tunisia, for example, could warm themselves in winter or cook their food without the importation of petroleum products.
In a sense a crisis of this kind might even have serious immediate consequences in view of the relatively heavy dependence of all these countries on oil products,
The countries covered by this study are:
- the countries of North Africa: Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Malta;
- the countries of the Mediterranean Near East: Turkey, Lebanon, Israel, Syria, Jordan, Cyprus;
- the countries of the Persian Middle East: Iraq, Saudi Arabia, the Arab Emirates, Qatar, Kuwait, Arab Republic of the Yemen, People's Democratic Republic of the Yemen.
5.2 Regional situation in 1980
5.2.1 Populations concerned and their energy needs
5.2.2 Present wood resources
5.2.3 Overall balance in 1980
5.2.1 Populations concerned and their energy needs
The total population of the countries concerned is estimated at 160 million in 1980, of which 35 percent live in towns with more than 100 000 inhabitants and the other 65 percent in rural areas or small towns.
In view of the past and present over-cutting of the forests and the growing use of oil products, one cannot but be surprised to note that, although the per capita consumption of wood is decreasing noticeably, total consumption throughout the zone considered is increasing rather than diminishing. The overall rise in the standard of living is synonymous with a fall in the relative importance of wood fuels, but not with a decrease in the total amount used: it does seem that the decline in the use of wood fuel over the last two decades has been due much more to the availability and low price of oil fuel than to any other reason, including the rise in the standard of living. Neither in the past nor in the present, however, has the conomic availability of other fuels made it possible to meet the growing needs for wood fuel, to judge from the ever more marked degradation of the forest stands and other woody formations owing to the removal of fuelwood.
Urban consumption represents only about 20 percent of total consumption. This proportion will probably decrease, because the price of fuelwood and charcoal will probably continue to increase, the costs of cutting and transport being high, although less for charcoal than for fuelwood. In Lebanon a big drop in the use of wood fuels in the towns has already occurred, except among the poorest classes.
Average annual consumption per inhabitant may vary from 0.02 to more than 1 m³ of air-dried fuelwood, and there may be big variations within the same country. In the mountainous countries, such as Algeria, Lebanon, Morocco and Turkey, the proportion of wood fuels increases with the altitude, both because wood is more abundant in mountainous areas than in the lowlands, at least up to about 1 000 m, and because family incomes are lower.
This question of income is important and explains why, in certain countries that are big oil-producers, such as Algeria, the low budgetary resources of part of the population lead these people still to prefer wood, resulting in a relatively high consumption per capita. The situation regarding the level of fuelwood consumption is not the same in all countries, however: in certain "forestry" countries, such as Cyprus, petroleum products are widely used, in particular for domestic purposes. Other countries without forests consume practically no wood fuels: Israel, Libya .and the countries of the Arabian peninsula, with the exception of the two Yemen, depend entirely on the oil they produce.
The countries may, therefore, be classed as follows :
(1) Countries not consuming fuelwood (or with a minute per capita consumption): Cyprus, Israel, Libya, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Oman;
(2) Countries that consume small amounts of fuelwood (from 0.05 to 0.1 m³/inhab./ year): Lebanon, Egypt, Jordan, Syria, South and North Yemen;
(3) Countries consuming large amounts of fuelwood (from 0.2 to 0.8/person/year): Tunisia, Iraq, Morocco, Algeria, Turkey.
In certain mountainous zones fuelwood requirements are undoubtedly much higher; this is the case in the massifs of North Africa, Iraq and Turkey, where fuelwood requirements are at least 1.5 m³/person/year.
5.2.2 Present wood resources
(a) Natural formations
The documents concerning estimation of the wood cover are often erroneous or incomplete ¹. Nevertheless, an attempt has been made to give for each country an estimate of the wood cover, distinguishing between:
¹ The countries in the group considered here are not covered by the FAO/UNEP Study on tropical forest resources.
1. Mediterranean forests of evergreen trees with small, hard leaves;
2. Temperate deciduous forests;
3. Mediterranean forests of needle-leaved conifers almost always evergreen;
4. Steppes and pseudo-steppes;
5. Shrub deserts;
6. Desert solontchak vegetation.
For these 6 types of vegetation the following fuelwood yields have been used:
Type 1 - abbreviation = MH = 1 m³/ha/year
Type 2 - abbreviation = TH = 0.5 m³/ha/year
Type 3 - abbreviation = MS = 0.5 m³/ha/year
Type 4 - abbreviation = nH1 = 0.2 m³/ha/year
Type 5 - abbreviation = nH2 = 0.04 m³/ha/year
Type 6 - abbreviation = nH3 = 0.02 m³/ha/year
It is evident that natural forest formations constitute a limited source of supply of fuelwood in the countries concerned. This is illustrated in the following table:
TABLE 16 - NATURAL FOREST FORMATIONS: FUELWOOD AVAILABILITY IN 1980
Countries
Area of natural formations 1 000 ha
Population (millions)
Available supply m³/year
MH
MS+TH
nH[1]
NH[2]NH[3]
Total area
Total
Urban
Rural
Total 1 000 m³/year
Per inhabitant
Per rural inhabitant
Lebanon
E
Egypt
Jordan
E
Syria
Sub - total
Tunisia
Iraq
Morocco
Algeria
Turkey
TOTAL
It will be noted that the resources derived from natural stands are very small for all countries.
(b) Forest plantations, row plantations, farm woodlots and fruit-tree plantations (vines, olives).
The following table gives an estimate of the total annual supply from this type of woody resource:
TABLE 17 - ANNUAL FUELWOOD SUPPLY - OTHER RESOURCES (million m³/yr)
Country
Wood from forest plantations
Other woody resources
Total
Lebanon
Egypt
Jordan
Syria
Sub-total
Tunisia
Iraq
Morocco
Algeria
Turkey
TOTAL
TABLE 18; WOODY RESOURCES UTILIZABLE AS FUELWOOD
Country
Natural formations
Others
Total
Totals/inhabitant
Total
Rural
1 000 m³/year
m³/year
Lebanon
Egypt
Jordan
Syria
Tunisia
Iraq
Morocco
Algeria
Turkey
It will be noticed that the two groups of countries also differ as regards resources, those with low fuelwood consumption having the lowest supplies. Considering its big population, Egypt has extremely small per capita supplies.
5.2.3 Overall balance in 1980
If one compares the theoretical supplies per inhabitant with the needs indicated in paragraph 5.2.1, it will be seen that all the countries studied have a fuelwood deficit. This deficit is small in volume, but important as a percentage of overall needs for the low-consumption countries, which can, therefore, content themselves with importing small amounts of wood in order to meet their requirements. This does not seem to be true for Egypt, whose deficit is much greater. Admittedly the fuelwood consumption figures usually put forward for Egypt are 10 times less than those given in this study. The truth probably lies between the two. In any event Egypt has a fuelwood deficit. The overall deficit is much greater for the big-consumption countries (0.3 to 0.5 m³/inhabitant/year in the plains and 0.8 to 1 m³/inhabitant/year in the mountainous areas) and leads to over-cutting of the existing woody vegetation and hence progressive degradation of this vegetation. Finally, in certain
extreme cases there is acute scarcity and the populations, despite the use of animal dung as fuel, are obliged to reduce their consumption, in particular for heating, which results in high mortality among old people and children (this applies particularly to eastern Turkey).
TABLE 19: OVERALL FUELWOOD BALANCE IN 1980
Country
Needs
Annual supply
Balance (total deficit)
Average deficit refers only to rural pop.
Per inhabitant ¹
Total
Rural
Urban
Rural
Urban
Total
m³/year
1 000 m³/year
1 000 m³/year
m³/inhab./yr
Lebanon
Egypt
Jordan
E
Syria
Total
Tunisia
Iraq
Morocco
Algeria
Turkey
¹ In these figures the situation in certain mountainous regions of Morocco, Algeria and Turkey has been taken into account to raise the average fuelwood requirement.
5.3 Prospects for the year 2000
5.3.1 Growth in population and needs
5.3.2 Changes in wood energy resources
5.3.3 Balance foreseeable in the year 2000
5.3.1 Growth in population and needs
The following table gives the United Nations forecasts for the population concerned:
TABLE 20: POPULATION TRENDS - 1980-2000
Country
Population 1980
Population 2000
Rural
Urban
Total
Rural
Urban
Total
million inhabitants
Lebanon
Egypt
Jordan
Syria
Sub-total
Tunisia
Iraq
Morocco
Algeria
Turkey
Sub-total
Grant Total
As regards the population of towns with more than 100 000 inhabitants, it has been assumed, that this will double in 20 years, whence the above distribution. The total population of these nine countries will therefore rise from 160 million in 1980 to 268 million in 2000, or an increase of 67 percent. However, the rural population will increase proportionately more slowly: from 104.5 million in 1980 to 158 million in 2000, or an increase of 51 percent.
It is very difficult to predict what the fuelwood consumption of these populations will be in the year 2000. It may be assumed, however, that the urban populations will consume less and less wood products for domestic energy needs. Account will therefore be taken only of rural consumption, for which it will be assumed that the level of consumption in 2000 will be the same as in 1980. This gives the following overall needs for the year 2000;
TABLE 21: OVERALL FUELWOOD NEEDS IN THE YEAR 2000
Country
Average fuelwood requirement
m³/inhab./year
Global population
(millions)
Total needs
million m³/year
Lebanon
Egypt
Jordan
Syria
Sub-total
Tunisia
Iraq
Morocco
Algeria
Turkey
Sub-total
TOTAL
5.3.2 Changes in wood energy resources
(a) Natural formations
As regards natural formations, it may be assumed that the efforts made by countries with a relatively large forest area and a well-staffed and competent forestry service (Morocco, Algeria, Turkey) will produce fruits with respect to the restoration of degraded forest areas, and that yield per hectare will therefore increase. Unfortunately, in view of the present situation of fuelwood deficit, much of this additional yield from the protected stands will be offset by a loss of capital, and hence of yield, from the other wooded areas. It therefore seems unrealistic to count on a substantial increase in fuelwood production from the natural formations. The levels of supply estimated in 1980 will therefore be retained.
(b) Forest plantations
Many countries have ambitious forest plantation programmes, but recent years have shown that there is often a time lag between the establishment of programmes and their effective implementation. We shall therefore be prudent in estimating the areas that will be planted between 1980 and 2000 and their output.
TABLE 22 - EVOLUTION OF PLANTATION AREAS FROM 1980 TO 2000 AND THEIR LEVEL OF PRODUCTION
Country
Estimated areas of plantations 1980 - 2000
(1 000 ha)
Estimate of their fuelwood output in 2000
(1 000 m³/year)
Yield from plantations established before 1980
(1 000 m³)
Total supplies in 2000
(1000 m^3)
Lebanon
Egypt
Jordan
Syria
Tunisia
Iraq
Morocco
Algeria
Turkey
(c) Other woody resources
The level of supplies in 1980 should increase by 50 percent to take into account:
- the increase in the rural population and hence the development of crop-growing and tree-cultivation;
- the establishment in many countries of row plantations, hedges and shelterbelts.
TABLE 23: SUPPLIES OF WOOD MATERIAL AVAILABLE IN 2000 FOR FUELWOOD DOMESTIC AND ARTISANAL CONSUMPTION
Country
Natural formations
Plantations
Others
Total
Available supplies
m³/inhab./yr
Lebanon
Egypt
Jordan
Syria
Tunisia
Iraq
Morocco
Algeria
Turkey
5.3.3 Balance foreseeable in the year 2000
The following table summarizes the supplies and needs of woody material for domestic and artisanal consumption in the year 2000.
TABLE 24; SUPPLIES AND NEEDS OF WOODY MATERIAL FOR FUELWOOD DOMESTIC AND ARTISANAL CONSUMPTION IN 2000
Country
Total needs
Total supplies
Balance (deficit)
Deficit per inhabitant
1 000 m³/year
m³/year
Lebanon
Egypt
Jordan
E
Syria
Sub-total
Tunisia
Iraq
Morocco
Algeria
Turkey
Sub-total
TOTAL
It will be seen, that the low - consumption countries (Lebanon, Egypt, Jordan, Syria) have reduced their deficit per inhabitant to an extremely low level. There is even a decrease in the total deficit for Lebanon and Egypt. It may be considered that the maximum will have been done as regards wood production and that the development of soft energies (wind and sun) will suffice to make up the deficits noted.
As regards the other countries, situations differ: Turkey will reduce its overall deficit by almost a half thanks to its reforestation efforts; Tunisia will reduce it slightly; but in Morocco, Iraq and above all Algeria it will increase considerably. If these deficits are compared with the total number of people living in rural areas and in towns with less than 100 000 inhabitants, it will be seen that there is an overall decrease in the deficit per inhabitant, particularly for Turkey and Tunisia. But these deficits will nevertheless remain considerable. It may be assumed that they will affect mainly the poor, whose incomes will not permit them access to other energy sources. There will also be a continuation of the activities causing degradation of the existing woody vegetation. The example of Turkey shows that the implementation of large reforestation programmes could constitute an extremely effective solution to this situation of deficit in available woody material for
energy needs for all these countries, with the exception of Tunisia, where there are few areas available and utilizable.
<section>7</section>
Chapter VI - Asia and the tropical far east
6.1 Introduction
6.2 Regional situation in 1980
6.3 Prospects for the tear 2000
6.4 Typology of deficit situations and feasibility of forestry solutions
6.1 Introduction
The countries of Asia and the tropical Far East as a whole are characterized by having been inhabited since ancient times by human beings who over the centuries have managed the resources necessary for their existence. This applies particularly to the woody resources necessary for domestic and artisanal energy consumption.
But the balance that had been established has now been upset in many zones as a result of the considerable growth in population during the last 30 years and the simultaneous extension of cultivated land. The situation has also been aggravated by the demands of industrial development, a consumer of woody material. Many zones are already in an obviously critical situation, while others run the risk of this in the near future in view of the extremely high growth rate of population.
The countries concerned are:
- the countries of southern Asia: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka;
- the countries of continental South - East Asia: Burma, Kampuchea, Lao , Thailand, Vietnam;
- the countries of insular South-East Asia: Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Papua New Guinea;
- the Republic of Korea.
6.2 Regional situation in 1980
6.2.1 Populations concerned and their energy needs
6.2.2 Woody resources utilizable as a source of energy
6.2.3 Identification and nature of the various categories of situation
6.2.4 Regional summary
6.2.1 Populations concerned and their energy needs
The total number of people living in this region of the world in 1980 can be estimated at about 1 196 million, or 27 percent of the world's total population. 13.4 percent of this population, or 160 million, live in towns with more than 100 000 inhabitants, and 86.6 percent, or 1 036 million, in rural areas or towns with less than 100 000 inhabitants which for the most part are no more than concentrations of rural people whose customs and way of life differ little from those of the true country folk.
According to statistics, the output of fuelwood and wood for charcoal - making in 1980 in the countries concerned was 570 million m³, or 86 percent of total removals. Fuelwood provided more than one-third of total energy consumption, not including the agricultural residues that in certain countries, such as India, account for a considerable part of this consumption. In four countries - Kampuchea, Lao , Nepal and Viet Nam - fuel-wood represents more than three-quarters of energy supplies.
Energy needs (for domestic and artisanal uses, for the incineration of corpses) vary according to customs and climate and also according to whether the environment is rural or urban.
In rural areas domestic consumption is preponderant. The major item is food cooking. Requirements are met from various fuel sources: hedge bushes, the branches of fruit trees and trees in row plantations, small farm woodlots, often isolated trees supply the fuelwood that is collected each day by the women and children. In addition to agricultural residues, animal dung represents an important part of the energy resources - as much as 50 percent -in all the countries of southern Asia. This use is often due more to tradition than to necessity, because dung is used even if fuelwood is abundant. Per capita consumption of woody material is therefore less than 0.6/m^3 in the countries of southern Asia: Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Burma,
In rural areas considerable amounts of fuelwood are consumed for artisanal purposes but unfortunately no valid statistics on this consumption exist. Local studies have shown that it may attain 50 to 60 percent of domestic consumption, woody material accounting for no more than about 20 percent. Energy resources are also necessary to cover requirements for festivities - particularly marriages - during which consumption is four or five times greater, and for the burning of corpses in the Hindu religion.
Finally, in the cold, lofty Himalayan countries - Afghanistan, Bhutan, Nepal, Northwestern India - the need to keep warm considerably increases energy requirements, which are two or three times greater than in the warm tropical zones, woody material representing almost all the energy resources.
In urban areas, the density of population results in a decrease in the size of households and hence in the size of courtyards, making open-air cooking difficult. More suitable, although expensive, sources of energy are therefore sought. As a result there is a decrease in the consumption of woody material, which represents only 15 to 20 percent of energy consumption.
This results, however, in particularly difficult situations for the poor sectors of the urban population, whose purchasing power is insufficient to cope with the costs of commercial energy (oil, electricity, gas, coal). In addition to domestic consumption, note must also be taken of consumption for artisanal and industrial purposes, which in certain sectors continues to be met partly from woody material. This is the case for bakeries and pastry-makers, laundries, lime and brick kilns, ceramic and pottery works, the sugar and beverage industries, hotels and hospitals.
To sum up, on the basis of the information supplied by the various regional and local studies conducted in Asia in recent years, it may be estimated that the average energy needs of the populations are as follows:
(1) Desert and sub-desert regions
Consumption is reduced by the nomadic way of life of the populations, who need an average of 0.3 to 0.5 m³/person/year.
(2) Agricultural regions situated in dry tropical zones
In these zones the results of the various consumption surveys made show the following average distribution of the various types of energy products.
Type of fuel
Percentage used by type of fuel
Commercial (gas, electricity, coal, oil
10 to 2.0%
30 to 70% non-wood
Animal dung
20 to 50%
Agricultural residues
20 to 40%
30 to 70% wood and plant material
Wood (and charcoal)
20 to 50%
Since minimum needs are between 6 GJ and 10 GJ/person/year, or between 0.65 and 1,05 m³/person/year (of equivalent woody material), "fuelwood" ¹ needs therefore vary between 0.20 and 0,75 m³/person/year.
¹ Wood (and charcoal) plus woody agricultural residues.
(3) Agricultural regions situated in moist tropical zones
The energy requirements of the populations in these zones are between 8 GJ and 12 GJ/ person/year, or 0.85 to 1.3 m³/person/year of equivalent woody material. Requirements are slightly higher than in the preceding zone owing to the humidity of the air and hence of the fuel. They are met from the following types of resources:
Type of fuel
Percentage used by type of fuel
Commercial fuels
10 to 20%
30 to 60% non-wood
Animal dung
20 to 40%
Agricultural residues
20 to 40%
40 to 70% wood and plant material
Wood and charcoal
20 to 50%
"Fuelwood" needs therefore vary between 0.3 and 0.90 m³/person/year.
(4) Regions of shifting agriculture in closed moist forests
Domestic energy consumption is high - 10 to 14 GJ/person/year and consists largely (80%) of fuelwood; annual fuelwood needs are therefore between 0.90 and 1.35 m³ per person.
(5) Mountainous regions in which energy needs are high owing to the necessity to keep warm
The energy consumption of the people in these regions can be estimated as follows:
Type of fuel
Percentage used per type of fuel
Commercial (gas, electricity, coal, oil)
5 to 10%
15 to 30% non-wood
Animal dung
10 to 20%
Agricultural residues
0 to 5%
70 to 85% woody and plant
Wood and charcoal
65 to 85%
Since the overall level of requirements is between 17 and 20 GJ/person/year, or between 1.8 and 2.1 m³/person/year, annual fuelwood requirements vary between 1.25 and 1.8 m³/person.
6.2.2 Woody resources utilizable as a source of energy
(a) Natural formations
Asia is covered by five main physiognomic types of forest vegetation:
(1) Closed monsoon forests, often of a semi-deciduous nature, covering part of the Indian peninsula, with a fuelwood yield - after extraction of timber - of between 1 and 3 m³/ha/year, according to the region ¹. The "productive" areas of these forests are estimated at 43 million hectares in 1980 ² out of a total of 52.6 million hectares.
(2) Closed, moist evergreen forests in lowland and hill areas in continental and insular East Asia, with an average fuelwood yield of more than 3 m³/ha/year.
The productive area is estimated at 149 million hectares, out of a total of 239.4 million hectares.
(3) Coniferous forests usually situated in mountainous areas and with an average fuelwood yield of about 2 m^3 /ha/year.
The total area is estimated at 8.4 million ha in 1980, of which 5.6 million are considered productive.
(4) Open forests and wooded savanna with a forest cover of between 10 and 80 percent, and a fuelwood yield of between 0.5 and 1 m³/ha/year. The area producing fuelwood is estimated at 31 million ha.
(5) Shrub formations with a fuelwood yield of between 0.1 and 0.2 m³/ha/year, covering a total area of 36 million hectares.
¹ Figures indicated by the "Pre-investment Survey of Forest Resources", Dehra Dun, India.
² Source: UNEP/FAO project on evaluation of tropical forest resources, 1981.
To these "natural" formations are added. the zones of forest fallow, which are secondary formations ranging from thickets to young high forests, the area of which was estimated in 1980 at 71 million hectares of broadleaved forest fallow and one million hectares of coniferous forest fallow.
Finally Korea, which owing to its "temperate" ecological position must be mentioned separately, has about 5 million hectares of forest, half broadleaved and half coniferous. The situation in the different countries varies greatly as regards the extent of the natural forest cover as compared with the density of the population:
- Afghanistan, Pakistan, India (with the exception of western Bengal), Bangladesh, southern Sri Lanka, the hills of Nepal, the central and northern part of the Philippines, Java and South Korea have a wooded area per inhabitant of less than 0,1 ha. This situation is aggravated by the generally low productivity of these forest formations - with the exception of the forests of South Korea - composed largely of closed broadleaved forests and open forests.
- Western Bengal, Nepal Terai, northern Sri Lanka, Lower Burma, Thailand, Viet Nam, peninsular Malaysia, the Island of Mindanao in the Philippines, and Sumatra, have a wooded area per inhabitant of between 0.2 and 1 hectare; but many zones are inaccessible because they are too far from the zones of human concentration, and the pressure of the populations on the forest areas around them is very heavy.
- Upper Burma, Bhutan, Kampuchea, Lao , Sarawak and Shaba, Kalimantan, Sulawesi, the Celebes, Irian and Papua New Guinea have wooded areas per inhabitant exceeding 1.5 ha and reaching 5 ha per inhabitant in Borneo and New Guinea.
(b) Forest plantations
(i) A certain number of countries (India, Pakistan, Thailand, Indonesia, Viet Nam) have established forest plantations for the purpose of producing fuelwood or charcoal. These plantations consist of fast-growing species grown on a short rotation. Few valid statistics exist on the species and age composition of these plantations. The total area planted is estimated at about 3 100 000 ha, of which 1 600 000 are in tropical countries and 1 500 000 in Korea.
(ii) As regards forest plantations for industrial purposes, better statistics are available on the areas planted to softwoods (about 600 000 hectares, of which 430 000 hectares are in Indonesia) and hardwoods (about 2.9 million ha, of which 1.5 million are in India and 1 million in Indonesia), and on the relative merits of slow-growing species with a long rotation, such as Shorea robust a, Tectona grandis, Juglans regia, Aesculus indica for hardwoods and Cedrus deodara, Pinus roxburghii, Abies pindrow for softwoods, and. fast-growing species with a short rotation, such as Eucalyptus sp. , Dalbergia sissoo, Morus alba, Fraxinus sp. and the Cryptomeria and tropical pines. Only species with a long rotation are thinned, and part of the thinnings can be used as fuelwood. In both cases it may be estimated that 30 percent of the volume of the final yield is utilizable as fuelwood.
In Korea the area estimated in 19.90 was 260 000 ha of broadleaved species poplar and willow - and 830000 ha of conifers.
(iii) The total volume of fuelwood from plantations specifically grown for fuelwood and from the residues from plantations established to produce timber is estimated as follows:
Countries of Southern Asia:
31 million m³
Lowland' hill and delta countries of South-east Asia:
15 million m³
Closed forest countries in South-east Asia:
0.7 million m³
South Korea:
20 million m³
The annual volume available therefore appears to be extremely low, with the exception of South Korea, where the reforestation effort is already providing the population with a considerable amount of fuelwood.
(c) Other natural woody resources: row plantations, hedges, village woodlots, orchards, trees scattered over arable land.
In Asia these resources constitute a very important source of woody material for domestic use and in particular as an energy raw material. They are present throughout the settled rural areas, but it is very difficult to evaluate the amount of fuelwood they supply. The following estimates are put forward:
(i) Trees are often planted along roads railways and canals in order to give shade and provide a not inconsiderable amount of wood. However, statistics are usually silent on the extent of these row plantations. As regards countries with settled rural communities, an extrapolation to all areas of an average number of ten trees per km³ in cultivated zones, with a yield per tree of 0.13 m³/year, or 5 m³ at 40 years, makes it possible to estimate the total supplies.
(ii) Woodlots with an area of less than 10 ha exist all around the villages. They serve as shelter for the cattle and as a source of fuelwood. These woodlots are usually not managed and badly maintained. In the absence of valid statistics, the area occupied by these woodlots and their yield has to be estimated on the basis of acquired local experience. They may thus be estimated at 5 to 10 percent of the agricultural area and the average yield at between 0.2 and 0.5 m³/ha/year.
(iii) The case of orchards is similar. These belong to private individuals rather than the community. The trees are grown for fruit, but a certain amount of wood is obtained through pruning and the fall of branches. Finally the old trees are cut down to be replaced when fruit yield falls. The area can be estimated at 5 to 10 percent of the agricultural land and the yield at 0.1 to 0.2 m³/ha/year.
(iv) Isolated trees, fruit trees and others, such as Melia azedarach and some species of Ficus, Ailanthus, Populus, and Salix, are plated in the courtyards of houses' the squares and approaches to villages, and in the fields, mainly to provide shade and fodder. Fuelwood is also obtained from these trees, which number about 3 to 5 per hectare and produce 0.01 to 0.02 m³ of fuelwood per tree per year.
(d) Woody residues from agriculture and industry
(i) Industrial waste: about 30 percent of the volume of lumber and industrial wood ends as waste - sawdust, shavings, etc. Half of this can be used as a source of energy.
(ii) Agricultural residues: these constitute an important resource in Asia. The various types are listed below, with the estimated equivalent in wood fuel per ton of product:
- rice husks
0.25 to 0.3 m³ equivalent woody material per ton of product
- groundnut shells
- coconut shells
- sugarcane bagasse
- maize, sorghum, castor beans, cottonseed
1 m³ per ton of product cottonseed
- Cassava, kenaf, natural rubber
4 m³ per ton of product
- jute and hemp
2 to 2.5 m³ per ton of product
- coffee
8 m³ per ton of product
- miscellaneous
0.2 to 0.5 m³/ha cultivated.
In the estimates made of the amounts available, account has been taken of the need to return to the soil 50 percent of the agricultural residues in order to maintain the recycling of organic matter. For many countries the figures are obtained by extrapolation from neighbouring countries.
6.2.3 Identification and nature of the various categories of situation
The zone-by-zone analysis showed that the situations could be classified into six categories relatively homogeneous as regards areas and productivity of the natural woody vegetation on the one hand, and population density and level of needs on the other. These categories are:
- Category 1: desert and sub-desert zones usually sparsely populated but with scanty forest resources;
- Category 2: high mountain zones more or less heavily populated and with limited and/or inaccessible forest resources;
- Category 3: densely-populated zones situated in regions not climatically favourable to forests, which cover only a limited area;
- Category 4: densely-populated zones situated in regions climatically favourable to forests, which have largely been cleared;
- Category 5: forest zones with a rapidly growing population leading to rapid extension of clearing;
- Category 6: closed forest zones with very large forest resources and usually a small population;
- South Korea: geographically removed from the other countries and presenting special characteristics, to be treated separately.
(a) Category 1
This comprises western Pakistan (Baluchistan) and western Afghanistan. These zones cover a large area of 87.7 million ha populated, by 10.3 million people, 92 percent of them rural.
The areas covered by woody vegetation are very small (one million "productive" hectares altogether) and consist mainly of open, mixed forest-grassland, formations and shrub formations. Because of the low yield of these formations (0.1 to 0.2 m³/ha), the vastness of the area, which reduces the zones accessible to the people to 10 percent, the absence of plantations and the rarity of trees on agricultural land, the accessible supply of woody material is very small: 0.01 to 0.02 m³/person/year. The supply of agricultural residues is also small (0.01 m³/ha/year), owing to the limited extent of cultivated land.
There is thus a considerable fuelwood deficit - more than 0.35 m³/person/year -leading to overcutting of the existing vegetation and consequent desertification of the rangelands.
(b) Category 2
This comprises the high mountain areas of the Himalayas: north-eastern Afghanistan, north-western India, northern Nepal. These zones cover a total area of 52.3 million ha inhabited by 30.7 million people, 26.5 million of whom (i.e. 93 percent) are rural.
Forest vegetation covers only a limited area - about 7 million productive hectares - of which 2 million hectares consist of high altitude coniferous forests, and the rest of more or less open and degraded broadleaved forests and many shrub formations. Average productivity is calculated at about 0,6 m³/ha/year. If the supply from farm woodlots and woody agricultural residues is added to the accessible supply from the natural formations (estimated at 80% of apparent supply), this gives a total accessible supply of 0,20 to 0.25 m³/person/year, which is far below the high level of needs for woody material caused by the harsh climate (1.25 to 1.8 m³/person/year). There is therefore a deficit of 1 to 1.6 m³/person/year.
Hence there is necessarily overcutting of part of the natural woody vegetation, which is becoming increasingly degraded, and over-use of the woody agricultural residues, the entire amount being used instead of at least part of it being dug back into the arable land. The present situation of acute scarcity forces certain poor populations to limit their consumption to below their real needs. This applies particularly to Afghanistan and Nepal.
(c) Category 3
This comprises the countries of the plains and valleys in the north of the Indian subcontinent; eastern and north-eastern Pakistan (Indus Valley), north-western and northern India (Gujarat, Rajasthan and the Ganges Valley), and southern Nepal. A population of 331.8 million lives on a total area of 175 million hectares - 13 percent, or 43.8 million, in towns with more than 100 000 inhabitants. The rural areas are densely populated - more than 200 people per km^2 in many places.
The "productive" natural forests consist essentially of semi-deciduous dry and moist forests (11 million productive hectares), relatively low-yielding, and open, mixed grassland-forestry formations (4.8 million hectares), the latter including shrub formations already considerably degraded owing to uncontrolled grazing. The total accessible supply (50 percent of the apparent supply) is only 8 million m³ , or 0.03 m³/person/year. Fuel-wood plantations and the thinnings from industrial plantations provide an additional 0.01 m³/person/year, farm woodlots 0.12 m³/person/year, and woody residues from crops 0.03 m^3/person/year. The total supply normally accessible to the rural populations, whose needs have been estimated at between 0.20 and 0.70 m³/person/year, therefore amounts to 0.19 m³/person/year. There is therefore a deficit almost everywhere, resulting in continuing degradation of the natural woody formations and extensive use of all agricultural wood waste, thus
accentuating degradation of the soils which are already frequently over-utilized.
The towns situated in these zones are theoretically deprived of almost any possibility of procuring wood fuel for domestic energy. At most they can use industrial wood waste, of which the average supply is 0.09 m³/urban inhabitant/year, but wood from the rural zones is rare and expensive, resulting in a situation of very acute scarcity for the poorest sectors of the population.
(d) Category 4
This comprises the Indian peninsula (Deccan) with the exception of the northeastern part (Orissa and Madhya Pradesh), Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and the heavily-populated zones of South-East Asia: central Thailand, coastal plains and deltas of Viet Nam, Java, the central Philippine islands.
These zones, covering a total area of 174 million hectares, had a population of 489.7 million in 1980 - 412.5 million in rural areas or towns with less than 100 000 inhabitants in which the way of life is very similar to that in the countryside. About 16 percent of the population (77.2 million) lives in towns with more than 100 000 inhabitants.
In all these zones the forests have been extensively cleared and survive only on hilly land, where they continue to be subjected to heavy pressure by people' looking both for wood products and for new land. Closed, moist, broadleaved forests still cover 10.6 million hectares, and coniferous forests about 300 000 hectares. Forest fallows, or more exactly zones where small stands of intact forest, of less than 10 hectares, are mingled with new forest growth and cultivated plots, cover a considerable area (more than 3 million ha). Finally, open forest, wooded savanna and savanna with trees cover a considerable area in central India and in Thailand (more than 3 million ha) to which should be added some 3 million ha of shrub formations. However, compared with the total area and the size of the population these forest resources are very small. The annual accessible supply of fuelwood (60 percent of the apparent supply) is estimated at only 21 million m³ , or 0.05 m³/person/year.
Plantations, situated mainly in India, Viet Nam and Java, provide a theoretical average annual supply of 0.01 m³/person/year, and the farm woodlots relatively frequent in the countryside, an amount estimated at 0.15 m³/person/year. Altogether, therefore, including the supply of woody material from agricultural residues (0.05 m³/person/year), the total annual supply is 0.26 m³/person/year, while needs are estimated at between 0.30 and 0.90 m³/person/year. There is therefore a deficit of woody material almost everywhere, with the exception of some zones in India (central and northern Deccan), some hills in Thailand and Java, some parts of north-eastern Sri Lanka and a few small islands in the central Philippines where population density is lower. Everywhere else the rural populations over-use all the available woody material - forest vegetation and agricultural residues - degrading both vegetation and soils.
The towns situated in these zones cannot obtain sufficient supplies of fuelwood and the poor cannot cover their energy needs, estimated, at 4 to 6 GJ/person/year, of which 30 to 70 percent consists of fuelwood, or 0.5 m³/person/year).
(e) Category 5
This comprise the closed forest zones where the forest is being continually eaten away by clearing for agricultural purposes: the Indian states of Orissa and Madhya Pradesh, Lower Burma, north-western Sumatra, the interior of Viet Nam, northern Philippines (Luzon), the southern part of Sulawesi and the Sunda islands in Indonesia. The total population is estimated at 161.3 million, of which 147.1 million (91 percent) live in rural areas. The total area is 139 million hectares.
The forest resources consist essentially of moist, closed forests in the lowlands and hills (30 million productive hectares), together with 0.5 million ha of productive coniferous forests (in Burma, Viet Nam and the Philippines). Forest fallows occupy a considerable area (about 38 million ha), and the zones situated in Indonesia and India contain open forests, wooded savanna and shrub formations (a total of 12 million productive hectares). The annual accessible supply (estimated at 60 percent of the apparent supply) is about 90 million m³, or an average supply per rural inhabitant of 0.6 m³/person/year. Plantations provide only a very limited amount (0.03 m³/person/year), and farm woodlots, less abundant than in the preceding zones, an average of 0.08 m³/person/year. The total supply is therefore 0.70 m³/person/year which, together with the fairly abundant supplies of woody agricultural residues (0.08 m³/person/year) more or less cover needs, which are between 0.50 and 0.90
m³/person/year. This level of needs is higher than that of the preceding categories because in these zones the people use less animal dung.
In 1980 there was therefore an approximate balance between supplies and needs in these rural zones. In the towns, where 14.2 million live, the situation is less favourable for the poor sectors. Owing to lack of sufficient cash income they have to reduce their requirements, since fuelwood is relatively expensive because there is little surplus in the rural areas, and despite the relative abundance of industrial wood waste (0.10 m³/person/ year considering only the urban populations).
(f) Category 6
This comprises all the northern hilly and mountainous regions of continental South-East Asia (Bhutan, north-eastern India, northern Burma, Lao , upper Thailand and Kampuchea), and the little populated regions of closed forest of insular South - East Asia (Malaysian peninsula, south-eastern Sumatra, Borneo, Mindanao, northern Sulawesi, the Moluccas, New Guinea).
A population of 134.1 million, largely rural (96 percent of the total population) occupies vast stretches generally covered by forests. The productive area is estimated at 140 million hectares of closed, broadleaved forests and 2.1 million hectares of coniferous forests. If the areas of open forest and savanna (65.6 million ha) and the 28 million ha of fallow are added to these, the apparent annual supply is about 500 million m³ . Assuming that at present only 40 percent of this supply is really accessible, the average supply per inhabitant is about 1.55 m³/person/year. Needs are therefore covered even without taking into account the resources provided by farm woodlots and agricultural residues. However, certain regions of north-eastern India and of Malaysia are undoubtedly in a less satisfactory situation than Irian or Papua New Guinea, where the supply per inhabitant is more than 5 m³/person/year.
(g) The Republic of Korea has 38.1 million inhabitants, a considerable proportion of whom (40% or 16.8 million) live in big towns where the way of life is very modern and almost no fuelwood is consumed. Natural woody formations, consisting half of broadleaved and half of coniferous species, cover a total of 4.3 million productive hectares. The relatively low yield of these temperate forests as compared with that of tropical forests produces a total annual fuelwood supply equal to about 9 million m³ , or 0.35 m³/rural inhabitant/year, assuming that 20 percent of the area remains inaccessible to the population. The many plantations established (1 500 000 ha of fuelwood plantations and 1 100 000 ha of industrial plantations) provide a considerable amount of fuelwood: 20 million m³/year, or 0.9 m³/rural inhabitant/year. This, together with the many farm woodlots (0.03 m³/person/year) and woody agricultural residues (0.10 to 0.15 m³/person/ year) makes it possible to meet all the
fuelwood needs of the rural populations. The overall situation is therefore satisfactory, thanks above all to the substantial contribution made by the forest plantations.
6.2.4 Regional summary
(a) Rural areas
The following tables show respectively:
- the total supplies of woody material
- the supplies of woody material per inhabitant
- the present overall balance.
They demonstrate the seriousness of the situation in the desert and sub-desert countries of Pakistan and Afghanistan and all the heavily populated lowland and delta zones of Categories 3 and 4, and above all in the Himalayan zones of Category 2.
In all these countries fuelwood consumption is very often greater than the level of supplies compatible with sustained production. There is therefore almost always over-cutting of the wooded zones, resulting in constant degradation of the wood capital, whose productivity per hectare is continually decreasing. In certain cases there is outright destruction of the woody vegetation. Yet the level of consumption is often at the lower limit of theoretical needs, leading in many places to a situation of acute scarcity for which the people try to compensate by making maximum use of agricultural residues. This is prejudicial for the soils, which are deprived of the input of organic matter.
In the mountainous zones, there is even greater destruction and degradation of the forests than in the plains and tablelands. This results in serious erosion problems, while in many places a situation of acute scarcity arises and forces consumption to fall below minimum needs; economies are therefore made in heating, resulting in an increase of mortality, particularly among the old and the children.
TABLE 25: SUPPLY OF WOODY MATERIAL FOR ENERGY IN 1980
Category of Country
Total Supplies (million m³)
Supply for rural inhabitant (m³/inhab./yr)
Natural Forest
Plantations
Agricultural trees
Agricultural residues
Natural Forests
Plantations
Farm woodlots
Agricultural residues
Total
apparent
accessible
1. Arid zones
2. Mountainous zones
3. Little-populated. dry zone
4. Heavily-populated humid zones
5. Moderately-populated forest zones
6. Heavily-populated forest zones
Sub-total (tropical countries)
7. Korea Rep.
TABLE 26; OVERALL FUELWOOD BALANCE 1980
Country
Level of needs
m³/inhab./yr
Supplies
m³/inhab./yr
Average Balance
m³/inhab./yr
Category 1
Category 2
Category 3
Category 4
Category 5
Category 6
Korea Rep.
(b) Urban areas in a deficit situation
The number of people affected is considerable, since the majority of the population (85 to 95 percent) of almost all towns with more than 100 000 inhabitants in the countries studied is involved: excluding Korea, 213 towns, with a total population of about 140 million.
These towns may be situated:
- either in rural zones which are themselves in a deficit situation as regards energy resources (111 towns, with about 94 million inhabitants);
- or in rural areas which now have a balance between energy supplies and needs but no great surplus (85 towns, with about 37 million inhabitants).
In urban zones the energy consumption per inhabitant varies considerably, according to social categories and the size of the town.
Taking only the poor, out of a total consumption of 4 to 6 GJ/person/year, wood accounts for 30 to 70 percent, or 0.5 m³/inhabitant/year. Towns situated in rural areas where there is a deficit are obviously in a situation of acute scarcity; towns situated in a rural area with a balance or a surplus of energy are better placed, but the cost of transporting the rural energy materials available (wood, plant residues) still leads to situations of acute scarcity for the poor social classes.
6.3 Prospects for the tear 2000
6.3.1 Growth in population and needs
6.3.2 Changes in wood energy resources
6.3.1 Growth in population and needs
It is estimated that in the year 2000¹ the population of all the zones studied will be 1.95 thousand million, which represents an increase of 755 million, or 65 percent, over 20 years. This increase will concern more particularly the rural areas. The population of the towns will rise from 160 million to 270 million, that of the rural areas from 1 036 million to 1 681 million, or an additional population of about 645 million, requiring an energy equivalent of about 500 million m³ of woody material per year.
¹ These estimates are based on the projections to 2000 made by FAO, except as regards India, for which the figures adopted are the official government figures, which assume that as a result of birth control successes, the population figure will be 130 million less than the FAO estimate.
An order of magnitude of the populations in the countries or zones of the six categories distinguished is given in Table 27.
TABLE 27: POPULATION FORECASTS FOR 2000
Category
Population (million)
Rural
Urban
Total
Korea Rep.
Total
As regards the fuelwood needs of these populations, there are no reasons for thinking that any rapid and appreciable change will occur in the share of woody material in domestic energy supplies, except for that which may result from acute scarcity of one or other source. At most there may be a slight increase in the percentage of commercial energies, leading to a corresponding fall of about 5 percent in the requirements for traditional wood fuel.
6.3.2 Changes in wood energy resources
(a) Natural formations
The studies conducted by FAO in 1978 and 1980 showed that for all the countries covered by this study the total area of forests that will be destroyed between 1980 and 2000 will be about 56 million hectares. This destruction will not be equal for all countries and all zones, and it will not concern only areas producing fuelwood. In addition, a considerable area of land (some 18 million hectares) will be transformed into forest fallow potentially productive of fuelwood. The total decrease in the apparent annual supply of fuelwood, taking into account the yield capacity of the various types of forest vegetation, will be about 100 million m³ . What is even more serious is the overall loss of material that can be used as wood fuel, which will be about 12 thousand million m³ in 20 years. On average, therefore, each year 600 million m³ of wood will be burnt in clearing forest land for agricultural purposes, very little of which will be recuperated.
Table 28 shows, for the categories of country and zone considered, the total area of forest likely to be destroyed between 1980 and 2000, the amount of woody material thus destroyed and, on the basis of the areas still available in 2000, the resulting level of annual supplies.
TABLE 28: NATURAL FOREST FORMATIONS; FUELWOOD SUPPLIES IN 2000
Category
Area¹ 1980
Area cleared between 1980 and 2000 ¹
Woody material lost
Portion of this woody material utilizable as energy
Area in 2000 ¹
Supply in 2000
(million ha)
(million ha)
(million m³)²
(million m³)
(million ha)
Total
million m³/year
Partial
m³/inhab year
TOTAL
¹ Not including shrub formations and fallow
² Including branches
(b) Plantations
By projecting to the year 2000 FAO estimates of the rate of plantation for the period 1980 - 85, and allowing for intensification of the programmes, it has been possible to estimate the areas that will be established by the year 2000 and the corresponding annual fuelwood supply.
TABLE 29: FUELWOOD SUPPLY FROM PLANTATIONS
Category
Total supply
(million m³/year)
Supply/rural inhabitant
m³/person/year
Korea Rep.
If these supplies are compared with those available in 1980, it will be seen that plantations will have made possible a substantial increase in the supply from this type of resources but despite a two-fold to five-fold increase, depending on the category, these supplies remain very low as compared with needs. Only Korea constitutes an example of the effectiveness of a plantation programme adapted to needs.
(c) Other wooded areas
It may be assumed that all the areas cleared for crop-growing will be managed in the same way as the present farm land, with village woodlots, hedges, orchards and isolated trees; but it must be remembered that most of these trees will not be mature by the year 2000 and their yield will therefore be very low.
The supply per inhabitant will therefore be significantly reduced, bearing in mind the growth in the rural population (62 percent in 20 years). It is therefore assumed that supplies per inhabitant will equal 70 percent of the 1980 figure.
(d) Woody agricultural and industrial residues
It may be estimated that these will increase in proportion to the growth in the population and will therefore provide the same amount per inhabitant per year similar to that estimated in 1980.
TABLE 30: ANNUAL PER CAPITA SUPPLY OF WOODY MATERIAL IN THE YEAR 2000
Category
Natural woody formations
Plantations
Farm woodlots
Woody agricultural residues
Total
Korea Rep.
If these data are compared with those in Table 25 showing resources in 1980, the following changes will be noted:
- Category 1: Fall in supply resulting from degradation of the natural formations and growth of the population.
- Category 2: Drop of 50 percent in annual supply per inhabitant despite reforestation efforts that although considerable are insufficient to produce a substantial increase in supplies.
- Category 3 Drop of more than 20 percent in annual supply per inhabitant owing and 4; to the decrease in supplies from natural formations and despite a doubling in the supplies obtained from plantations.
- Category 5: Drop of 40 percent in annual supply per inhabitant because, although it has been assumed that 80 percent of the forest stands surviving will be accessible, the amount of deforestation carried out decreases supplies from forest stands by 50 percent.
- Category 6: The overall decrease in supplies is attributable to the decrease in supplies from the natural formations, but this situation applies in fact only to Thailand and north - eastern India, zones which contain a quarter of the rural population in this entire category. For the other countries supply per inhabitant varies little.
- Korea; Maintenance of level of supply per inhabitant, despite a big growth in population and a decrease in the supplies from natural formations, thanks to a remarkable plantation programme which contributes more than 50 percent to the total supply of woody material.
TABLE 31: BALANCE FORESEEABLE IN THE YEAR 2000
Country
Level of needs ¹
m³/inhab./yr
Supplies
m³/inhab./yr
Average balance
m³/inhab./yr
Category 1
0.3 to 0.5
0.01 to 0.02
Category 2
1.2 to 1.7
0.10 to 0.14
Category 3
0.2 to 0.7
0.14 to 0.18
Category 4
0.3 to 0.85
0.19 to 0.23
Category 5
0.5 to 0.85
0.45 to 0.50
Category 6
0.85 to 1.20
0.70 to 4
Korea Rep.
0.25 to 0.80
¹ Needs reduced by 5% as compared to 1980,
This balance makes it possible to establish the following:
Category 1: The situation of acute scarcity continues to grow worse owing to degradation of the vegetation, making it more and more difficult to obtain sufficient woody material.
Category 2, 3 and 4: The situation of considerable deficit grows constantly worse, despite the fact that it has been assumed that almost all the existing forest resources are utilized. In many overpopulated regions wood resources will become practically non-existent and the inhabitants of these zones will suffer from an acute scarcity of fuelwood. This applies to the whole of the Indian sub-continent (Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal) and to the deltas and overpopulated islands of South - East Asia (lower Thailand, coastal plains and delta in Viet Nam, the islands of central Philippines, Java), where the woody resources will no longer be able to play more than a marginal role in supplying domestic and artisanal energy.
Category 5: These zones, which in 1980 were overall in a situation of balance between supplies and needs, will be in a deficit situation in 2000. People living near uncleared forest formations will be able to meet their energy requirements without difficulty, but the heavily-populated rural regions far from the forest borders will have to over-use all the woody resources present (farm woodlots, forest fallows, agricultural residues) in order to cover their needs, whence a constant degradation of the environment.
Category 6: Although the average supply decreases by practically a half, the zones as a whole remain in a satisfactory situation. It must be noted, however, that in two of these zones - north - eastern India (Bast Bengal) and northern and eastern Thailand - deficit situations will appear locally.
Korea Rep.: The positive balance is maintained, despite the growth in population, thanks to the output of the plantations established.
6.4 Typology of deficit situations and feasibility of forestry solutions
(1) Acute scarsity situations
These concern three groups of populations:
(i) Populations living in desert and sub-desert zones (Category 1), where 9.5 million rural people, mainly nomadic shepherds, inhabit an area of 88 million hectares. Their average needs are estimated at 0.4 m³/person/year and supplies at 0.025 m³/ person/year, or only 6 percent of needs. To cover these needs the people over-cut the vegetation and the situation grows ever worse. There is no large-scale forestry solution. All that could be done is to establish plantations around the watering points, with the threefold aim of providing the livestock with additional fodder, providing the people with some fuelwood, and stabilizing and protecting the environment; but this will be quite insufficient to resolve the problem throughout the area.
(ii) Population living in the Himalayan (Category 2), where 28.5 million people inhabiting the rural areas need considerable wood energy material because of the climatic conditions (1.3 to 1.8 m³/person/year). The theoretical supplies are 0.18 m³/person/year, or only 12 percent of needs. These needs, moreover, are in addition to the considerable requirements for other forest and fodder products also met by the same forest vegetation. The people are therefore forced to over-cut all the available woody resources, leading to ever more rapid degradation of soils and vegetation. This situation will inevitably worsen over the next 20 years. Forestry action is absolutely necessary to halt the process of soil degradation and erosion. It must be the constant concern of those responsible for agricultural development to see that trees are incorporated into the farming systems and that a certain forest cover is maintained. It must be admitted, however, that fuelwood plantations will
never suffice to satisfy all domestic energy needs. Other actions are necessary.
(iii) The poor living in large towns. It is impossible to assess exactly how many people are concerned, but the number is certainly high - several thousand million. Even assuming that their needs are small, their inability to pay the price of the substitute commercial energies places them in a situation of acute energy scarcity which is often in addition to shortage of food. Here the problem is not of a forestry nature, but of a social and economic one.
(2) Deficit situations
These concern rural areas in which the supply compatible with sustained production is below needs, but where the populations generally manage to meet their needs by over-cutting the existing wood and plant resources.
One may distinguish:
(i) Populations living in rural areas with a climate not very favourable to forest vegetation, in the zones in Category 3. The 288 million people concerned lead a frugal existence with modest needs. Energy needs for woody and plant material are between 0.2 and 0.7 m³/person/year, in view of the large use made of animal dung, of which there is an abundant supply. The average supply of wood and plant fuel has been estimated at 0.18 m³/person/year, or 40 percent of average needs. The extreme situations are more serious. In certain places only 20 percent of needs are covered by the supply calculated. This therefore leads to over - use of the resources and to the degradation of soils and vegetation. The size of the populations concerned makes any forestry solution of limited effect. How could 75 million m³ of fuelwood per year (present size of overall deficit) possibly be produced from forestry plantations in a region where the climate is unfavourable and the best soils are
intensively cultivated? As regards the natural vegetation, the governments concerned (Pakistan, India, Nepal) are doing everything possible to protect and manage it, but the natural conditions limit its yield capacity.
(ii) Populations living in rural areas with a climate generally favourable to forest vegetation (zones in Category 4). This concerns 412 million human beings whose way of life is fairly similar to that of the populations referred to above, but whose requirements for energy of wood and plant origin are slightly higher owing to the smaller amount of dung available and the more humid climate; 0.3 to 0.9 m³/person/year. The average supply calculated is 0.27 m³/person/year, or 30 to 90 percent of needs. Here too, therefore, there is inevitably over-use of the resources in order to cover needs. The favourable climate of these zones makes it possible to contemplate reducing part of the deficit by establishing forest plantations; but the lack of unutilized productive land in these overpopulated zones excludes the possibility of large-scale reforestation. Efforts should therefore be concentrated on integrating trees with agriculture and developing small family or community
plantations. Assuming a yield of 12 m³/ha/year of fuelwood at the age of 6 years, 25 to 30 ha would be enough to provide a considerable part of the fuelwood needed by a group of 100 people. The forestry solution to the deficit of domestic energy ascertained should therefore be given first consideration. If it is to be successful, the rural populations will have to be made aware of its importance, educated, encouraged and trained. Trees must be introduced wherever they do not hinder agricultural development and productivity, to which they should, on the contrary, contribute.
(3) Potential deficit situation (evolving towards a deficit situation).
This concerns part of the rural populations living in zones largely occupied by closed forest but where deforestation to clear the land for crop-growing is increasing. These are the zones in Category 5. In 1980 147 million people were living in rural areas in these zones where the fuelwood supply per inhabitant usually exceeds requirements. Bat the growth in population and the decrease in forest resources mean that in many places there will be a deficit situation in 2000. To cope with this situation, the people will be led to over-use the resources available, resulting in progressive impoverishment of the accessible wooded zones and in particular of the forest fallows, which will therefore no longer be able to fulfil their function fully. Measures will have to be taken now to ensure that:
- the settlement of forest land by agricultural populations is effected in accordance with sound land-use planning which provides for conservation of the forest zones indispensable for furnishing fuelwood and the development of new agricultural techniques aimed simultaneously at increasing production, stabilizing agricultural land and conserving the trees;
- the maximum possible amount of woody products is recuperated in order to avoid the wastage that now occurs during clearing;
- plantations are established as the agricultural frontier advances, without making them so extensive as to be incompatible with their high unit cost. Priority should therefore be given to community and farm plantations and the use of agro-silvicultural techniques.
If all these measures are put into effect together, it should be possible to halt the present trend, and the populations concerned should be able to cover their domestic energy needs in 2000 without major difficulties
<section>8</section>
Chapter VII - Latin America
7.1 Introduction
7.2 Regional situation in 1980
7.3 Prospects for the year 2000
7.4 Typology of deficit situations and feasibility of forestry solutions
7.1 Introduction
Latin America as a whole has a fairly positive energy balance as regards its present needs, whether for oil, gas and hydro - electric energy or for fuelwood and charcoal. But within individual sub-regions, countries or zones there is a marked difference between sectors that have abundant resources and others which lack them, in particular as regards petroleum.
The sub-regions of Central America and the Caribbean are unquestionably in the worst situation; the Andean countries with the exception of Venezuela, i.e. Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia and Chile, have relatively few petroleum resources but abundant hydro-electrical and biomass resources; Brazil has considerable resources in the form of biomass, charcoal, uranium and hydro - electricity; and the southern countries (Paraguay, Uruguay and Argentina) also have limited petroleum resources but an adequate hydro-electric potential and, in the case of Argentina, a good uranium potential.
The population of Latin America is predominantly rural and wood constitutes the main source of domestic fuel supplies. It is estimated that about 60 percent of Latin America's population lives in the country or has consumption habits characteristic of rural areas. This means that in 1980 approximately 223 million people were using wood as a source of energy.
The present per capita consumption of fuelwood for the whole region is about 0.6 m³ per year, and the average in the rural areas is 1 m³³ per year, representing a total annual consumption of 223 million m³, not counting the 50 million m³ of wood waste produced each year by industry and logging.
Fuelwood and charcoal consumption should remain stable during the forthcoming years, despite the constant rise in prices which worsens the economic situation of the rural populations, whose purchasing power is very low.
Fuelwood and charcoal from forest plantations will cost two to four times as much as that from natural forests, but it does hot seem that any effort is being made to manage and protect forests and degraded zones, although this would make it possible to improve supplies or even resolve the problem completely.
The present rate of deforestation is alarming; if it continues the forest area will be reduced by 16 percent by the year 2000.
The share of forests in energy resources varies as follows between the various zones of the regions:
Central America
Brazil
Caribbean
South Cone
Andean countries (except Venezuela)
Appropriate techniques must therefore be developed for using this resource and, above all, ending the destruction of the forests.
Except in Brazil and Argentina, no major project exists for the use of non-conventional fuels; only a small amount of research is being done on this subject and applications are still at the experimental stage.
With the exception of Venezuela and Mexico, Latin America is poor in petroleum as compared with Asia and Africa, but it has considerable energy potential in the form of hydro-electric energy and wood. The overall balance is very modest as compared with the other regions, and decisions will have to be taken very quickly in order to improve the situation by making the best possible use of the existing natural resources, of which wood is the most important.
Mexico, Central America, the Caribbean countries, the Andean countries, Brazil and the South Cone constitute the region studied ¹.
¹ In this study the word "country is systematically used for reasons of convenience, although one of the units (French Guiana) is not a country in the strict sense of the term, but a department.
7.2 Regional situation in 1980
7.2.1 Populations concerned and their energy needs
7.2.2 Forest and plant resources available as fuel
7.2.3 Identification and nature of the different categories of situation
7.2.4 Regional summary
7.2.1 Populations concerned and their energy needs
The total population of the region in 1980 was about 360 million, of whom 250 million lived in towns with more than 10 000 inhabitants and 125 million in rural areas. However, for the purposes of this study people living in towns with less than 100 000 inhabitants will be considered as belonging to the rural areas as regards energy consumption, which brings the total "rural" population up to 223 million.
This estimate is realistic because, although a large part of the rural population is grouped together in semi-rural centres, the inhabitants do not meet the minimum conditions that would make it possible to consider them as town dwellers, and they keep the habits and customs inherited from the rural environment.
According to statistics, the amount of fuelwood and wood for charcoal produced in the Latin American region in 1980 was 285.5 million m³, representing 79 percent of total removals. Compared with the total energy consumption of the region, fuelwood accounted for 18 percent of supplies; but this figure conceals a great disparity in national situations, fuelwood playing a much more important part in certain Latin American and Caribbean countries.
Domestic energy needs in rural areas are from 10 to 23 GJ per person per year, depending on local climatic, social and economic conditions.
TABLE 32: ENERGY NEEDS IN RURAL AREAS IN LATIN AMERICA
Ecological situation
Energy needs per person (GJ/person/year)
Percent of different sources of energy consumed
Fuelwood and charcoal needs (m³/person/year)
Fuelwood and Charcoal
Others
Hot region: Amazon and Orinoco basin, tropical and sub-tropical coastal area
10 to 14
50 to 60
40 to 50
0.55 to 0.90
Temperate region: Upper basins of the Amazon, Orinoco and Plate Rivers; Andes below 1 800 m
12 to 17
55 to 65
35 to 45
0.70 to 1.20
Cold region: Upper part of the Andes, southern Chile and Argentina
18 to 23
50 to 65
35 to 50
0.95 to 1.60
7.2.2 Forest and plant resources available as fuel
(a) Natural formations
(i) Tropical America
Tropical America is the most wooded of the three big tropical regions, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of its total area. The 23 countries of this region contain 678.6 million hectares of closed forests, which cover 40 percent of the land area. There are also open forests of broadleaved species, covering 264 million hectares, in the 7 tropical Latin American countries. It is difficult to estimate the area covered by shrub formations owing to the lack of quantitative studies on these formations, and to make a distinction between open forest and shrub formations. The latter were estimated to cover 14.6 million hectares in 1980.
The different types of forest have been analysed and grouped according to the following classification:
- Closed broadleaved forests
- Closed coniferous forests
- Open forest formations
- Savanna with trees
- Matorral (scrub)
- Closed forest modified by agriculture and fallows.
1. Heterogeneous tropical and sub-tropical closed forests
Forests of this type, with relatively heterogeneous and very dense stands; predominate in the region, They represent 54 percent of the total area of forest and shrub formations and 61 percent of the forest formations, or a total of 654 million hectares, lying mainly in the Amazon and Orinoco basins, Brazil and the Andean countries. The average standing volume is 100 to 300 m³ per hectare. Over the 506.5 million hectares considered as productive, the fuelwood yield is 3 m³ per hectare per year.
2. Closed coniferous forests
These forests consist essentially of conifers, with a few scattered hardwood species. The species are more homogeneous, Forests of this type are to be found mainly in Central America, the Caribbean countries and Mexico. They cover a total area of 25 million hectares, or 2 percent of the forest and shrub formations and 2.5 percent of the forest area. The productive area is 15 million hectares and the average yield of fuelwood 2.5 m³ per hectare per year.
3. Open forest formations
These are open forests studded with clearings and are found in dry regions such as eastern Paraguay and Bolivia, southern Brazil, certain parts of Venezuela and Colombia, and central Mexico. They cover a total of 225 million hectares, representing 16 percent of the total area of forest and shrub formations and 20 percent of the forest area. The average standing volume is about 80 m³ per hectare, with a yield of fuelwood and wood for charcoal of 1.5 m³ per hectare per year.
4. Savanna with trees
These are grassland prairies with scattered trees, typical of the zones known as Chaco Paraguayo, Chaco Boliviano and Cerrado Brasilero. The total area covered by formations of this type is 112 million hectares. The standing volume is 30 m^3 per hectare and the average fuelwood yield is estimated at 0.8 m³ per hectare per year.
5. Shrub formations or matorral
These are formations of low woody vegetation (less than 5 metres high), found essentially in southern Brazil, northern Mexico (chaparral) and southern Bolivia. The total area covered by these formations is estimated at 146 million hectares, with an average yield of 0.3 m³ of fuelwood per hectare per year.
6.. Closed forest fallows
It is estimated that the zones of closed forest affected by agriculture and fallows covered a total area of about 109 million hectares in 1980 (more than 99 million hectares of closed hardwood forest fallows and 10 million hectares of closed softwood forest fallows). The proportion varies from one country to another according to the density of the population practising shifting agriculture: it is low in Guyana and Bolivia, high in Mexico and in the other Central American countries, and fairly high in the Andean countries and Brazil. The average yield of fuelwood is estimated at 1 m³ per hectare per year.
(ii) Temperate America (Argentina, Uruguay and Chile)
The countries in this region contain 14.6 million hectares of closed broadleaved forests in the Andes, 0.3 million hectares of coniferous forests, 10 million hectares of open formations (60 percent in northern Argentina) and 135 million hectares of matorral (central and northern Argentina and Chile). The fuelwood yield is below that of the tropical forests (about 60 percent).
(b) Forest plantations
During recent years, owing to the increasing demand for wood and its scarcity on the countries' domestic markets, big forest plantation programmes have been launched, partly for the production of fuelwood, despite its high cost.
These programmes deserve particular attention and should be studied in more detail, particularly as regards production costs, because it will be very difficult to sell fuelwood or charcoal from these plantations to rural people who are in the habit of collecting wood from the forest near them.
Transport plays a very important, even decisive role in the marketing of fuelwood and charcoal. To be sold at a reasonable price, wood should not be transported over more than 10 km, and hence plantations for this purpose should be communal forests located near the consumer populations: this is the only way of producing wood at reasonable prices.
Eucalyptus is the species most widely used in these plantations, particularly throughout the Andean zone, where it adapts very well; but the soil is rarely rich enough and yields are therefore low (about 5 m³ per hectare per year at high altitudes). On soils of better quality, yields of 15 to 20 m³ per hectare per year are obtained.
Hardly any thinning or pruning is carried out and there is therefore no intermediate yield. These operations are sometimes done in an empirical way, but the growth of the stand often suffers as a consequence.
The countries with the highest annual rate of plantation are Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Venezuela and Mexico. In Brazil, the plantations are of eucalyptus, pine and Gmelina. The other countries use mainly pine, followed by eucalyptus (particularly Argentina).
The area covered by plantations is estimated at 4.6 million hectares (2 million hectares planted over the past five years) in the tropical countries and 1.3 million ha in the temperate countries of the South Cone.
(i) Industrial plantations
Of the 3.55 million ha of industrial plantations (of which 2.57 million are in the tropical countries), Brazil has 1.9 million ha, Argentina 450 000 ha, Chile 500 000 ha, Cuba 157 000 ha and Venezuela 120 000 ha. Forty percent of the present industrial plantations are less than five years old. In most cases the quick-growing species (Gmelina, eucalyptus, alder, poplar, Juglandaceae) or conifers (cypress, pine, Araucaria) are used. Fuelwood output is very low, because most of these plantations are intended for the paper-making industry.
(ii) Non-industrial plantations
Eighty percent of the 2.4 million ha of non-industrial plantations are concentrated in Brazil. Seventy-three percent (1.5 million ha) are eucalyptus plantations for the production of charcoal for the iron and steel industry of Minas Gerais, and 19 percent are plantations of fruit trees and palmettos.
The plantations devoted exclusively to soil protection cover 100 000 ha, in Mexico (87 000 ha), the Dominican Republic and Haiti. The other plantations (520 000 ha) are intended for the production of wood for charcoal-making. The yield of these plantations is between 5 and 15 m³ per ha per year.
(c) Other forest plantations (hedges and windbreaks)
In addition to plantations for industrial purposes (lumber) and for the production of wood for fuel and charcoal - making, hedges are planted to act as windbreaks (cercos) in cultivated areas. They are frequent in the Andean region, where small holdings predominate, slopes are steep and winds strong. These plantations are of great economic importance and constitute an additional source of income for the farmer, who uses or sells the wood, mainly for heating.
It is estimated that these hedges represent 20 percent of the plantations and that 60 percent of them are used to produce fuelwood for domestic consumption or for sale.
Bow plantations represent the equivalent of 850 000 ha and are situated mainly in fairly heavily populated zones.
The average yield of these plantations - 10 to 20 m³ per ha per year - is higher than that of the others because the trees benefit from irrigation and manuring.
(d) Agricultural residues
Agricultural residues also constitute a source of fuel supplies, particularly in Zones where wood is lacking because the natural conditions are not propitious to the growth of natural woody vegetation or because the vegetation in the region has been very degraded by over-cutting or over-grazing.
The Andean region in Peru and Bolivia illustrates this situation well: there is a large consumption of agricultural residues and above all of dung as fuel. The same situation occurs in the desert and semi-desert zones. It is very difficult to obtain statistics on agricultural residues for the regions and categories of countries adopted for the purposes of this study. The data given here are therefore mere estimates or orders of magnitude. It is estimated (to calculate the equivalent in wood of the agricultural residues) that 30 percent of the residues are accessible and utilizable as fuel and have a calorific power equal to 30 percent that of wood.
7.2.3 Identification and nature of the different categories of situation
The zone-by-zone analysis showed that the situations could be classified into 6 categories relatively homogeneous as regards area and productivity of the natural woody vegetation on the one hand, and population density and level of requirements on the other.
These categories are as follows:
- Category 1: Heavily-populated, high mountain zones with big fuelwood needs, the forest resources being exiguous or inaccessible.
- Category 2: Zones with very scanty forest resources owing either to the arid climate or to destruction by fairly big rural populations.
- Category 3: Zones with limited forest resources and low yields owing to a fairly unfavourable climate and a relatively big population.
- Category 4: Zones with low-yielding, not very accessible forest resources, and a population rather small at present but growing rapidly.
- Category 5: Zones with small populations and abundant, although not always accessible, forest resources.
- Category 6: Zones of tropical closed forest with immense forest resources and very small populations.
(a) Category 1
This consists of the Peruvian-Bolivian altiplano (south-eastern Peru and western Bolivia), which covers an area of about 125 000 km inhabited by 3.2 million people, of whom 2.2 million are rural dwellers; the area really inhabitable (Andean plateau) is, however, much smaller.
The woody vegetation is limited to high-altitude shrub formations estimated to cower 18.5 million ha, with a very low yield (0.1 m³/ha/yr), whence a very small apparent annual ' supply: 1.85 million m³ . This supply is in fact reduced owing to difficulties of access, because there are many shrub formations in the mountains and on slopes that are not accessible and not inhabited. The accessible supply may therefore be estimated at only 20%, or about 400 000 m³/year, so that the supply per inhabitant is 0.18 m³/person/year. A few plantations have been established, providing a total supply of less than 50 000 m³/yr or less than 0.02 m³/inhab./yr; and there are a few trees' planted by farmers, providing less than 0.01 m³/inhab./yr. Agricultural residues represent about 0.1 m³/inhab./yr (assuming that two-thirds must be dug back into the land). Altogether, the supply of wood and plant material utilizable as fuel is 0.31 m³/inhab./yr, while needs are estimated at between 0.95 and
1.6. The deficit is therefore in the order of 1 m³/inhab./yr. The populations make maximum use of the agricultural residues which provide them with an additional 0.2 m³/inhab./yr, and of animal dung. Despite this, needs are not usually covered, and an overall situation of acute scarcity exists, resulting in high mortality among children and the old.
(b) Category 2
This comprises the desert and sub-desert zones of the Pacific coast in northern Chile and Peru, and three countries in Central America and the Caribbean: El Salvador, Haiti and Jamaica. A total of 23.4 million people are concerned, of whom 16.2 million live in rural areas and in towns with less than 100 000 inhabitants.
(i) In the desert and sub-desert zones, inhabited by 11.7 million people, of whom 6.8 are rural dwellers, the natural vegetation is limited to shrub formations, particularly abundant in the Chilean part, and which cover a total of 22.5 million ha. The limited yield (<0.1 m³/ha/yr) provides an apparent annual supply of 2.25 million m³ , only 20 percent of which is estimated, to be accessible, whence only 450 000 m³/year or only 0.07 m³/inhab./yr. The plant at ions established are mainly for industrial purposes, so that the total supply of fuelwood is very small (about 110 000 m³/year, or less than 0.02 m³/ person/year. Finally, isolated trees on arable land and agricultural residues provide very little: less than 0.1 m³/person/year altogether. All told, the annual supply of wood and plant material utilizable as energy is only 0.19 m³/ person/year.
The people therefore over-cut the existing woody formations, which otherwise would be able to develop more and in certain places form real dry closed forests. These forests have now almost completely disappeared, owing not only to over-cutting but also to grazing by domestic animals.
In many places the populations are therefore in a situation of acute scarcity and cannot cover their needs, which are between 0.6 and 0.9 m³/person/year. The situation of Lima is particularly worrying, because the almost total destruction of tree vegetation in the vicinity of the town makes it extremely difficult to supply enough fuelwood and charcoal, the price of which reaches levels incompatible with the incomes of the poorest sectors of the population.
(ii) In the three small countries of the Central American-Caribbean zone, where the rural population is 9.4 million, the deficit situation is of the same order of magnitude, so that spots of acute scarcity already exist. The natural forest formations are very degraded and only a few tens of thousands of hectares of broadleaved and coniferous closed forest remain, the rest consisting of fallow (213.000 ha) and shrub formations (600 000 ha). The annual supply per inhabitant is 0.02 m³ in Haiti, 0.04 m³ in El Salvador and 0,26 m³ in Jamaica, assuming that all the areas are accessible. Taking into account the very limited supplies of wood from plantations (68 000 m³/year) and from village woodlots and agricultural residues, the annual supply per inhabitant is only about 0.1 to 0.3 m³. This is insufficient to cover needs, which are about 0.55 to 0.9 m³/person/year. The people continue to destroy and over-cut the vegetation, with serious consequences as regards soil erosion.
(c) Category 3
This category comprises: the relatively populated zones of Central American and Caribbean countries where the forest resources are limited because they lie in relatively dry sub-tropical zones (central Mexico, Guatemala, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Trinidad and Tobago); the populated zones of central Colombia, Peru and Chile where forest resources are relatively abundant but not very accessible; and finally eastern Brazil, heavily populated and with limited forest resources.
Altogether this concerns 201.5 million people, of whom 30 percent live in towns with more than 10 000 inhabitants. The rural population is therefore 142.7 million (75 million in Brazil alone).
The total supply of fuelwood calculated on the basis of estimates of area is 162.3 million m³/year, of which 89 million may be considered accessible. (This accessibility of the total apparent supplies varies from 40 to 90 percent according to the zone and the population distribution). The mean per capita supply is therefore 0.60 m³/person/year (the figure varying from 0,43 to 0.78 according to the country).
With the exception of south-western Brazil, very little wood is available from plantations: for the whole of this category it is an average of about 0.04 m³/inhab/yr. If farm woodlots (the supply from which is estimated at 0.05 m³/inhab./yr) and agricultural residues (0.10 m³/inhab./yr) are added, an average of 0.80 m³/inhab./yr is obtained. There is therefore an overall deficit situation which in certain regions in north-eastern Brazil may even be so bad as to lead to a reduction in the consumption of fuelwood and hence to a situation of acute scarcity.
(d) Category 4
This comprises the mountainous zones in the interior of Venezuela and Ecuador, central Brazil, eastern Paraguay, Uruguay and north-eastern Argentina. These zones are inhabited by 50 million people, of whom 29.8 million (60 percent) live in rural areas and towns with less than 100 000 inhabitants. These populations are growing rapidly at present. Fuelwood needs vary from 0.5 to 1.20 m³/inhab./yr, depending on the zone and the climate. A large part of the area in these zones (about 300 million ha) is occupied by wooded and shrub formations of low density and with a low fuelwood yield. Productive closed forests occupy no more than about 10 million hectares (together with 9 million ha of fallow). The total apparent annual supply of fuelwood is estimated at 124 million m³ , but only 50 million m³ can be considered accessible, owing to the vastness of the areas. The accessible supply per inhabitant is therefore on average 1,71 m³/year, varying according to the zone between 1.55
and 1.85 m³/year.
Fuelwood needs are therefore covered by the natural formations alone. Plantations provide a considerable additional amount in some countries (Argentina, Uruguay): the total supply is estimated at 3 million m³ , or 0. 1 m³/inhab./yr. To this should be added 0,2 m³/inhab./yr from farm woodlots and 0.15 m³/inhab./yr from agricultural residues. The total fuelwood supply is thus 2.16 m³/inhab./yr. This estimate excludes the production of the Brazilian plantations of fuelwood for the iron and steel industries and other clearly industrial uses.
At present, therefore, there is in general no problem. However, in certain regions, such as parts of the Andean plateau in Ecuador, there are deficit situations analogous to those of the similar zones in Colombia and Peru classed in the preceding category.
(e) Category 5
This comprises, in addition to northern Mexico, all the Central American countries (with the exception of southern Guatemala and of El Salvador, included in the previous categories) and the Pacific coast of Colombia and Ecuador. Also included is the interior of Argentina and the extreme south of the continent (southern Argentina and southern Chile). In all these countries the forest resources are abundant as compared with the population: 29 million inhabitants, of whom 25.2 million live in rural areas. In some zones the forest resources are even very abundant as compared with the population (northern Guatemala, eastern Nicaragua, Belize, eastern Honduras, eastern Panama), but real accessibility is limited. Overall, the accessible supply per inhabitant is everywhere more than 2.5 m³/yr. This amply covers the needs, which range from 0.5 to 1.2 m³/inhab./yr according to the zone and the climate. There is therefore practically no fuelwood supply problem.
(f) Category 6
This consists of all the zones situated in the Amazonian region in the broad sense of the term, where the forest resources are immense and the population very small (13.8 million in rural areas). This region, which contains the world's 'largest tropical forest reserves, does not, of course, have any problem as regards fuelwood supplies, which are 100 times greater than requirements.
TABLE 33 - SUPPLY OF WOOD FUEL RESOURCES IN 1980
Categories of situations
Population
Total annual accessible supplies
Total
Annual supply per inhabitant
Total
Rural
Natural formations
Plantations
Farm wood-lots
Woody Residues
Total
Rural
(...millions...)
(...million m³...)
(m³/person/year)
Category 1: Andean meseta
0.1 to 0.3
0.2 to 0.4
Category 2: Arid zones in the western part of South America and densely-populated zones
0.1 to 0.15
0.1 to 0.3
Category 3: Populated semi-arid and Andean zones
0.5 to 0.6
0.7 to 0.9
Category 4: Less populated sub - tropical and temperate zones
Category 5: Sub-tropical and temperate zones with new and growing human settlements
Category 6: Amazonian zones with abundant forest resources
TABLE 34 - OVERALL FUELWOOD BALANCE 1980
Categories of situation
Level of needs
Level of supplies
Average balance
Order of magnitude
deficit
surplus
m³/person/year
million m³/year
Category 1: Andean meseta
0.9 to 1.6
0.2 to 0.4
Category 2: Arid zones in the eastern part of South America and densely-populated zones
0.6 to 0.9
0.1 to 0.3
Category 3: Populated semi-arid and Andean zones
0.7 to 1.2
0.6 to 1
Category 4: Less populated sub-tropical and temperate zones
0.5 to 1.2
1.9 to 2.3
Category 5: Sub-tropical and temperate zones with new and growing human settlements
0.5 to 1.2
Category 6: Amazonian zones with abundant forest resources
0.4 to 1.1
higher
7.2.4 Regional summary
The following tables show, for each category of situation, the total supplies of wood fuel and the overall balance per rural inhabitant. They underline the contrasts within the region as regards fuelwood.
In the high mountain zones, where needs are high, the climate harsh and forest resources rare, and in the zones where forest resources are very limited owing either to the arid climate or to pressure from a large rural population, a real situation of acute scarcity is revealed: fuelwood supplies, counting all resources, cannot cover more than a quarter of the needs per rural inhabitant if the limits compatible with sustained production are to be respected. There is therefore marked over-use of the accessible resources and maximum use of agricultural residues as fuel. Despite this the rural populations are generally faced with an imbalance between supplies and needs, an acute scarcity which is becoming worse and which has serious implications both of a social and economic nature and for the environment and natural resources. The situation is particularly serious in three countries of Central America (Haiti, Jamaica and El Salvador), and on the high Andean Plateau, in Bolivia
and Peru.
In the relatively dry sub-tropical zones where the forest resources are limited either by nature or by accessibility and where the population is fairly dense, the elements of a deficit situation are manifest. The level of accessible supplies of fuelwood compatible with the maintenance of sustained production shows a deficit as compared with needs per inhabitant. This deficit, still limited for these zones as a whole, assumes alarming proportions in certain cases, such as north - western Brazil.
In contrast, the other categories of situation, particularly categories 5 and 6 with large forest resources and small populations, obviously do not have any immediate supply problem: the natural formations alone suffice to cover present levels of needs. The extent of the resources of the Amazon region is particularly striking.
7.3 Prospects for the year 2000
7.3.1. Growth in population and needs
7.3.2 Changes in fuelwood and charcoal resources
7.3.3 Balance foreseeable in the year 2000
Leaving out of account the increasing shortage of fossil energy (petroleum) and taking as a basis normal population growth rates, an average rate of deforestation or degradation of the natural forests, the plantation programme from now to the year 2000 and energy needs in 1980, the situation in the year 2000 can be assessed as set out below.
7.3.1. Growth in population and needs
The following table gives an idea of the increase in population, based on average growth rates in each country in the region, both for the total population and for the urban and rural populations separately.
TABLE 35 POPULATION IN THE YEAR 2000
Category
Total population
Rural population
Urban population
7.3.2 Changes in fuelwood and charcoal resources
(a) Natural formations
The wood resources from productive closed forests will fall by more than 13 percent owing to deforestation, which will proceed at an average rate of 3 500 000 hectares per year between 1980 and 2000.
In order to analyse deforestation in tropical America, it is necessary to group the countries according to their situation in this respect. On the one hand there are countries or zones where deforestation is insignificant owing to the absence of agricultural pressure on forest land: this is the case in Guyana and most of Brazilian Amazonia (Category 6). At the other extreme, there are countries where deforestation is insignificant for the simple reason that there are no forests (El Salvador, Haiti and Jamaica in Category 2). In almost all the other countries, there is a considerable amount of deforestation in both absolute and relative terms. The process of deforestation is at different stages according to the country. It has increased regularly in countries where the wooded zones previously out of reach are becoming more and more accessible as a result of infrastructure and settlement programmes, as in Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia. Deforestation is slower if the
wooded zones are situated on hilly terrain or in zones difficult of access, or if there are conservation programmes: Costa Rica, Honduras, Brazil and Venezuela.
The most important factor in deforestation is spontaneous shifting cultivation, which is responsible for almost all the deforestation in Mexico, Central America, the Andean countries and Paraguay. In each country the area of forest fallow increases with the spread of shifting cultivation (1.5 million hectares per year). The other forms of deforestation are essentially due to shifting cultivation without rotation in the mountainous areas and to intensive livestock-raising.
The Brazilian formations known as "cerrado", and other types of open formations, which represent three-quarters of the open forests in tropical America, are reduced mainly by extensive forms of livestock-raising and by felling to supply wood for the iron and steel industry. These losses are evaluated at a little over 1 million hectares per year. In the other countries the open formations are not being destroyed very quickly, but they are threatened by many factors of degradation: fires, over - cutting for the production of fuel-wood and charcoal, and over-grazing. The zones most affected are the Chaco and the Brazilian "cerrado", and the dry forests of the Peruvian coastal area.
TABLE 36 - NATURAL FORMATIONS
Category
Pall in the supply of wood (as percentage)
Total supply in the year 2000 (in millions of m³ per year)
Average accessible percentage
Accessible volume (in millions of m³ per year)
Supply per inhabitant (in m³ per year)
(b) Forest plantations
In accordance with the trends or the plantation programmes in each country, it is estimated that in the region as a whole an average of 600 000 hectares per year will be planted, of which 125 000 hectares will be for the production of fuelwood and charcoal.
TABLE 37 - FOREST PLANTATIONS
Category
Total supply in the year 2000 (in thousands of m³- per year)
Supply for rural populations (m^3 per person per year)
e
NE
NE
(c) Hedges and windbreaks
Since it is not possible to forecast whether row plantations will increase or decrease, because they are linked to the bringing into cultivation of new arable land, it is assumed that the supplies of wood from this source will remain at the same level as in 1980. .
(d) Agricultural residues
It is assumed that in the year 2000 this source too will be at the same level as in 1980.
TABLE 38: SUMMARY OF WOOD FUEL SUPPLIES IN THE YEAR 2000 IN RURAL AREAS (m³/PERSON/YEAR)
Category
Natural formations
Plantations
Row plantations
Agricultural residues
Total supplies
NE
NE
NE
TABLE 39: SUMMARY OF WOOD FUEL SUPPLIES AND NEEDS IN THE YEAR 2000. IN RURAL AREAS (m³/PERSON/YEAR)
Category
Needs
Supplies
Balance
0.9 to 1.5
0.15 to 0.35
0.5 to 0.8
0.05 to 0.15
0.6 to 1.1
0.3 to 0.5
0.4 to 1.1
0.9 to 1.2
0.4 to 1.1
1.3 to 1.7
0.4 to 1.1
7.3.3 Balance foreseeable in the year 2000
This balance indicates the following developments in the different categories of situations identified in 1980:
- Category 1: Andean Plateau. Apparently little change in the situation of acute scarcity noted previously. Total supplies per inhabitant will fall. by about 20 percent, covering only one-fifth of needs as compared with one-quarter in 1980. The fall in supplies is connected with the degradation of the natural formations, for which new plantations compensate only to a small extent. Given the growth in population, the overall deficit will be double the 1980 figure and may reach 4 million m³.
- Category 2: Arid zones in western South America and heavily - populated zones in Central America, The acute scarcity existing in 1980 will worsen. Owing essentially to an accelerated decline in the natural formations, total supplies per inhabitant will drop by practically a half and in the year 2000 will represent barely more than one-tenth of the populations' needs. The total fuelwood deficit will be more than 15 million m³, and it can already be stated that this fuel will no longer play more than a marginal role in El Salvador, Haiti and Jamaica, which contain two-thirds of the populations in this category.
- Category 3: Populated zones in the relatively dry sub-tropical area and the remaining Andean zones. The bulk of the supplies in 1980 came from natural formations. By the year 2000 they will be considerably decreased owing to the growth in population -this category contains about two-thirds of the region's rural population. The combined effect of deforestation and population growth will bring the available supply per inhabitant of fuelwood from natural formations down to one-third of the 1980 level. The increase in supplies from the plantations planned is completely inadequate to compensate for the overall trend. The total supply per inhabitant will fall by a half, but it will still remain significant, covering about half the needs. It must be emphasized, however, that the overall increase in the deficit will be accompanied by extension and worsening of the zones of acute scarcity incipient in 1980.
- Category 4: Less populated zones of the sub-tropical and temperate areas. No overall deficit in this category appears in the year 2000, although there will be a considerable fall. in supplies from natural formations. In view of the growth in population the positive balance between supplies and needs per inhabitant will be reduced to a quarter of that in 1980. It is the accelerated degradation of this balance per inhabitant and the. existence of pockets of actual deficit in this category that causes it to be classified as a potential deficit situation, despite a positive overall balance. The problem arises particularly in regions where population density is greatest and in those where large agricultural development programmes will not maintain a sufficient fuelwood resource. It applies also to zones where the provision of industrial fuelwood or charcoal gives rise to intensive deforestation over large areas.
- Category 5: Sub-tropical and temperate zones with recent and growing settlement zones. Despite a marked drop in accessible fuelwood supplies, the level of supplies in the year 2000 will remain well in excess of the populations' needs. The available surplus illustrates the energy potential of the forest resources over and above satisfying the fuelwood needs of the populations which use this fuel.
- Category 6: Zones with abundant forest resources in the Amazon basin. The situation of abundance remains unchanged in this category, which comprises the world's largest forest reserves and which remains sparsely populated.
7.4 Typology of deficit situations and feasibility of forestry solutions
7.4.1 Situations of acute scarcity affecting three main groups of populations
7.4.2 Deficit situation
7.4.3 Potential deficit situation
The three main types of critical situations identified in Latin America are as follows:
7.4.1 Situations of acute scarcity affecting three main groups of populations
(i) The Bolivian and Peruvian Altiplano, where 2.2 million people depend on traditional fuels: fuelwood and plant and animal residues. In difficult ecological and topographical conditions, accessible fuelwood resources are very limited, while the harshness of the climate results in needs being high. Despite over-use of all the available resources, there is a very acute scarsity of fuelwood: only 25 percent of the needs are covered, and the deficit amounts to about 1 m³/person/year. The conditions of growth, the limited amount of land available and the fragility of an environment that is already often very degraded, offer limited prospects for forestry solutions. In many cases, at high altitudes only intensified rural plantation programmes will be able to ensure that wood fuel continues to make an effective contribution to meeting the minimum energy needs of the rural populations: forestry solutions will have only a limited impact on solving the problem of rural energy,
but they are essential because of their simultaneous effect in maintaining the natural resources and a productive environment.
(ii) The arid and sub-arid, zones of the Pacific coast of South America, containing some 7 million people dependent on traditional fuels. The accessible supply of natural woody vegetation is less than 0.1 m³/person/year and the other woody resources add very little to this. Despite a relatively low level of needs - 0.6 to 0.9 m³/person/year - they will only be partially covered, and here too there is a very marked scarcity, accompanied by over-use of the available resources. Because of the aridity, only limited, localized forestry solutions in the form of plantations can be envisaged.
(iii) The three most densely populated countries of Central America - Haiti, Jamaica and El Salvador - where more than 9 million people have a rural-type energy consumption, with needs of 0.55 to 0.9 m³/person/year. The very limited fuelwood supplies cover only a quarter of these needs, and the people are forced to over-cut all the available woody resources, with serious consequences for the vegetation and the soils. Relatively favourable ecological conditions should favour the establishment of plantations enabling at least part of the resource to be reconstituted; but this would hardly be able to make up for the rapid growth in population leading to more acute scarcity per inhabitant.
7.4.2 Deficit situation
Deficit situation affecting almost two-thirds of the populations with a rural type of energy consumption in the region. These populations are usually able to satisfy their minimum energy needs, but at the price of over - using the resources and hence degrading their potential. Needs are in the order of 0.7 to 1.2 m³/person/year. In the zones of Central America and the Caribbean, the limited forest resources are decreasing rapidly owing to over-cutting; in the zones concerned in the Andean countries, the forest resources exist but are difficult of access; and in eastern Brazil the deficit situation is the result of high population and limited resources. If present trends continue, the deficit per inhabitant will reach 0.4 m³ in the year 2000, while the global figure will triple, reaching 117 million m³. However diverse the various situations, the extent of the foreseeable deficit and the speed with which the situations will deteriorate make it essential that full attention be
paid to them. For the category as a whole, three main types of measures must be taken as quickly as possible: management of the accessible forest resources and integration of the energy and production functions; accelerated establishment of forest plantations; and, when the supply of unused productive land is limited, development of farm woodlots and family and community plantations. The ecological conditions are generally favourable and the forestry solution to the rapidly growing deficit should be put into practice with the utmost priority and without delay: actions should be oriented above all towards maintaining and/or restoring decentralized provisioning for rural communities, guaranteeing them autonomous energy supplies and providing them with access to the resource while making them responsible for its maintenance.
7.4.3 Potential deficit situation
Potential deficit situation affecting about 30 million people in the mountainous zones of Venezuela and Ecuador and the south-east of South America. The accessible natural formations were sufficient to cover the needs of 0.5 to 1.2 m³/ person/year in 1980. But the growth in population in zones occupied largely by vast stretches of low-yielding broken formations will result in deforestation on such a scale that fuelwood supplies will eventually be threatened. It is this degradation that makes it necessary to underline the critical nature of these situations, which might result in an overall deficit soon after the year 2000. This could easily be prevented if programmes for the settlement of new lands maintained and incorporated sufficient forest zones to ensure the supply of fuelwood, and complementary plantation programmes were undertaken at the same time, with priority given to action at the level of individual peasants and communities.
These measures must be taken immediately if they are to be fully effective, without waiting until the trend now observable takes a turn that would make the situation more and more difficult to control. A forestry solution is completely feasible in this type of situation, coverage of the populations' fuelwood requirements in the year 2000 can be ensured without major difficulty provided the necessary action is undertaken without delay.
<section>9</section>
Chapter VIII - Improving the situations: solutions and strategies
8.1 The feasibility of forestry solutions
8.2 Strategic action guidelines
8.3 Scope of the strategies concerning fuelwood
The results of the analyses presented in the preceding chapters have demonstrated the seriousness and the size of the gap between accessible supplies compatible with sustained production and the present minimum levels of fuelwood needs. About 920 million rural people were affected by such situations in 1980 and this figure might be two and a half times greater by the year 2000 should present trends persist. In vast zones of western and eastern Africa and in the Indian sub-continent, fuelwood may well be playing no more than a marginal role by then. But all recent experience has shown that no substitute energy is able, under acceptable technical and socio-economic conditions, to replace fuelwood on a scale able to have a real impact on these gloomy prospects. This means that at least for the last two decades of this century the rural populations in the Third World, and probably the poorest urban sectors, will continue to depend to an over-whelming extent on the plant fuels
immediately available in their environment. This situation will continue until the conditions for a mass substitution of another energy source for fuelwood are met: and even then considerable time will have to elapse before a new technology can noticeably change a situation, so that it will take that much longer to have an impact. However, the fact that the real nature and extent of the problem is now being increasingly recognized already constitutes a first important step towards resolving it, or at least reversing the present trends.
The problem is, then, of exceptional gravity, and it is essential to examine, however briefly, the possible solutions. Up to the energy crisis of the seventies, it was assumed that the transition from traditional fuelwood to commercial energies was automatic, and few deliberate efforts were made to control, far less improve, fuelwood supplies. But now fuelwood, a renewable source of energy of local origin, has strategic as well as social importance. It is therefore essential that forestry's full potential to resolve the problem and maintain supplies be mobilized. This chapter will therefore analyse the feasibility of forestry solutions aimed at increasing fuelwood supplies. It will also show that no single or simple solution will suffice and that a number of actions will have to be combined in strategies adapted to the specific situation. It will also emphasize that in most cases there is a common denominator of similar constraints which hinder action. The removal of these
constraints can set in motion a dynamic process of development..
8.1 The feasibility of forestry solutions
8.1.1 Increasing the productivity of the natural formations
8.1.2 Creating new resources: plantations
8.1.3 Coordination of forestry solutions
Forestry solutions to the problem of increasing the amount of wood available for energy rely either on increased mobilization of the potential of existing natural formations or on the provision of new resources. These two types of solution must usually be applied simultaneously in view of the need to produce effective results as soon as possible in situations of fuelwood deficit. Ecological conditions constitute a serious limiting factor in many cases of aridity or difficult terrain; but even if the impact of forestry solutions on energy supplies remains limited, the role of trees in conserving the environment and in local agricultural and pastoral economies makes recourse to these solutions equally necessary, it is essential, in fact, that the fuelwood problem and its solutions be tackled in close coordination with integrated land management and cultivation systems, since for the populations concerned they constitute an indivisible whole. In fact, any forestry solution to
the problem of fuelwood supplies cannot and should not be considered in isolation from the overall problem of the complex role of forest resources in the rural economy and of their various contributions, productive and protective. Forestry solutions to the fuelwood crisis are inseparable from forest policy and management, to which they contribute fresh impulse and importance. The forestry solutions contemplated must therefore affect not only woody vegetation and stands of all sizes, but also the association of forest trees, even isolated ones, with agricultural or pastoral practices, in view of the role that all these elements may play in ensuring supplies.
8.1.1 Increasing the productivity of the natural formations
The combined effects of logging, grazing and destruction by fire or other agents, particularly climatic ones, limit or reduce the potential yield of the natural formations, in particular open forest, savanna and steppe. The productivity of these formations can usually be increased considerably by more rational use of the available woody biomass and by applying relatively simple protection methods. Recent studies, particularly by FAO, have shown that 75 m³ per hectare of fuelwood are available in the Terai region in Nepal, more than 80 m³ per hectare in the Brazilian "cerrado" and 30 m³ in the central southern part of Upper Volta. A considerable percentage of these supplies is frequently wasted either during commercial felling or through burning by shifting cultivators or shepherds, or even during official deforestation and settlement programmes. The productivity of the natural formations can be improved by relatively simple means: tests with protection measures have resulted
in a doubling of the yield from savanna formations; in other cases it is necessary only to include the production of energy as an additional objective in forest management. What makes these actions complex is the necessity of reconciling them with the local population's need for new arable land or pasture, and of obtaining the indispensable adherence of this population.
There are, however, very important obstacles:
- the difficulty of managing vast stretches of natural formations, of low to average productivity, for forestry services that are not very well established and have limited staff and means;
- possible lack of interest on the part of populations who have traditionally been excluded from management of the forest resources and who see these resources as a form of land use in competition with the uses that meet their immediate needs;
- the difficulty of controlling fires and preventing them spreading;
- the difficulty of organizing grazing and avoiding destruction of the woody vegetation by a livestock population that far exceeds the capacity of the grass cover;
- the lack of information both on existing resources and on the possibilities of improving their fuelwood yield by, among other things, associating it with other production and protection functions;
- the sometimes very advanced state of degradation of the woody vegetation, which despite the protection measures is no longer able to reconstitute itself, particularly if the ecological conditions are not favourable.
To ensure that forest land is managed effectively, forestry services must work in cooperation with the rural development and livestock services and with the direct participation by the people concerned. A positive attitude, indeed active participation by the people in the protection and management of the forest resources on which their supplies depend, is indispensable: they must therefore be made continuously aware of the role of the forest in their well-being and in the local economy.
In many cases a particularly effective way of getting rural populations to adopt a responsible attitude towards their forest resources is to entrust them with the management of these resources, with the technical assistance of the forestry service, and to allow them to reap the benefits. The task of the forestry service is thus radically altered: direct action on forest stands is replaced by support for actions undertaken by the people themselves in accordance with what they themselves see as their needs - actions which , require technical and logistical assistance in order to improve their chances of success¹. In the initial stage the forestry service must devote itself to showing the people what can and should be done and the benefits that would result.
¹ This new orientation of forestry action and the far-reaching changes it necessitates have been discussed in several FAO documents, and more particularly in "The role of forests in the development of local communities", FAO, Rome, 1978.
However, forest resources situated near big markets, such as large towns, will have to continue, in the main, to be directly managed by the forestry service in order to ensure regular supplies for consumers under satisfactory economic conditions. At the same time it is necessary to avoid fuelwood supplies being diverted to town dwellers to the detriment of the rural people, who are usually poorer.
If a big effort is made to overcome the difficulties that have been enumerated, in many situations characterized by the existence of still relatively extensive natural formations improved management could result in a perceptible increase in the output of wood fuels within 10 to 15 years. If this action is conducted in conjunction with actions to increase output of the other forest products, improve agricultural productivity and, where applicable, introduce a settled type of farming, the annual rate of deforestation could be markedly reduced and fuelwood supplies considerably increased.
In many situations a relatively simple calculation is possible: an average increase of 20 percent in the yield of the accessible natural formations as a whole constitutes a realistic target that does not require large investments. The increase in supplies can easily be compared with the total area of plantations that would have to be established to provide the same amount, assuming average yields, and the generally high cost of such an operation. This comparison often illustrates how advisable it would be to accord prior attention to improving the productivity of the natural formations - a solution difficult to implement successfully but which gives particularly rewarding results.
8.1.2 Creating new resources: plantations
The creation of additional wood energy resources is frequently essential, all the more so because the populations which depend on this source of energy are usually concentrated in regions which by force of circumstances have been subjected to intensive deforestation: the remaining natural formations are not able to ensure sufficient supplies even if their productivity is improved. Forest plantations have often been preferred too, because they are relatively easy to establish and manage successfully. However, the feasibility and impact of these plantations are limited by major difficulties: ecological conditions, the lack of sufficiently favourable land, the attitude of the populations concerned, the costs.
(a) Ecological conditions in the deficit zones, in particular the climate and the soils, are often not very favourable to plantations, whose survival and yield is affected by unfavourable and unforeseeable variations. It is relatively easy to make a success of the first few years, but more difficult to maintain a satisfactory level of productivity up to the end. Information and basic research on exotic and indigenous species, planting and management techniques, tending, and the prevention of diseases and shortages are often inadequate and the distribution of such information often leaves something to be desired. These obstacles are often underestimated and many large-scale projects are drawn up on the basis of an extrapolation of the results obtained in research plots benefiting from special care under site and scale conditions that make them irrelevant. In addition, the real complexity of combining protection and tending with the achievement of maximum productivity is not
always fully grasped.
All these technical aspects require priority attention: forest plantations must be approached in the same way as other agricultural undertakings. The trees constitute a crop, requiring selection of species and provenances, choice of site and follow-up action that guarantees the best possible results, if the operation is to be profitable.
(b) The lack of land where conditions are favourable to forest plantations is a widespread problem, because it is often the need for arable land that has led to the deforestation which makes it necessary to plant trees: farmers are rarely willing to release land for plantations unless their low fertility renders them marginal for agricultural purposes. Various solutions are possible:
- establish plantations in marginal zones where they will have the double purpose of restoring denuded or eroded land and producing: results from the point of view of production alone are rarely encouraging.
- replant forest areas previously cleared of their natural vegetation. This solution often proves expensive owing to the cost of clearing and can only be justified if it has been ascertained by careful study that the existing vegetation is too degraded or unproductive and that it is preferable to incur the costs and the risks inherent in a new plantation rather than attempt to increase the yield from a vegetation that has the merit of being adapted to the local ecological conditions. In all cases the site conditions must be such as to enable a reasonable yield to be expected. It is usually this solution that lends itself to large-scale plantations established by forestry administrations on State-owned lands.
- increase the number of trees grown outside forest lands. Widespread distribution of trees in every vacant spot throughout the countryside undoubtedly represents a particularly promising way of increasing the supply of fuelwood. The integration of trees and agriculture, in particular agro-forestry, constitutes an extension of the management of forest resources and a remarkably flexible way of resolving the conflict between agriculture and forestry by fusing the populations' various interests and multiplying the benefits they can obtain directly from the same plot. In many cases the traditional land-use systems already provide for such integration.
Mention should also be made of the decisive effect that the improvement and intensification of agricultural productivity can have on land use, with the result that land may be made available for fuelwood plantations.
(c) The attitude of the people is a determining factor. People do not feel concerned by or interested in plantations in the form of blocks of a certain size, immobilized for forestry use for a long period of time, about which they have not been consulted and the yield from which will not provide them with any direct, substantial and equitably divided benefits. At best the most that can be expected is a passive attitude: often there is more or less open hostility, resulting in illegal felling and degradation. In addition, it is relatively easy to plant a tree but notoriously more difficult to convince a peasant to assign part of his land to this purpose and to protect and tend the tree until it reaches maturity.
There is only one, many-sided solution: active participation by the people from the earliest stage up to the time when the final benefits are reaped. A plantation must meet the people's needs as they themselves see them and constitute for them an interesting line of production whose protection and management will produce more direct benefits than would its destruction and replacement by some other way of using the same piece of land.
Pull advantage must be taken of two determining aspects: the capacity of any forest plantation, through a judicious choice of species and techniques, to fulfil a number of objectives (provision of wood, fruit and fodder, protection, etc.); and the people's undoubted interest in plantations whose principal aim is to satisfy their domestic requirements for energy and other products. Beyond this, the major condition for the success of plantation programmes is that the people be aware of the importance of the fuelwood problem and of their role and interest in improving supplies. Before organizing and training the people, foresters have an essential role to play in stimulating such awareness by providing information and acting as animators.
(d) The costs of implementation undoubtedly constitute an obstacle to increasing the areas planted in proportion to needs and probable deficits. Concordant observations made by FAO, the World Bank and other bodies indicate that in 1981 the costs of establishing and tending large-scale plantations in the Sahelian region, were well over US$1 000 per hectare, for an expected average yield of 4 to 7 m³/ha/year. Two solutions are possible: recourse to external financing, or mobilization of local resources with the agreement of the populations concerned.
In the first case the benefits to be expected from programmes financed by loans must be carefully evaluated, particularly as regards the solidity of the factors (yields, quality and value of products, time span, etc.) that condition financial profitability. The accompanying measures, human resources, infrastructure and institutions must also be considered with particular attention, owing to their decisive role in ensuring that the operation is conducted to a successful conclusion. Profitability can also be improved by modifying the traditional concept of forest production, adopting shorter rotations and producing more small wood.
Active participation by the local people in operations of which they obtain the benefits makes it possible to cover a considerable part of the costs of installation from local resources, in particular labour. Not including the value of the land, the cost of the inputs at market price that the State has to provide for a community plantation programme usually represents between one-third and one-quarter per cubic metre produced of that for a standard large-scale programme ¹. Here again it is necessary to motivate the population and to provide real support through appropriate incentive measures and technical assistance.
¹ "Potential for Fuelwood and Charcoal in the Energy Systems of Developing Countries", prepared by Meta Systems Inc., as a US input for the FAO Forestry Department Secretariat for the UN Technical Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal. 1980
8.1.3 Coordination of forestry solutions
In most cases improvements and increases in fuelwood supplies will depend on a complex programme ranging from actions to increase the yield of natural formations to the creation of new resources. The specific conditions of each situation will determine the result to be expected and the respective importance to be given to these forestry solutions. The effective importance of fuelwood in the rural economy and a detailed analysis of costs and benefits will provide valuable indications for improving the effectiveness of the actions. In cases where the ecological situation is particularly difficult or population density particularly high, these forestry solutions will probably be able to play only a limited role and require complementary action. Bat it must be emphasized that in all cases the forestry solutions should be incorporated into a supply and distribution plan which guarantees access by the people to the fuel they need under economic and stable conditions. Given the
weight and bulkiness of wood fuel, the spatial distribution of the resources as compared with the demand, the transport infrastructure and the organization of distribution are important aspects inseparable from the feasibility and impact of the forestry solutions. It is necessary to ensure, in particular, that supplies for large towns or more heavily populated zones are not guaranteed at the expense of the people in the neighbouring rural reas.
Because of their complexity and the importance of what is at stake, the forestry solutions to be implemented must constitute an important and integral part of a country's forest policy: this should simultaneously reveal effective aknowledgement of the extent of the energy contribution of forest resources and demonstrate the political authorities' commitment to voluntarist actions at all levels in this field.
8.2 Strategic action guidelines
8.2.1 Short to medium-term actions
8.2.2 Medium - to long-term actions
In most of the situations that have been identified, the deferred impact of the forestry solutions alone will not make it possible to resolve in the short term the tensions and problems resulting from insufficient fuelwood supplies. In practice it will always be necessary to resort to a combination of measures affecting the main parameters of supply and demand. What is needed is a real strategy for attacking the problem: the general outlines of this can be indicated, but the specific ingredients will have to be combined in accordance with the particular situations. And it must be emphasized from the start that any strategy concerning fuelwood must be closely linked with the national energy situation and in particular with clear recognition of the importance of this source of energy as compared with the other forms of energy available and according to the various groups of users and requirements. The production of wood-energy must also be set within the wider context of the
overall contribution of forest vegetation and trees to the rural and national economy and to the maintenance of productive environmental conditions. The production of energy is only one aspect, important but not unique, of the forestry sector's contribution to development.
As part of the preparations for the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, Nairobi 1981, ^a technical panel went very fully into the problem of fuelwood and charcoal. This panel's main contribution to the Conference consisted of the ; formulation of a "Strategy for fuelwood as a source of energy for survival and development¹.
¹ Report of the Technical Panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal on its second session, United Nations General Assembly, February 1981. A/CONF.100/PC/34.
The salient features and implications of this strategy are briefly reviewed in the following paragraphs in order to emphasize both the extent and the complexity of the tasks to be carried out.
A strategy for fuelwood has to recognize the absolute necessity of combining short-term actions with longer-term ones, those aimed at increasing supplies with those aimed at lowering demand, so as to tackle the problem from all sides at once and prevent it assuming unmanageable proportions before the more far-reaching solutions can produce their effect. Six main types of action were thus identified, affecting both supply and demand of fuelwood.
8.2.1 Short to medium-term actions
8.2.1.1 Substitution or supplement by other sources of energy, particularly commercial ones, may be indispensable in the worst situations in order to supplement fuelwood resources that are clearly insufficient to cover even minimum requirements. This may even be just a temporary measure to alleviate pressure on the remaining resources and gain time in which to establish new resources and await their entry into production. So far such actions have been limited to urban areas - e.g. the campaign to introduce butane in Senegal; and even here they have come up against the obstacles of the cost of the substitute fuel and the equipment for using it, and the difficulties of getting the people to accept a fuel with characteristics different to the traditional one. Substitution proves particularly difficult for domestic uses, and recent surveys have shown housewives' attachment to the traditional fuels. There is no doubt, however, that in situations of acute scarcity the use of
substitute fuels will be more and more necessary in order to assure coverage of the minimum energy requirements. Efforts to encourage substitution should be aimed initially at uses for which such fuels are best adapted, such as rural industries, brick-making plants, pottery works, etc., which it is easier to influence owing to their concentration, provided a regular supply is guaranteed. In the longer term all possible uses of a renewable substitute fuel should be encouraged as the technology and equipment become available under technical, social and economic conditions appropriate to the specific uses.
8.2.1.2 The distribution of wood fuels must be organized and controlled in order to ensure regular supplies and thus avoid both acute seasonal fluctuations and the appearance of localized shortages a short distance away from surplus areas, which often marks the situations observed, particularly in Africa. In most cases this poses the problems of absence or inadequacy of a communication and transport infrastructure, change-over from a traditional, informal organization to a modern, structured organization for distribution, control of the machinery for fixing prices and the possible disturbing effect of big concentrations of demand, such as large towns, or situations of oligopoly. These aspects rarely form the object of voluntarist action, although they are fundamental if rational use is to be made of resources in the face of demand. The transformation of fuel-wood from a traditionally free product into an item with a monetary value should draw increasing attention to the
importance of marketing and the need to encourage effective distribution under regular and equitable economic conditions. The transformation of fuel-wood into a normal economic commodity cannot but encourage greater efficiency in production and use.
8.2.1.3 The improvement of conversion techniques covers a number of operations, from harvesting to charcoal-making, including packaging for transport and processing for making available to the user a fuel with the highest possible energy yield. These techniques aim at better utilization of the existing resources and include drying of the fuel, the improvement of transport and storage conditions through densification or agglomeration, and the promotion of higher-yielding charcoal-making techniques. All these measures result in the provision of a better-quality fuel, extension of the range of the biomass utilizable as fuel and improvement of the handling and transportation conditions, and the production of more charcoal of similar or higher quality from the same woody mass. Improved processing techniques can make possible considerable savings by reducing the demand for wood for the same energy use. These measures should include a particular effort to disseminate knowledge and
appropriate techniques, regroup procedures in order to improve their productivity and their investment capacity, and establish distribution circuits promoting effective economic organization while safeguarding employment.
8.2.1.4 The improvement of wood-burning stoves is of particular importance because of the low thermic yield usually obtained from the fuel by traditional methods - seldom over 10 percent of wood's calorific value. In view of the amount of wood used for domestic purposes, efforts should be concentrated mainly on domestic stoves, but without ignoring other uses such as tea and tobacco-drying equipment, ovens for smoking fish, bread-ovens, etc. It is technically possible, without major difficulties, to save one-third or more of fuel, and hence to lower fuelwood requirements by this amount, by using stoves that are better designed and better used. For this it is necessary to tackle all aspects, including the characteristics and preparation of the fuel, and cooking and heating methods and equipment. The use of locally available materials and technical skills makes it possible to produce improved stoves at very modest prices - less than US$10 per unit: an investment which, at the
current price of wood, is usually amortized very quickly. However, experience has demonstrated that social, cultural and nutritional customs, and resistance to change in an important aspect of the household's life, constitute determining factors in the acceptability of an appropriate technical solution and may considerably slow down its dissemination and hence its impact. The short-term effect should not be overestimated, therefore: considerable results are possible, but they require close attention to local conditions, prior designing, jointly with the users, of appropriate and well-tried models, testing under real conditions of use, considerable technical assistance and the participation of local organizations and associations in the promotional campaign. However, in the most serious situations it is the solution with the greatest potential . short-term impact; it therefore warrants full attention, but also serious preparation in order to ensure success.
8.2.2 Medium - to long-term actions
Measures able to improve the fuelwood situation rapidly are an important way of reducing tensions so as to facilitate the introduction of measures whose effect will be longer-lasting and slower to appear. These consist essentially of actions to increase the amount of fuelwood available by improving the productivity of the existing resources or establishing new ones. The feasibility of these actions was discussed in the previous section, and they are now briefly taken up again here.
8.2.2.1 Increasing the productivity of the existing natural formations should receive an attention proportionate to the usually considerable contribution of these formations to supplies. The analysis of many situations shows that these natural formations constitute the bulk of the supplies and that a considerable proportion of them is still almost inaccessible. In those which are accessible, productivity can often be increased by between 50 and 100 percent. Except in cases of severe degradation, natural formations (forests, tree and shrub formations) afford the possibility of increasing fuel-wood supplies through relatively simple protection methods and rational management. Three aspects are involved: fuller mobilization of the available biomass, avoiding the abandonment of waste and small, recuperable elements; increasing the actual productivity of the existing biomass by methods which stimulate its growth; improvement and simultaneous control of access to the resources.
Conditions for people's access to the fuelwood resources are of particular importance because they condition not only the effective mobilization of the resources but also the people's attitude towards them. Accessibility is determined by a complex set of physical, economic and juridical factors and is often inseparable from rational use of the resources.
Improvement of the economic conditions for the production and marketing of fuelwood can undoubtedly increase access to resources that have been marginal to date under current conditions of collection on the basis of rights of usage. If the local people are involved in harvesting the fuelwood and obtain direct employment and benefits under conditions of accessibility defined in a more positive, less rigid fashion, they will take an interest and eventually an active part in conserving and even managing the fuel - wood resources. This applies not only to actual forests, but also to the open or shrub formations which often constitute the only resource available locally.
The production of wood - energy was a traditional aspect of forest management that has been overlooked in recent decades. It needs to be rediscovered to benefit from technical advances and information. It is necessary above all to support it in national policies, allot it means proportional to the results expected, and rely on the people to gear down the effort needed. Innovatory solutions are undoubtedly necessary and human investment is probably at least as important as financial investment.
8.2.2.2 The creation of new resources through plantations is, in the long run, an indispensable element in the strategy in many cases, as a complement to measures affecting the remaining resources. In accordance with the specific nature of the situations and problems, there is a wide range of possible actions, which can be combined; large-scale plantations, costly but geared to a concentrated and usually monetized market, such as a town; community or village plantations able to meet the needs of a community; individual or family stands. In the last two cases, part of the output is consumed locally and the surplus may be put on the market and provide cash incomes.
A complex set of technical and socio-economic factors guide the decision regarding the relative weight to be given to each type of plantation. In all cases it is essential to integrate the plantation programme in land-use planning taking into account the other requirements and uses of the land.
In most of the situations studied, and hence of the countries concerned, the analysis showed the inadequacy of the present plantation programmes. On the basis of this analysis, the Technical panel on Fuelwood and Charcoal recommended "a five-fold increase in current levels of tree - planting for fuel". This recommendation was endorsed by the Nairobi Conference and forms part of the Nairobi Programme of Action. The effort required is considerable, and enormous financial resources would be needed should the traditional method of implementation by official bodies be used. Such an acceleration in the rate of planting is possible only if a mass appeal is made for active collaboration by the rural people; if the effort required is distributed among individuals and based on increasing the number of trees planted in any non-utilized space; and if the maximum amount of local resources, land and labour, is mobilized by individuals and local communities' for their own benefit and
within the wider framework of the multiple . contribution that forestry can make to meeting their requirements. Such programmes have recently been undertaken in China, India, Indonesia, the Republic of. Korea and Tanzania, and show the path to be followed.
However, in order to be really large-scale and hence lead to the results desired, such an effort must be based on a clearly expressed political commitment, supported by a set of technical, financial and institutional means. A solid technical basis is indispensable, and the approaches used must be those best adapted to the possibilities, means, requirements and structures of the people concerned. The rate at which such plantation activities are carried out should be stimulated and accelerated both by systems of loans and incentives and by emphasizing the other benefits and functions that the trees planted can provide within the context of the rural economy. It is also necessary to know how to take advantage of the opportunities offered by other aspects of rural development, such as the rationalization of land-use planning, greater integration among various forms of land use, the search for a more productive type of agriculture, social programmes for combating under-employment
and rural poverty, etc.
In fact it is clear from all the analyses that a real strategy has to be defined case by case, in accordance with the specific conditions. But all strategies will have four basic characteristics in common:
(i) they will lay down a set of actions affecting needs and consumption as well as supplies;
(ii) they will associate actions with immediate effects with longer-term ones, but will in all cases programme them on the basis of a critical assessment of the time factor;
(iii) they will be on a sufficiently large scale: there is little risk of over-estimating the scope of the action, because only massive programmes can have an appreciable impact;
(iv) they will mobilize the people en masse and induce them to play an active part in implementing actions for which they should be responsible and from which they should reap the benefits.
Implementation of the programmes required poses a real challenge, in view of their complexity and size: but there is no doubt that if the situations are allowed to worsen, an even greater and more expensive effort will be needed, not to mention the effect on the people's lives and on the natural resources.
8.3 Scope of the strategies concerning fuelwood
8.3.1 Adaptation and strengthening of institutional structures
8.3.2 Training
8.3.3 The people
8.3.4 Research
After having stressed the seriousness of the energy crisis situations caused by the scarcity of fuelwood, and the relative complexity of the solutions to be adopted, the last section of this chapter is intended to show both the magnitude of the existing constraints and the role that the fuelwood problem can play in stimulating development. It would be a serious mistake to regard the problem of fuelwood and its solutions as a mere subsistence problem affecting only the poorest, most isolated, least developed sections of Third World societies, a problem connected with that of the transition towards more advanced sources of energy and technologies. Although it is true that the poorest are the ones most affected, the importance of fuelwood in national energy balances, and its intrinsic qualities as a renewable, decentralized and inexpensive system for storing solar energy, make it a real, strategic energy source whose potential should be fully mobilized in the service of
development. In assessing the effort required it is important to stress how much the mobilization of efforts and of human and financial resources, always in demand for a multitude of tasks and priorities, goes beyond the mere provision of an energy supply, essential and difficult to replace though this is. The scope of the strategies recommended should be seen as an ideal opportunity for removing certain constraints that are constraints on development, by, for example, adapting and strengthening institutional structures, mobilizing and training human resources, and strengthening applied research: it is not just a question of resolving a serious problem, but of taking the opportunity to stimulate a drive towards development among the people concerned through an active and responsible effort to achieve energy self-sufficiency, in conformity with the criteria of rural development.
8.3.1 Adaptation and strengthening of institutional structures
The social dimension of forestry is now being increasingly recognized, and the essential contribution of fuelwood to the energy supply constitutes one of the most obvious examples of the importance of forestry for the development of rural people. But in many cases the major concern of forest policies remains conservation of the forest domain and industrial development; the forest is normally still considered State property, the people are excluded from this part of the land and know nothing about forestry; the benefits of the forestry actions which they can undertake or in which they car. participate are marginal for them; and they are deprived, without compensation, of usage rights and other products in areas under forest management. The drawbacks of the traditional structures in a changing world marked by population growth and the requirements of development are obvious in these instances and call for change; Hence the new trends towards community forestry that are now
spreading. Foresters were the first to become aware of the rural energy crisis caused by the growing shortage of fuelwood and saw in this one of the most important social dimensions of forestry.
Fuelwood strategies call for modification and adaptation of the existing structures. The importance of fuelwood for energy supplies makes it necessary to revise the conditions for access to the resources: this must be controlled, but at the same time guarantee supplies. The inflexibility of, or changes in, land tenure structures must not constitute a major growing obstacle to access to fuelwood supplies, far less discourage people from planting trees because they will not be the acknowledged owners or because this will tie to one use a plot which might be needed tomorrow for other purposes.
The legislative and regulatory framework must evolve in the same direction, no longer closing the forest to the people dependent on it but making forestry an integral part of land-use planning in order to meet their needs and help in their development.
The role of the forestry services is of primary importance and constitutes a real departure from their traditional function as the direct executive of programmes drawn up within their own sector. Fuelwood strategies can only be successful if the people are the main protagonists and the forestry services provide active, comprehensive and constant technical support. This presupposes both changes in capacities, the aim now being to stimulate action by others as much as to take direct action, and greater technical efficiency, in order to multiply the examples of success which will provide the best tool for persuasion.
If the people are to feel really concerned in action to protect and increase the fuelwood resources, they must perceive these as responding to their needs and benefiting them directly. This is only possible if administrations decentralize the decision-making process and operational responsibilities to the field, where it is easier to perceive the people's needs and establish a dialogue with them, and where innovatory solutions can be implemented to solve specific local problems. For example, socio-cultural factors may result in collective forestry plantations being promoted on a large scale in one region, while in another the emphasis will be on individual tree-planting, using fruit-bearing as well as forestry species. Actions concerned with fuelwood therefore constitute a particularly good opportunity for changing the traditional relations between forestry administrations and the people and developing direct approaches which uphold their interests and respond to their
needs.
In most cases the solution to fuelwood problems will have to be implemented within a wider framework embracing not only the other productive and protective contributions of the forest vegetation but also close association with other uses of the land and integration in rural development programmes. This entails dialogue and coordination with the other agricultural technical services in the field, so that the integration of trees into the rural environment may be evidenced also by the coordinated approach adopted by the various disciplines and authorities concerned with this environment. The ultimate purpose must be to illustrate to the peasants the advantages of a system of land use that combines trees and crops.
Adaptation of the institutional structures as briefly suggested here is not only indispensable for translating fuelwood strategies rapidly into actions and concrete results: it will also show the degree of commitment by governments to these strategies and the amount of political support, an essential factor in motivating the people.
8.3.2 Training
The institutional framework cannot undergo a significant and tangible change unless the staff who translate this change into reality are themseleves prepared for the new tasks and evince new attitudes. But almost everywhere the large-scale actions required come up against the problem of lack of personnel and inadequate qualification of the staff that do exist. In many cases the inadequacy of the existing forestry staff constitutes the major constraint to any intensification of forestry activities and this deficiency is most marked among the technical field staff, who are the most indispensable. Implementation of a fuelwood strategy will therefore have to entail critical analysis of the capacities of the existing personnel and of the indispensable training measures required.
In order to increase the number of qualified personnel it will be necessary not . only to increase the training capacities of the existing institutions, but also to make use of flexible, perhaps more economic, solutions which will enlarge the number of technicians without simultaneously enlarging the number of officials. Because of the decisive role of the technical field staff, their training must receive prior attention. The capacities for normal long training will generally have to be strengthened, and courses for accelerated, refresher and advanced training will have to be increased. Where the national institutions are not immediately able to meet training requirements, multinational actions can resolve the problem during the transitional period, either by recourse to institutions existing in neighbouring countries with similar conditions, or by the organization of special programmes to train instructors.
The novelty of the strategic guidelines for action as compared with the traditional forestry actions requires thorough revision of the contents of forestry training. This revision must cover the socio-economic as well as the technical contents. particular importance must be given to the insertion of wooded elements or trees into the landscape, to knowledge of local species and quick-growing, multiple-purpose species, to methods for regenerating and increasing the productivity of natural formations and for planting and managing artificial stands, and to the relationship between agriculture, grazing and forestry, to cite only a few outstanding aspects.
The staff are obviously even more important than the techniques for the success of programmes connected with wood energy, and it is essential that they receive preparation in sociological and economic aspects, oriented towards understanding of the specific social, cultural and economic background of the people on whose behalf the programmes are to be undertaken: the particular characteristics of the subsistence or transition economies, the function of the tree and its integration into the rural environment, the structures and processes of decision-making and allocation of resources and benefits are just a few of the aspects it is essential to know in order to understand the needs and motivation of the people and guide the technicians in their approach.
An in-depth revision of forestry training is therefore essential for the successful implementation of actions concerned with fuelwood; and it is urgent that this revision be undertaken quickly, so that these actions can be implemented before irreversible degradation occurs in too many situations.
8.3.3 The people
The interest and active participation of the people are essential factors that have conditioned the success, or in their absence the failure, of all programmes undertaken to date: moreover, they alone are able to scale down the effort needed to obtain the large-scale impact desired. Interest and participation are encouraged by information and extension work; but also by internal factors such as social organization, equitable procedures for decision-making and distribution of costs and benefits, a real awareness of the consequences of a scarcity of fuelwood and of deforestation, the dynamic role that can be played by those particularly concerned, the women; and by inserting the effort regarding fuelwood within an overall development framework,
In many situations in which fuelwood is a problem, the rural people are concerned with many other acute survival problems and give immediate priority to the problems of water and food production: the supply of wood for energy and the negative consequences of · deforestation are not seen as an important priority, at least not until degradation has become so serious as to be practically irreversible. It is therefore essential to inform these people about the process of degradation into which they may find themselves led, and on its dangers; at the same time they must be brought to realize, by demonstration and extension work, that they can play an active role and even assume responsibility for reversing these situations, and that such actions may also respond to their other requirements. It is therefore essential that the species to be planted be carefully chosen so as to include species known locally, increase the amount of fodder or feed as well as of wood available, lead to
the creation of jobs and income, produce the first products or services in as short a time as possible, etc. At the same time, the diffusion of simple appropriate techniques will increase awareness of the active role that each individual can play.
Information and extension work should be aimed in the first place at those members of the population who are most directly concerned with the supply and use of wood fuel. In this connection the women can play a vital role both in increasing awareness and in promoting action, because it is they who are most directly affected by the fuelwood problem: not only are they usually responsible for collecting the fuelwood and using it in the home, they also play in some cases an essential role in marketing it. Recent studies have also shown women's potential impact at the production level, in the form of individual stands associated with the gardens around their houses or in the fields. The women must be systematically considered as a dynamic element in decision-making and action at all stages, because of their energy needs and their normal active role in traditional societies.
The people will become more quickly and keenly aware of the situation the more opinion - forming activities are backed up by incentive measures. These could consist of providing compensation for the immediate losses in land, available labour or agricultural production resulting from plantations, or encouraging the rural people to protect their sources of fuelwood, or complementing forestry measures with actions to meet needs more immediately felt (roads, schools, health centres). These incentive measures can take many different forms, monetary and non-monetary, subsidies or loans, etc. They constitute a powerful means of motivation, to be framed according to the specific requirements and characteristics of each rural community.
Finally, it is necessary to emphasize the impact that the process of mobilizing efforts around the problem of fuelwood can have on the dynamics of development in a rural community. This is linked first of all with the multiple effects of forest vegetation, from supply of the wood indispensable for fire and construction to the maintenance of a viable and productive environment, including the supply of food for people and their livestock. Bat examples such as that of the Republic of Korea or of Gujarat in India have shown that an organized effort, with the participation of the local inhabitants, to improve the fuelwood situation, can act as the catalyzer for a process of development, economic growth and social transformation. These programmes possess many of the conditions for success. But there are also other, more limited examples, in such difficult conditions as in the Sahel, which show that the task, though arduous, is possible. Owing to the complexity of the fuelwood
problem and the need to combine actions over the entire chain from production to utilization, any programme of action on a certain scale touches in one way or another many aspects of the life and organization of a rural community: land-use planning, intensification of agriculture and integration of trees, silvo-pastoral organization, collection and marketing of wood fuel, organization of its domestic use, grouping or association of individuals to carry out the work and share the products, participation of women and children, etc. Apart from supplying- energy, such a programme has an impact that coincides with the fundamental guidelines for development, such as improving conditions of life for the poorest sectors, helping to achieve self-sufficiency, strengthening the process of participation and decision - making at local level, diversifying activities and creating or increasing employment and income, stabilizing or improving environmental conditions suitable for life and
economic activities, facilitating the transition towards a structured economic organization ensuring equitable distribution of efforts, production and benefits. Such programmes are therefore particularly suitable for encouraging initiative and the organization of individual and collective efforts in rural areas and for promoting a dynamic process of development.
8.3.4 Research
The main solutions to the technical problems of fuelwood are more or less known. They are based on relatively simple technologies, which makes it easier to apply them and get them accepted in the developing countries than is the case for any other form of renewable energy. However, research has accorded too little importance to the production and use of wood energy in recent years: considerable research is needed if programmes of action are to be launched without delay on the scale necessary.
Research requirements have been reviewed in several recent studies, in particular a joint document by FAO and the World Bank published in 1981¹. These studies emphasize the absolute necessity of intensifying research on technical aspects in order to increase the productivity of woody formations in biomass and energy and promote more efficient use of the supplies available. At the same time the newer aspects of the integration of forestry into rural development, as regards both the protective and the productive functions of the forest, must be the subject of systematic attention. In this connection the development of integrated agro-silvicultural systems based on the use of quick-growing, multi-purpose species, possibly leguminous, is of top priority. The third essential aspect of this research effort concerns the human sciences; the social and economic features of local communities, their present organization and their potential engagement in activities concerned with
producing and using wood fuel. Understanding of the needs and aptitudes of the local people conditions the success of any action, but the most elementary information is still too often lacking.
¹ Forestry Research Neets in Developing Countries - Time for a Reappraisal? FAO/World Bank, August 1981.
In addition to reorienting research efforts, it is indispensable to increase the research staff and equipment in the countries where the programmes are to be carried out. Only thus can particular local conditions really be taken into account and suitable solution devised. Systematic exchange and accelerated distribution of information on results, successes and failures, and new developments can stimulate and accelerate the impact of the programmes. But in most cases the training of research workers constitutes the necessary precondition to any strengthening of research.
In conclusion, immediate solutions are possible to situations of obvious seriousness, provided these solutions are based on a stratification of specific local characteristics and use appropriate combinations of actions concerned not only with supplies but also with their distribution and use. Two key factors can accelerate implementation of the solutions: a) the advantages of the forest biomass as a local, renewable source of energy which at the same time provides other important goods and services, such as stabilizing the environment; b) the relative simplicity of the techniques to be employed, which do not require any basically new technology, but merely a special effort to spread information and knowledge and to motivate the executors.
There are many obstacles, but the actions required can and should be implemented using locally available resources and with the active participation of the people. Both because of the nature of the institutional, economic and social constraints to be overcome, and because of the manifold aspects of production, distribution and use of wood fuel, any fuelwood programme goes well beyond the sole dimension of supplying energy. It constitutes a special opportunity to mobilize efforts and help to stimulate development by improving the energy situation within the framework of a more solid economic basis and better conditions of life.
<section>a</section>
Chapter IX - Conclusions
In conformity with its objectives, this study has made it possible to assess the situation regarding fuelwood supplies in the developing countries in 1980. This assessment is necessarily only a rough one, given the abundance of 'the information to be handled and its often heterogeneous nature, and also because of the specific character of the situations to be analysed, strongly influenced by local ecological and human conditions. However, in many cases the analysis made has not only been confirmed by those with experience and direct knowledge of the situations identified, but has proved sufficient to identify the main lines of action. The first important conclusion to be drawn, therefore, is that the information available on the parameters of fuelwood supply and demand is usually sufficient to enable difficult situations to be identified and actions launched: the fuller and more detailed information that is still necessary can be gathered when the programmes of action are
being designed, and not prior to this. The implication of this is important, because the time factor is critical and any delay will result in a worsening of the situation and hence the need for more expensive and larger-scale action.
However, attention must be drawn to the limits and approximations of this study, to avoid there being any ambiguity regarding the possible uses of the figures provided in the tables. This is a global study intended to illustrate the average situations in each region (region = sub-continent) regarding the balance between fuelwood supplies and needs. In making these evaluations use has been made of the most commonly accepted average figures for the productivity of the various sources of fuelwood and the needs of the populations according to their habitat and way of life. In addition, in order to identify in each region geographically representable categories of situations, it has been necessary to limit the number of categories, smooth out the contours, and ignore certain particular local situations. It is therefore risky to use the figures supplied by this study on a particular region to assess a local situation within this region, even though concern for truth and accuracy
has led the authors to base their methodological approach on the most precise and detailed local analysis possible by zoning within each country.
The study covers 95 developing countries in tropical and temperate zones, for which the uniform application of a methodology based on the same concepts and classification and the same reference years has made it possible to obtain relatively homogeneous results which then lend themselves to representation on an overall thematic map. In these 95 countries fuelwood played a very significant energy role in 1980, accounting in 12 of them for nine-tenths of total energy supplies. Of these 12 countries, 9 are in Africa. More than half the least developed countries are almost totally dependent on fuelwood: and in most of the others, it is usually because of inadequate local supplies of fuelwood that the people turn to other fuels, usually plant waste. The total population involved in the study amounted in 1980 to 2.1 thousand million people. It is estimated that more than 80' percent of these either live in rural areas or have conserved a rural type of energy consumption and depend
to an overwhelming extent on plant fuels, mainly fuelwood, for such elementary needs as cooking food and heating the home. Domestic needs and requirements of small rural industries constitute the bulk of the energy needs indispensable for the survival of the rural populations and of urban dwellers with low to medium incomes.
In 1980 marked symptoms of fuelwood supply difficulties were detected in all or part of 39 African countries, 18 countries in the Middle East and Asia, and 14 Latin American countries. A total of 1.15 thousand million people are affected by these situations, in which their energy needs can only be met by over-utilization of the woody vegetation, sometimes to the point of its complete destruction. In the worst situations, about 100 million people, half of them in Africa, are obviously unable to cover their minimum needs and are therefore faced with a really acute scarcity.
In many cases the situations of acute scarcity correspond to difficult climatic and ecological zones, where the shortage of fuelwood leads to the destruction of all woody vegetation, resulting in destabilization of the environment and the risk of erosion, the consequences of which are felt beyond the zone directly concerned by the energy problem. Such situations have been identified mainly in the Himalayas, and in the mountainous areas of eastern and central Africa and of Latin America. Elsewhere, in the arid and semi-arid areas of Africa and Asia, the deforestation resulting from the search for fuel makes a dangerous contribution to desertification. Finally, in the most densely populated zones of Asia and Africa, the need for fuel leads to use being made of all possible plant elements, including crop residues indispensable for fertilization. The search for fuel-wood in these scarcity zones represents a threat to the natural resources indispensable for agricultural
production, and therefore directly affects the objectives of food self-sufficiency fixed by the governments of the countries concerned.
The deficit situations detected affect more than a thousand million people, who are finding increasing difficulty in meeting their minimum energy needs as regards fuelwood. They manage to meet these needs only by over-cutting the woody vegetation, and this, combined with the effects of the population growth, presents an increasing danger to future supplies. Many deficit situations are evolving rapidly towards a situation of acute scarcity. The degeneration is perceptible, but it is difficult to measure its rate, and often there is no full awareness of the situation until it has reached an almost irreversible stage. It is in the Indian sub-continent that this process gives most cause for alarm, because of the size of the populations concerned,
The study of the effect of the prolongation of present trends up to the year 2000 dramatically illustrates what is happening. In what are now situations of acute scarcity, wood will be of no more than marginal use as fuel; while the deficit situations are evolving towards real scarcity. Under the pressure of the population growth and with forest resources decreasing, new deficit situations appear in Latin America and throughout most of Africa and Asia. Because of its very dimensions the problem must constitute a major concern which goes beyond the mere problem of fuelwood supplies. What other source of energy, and at what price, would be able to replace fuelwood on such a scale and within such a short lapse of time so as to guarantee coverage of the daily energy needs of the populations concerned?
The main results of the study can be summarized as follows:
1) In Asia, some 30 million people, mainly in the coldest zones of the Himalayas, were unable to ensure their energy supply in 1980, despite over-utilization of all the wood available. Aprroximately 710 million people were in a situation of decidedly inadequate fuelwood supplies, mainly in the highly populated zones of the Ganges and Indus plains and in the lowlands and islands of South-East Asia. It is estimated that by 2000, if present trends continue, 1.4 thousand million people in this region will be living in zones where fuelwood supplies are completely inadequate to cover their minimum energy needs. The deficit might reach 500 million m³ of wood. A total of 11 heavily populated countries are mainly concerned.
2) In Africa south of the Sahara, 50 million people, mainly in the arid zones and the sparsely inhabited mountainous areas, were unable to cover their minimum energy needs in 1980, although the existing woody vegetation was over-utilized.. Approximately 130 million people, mainly in the relatively densely populated savanna zones, could cover their minimum energy needs only by over-cutting the existing vegetation. It is estimated that in this region, as a whole about 500 million people will be faced with marked fuelwood supply difficulties in the year 2000 unless present trends are modified. The deficit might reach 300 million m³ and concern 37 countries of the region,
3) . In North Africa and the Middle East the situations of fuelwood deficit concern approximately 70 million people spread over all the countries in varying degrees. On the basis of present trends, by the year 2000 about 160 million people will be affected by a deficit of over 37 million m³
4) In Latin America, about 20 million people were unable to cover their minimum energy needs in 1980, even by over-cutting the vegetation to which they had access. The zones concerned are arid or at high altitudes in the Andean region, and particularly densely populated zones in Central America and the Caribbean. About 150 million people, mainly in the rest of the Andean region, were able to cover their minimum needs only by over - utilizing the existing resources. If present trends continue, by the year 2000 the fuelwood deficit might reach 135 million m³ and affect about 340 million people in 17 countries of the region.
The study has demonstrated once again the specific nature of the situations, problems and solutions. It has resulted in a classification of the critical situations which provides a basis for reflection on the strategies and actions to be employed. This classification shows the relative importance of the various types of supplies in the various categories of situations. It therefore provides indications on the actions to be undertaken, while making it clear that a combination of actions affecting the various parameters of supply and demand will in practice always be necessary. This approach highlights three important points:
1) Even in the situations where forestry solutions seem both more difficult and less likely to have a major impact on the energy situation, they are indispensable because of their other productive and protective functions where the environment is particularly fragile.
2) Although the natural forest vegetation in all its forms constitutes the most important part of the supplies on which a high proportion of the population depends, much of it is often not accessible to the people. Very serious attention should therefore be given to the accessibility and distribution of these supplies, in fact to including the energy aspect in the management of these resources.
3) The rate at which plantations for the production of fuelwood are being established at present is clearly insufficient to have a real impact by the end of the century. Considerable acceleration is necessary in all types of tree-planting, but above all in spreading trees throughout agricultural areas. This is the most. promising measure and the one most likely to receive the support of the populations, thus decreasing the amount of effort needed.
The study has also demonstrated the extent of certain gaps in information which show how inadequate has been the attention given to the energy role of the forest resource in recent years. These gaps relate in particular to:
1) The productivity of natural formations other than closed forests producing mainly for industry: specific data on tree and shrub formations - an important source of fuel - are often lacking, and this limits assessment of the real possibilities for action and hence a serious management effort;
2) The actual area covered by non-industrial plantations and their real state and productivity;
3) The actual amounts of agricultural and industrial residues available and used for energy purposes as substitutes for or additions to wood fuels;
4) The legal, physical and economic conditions for access to the fuelwood resources, which condition the real availability of wood fuels for the population; essentially linked to specific local conditions, they seem to have attracted little attention on the whole.
It would be particularly useful to go further into these aspects, because they would provide better knowledge of fuelwood supplies and understanding of the solutions to be adopted. But they are closely linked with specific local conditions and cannot be satisfactorily grasped from a global study like this one. It is here. that this study must play its full role and draw the attention of all those concerned by the problem to the need to devote prior attention to the zones where situations of acute scarcity have been identified. In these zones the various supply parameters should be investigated more thoroughly so as to understand the problem better and analyse the feasibility of appropriate solutions. At the same time it is essential to understand the underlying causes of the degradation of supplies: urban growth, the impact of certain trends in modern agriculture, the transformation of wood fuel from a free good available to all into an important commercial commodity, the
effect of the energy supply of the over-utilization of the woody resources for other agricultural or grazing purposes, the spread of uncontrolled production of charcoal, etc.
The study has therefore brought out a major point: the situation regarding fuelwood supplies is deteriorating ever more rapidly in many regions owing to the growth in population and the dependence of the people on this fuel. The actions undertaken so far are, without exception, completely inadequate. But the implications of the scarcity and the actions aimed at restoring supplies go well beyond the energy question alone, important though this is: they concern the other effects of forestry actions, whether maintenance of the conditions for productivity of the natural resources or of the conditions for life, or survival, of the populations concerned. Owing to the many aspects involved, actions to improve fuelwood supplies can stimulate and induce a dynamic development movement based essentially on active participation and assumption of responsibility by the people concerned in efforts to meet their own needs.
Awareness of the seriousness and extent of the fuelwood crisis constitutes a first step towards ensuring the commitment of all - the populations concerned, governments, the international community - to immediate, large-scale action. The fuelwood crisis is not the energy crisis of the poor; it is a particularly serious element in the energy crisis of the rural areas in the developing countries. Efforts must be made in many different fields: management of the remaining resources, even the degraded ones; planting and multiplication of trees in agricultural areas; stabilization of supplies; improvement of conversion techniques, etc. If the actions undertaken are to be successful and sufficiently massive to attain the impact required, it is indispensable to train personnel, strengthen structures, intensify applied research, instil new capacities for development and new enthusiasm in the populations concerned, and combine the efforts of various disciplines in an approach that is
typically that of rural development. This is the challenge that is posed. Its scope goes beyond the energy situation and concerns the potential for expanding food production. In many cases it is already an emergency problem, calling for immediate action before the situation deteriorates so far as to become irreversible.
<section>b</section>
Annex - List and classification of fuelwood situations¹
¹ Satisfactory situations are not listed
Africa
Acute Scarcity Situations
Botswana: western
Burundi
Chad: northern
Comoros
Djibouti
Ethiopia: Abyssinia
Ethiopia: Ogaden
Kenya: northern Lesotho
Mali: northern
Mauritania
Mauritius
Namibia
Niger: northern
Réunion
Rwanda
Somalia: northern and southern
Sudan: northern
Swaziland
Deficit Situations
Angola: northeastern and southwestern
Benin: southern
Cameroon: northern, western
Ethiopia: Eritrea
Gambia
Guinea: northern
Kenya: coastal province and central
Madagascar: except Diego Suarez and Tamatave
Malawi
Mozambique: southern
Niger: southwest
Nigeria: northern
Senegal: central west, river plain
Tanzania: northern
Togo: southern
Uganda
Upper Volt a: central
Zaire: southern, western (partly)
Zambia: eastern
Prospective Deficit Situations
Benin: northern
Chad: Central and southern
Ghana: northern and southern
Guinea: southern
Ivory Coast: northern and southern
Madagascar: Diego Suarez, Tamatave
Mali: southern
Mozambique: central and northern
Niger: southeastern
Nigeria: southern
Sudan: central
Tanzania: southern
Togo: northern
Upper Volta: western and eastern
North Africa and Near East
Deficit Situations
Algeria
Egypt
Iraq
Jordan
Lebanon
Morocco
Syria
Tunisia
Turkey
Yemen AR
Yemen PDR
Far East Asia
Acute Scarcity Situations
Afghanistan: northeastern
India: western Himalayas
Nepal: hills
Major urban centres in this category and in Deficit Situations
Deficit Situations
Afghanistan: western
Bangladesh
India: Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, northern plains, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu
Indonesia: Java
Nepal: foothills
Pakistan: Baluchistan, Punjab, Sind
Philippines: central
Sri Lanka
Thailand: central area
Viet Nam: coastal areas
Prospective Deficit Situations
Burma: southern
India: Orissa, Madhya Pradesh
Indonesia: northern Sumatra, Sulawesi, Timor
Philippines: Luzon
Viet Nam: except coastal plains
Latin America
Acute Scarcity Situations
Bolivia: western
Chile: northern
El Salvador
Haiti
Jamaica
Peru: northern, southern, western
Deficit Situations
Brazil: northeast, southeast
Chile: central
Colombia: central
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador, central
Guatemala: southern
Mexico: central, eastern, western
Paraguay: eastern
Peru: central
Prospective Deficit Situations
Argentina: northern
Brazil: central
Paraguay: eastern
Uruguay
Venezuela: northwestern, central
Note: This List of Fuelwood Situations has been prepared in order to facilitate the understanding of the Map and the identification of specific situations as they have been classified in relation to fuelwood supplies and needs and as represented on the Map. This List should be interpreted in the light of the definitions of the categories of fuelwood situations. It must be recognised that the listing of areas under these categories is the result of a first assessment of fuelwood situations based on available information.
THE FAO TECHNICAL PAPERS
FAO FORESTRY PAPERS
1. Forest utilization contracts on public land, 1977 (E* F* S*)
2. Planning forest roads and harvesting systems, 1977 (E* F* S*)
3. World list of forestry schools, 1977 (E/F/S*)
3 Rev.1. - World list of forestry schools, 1981 (E/F/S*)
4. World pulp and paper demand, supply and trade - Vol. 1, 1977 (E* F* S*)
World pulp and paper demand, supply and trade - Vol. 2, 1978 (E* F* S*)
5. The marketing of tropical wood in South America, 1978 (E* S*)
6. National parks planning, 1978 (E* F*** S***)
7. Forestry for local community development, 1978 (E* F* S*)
8. Establishment techniques for forest plantations, 1978 (Ar*** C* E** F* S*)
9. Wood chips, 1978 (C* E* S*)
10. Assessment of logging costs from forest inventories in the tropics, 1978
1. Principles and methodology (E* F* S*)
2. Data collection and calculations (E* F* S*)
11. Savanna afforestation in Africa, 1978 (E* F*)
12. China: forestry support for agriculture, 1978 (E*)
13. Forest products prices, 1979 (E/F/S*)
14. Mountain forest roads and harvesting, 1979 (E*)
15. AGRIS forestry wood catalogue of information and documentation services, 1979 (E/F/S*)
16. China: integrated wood processing industries, 1979 (E* F* S***)
17. Economic analysis of forestry projects, 1979 (E* F* S*)
17 Sup. 1. - Economic analysis of forestry projects: case studies, 1979 (E* F* S*)
17 Sup. 2. - Economic analysis of forestry projects: readings, 1980 (E*)
18. Forest products prices 1960-1978,1979 (E/F/S*)
19. Pulping and paper-making properties of fast-growing plantation wood species - Vol. 1,1980 (E**
19. Pulping and paper-making properties of fast-growing plantation wood species - Vol. 2,1980 (E**
20. Mejora genética de árboles forestales, 1980 (S*)
21. Impact on soils of fast-growing species in lowland humid tropics, 1980 (E* F*)
22/1. Forest volume estimation and yield prediction, 1980 (E* F* S*)
Vol. 1 - Volume estimation
22/2. Forest volume estimation and yield prediction, 1980 (E* F* S*)
Vol. 2 - Yield prediction
23. Forest products prices 1961-1980, 1981 (E/F/S*)
24. Cable logging systems, 1981 (E *)
25. Public forestry administration in Latin America, 1981 (E*)
26. Forestry and rural development, 1981 (E* F* S*)
27. Manual of forest inventory, 1981 (E* F*)
28. Small and medium sawmills in developing countries, 1981 (E* S*)
29. World forest products, demand and supply 1990 and 2000,1982 (E* F* S*)
30. Tropical forest resources, 1982 (E/F/S*)
31. Appropriate technology in forestry, 1982 (E*)
32. Classification and definitions of forest products, 1982 (Ar/E/F/S*)
33. Logging of mountain forests, 1982 (E*)
34. Fruit-bearing forest trees, 1982 (E* F* S*)
35. Forestry in China, 1982 (E*)
36. Basic technology in forest operations, 1982 (E* F* S*)
37. Conservation and development of tropical forest resources, 1982 (E* S*)
38. Forest products prices, 1962-1981, 1982 (E/F/S*)
39. Frame saw manual, 1982 (E*)
40. Circular saw manual, 1983 (E*)
41. Simple technologies for charcoal making, 1983 (E*)
42. Fuelwood supplies in the developing countries, 1983 (E*)
FAO PLANT PRODUCTION AND PROTECTION PAPERS: 42 titles published
FAO CONSERVATION GUIDES: 6 titles published
FAO ANIMAL PRODUCTION AND HEALTH PAPERS: 38 titles published
FAO FOOD AND NUTRITION PAPERS: 27 titles published
FAO AGRICULTURAL SERVICES BULLETINS: 53 titles published
FAO IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE PAPERS: 40 titles published
FAO SOILS BULLETINS: 49 titles published
Availability: March 1983
Ar - Arabic
C - Chinese
E - English
F - French
S - Spanish
* Available
** Out of print
*** In preparation
The FAO Technical Papers are available through the authorized FAO Sales Agents or directly from Distribution and Sales Section, FAO, Via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
M-37
ISBN 92-5-101252-0
