<title>The role of domestic livestock in desertification control</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
Back to contents - Next file
Professional alarmist and special interest groups, especially vegetarians, are blaming most of the world's ills and a forthcoming global catastrophe on livestock. Livestock, particularly cattle, are blamed for causing desertification, expending and polluting the earth's waters and contributing to global warming and depletion of the ozone layer. While scientists state that most of these spectacular and serious accusations are not based on fact, they nevertheless are being advanced and repeated mechanically, without understanding, by the media. The public is being misinformed and it is not surprising that many individuals are supportive of the extremists' call for an ecological renaissance and return to nature involving no domestic livestock grazing.
On the other hand, technologies which will allow man to better control his environment and to enhance and assure his quality of life are known and new ones are being continually developed. If the professional alarmists are serious, one would think that they would be more interested in supporting the implementation of these technologies, rather than making spectacular and illogical recommendations. However, it appears that they are either unaware of the technologies or prefer to ignore them.
To understand desertification on rangelands, its control and its reversal, one must have some knowledge of certain plant physiological, ecological and environmental phenomena and principles. An objective of this document is to describe and illustrate these phenomena and principles in a manner that can be readily understood by the uninformed. Moreover, to understand the role of domestic livestock in desertification control, one must know that livestock can be manipulated in order to achieve a desired effect for both the animals and the environment. Another objective of this document is to illustrate how this can be achieved. These objectives will pertain primarily to natural pastures or rangelands.
Principles are principles and while specifics will vary, most are applicable to all parts of the world. However, the practices for controlling desertification, will deal mainly with the livestock production situations in the Americas. The Near and Mid-East and Africa are not included because the vast majority of livestock are raised under a migratory system of production. Moreover, desertification control in these regions goes beyond technological implementation because a multitude of entangled sociological, economical, political and marketing factors that cannot be unravelled easily are involved. This does not mean that the problem cannot be solved. Readers interested in possible solutions in the Near East Region and possibly Africa are referred to Huss (1985).
This document emphasizes ruminant livestock. However, it is appropriate to say here that free-roaming pigs on pasturelands, as is the case in many Latin American countries, can be very destructive and the practice should be minimized as far as possible. Also, equines, kilo for kilo, put more pressure on grasslands than ruminant stock.
The Latin American and Caribbean region in this document is composed of those countries in FAO's South America, the Caribbean and North and Central America classifications with the exception of the United States of America and Canada. Specific references are made to the U.S. and to countries in other regions of the world merely to illustrate facts and/or points. Much of the information regarding the influence of grazing and vegetation on water yields, erosion and water quality comes from the United States because that is where the research is being conducted.
<section>2</section>
Livestock in support of people
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Ruminant products, services and values
Since domestic animals, especially cattle, are being blamed for all kinds of disasters varying from the decline of civilization to famine, pestilence, destruction and death, it is only proper that a short portion of this document be dedicated to the defense of livestock. Domestic ruminants and mankind have been associated with each other for centuries. Mankind has depended and still depends on ruminant livestock for food, byproducts and services. At the same time, ruminants have depended and still depend on man for their welfare.
The basic importance of ruminants to mankind lies in the fact that they can obtain their nourishment from fibrous forage and agricultural and industrial byproducts which people cannot directly consume or utilize. In turn, ruminants provide mankind with food, byproducts and services. About 50% of the earth's land surface is incapable of producing anything other than fibrous forage (Williams, et al., 1968). This land would be of little use to mankind without ruminant livestock.
The quantities of crop, fish, animal and industrial byproducts are astounding. All crops produce many more byproducts than products. For example, corn produces two times more byproducts than grain during the food processing stage, not including field by-products (Kassila, 1983). Many byproducts are processed and sold as feed, adding to the economy and possibly reducing the cost of food.
Garbage disposal is a serious environmental problem which would be more serious without ruminants. The processing of food crops for human consumption results in tremendous amounts of byproducts which are consumed by ruminants and converted into human food. If it were not for livestock, the disposal of this material would create an additional burden to an already overloaded garbage disposal system.
Ruminant products, services and values
Nutritious Food
Meat and milk are excellent foods containing many of the nutrients needed by humans. An outstanding attribute is that they provide an adequate supply and proper balance of ten essential amino acids (protein building blocks). Small quantities of meat and milk added to cereal and root diets can prevent the adverse effects of protein deficiency, such as the killer disease kwashiorkor, which also causes irreversible mental and physical retardation during a child's formative years, poor fetus development, inadequate body maintenance and many other health problems.
Total reported cattle and buffalo, sheep and goat meat production in Latin America and the Caribbean in 1991 was 10,533 million metric tons (FAO, 1991). Total reported fresh whole cow, sheep and goat milk production was 42,599 million tons (FAO, 1991). Portions of this are processed into cheese, butter, ghee, powdered milk and evaporated condensed milk for economic, conservation and distribution reasons. In respect to food supplies per capita per day in 1990, animals provided 18% of 2,693 calories, 43% of 66.8 grams of protein and 44% of 75.6 grams of fat.
The contribution of ruminants to national food supplies are even greater than indicated in the FAO Production Yearbook. The contributions of the llama and alpaca, which are also used for meat, are not included. Farm and village slaughtered animals, especially tropical sheep and goats, do not show up in national inventories. Many countries do not report goat meat and milk production to FAO, although the quantities are known to be quite high.
In spite of these discrepancies, it is obvious that domestic stock are making significant contributions towards nutritious diets in the Region. Statistics show that available calories, protein and fat of animal origin per capita per day are much higher in Latin America and the Caribbean than in any other developing region (FAO, 1991). The animals are valuable for this reason, if for no other reason, and attempts to eliminate them would be pure folly.
Clothing and Comfort
The Region produced 175,749 tons of scoured wool in 1991, along with 1,336 million tons of fresh cow hides, 86,000 tons of fresh sheepskins and 25,000 tons of fresh goat skins (FAO, 1991) plus an unknown amount of alpaca and llama hair. The hides and skins are processed into leather for the manufacture of shoes, clothes, furniture and other products.
While wool is exported, much of it is used for the manufacture of cloth and clothing items. Large amounts are used by cottage industries in the fabrication of sweaters, shawls, capes, socks, gloves and other such items to add to one's comfort during winter. Llama hair is used in the cottage industry for rug making and some countries manufacture woolen rugs. Alpaca fiber is highly prized by the textile industry and the price is usually two to three times that of sheep's wool.
Employment
Data is insufficient to determine the extent of either self-employment or employment due to both the rearing of stock and associated agribusinesses; marketing, processing, distribution, wholesaling, retailing, etc. It must be very large, involving millions of individuals. An estimate to demonstrate the extent of employment created by livestock is nevertheless attempted.
The Region's population in 1991 was 457 million, of which 162 million or 35% were economically active and 41 million or 25.6% of this group were active in agriculture. It is reasonable to assume that at least two-thirds of those individuals economically active in agriculture were also active in livestock production.
Cardozo (1984) reported that all of the small farm holders in the Altiplanos of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru owned some livestock. Personal experience indicates that the vast majority of the 13 million small farms in Central America and the Caribbean are stocked in part with livestock, particularly tropical sheep and/or goats. Nearly all the Savannah, the Pampa, the Patagonia and the arid and semiarid areas are utilized by livestock. Thus, it appears safe to assume that around 27 million of those economically active in agriculture were either fully or partly employed by the livestock sector, including self-employment.
A very conservative employment multiplier of 3, from the farm gate to the consumer, would result in a total of 81 million employed people due to domestic livestock. According to this estimate, 17% of the Region's total population and 50% of the economically active population is employed, at least in part, by the livestock sector.
Security and Stability
Livestock are like bank savings accounts (perhaps better because their values increase with inflation) to many landowners, particularly those with small and marginal holdings. The animals are kept when times are good and sold during family emergencies, such as sickness or when crops fail creating food and income crises.
Studies indicate that mixed-farming systems result in higher and more secure net incomes than crop production alone. As an example, in a study conducted in Colombia, animals represented 45.2% of a farm's revenue, requiring only 7.7% of the farm labour. Each unit of labour for livestock contributed 5.9% to the farm income whereas each unit of labour for other activities contributed only 0.49%. Another study in Colombia showed that animals represented 70% of the net income in integrated farming systems because production costs were lower than those for crops and because animals commanded higher prices. There was also less risk with livestock than with crops (FAO, RLAC, 1988).
Energy
Some ruminant species serve as a renewable source of energy. Oxen are used to pull farm equipment, wagons and carts in some areas. Even goats are used to pull water carts in Central American countries. Various world forums have stated that food production increases should be 1% above the population growth rate and mechanization is generally considered the required way for achieving this. However, the cost of tractorization and the required fuel is beyond the means of many farmers. Moreover, mechanization, as mentioned later, has been identified as a major cause of desertification in some areas.
Manure can also be converted into biogas without loss of fertilizer value. Fuel produced by anaerobic digestion can be used for mechanical and electrical energy and for heat and light.
Fuel
Although the use of dried manure for fuel is not common in Latin America and the Caribbean, it is in other developing regions such as Africa and the Near East.
Fertilizers
Organic fertilizers improve both soil condition and nutrient content. Animal manure is a very good and inexpensive fertilizer -- and the amount produced is important. A cow, for example, excretes 5.5 kg of dry matter per day. Most of this and manure from other kinds of stock falls on the grazing lands. With intensive production systems, however, large quantities can be collected and spread on croplands. There are also industries that collect, process and bag manure for sale to urban dwellers for lawn, flower and other plant fertilization.
Inedible Byproducts
There are many uses of the inedible byproducts such as pharmaceuticals, glue, soap, candles, bone jewelry, mineral supplements, animal feed and many others.
<section>3</section>
The rangeland resource and its importance
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
At least 50% of Latin America and the Caribbean is either too dry, too wet, too steep, too shallow, too infertile and/or too fragile to sustain cultivation or to support arborescent forests. These are the Region's rangelands defined by the Society for Range Management as, "Land on which the native vegetation (climax or natural potential) is predominantly grasses, grass-like plants, fortes, or shrubs. Includes lands revegetated naturally or artificially when routine management of that vegetation is accomplished mainly through manipulation of grazing" (SRM, 1989).
There is no rangeland prototype because there are many different types. Rangelands in the Region include natural grasslands consisting of either tall, short, medium, annual or desert species; savannahs both wet and dry; shrub-lands of various characteristics; alpine communities; coastal marshes; wet meadows and most deserts. The commonalities between these are: (1) they produce a kind of vegetation that only animals can consume and convert into products beneficial to man; and (2) they are not suitable for sustained cultivation and they are incapable of supporting arborescent forests. However, many forests can be grazed without damage to the trees within the multiple-use concept and these are often called "woodland ranges". The objective is not to destroy the forest, but instead to use its resources for more than one product.
Far too many national policy makers and planners do not know what the rangeland resource is, and it goes by many names, some of which are demeaning such as "wasteland" and "underdeveloped" land or "nonutilized" lands. Savannahs and natural shrublands are often put into the forest pigeonhole. Many original grasslands have been invaded by undesirable, high water-requiring and poor environmental stabilizing shrub and small tree species. These are often classified as "forest" and environmentalists cry, "deforestation" at attempts to reduce the woody cover in order to restore the original grassland. At any rate, rangeland resources are too often ignored in national resource surveys and inventories.
Feed Production
If the total digestible nutrients produced by the world's rangelands could be measured in grain crop equivalents, the results would be astounding. In the Near East, rangelands provide more than 90% of the nutrients consumed by 302 million head of domestic livestock; cattle, sheep, goats, buffalo, camels, horses, mules and asses (Norris, 1972 and FAO, 1991). Domestic animals in Africa likely obtain nearly 100% of their nutrients from natural forages.
While studies have not been made in Latin America and the Caribbean, experience indicates that more than 90% of the nutrients consumed by 519 million head of domestic stock comes from rangelands. It is 100% in some areas. Even in the United States, which is criticized for feeding grain to cattle, forages and roughages account for 80-85% of the total feed used to produce a pound of fed beef, including the breeding herd, calf-stocker phase and feedlot. Less than five pounds of feed grains are used per each pound of edible beef produced (Kunkel, 1990).
The total value of the rangeland feed provided by nature in terms of grain and processed feeds amounts to hundreds of thousands of millions of dollars. There would be very little affordable meat, milk, milk products, leather, wool and mohair for people's use without the inexpensive rangeland feed.
Water Yields
Water is at the bottom of any web of life. It is also essential for many of man's endeavors to improve the quality of life such as sanitation, industrialization, navigation, irrigation and recreation, to name just a few. Fresh water is not an abundant resource or at best, there is not an overwhelming surplus.
Table 1. Approximate distribution of water in the hydrosphere (FAO, 1973)
Type of water % of total water % of fresh water % of available water (i.e., fresh and unfrozen)
TOTAL:
Salt 95 
Fresh 5 
FRESH:
Frozen 4 80 
Liquid 1 20 
FRESH LIQUID:
Groundwater 0 .99 19 . 7 99
Lakes 0.01 0.2 1
Soils 0.002 0.04 0.2
Rivers 0.001 0.02 0.1
Atmospheric 0.001 0.02 0.1
Biological 0.0005 0.001 0.005
Table 1 summarizes the general distribution of the water of the hydrosphere among different types of water. Practically all of this water is contained in the oceans and salt seas. Of the fresh water resources of the earth (i.e., about five percent of the total water), the proportion stored in the form of snow and ice or permafrost - and thus not readily available for use-has been estimated as about three quarters of the total fresh water. Consequently, only about one percent of the total water of the earth's hydrosphere is in a form that can be readily and economically exploited (FAO, 1973).
Around 99% of the fresh liquid or available water is in the form of groundwater and the remaining 1% occurs in other forms (Table 1). This should not be construed to mean that this one percent is insignificant. To the contrary, these forms of storage or availability are very significant in respect to desertification. More about this subject will be approached in subsequent sections.
Forests rightly receive considerable attention as watersheds for both surface and underground water supplies. The contributions of rangelands, which also provide both surface and underground water, are either not realized or appreciated. The quantities of water provided by rangelands can be quite high even in arid and semiarid zones.
To illustrate the point, an example is taken from a study in Saudi Arabia, which is one of the driest countries in the world. Average annual rainfalls for various parts of Saudi Arabia vary from 30 to 300 mm. Ninety-nine percent of the country receives less than 100 mm of rainfall and one percent receives between 100 and 300 mm (Juneidi and Huss, 1978).
The Wadi Jizan in Saudi Arabia is around 1,100 km² and the estimated surface flow to Jizan Dam is 90 million cubic meters per year. Studies in the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia indicate a field of 2,900 cubic meters of groundwater per square kilometer of outcrop. Infiltration of only 1 mm over the 1.5 million square kilometers of sedimentary area comes to about 1,500 million cubic meters of water per year (Alfred, 1968).
The land area of Latin America and the Caribbean is 2,053 million hectares, of which approximately 50% or 1,026.5 million hectares are rangeland. Since one square meter of land yields one liter of water for each millimeter of rain and assuming that 15% of this water either runs off or percolates to an aquifer, the amount of water that these lands yield is beyond imagination. The Region's rangelands as watersheds deserve greater attention than they are getting.
Wildlife
The Region's ranges, forest and often the two in connection with each other, support a wide array of wildlife species: ruminants, birds, reptiles, rodents and others. Fish can be included because their habitat depends on the use and condition of the watersheds. Wildlife species are valuable for tourism, hunting, fishing and food. Their economic value is often greater than that for domestic livestock.
The conservation of wildlife is now receiving more attention than in the past. A Technical Cooperation Network on National Parks and Other Protected Areas, Flora and Wildlife has been formed with FAO And UNEP support. Laws have been passed protecting certain species, albeit enforcement is a problem. An association of rancher wildlife conservationists has been formed in Venezuela and some landowners in Mexico have gone into game farming. These are, no doubt, examples of just a few endeavors to conserve and exploit this natural resource.
Recreational and Aesthetic Values
Apart from hunting and the mere observation of wildlife, rangelands have other recreational and aesthetic values. Rangeland scenes are not static, but change from place to place, sunrise to sunset, and season to season. The photographer or anyone desiring the beauty of wide-open spaces can be at home on most rangelands. Rangelands may very well represent the last frontier of clean air to breathe and space to play.
Renewability
Rangelands are a natural renewable resource and they can be managed ecologically and be made to remain productive and environmentally stable forever and ever. However, rangeland abuse is more the rule than the exception in the Region and the resource is simply not given the opportunity to fully renew itself as it is capable of doing. Consequently, the desertification process is rampant and productivity is only a fraction of the potential.
Ranges have a remarkable ability to bounce back when given the opportunity. An example of this is taken from Syria (as illustrated in Figure 1). This arid area was thought to be beyond natural renewability owing to hundreds of years of overgrazing. It was deferred from grazing in order to plant fodder shrubs in plowed rows. The natural regeneration of shrubs and grasses between the rows was equal, if not superior, to the artificial and costly improvement practice. This example clearly shows that man can take advantage of the renewability attributes of rangelands and create productive and stable pastures to the benefit of both livestock and the environment.
In summary, the Region's rangelands produce a kind of vegetation that only animals, domestic livestock and wildlife, can consume and convert into products and services beneficial to people. The resource is naturally renewable and can be managed to meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability to meet those of the future. Unfortunately, this goal is not being met.
Abuse is widespread, causing non-renewal of the resource's desirable components, deterioration and poor animal productivity. The abuse is continuing. If man intends to live and depend upon these lands on a sustained basis, this abuse must stop. Sustainable use and management must become the rule rather than the exception.
<section>4</section>
Desertification and its causes
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Concepts and Definitions
Desertification (also called desert creep, desert encroachment, desert formation, etc.) comes from the French meaning "making deserts." There are two schools of thought regarding its cause: (1) long-term (in the geologic sense) climatic change and (2) the destructive consequences of man's activities. The possibility of climatic change being responsible has prompted as many theories as controversies.
Instrumental climatology, the precise, modern science based upon actual measured observations, dates only from the middle of the nineteenth century, which is hardly enough time to detect climatic changes in geological terms. Desertification is occurring at a rapid rate in certain situations. Lamprey (1975), by comparing reconnaissance surveys in 1958 and 1975 in the Sudan, asserted that the desert's southern boundary had shifted south by an average of 90-100 kilometers during the 17-year period. This represents a rate of between 5.3 and 5.9 kilometers per year. Such a rapid rate of vegetation change would require a climatic change of huge magnitude and one that certainly would be measured by meteorological instruments.
Desertification symptoms have been observed to occur in patches only a few kilometers apart or even on the other side of fences. This is illustrated in Figures 2, 3 and 4. Figure 2 is a view of two different ranches in the Sertâo region of northeast Brazil. Vegetation on the ranch on the left is approaching the last stages of the desertification process. Desirable and environmental stabilizing vegetation dominates the ranch on the right. This is due to management.
Figure 3 is a view of an undisturbed range site in northwest Mexico which has not been grazed, at least heavily, because of the lack of livestock drinking water. There is no evidence of desertification symptoms. However, the same kind of range site, as shown in Figure 4, has been decertified because of prolonged destructive grazing pressure. These areas are near each other and the differences in vegetation cover could not be due to different climates.
Climatic change should not be confused with weather fluctuations or with micro-climatic changes. Climate or macroclimate is a long-term average of weathers. Weather is the day to day, month to month and year to year occurrence of climatic features: precipitation, temperature, wind, humidity and radiation. Weather fluctuates and cold spells, heat waves, wet spells, dry spells and droughts are normal. The media and general public often refer to "normal" rainfall, "normal" temperatures, " etc. The only thing "normal" about weather is its variability. However, patterns of recurrent droughts, possibly cyclic in nature, appear to be "normal" for the arid and semiarid regions. This is important regarding desertification and its control.
Macroclimate is the average of weathers as measured by meteorological instruments, all of which are located above ground and some of which are located a meter or more above the soil surface. Microclimate is the climate in which plants actually live including conditions both above and below ground. For example, if only 200 mm of 400 mm of annual rainfall measured in a gauge is available for plant growth because of runoff and evaporation, the plants are actually living in a 200 mm rainfall habitat, where only xerophytes can survive.
Microclimates can change, for better or worse, depending on man's interventions. Man has no control over weather and macroclimate, but he does have control over microclimate. This is fundamental to the understanding of what desertification really is and how it can be controlled and rehabilitated.
There is a possibility that there is an irreversible warming trend because of an increasing greenhouse effect due to an artificial elevation of atmospheric gases such as carbon dioxide, nitrous oxides and methane. The release of extra CO2 into the atmosphere is due to man's prodigious use of fossil fuels. Some claim that this is largely due to the energy required by livestock production systems, especially beef production in the U.S.A. Yet, Byers (1990) calculated that agriculture uses less than 3% of the fossil energy used in the U.S.A. and beef cattle production directly uses only 5% of this 3%. It is also claimed that the burning of grasslands and forests releases tons of carbon into the atmosphere. Yet the pyric factor is one of the factors involved in the formation of pristine vegetation. Grassland fires likely occurred in greater frequency and intensity in the past than at present (Billings, 1966). The consultant does not subscribe to the widespread destruction and
burning of forests in Latin America.
Ruminants generate methane, but all ruminants are not domesticated. There are millions of head of ruminant wildlife and their numbers in the past, in some situations, were greater than the current number of domestic ruminants. The American bison existed in greater numbers than the current number of cattle in the Great Plains of the United States. Claims that domestic ruminants contribute significantly to global methane production and global warming is highly questionable. Obviously, any warming trend is due to man rather than animals. Man has caused and is causing desertification and only man can undo what he has done and is doing.
Figure 5. Schematic illustration of desertification process.
Table 2. Classification of the world's climates according to average annual precipitation (Willie, 1962)
Average annual precipitation (mm) Classification % of Land Surface
Less than 500 Arid and Semiarid 55
500 to 1,000 Subhumid 20
1,000 to 1,500 Humid 10
More than 1,500 Very Humid 15
The end product or the last stage of the deterioration process is called either "desertized" or "desertified." Figure 5 is an attempt to schematically demonstrate the process. The symptoms and manifestations of desertification are highlighted in the Figure. The degree of departure of these from an environmentally stabilized plant community represents stages of desertification. The stages can be measured or at least estimated on rangeland ecosystems and perhaps other ecosystems as well.
The rate of desertification as measured in terms of years depends on a multitude of factors beginning with the character of the original plant community and the kind and intensity of misuse. A desertified ecosystem is irreversible regarding natural regeneration. It appears that it takes a very long time for rangelands to become desertified due to overgrazing. This is evidenced by the rangelands in the Near and Middle East which have the longest history of domestic livestock grazing in the world. These lands have been grazed for centuries and heavily overgrazed for the last 50 or more years. Yet, many have not reached the decertified stage (See Figure 1).
Reversibility or natural renewal is essential for desertification control and rehabilitation of the Region's rangelands. Most of the stages of degradation of the desertification process as shown in Figure 5 are reversible. Planners and policy makers need to be aware of this and implement appropriate actions.
Causes
Slightly more than one-half of the world's climates are classified as arid and semiarid (Table 2). Further sub-division of the arid and semiarid areas is loosely defined. Generally speaking, deserts receive 100 mm or less of rainfall, arid lands receive between 100 and 300 mm and semiarid
Arid:
Areas with limited options generally confined to native pastures and extensive animal production. Irrigation possible in some situations.
Semiarid:
Slightly more options than for arid areas. Primarily limited to native pastures and livestock production, but food crop and fodder production are feasible in specific areas. Irrigation also possible in some situations.
Although all climatic areas are subject to desertification the arid and semiarid areas in general and the arid areas in particular, are highly susceptible because they are only a few millimeters of rain away from being true deserts. These areas also represent the heart of the Region's livestock industry.
Weather Fluctuations
Arid and semiarid areas have harsh climates made more harsh by weather fluctuations. There are normally many more years of below average rainfall than average or above. Prolonged droughts occur frequently. Droughts occur so frequently in northeast Brazil, for example, that the area is called the drought polygon. Weather variation, per se, does not cause desertification, but it is an accelerator to desertification, especially when man continues land uses supportable only by average or above average rainfall. Failure to plan for the "bad" years and modify land use accordingly accelerates the desertification process.
Cultivation
Around 75% of the Region's total land area is considered to be arable (FAO, 1991). These lands are capable of sustaining cultivation. Unfortunately, attempts to meet the demands of a rising population have resulted in cultivation of rangelands and, in some cases, forest. These lands are incapable of sustaining cultivation for various reasons.
The common practice of cultivating steep slopes causes degradation. Fortunately, in some cases the system slash-burn-plant-harvest-and-shift to another spot does provide some environmental protection and rehabilitation in the intervals between plantings. The system does provide the rural inhabitants with some food and perhaps some income. The question is: "What could these people do if shifting agriculture were not available to them?" Shifting agriculture is not only a land-use problem, it is also a socioeconomic problem which must be solved. The development of conservation farming systems applicable to this situation is badly needed.
Mechanized farming of rangelands greatly accelerates the desertification process. The tractor and plough can destroy the living components and greatly damage the non-living component of an ecosystem in minutes. Continued cultivation until abandonment becomes necessary leaves a decertified condition unfit for man and beast. This practice also contributes to overgrazing because the area for grazing is reduced and only the most productive range sites are cultivated. This results in less and less land for grazing with lower and lower grazing capacities for more and more livestock.
Many forest soils, especially tropical forest soils, cannot sustain agriculture. While this is connected with deforestation, attempts to convert forest lands into arable lands can also create a condition unfit for man and beast. Establishment of cultivated perennial pastures is better than cultivation because of some environmental stabilization. Nevertheless, desertification has taken place.
Deforestation
Deforestation should not be confused with brush control. As previously stated, many of the Region's rangelands have been invaded by undesirable and high water-requiring woody species. This invasion is a desertification symptom because, if for no other reason, it upsets water regimes (See Figure 5). Brush control, provided it is followed with proper management, is a desertification control measure.
Deforestation of true forests in Latin America and the Caribbean is a serious problem. Table 3 describes current rates of forest destruction in selected countries, and the destruction is likely to continue (Belk, et al., 1990A).
Livestock grazing does very little damage to mature forests, although it can interfere with natural reforestation. Deforestation is due to man's decisions to expand cultivation and ranching to meet an increasing demand for land forced by an ever increasing population (Table 4). The establishment of cultivated perennial pastures does create a new ecosystem which provides some environmental protection, provided the pastures are properly managed afterwards. Regardless, many of the desirable attributes of the original forest ecosystem are lost. As a famous ecologist, E.J. Dyksterhuis, said, "a grassland invaded by woody species is not a 'woodland' and a forest converted to pasture is not a 'pastureland'. "
There is no evidence that tropical forest defoliation in the Region is due to an American (U.S.A.) hamburger diet. Belk, et al. (1990), concluded; "Central America and Brazil combined contributed only 9.5% of total U.S. beef and veal imports. This figure can be further defined to show that less than 0.6% of the total beef consumed in the U.S. was from Central America or Brazil. It is important to point out that the contributions by Australia and New Zealand to total U.S. beef and veal imports were almost entirely made up of frozen, boneless beef for grinding ( > 90% lean) --thus, a complete boycott of fast-food hamburgers would affect only Oceanic imports and would not resolve the rainforest destruction problem. "
Moreover, the U.S. does not accept meat from countries with endemic or sporadic foot-and-mouth disease unless the meat has been previously cooked. Brazil exports only canned and frozen cooked meats to the U.S. which are not used in the fast-food hamburger industries.
Table 3. Rates of deforestation in selected tropical Latin American countries, 1980-85. (Adapted from Belk, et al., 1990B and World Resources Institute, 1986 as cited by Belk, et al., 1990A.)
Country Closed Forest Area, 1980 (1,000 acres) Annual Rate of Deforestation, 1981-85 (%) Area Deforested Annually (1,000 acres) Category^a
El Salvador 383 3.2 12 III
Dominican Republic 1,693 0.6 10 IV
Belize 3,433 0.6 22 IV
Costa Rica 4,112 3.9 161 I
Cuba 7,475 0.1 5 IV
Honduras 9,382 2.4 222 I
Panama 10,388 0.9 89 I
Nicaragua 11,139 2.7 299 I
Guatemala 11,357 2.0 222 I
Ecuador 36,272 2.3 840 I
Venezuela 81,728 0.4 309 II
Bolivia 108,756 0.2 215 II
Colombia 117,004 1.7 2,026 I
Mexico 118,213 1.2 1,470 I
Peru 174,255 0.4 667 II
Brazil 978,590 0.4 3,657 II
^a I = Higher than averages rates of deforestation and large areas deforested, II = Relatively low rates of deforestation but large areas deforested, m = High rates of deforestation and small areas of remaining forest, and IV = Low or moderate rates of deforestation and small areas affected.
Table 4. Population growth from 1975 to 1991 in selected Latin American countries! (FAO, 1991).
Country Population in Thousands 1975 % Increase 1991 (Rounded)
El Salvador 4,085 5,375 32
Dominican Republic 5,048 7,320 45
Belize 129 191 48
Costa Rica 1,968 3,088 57
Cuba 9,306 10,720 15
Honduras 3,081 5,299 72
Panama 1,748 2,466 41
Nicaragua 2,408 3,999 66
Guatemala 6,022 9,467 57
Ecuador 7,025 10,851 54
Venezuela 12,665 20,226 60
Bolivia 4,894 7,522 54
Colombia 23,991 33,608 40
Mexico 61,918 90,467 46
Peru 15,161 21,989 45
Brazil 108,032 153,322 42
^1 Selected to correspond with those countries in Table 3 undergoing vast deforestation.
Ever Increasing Population
Table 4 is an analysis of the population growth from 1975 to 1992 in selected countries. These were selected to correspond with those countries in Table 3 where tropical forest deforestation is largely taking place. Except for Cuba and El Salvador, the population increased forty or more percent in all countries during this sixteen year period. The percent of increase ranged from 40% in Colombia up to 72% in Honduras. The average was 51.9%. Increases in Cuba and El Salvador were 15 and 32%, respectively.
This analysis indicates that the population is overcoming or has already overcome the capacity of the land. Since the people have no other recourse, they turn to the forest and the rangelands for the cultivation of their food crops. Compulsory abandonment after a few years owing to the collapse of soil structure and fertility leaves decertified land.
This very serious problem made by man is in dire need of solution. The establishment of biosphere reserves, forest reserves and national parks to protect the environment is commendable, but this does very little to help the people who have no other place to go. The question is, "What can and should be done?"
Fuel Gathering
The number of small trees and shrubs that are either cut down or uprooted for fuel is enormous. In Jordan, it was estimated that Bedouins annually uproot 182 million fodder shrubs just for cooking and in the Sudan, 548 million acacia shrubs are annually destroyed for the same purpose (FAO, 1976). The uprooting of fodder shrubs and trees puts man and his livestock in direct competition which contributes even funkier to desertification especially with overgrazing.
Data regarding the extent of fuel gathering in Latin America and the Caribbean are limited. Stuart (1992) reported that each family in Guatemala's Petén region consumes 10 to 20 cords of wood a year, requiring hundreds of trees. Similar consumption rates are likely applicable in many other countries where fossil fuels are either not available or too expensive. Fuel gathering is an important factor contributing to Haiti's serious desertification problem. As in the Near East, people and livestock in Haiti are too often in direct competition with each other. This, coupled with destructive grazing, and other land misuses, is resulting in the country's environmental destruction.
Continued Destructive Grazing
An understanding of this subject requires some knowledge of certain definitions. Stocking rate is the number of specific kinds and classes of animals grazing or utilizing a unit of land for a specified time period. The widely publicized term "carrying capacity" is an original wildlife term. In its true sense, it means the maximum number of individual animals that can survive the greatest period of stress each year on a given land area (ASRM, 1964). In other words, where the stocking rate greatly exceeds the feed supply, some animals die, some survive and a balance is restored without permanent damage to the habitat.
Grazing capacity refers to domestic animals. It is the maximum stocking rate possible which is consistent with maintaining or improving vegetation or related resources. It may vary from year to year on the same area due to fluctuating forage production owing to fluctuating weather. Grazing and carrying capacities have become synonymous over the years. The term "grazing capacity" is used in this document in the context described above. Carrying capacity is used only where applicable as previously defined.
A stocking rate that exceeds grazing capacity, even slightly or for a short period of time, is commonly called "overgrazing." A stocking rate less than grazing capacity is commonly called "undergrazing. " Range scientists have more specific descriptive terms which are discussed in more detail in a later section.
Overgrazing is categorically blamed for worldwide desertification, which is partly true and partly false, depending on the situation. There are various overgrazing intensities such as slight, heavy, very heavy and destructive. There are also overgrazing durations which can be measured in months, years, decades or even centuries.
Apart from prolonged droughts, acceptable and fixed stocking rates will cause temporary overgrazing in some years because of grazing capacity fluctuations. Damage to the vegetation, if any, is usually repaired by natural processes. Designed temporary overgrazing is useful in desertification control and reversal of the process. Many range improvement technologies such as rotation, deferred rotation and rest rotation grazing systems include temporary overgrazing. Sheep and goat overgrazing can be used to control undesirable and noxious weeds and brush without damage to the environment. To the contrary, the microenvironment or microclimate is improved.
In some cases, overgrazing has led to the creation of new ecosystems which are just as productive, if not more, and as environmentally stable as the original one. The Edwards Plateau of Texas is an example. The original vegetation of this area was suitable mainly for cattle and a few deer, turkey and other wildlife species. It has been transformed into one of the most productive livestock and wildlife areas in Texas. It is now suitable for cattle, sheep and goat rearing. Around 6% of Texas' cattle, 77% of its Angora goats and 73% of its sheep are raised on the Edwards Plateau. The area now has one of the highest white-tail deer populations in the U.S. and the highest Rio Grande wild turkey population. The Edwards Plateau is prized for its watershed and recreational values. It also has suitable habitats for various endangered species. These habitats probably did not exist in the beginning.
This is not intended to say that range abuse is not taking place on some ranches, because it is. Neither is it intended to say that the current overall ecosystem cannot be improved, because it can and should be. There is evidence that the desertification process has taken place which has resulted in some undesirable water regime and vegetation changes. Decertified land is practically non-existent.
Continual undergrazing or no plant defoliation at all can result in poor vegetation health and declining productivity. This is often seen in exclosure studies whereas the vegetation outside the exclosure with proper grazing is better than that within it. Pristine vegetation did not develop in the absences of defoliation either by wildlife or fire or both. Thus, the establishment and maintenance of a desirable and protective vegetation cover requires some grazing and defoliation and the participation of domestic livestock is plausible.
Stocking rates and managerial systems that result in continual destructive grazing are a major cause of desertification on rangelands. The desertification process is accelerated when these practices are maintained during droughts and certain seasons where plants are highly vulnerable to abuse. While it takes a long time, this will eventually result in decertified rangelands.
Destructive grazing also causes poor livestock performance and many private landowners have learned this lesson the hard way. It is, therefore, not as common on private lands as it is on public or community grazing lands where central control is lacking. In spite of this, overgrazing at intensities lighter than destructive is a major problem in the Region. This not only causes gradual deterioration, it also adversely affects animal production.
Lack of Land use Policies
The above identification of desertification causes is not intended to be a comprehensive review of the subject. These were selected because they are related in one way or another to livestock production and rangeland desertification. Tropical forest deforestation is highlighted because it is, in part, due to attempts to expand the livestock industry. For this reason, it could be indirectly related to the rangeland desertification problem.
Considering that rangelands are producing only a fraction of their potential due to degradation, it is very likely that they are not meeting national demands and needs for whatever reason. If so, this reinforces the urgent need for land use policies aimed at desertification control on rangelands and the implementation of sustained and improved livestock production systems. This would result in greater production of animal products which in turn might reduce the need for expanding the livestock industry onto forest lands. Why jeopardize yet another valuable natural resource when the other can be rehabilitated?
Many desertification symptoms or manifestations shown in Figure 5 are also occurring on the Region's arable lands because of poor agriculture practices. These can be reversed and crop production increased with implementation of improved cultural practices. These technologies are generally known in the Region, but they are not being widely applied. Concerted implementation efforts might reduce the pressure for expanding cultivation onto range and forest lands.
The fundamental cause of desertification is the use of land beyond its capabilities. Generally speaking, the countries have not made land capability surveys and developed land use policies
<section>5</section>
The desertification process on rangelands and its reversal
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
The Rangeland ecosystem
Decomposers and microconsumers
The Rangeland ecosystem
The rangeland ecosystem is a complex phenomenon involving a multitude of interrelated functions with each influencing the others. The system's major components are: producers, converters, soils, decomposers and microconsumers, microclimate and manipulators.
Producers
Plants are the producers of the ecosystem. They convert the energy from the sun into energy and other nutrients needed by animals. The producers can be likened to an electric generator. The other wise disturbed, with maximum energy output. They suffer when ther living components of the system thrive, unless the output is reduced and they will eventually die with zero output.
The generator is an aggregation of vascular plants and plant species forming vegetation. The amount of energy produced and made available to the other living components of the ecosystem depends on the characteristic, composition and health of the vegetation. Vegetation can be manipulated and be made either more or less efficient in gross energy production depending on the physiological and ecological responses to the manipulations. Energy outputs below potential resulting in declining productivity is a desertification symptom (Figure 5). In this case, the generator is in need of repair.
Converters
Animals are converters and not producers, contrary to the beliefs of many, including livestockmen. Animals convert the energy and other nutrients produced by plants to products of direct use to humans. Domestic livestock can be managed and the impact that they have on the rest of the ecosystem can be significant, but controlled. The impact can either improve or impair the overall function of the system.
The fact that the impact of domestic livestock on the overall functioning and energy output of the ecosystem can be controlled is highly significant. Here lies the root of the role of domestic livestock on desertification control and rehabilitation. A malfunctioning generator can be repaired by the converters.
Soils
A soil is the supporting component of the ecosystem. It serves as a house for roots and some vegetative reproduction organs and as a warehouse for air, water and minerals. The four soil fractions are mineral materials, organic matter, water and air. The air and water in a soil are variable and their content determines its suitability for plant growth. The ease with which air and water enter the soil depends on soil condition, or degree of porosity, aggregation and granulation. Organic matter, humus and roots play the major role in the formation of these. Organic matter is transitory because it succumbs to the attack of microorganisms. Thus, it requires constant renewal.
Producers must either directly or indirectly supply of organic material for this renewal. Failure to do so results in soil condition deterioration which hinders air and water penetration and increases soil erosion hazard. The overall efficiency of the system is impaired.
Roots can be likened to tubes which transport water and minerals to the generator. This transportation requires energy supplied by the generator. An inadequate energy supply because of an inefficient generator merely adds to its inefficiency. Again, the overall function of the ecosystem is impaired.
Decomposers and microconsumers
These consist of bacteria, fungi, nematodes, protozoa, termites, grasshoppers and other insects. They break down living and dead plant and animal material contributing to the organic and humus composition of soils. They are also a vital component in nutritional cycling. An ecosystem uses the same nutrients over and over again and proper cycling assures an adequate supply. It is appropriate to say here that microconsumers, wildlife and rodents eat large quantities of living forage which influences grazing capacity.
Microclimate
The microclimate is the factor that regulates the speed and efficiency of ecosystem functions. The character of the microclimate is controlled by the functions of the other components.
Manipulators
These are people, beginning with indigenous people. Since the needs of indigenous people were small, their manipulations pertained mainly to hunting. Fire was one of their hunting tools. These plus natural and probably accidental fires were instrumental in the formation and maintenance of pristine grasslands and savannahs.
Modern day people are the great manipulators and domestic stock is their principal tool. They can manipulate grazing to either destroy, improve or maintain a rangeland ecosystem. Improvement with subsequent maintenance must be the objective and it must be achieved if people intend to live and depend on rangelands forever. And, it can be achieved with the application of range management principles and practices.
Range Management
Range management is a relatively new discipline born only a few decades ago in North America by scientists concerned about rangeland deterioration. It is likely the only discipline that originated in the Americas. It is defined as "The science and art of planning and directing rangeland use in order to obtain maximum sustained economic livestock production consistent with the conservation and/or improvement of the related natural resources: soil, water, vegetation, wildlife and recreation" (Huss and Aguirre, 1974).
Range management according to this definition has two objectives; (1) obtaining maximum sustained economic livestock production and (2) conservation and/or improvement of the related natural resource. Scientific range management stands on the premise that the range resources can be improved and grazed perpetually by domestic stock and, at the same time, produce high-quality watershed, wildlife, recreation and, where suitable, forest products. Research and practical application of range management principles and practices have shown this to be true and as solid as the Rock of Gibraltar.
In order to achieve the first objective, the manager must not only plan and direct rangeland use for maximum forage production, he must also see that the forage is efficiently converted by animals on a sustainable basis into consumable products. Plant husbandry and animal husbandry can never be considered separately in range management. This is illustrated as follows:
Poor Producers + Poor Converters = Very Low Production
Poor Producers + Good Converters = Low Production
Good Producers + Poor Converters = Low Production
Good Producers + Good Converters = Maximum Production.
Range science is the organized body of knowledge upon which the practice of range management is based. It is a unique profession. It requires utilization of knowledge in a wide variety of subjects such as soils, plant taxonomy and physiology, ecology, animal production, economics, marketing, agronomy, wildlife and, in some situations, forestry. A specialist in any one of these subjects is not a range scientist because range science is a distinct discipline which requires special study and which has its own principles, practices, concepts and theories. Unfortunately, range management, for all practical purposes, is unknown in the Region except in Mexico and for a few individuals in the other countries who have studied abroad. No country has a range development agency.
Range Plant Nutrition
Nutrition is a word that probably conjures up thoughts of humans or animals. The assumption in fact would be quite right, but there is something else one needs to know. Plants are living organisms and they too have nutritional requirements. In fact, the nutritional requirements of plants and animals are very similar and the general principles of nutrition apply to both. A chief difference between plants and animals is that in animals the walls of the body cells are made mainly of protein while in plants they are composed of cellulose and carbohydrates. In plants, the reserve food is stored as carbohydrates whereas in animals nearly all of the reserve is stored in the form of fat.
A major and most important difference between plants and animals is in their sources of energy. Plants can use energy supplied by the sun to change inorganic matter taken from the earth and from the air into organic compounds. Animals cannot secure directly from the sun the energy necessary for their life. They must live on the organic energy rich compounds built by plants.
With photosynthesis, plants are able to make simple carbohydrates from carbon dioxide and water through the action of sunlight on the green colored chlorophyll in the leaves and other green parts. Carbon dioxide from the air is taken into the leaves through the stomata and water is absorbed from the soil by the roots. From the sugars or other simple carbohydrates first formed, plants can build the more complex organic compounds such as the polysaccharides and pentosans, protein, cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, vitamins, fats, oils and others upon which all animal life depends.
Plants must be properly nourished in order to carry out photosynthesis and to build the complex organic compounds and they must provide that nourishment themselves. Their role is twofold: first to feed themselves and second to feed man and his animals. It is imperative that plants be properly fed so that they can successfully carry out both roles. This is particularly true in range management and is one of its most important aspects. The objective of obtaining maximum sustained livestock production cannot be achieved with a system of grazing that does not permit the plants to properly feed themselves. Therefore, it is the range manager's responsibility to plan, direct and manipulate grazing in such a manner that the range forage plants can adequately feed themselves and live to produce forage and to protect the environment.
The factors that influence the amount of photosynthesis are: (1) physiological efficiency of the species; (2) amount of carbon dioxide in the air; (3) leaf area; (4) amount and kind of light; (5) amount of water; (6) temperature and (7) soil nutrients. The manipulator can influence all of these except perhaps the amount of carbon dioxide in the air. While leaf area and amount of water made available through root absorption often receive more attention than the other factors, all are important in range management.
It was determined in a classic study that the rate of photosynthesis is between 0.8 and 1.8 grams of sugar per hour per square meter of leaf area (Miller, 1938). If leaf area is reduced, the rate of photosynthesis is correspondingly reduced, which is what happens with grazing because it is in effect defoliation. Considerable research has been conducted to determine how plants can be utilized to assure maximum livestock production and at the same time to assure healthy productive plants and it has been determined that the productivity of plants depends upon the intensity, frequency and season of defoliation.
Defoliation Intensity
Defoliation intensity refers to the amount of the current year's weight production that is cut by man or consumed by livestock. This is also called "degree of utilization" which is often expressed in percent of the produced weight consumed, such as 25, 50 or 75. Research has shown that the proper degree of utilization for most species is around 50 to 60 percent, although some species can withstand heavier degrees of use and some are mortally injured at 50 to 60 percent. The general rule, however, has led the range management technicians to adopt the slogan "take half and leave half", meaning that about one-half of the current year's production can be consumed or destroyed by animals and that the remaining half should be left for the plants in order that they might feed and maintain themselves. With most grasses, 50% use of a plant's weight is not 50% use of its ungrazed height. Normally, two-thirds use of its height is 50% use of its weight. Owing to this or similar
relationships, stubble height can be used as one way for estimating degree of utilization on grasslands.
The importance of defoliation intensity on plant nutrition, health and productivity can be demonstrated mathematically. Assume that the ungrazed leaf area of a grass is one square meter, that photosynthesis functions twelve hours per day and the rate is one gram of carbohydrate per hour. This plant will produce 12 grams of carbohydrates per day. Six grams remain for the plant's needs with 50% defoliation, which is enough. Only three grams for the plant remain with 75% defoliation, which is not enough and the plant will begin to suffer from malnutrition. Only 1.2 grams will remain for the plant with 90% defoliation, which is far below its needs and, if continued, the plant will die from starvation. This is also illustrated in Figure 6. Note the effect of excessive defoliation on both leaf and root area and the microenvironment.
Defoliation Frequency
Defoliation frequency refers to the interval between defoliation intensities such as days, weeks, months or years. As a general rule, damage to the plant increases with increased frequency of defoliation. For example, a study in Mexico revealed that buffelgrass (Cenchrus ciliaris) was most productive when defoliated to a 15 cm stubble height (the basal portion of herbaceous plants remaining after the top has been harvested). However, weekly defoliation to 15 cm caused a considerable reduction in forage production compared with bi-weekly or monthly defoliation to the same stubble height (Barbaroux, 1969). Clearly, in this case, a properly stocked rotation grazing system that would result in defoliation to a 15 cm stubble height every other month would be superior in forage production, grazing capacity and livestock production than a continuous grazing system that resulted in weekly defoliation to the same stubble height.
This example refers to defoliation frequency in terms of weeks or one month. Frequency can also be thought of in terms of months and years. While excessive defoliation for several months is harmful, it is not necessarily destructive, especially if it is followed by a period of proper use and rest. The same is also true in respect to years. It is year after year of excessive defoliation that causes destruction to perennial vegetations. These are most important points and deferred rotation grazing systems have been designed around them with the objective of reducing defoliation frequency in terms of months and years.
Seasonal Defoliation
Seasonal defoliation refers to the time of defoliation in respect to a plant's physiological activities. The two most critical times in a plant's growth cycle are: (1) the season when emergence from dormancy occurs; and (2) the season when it produces seed and enters dormancy. These critical periods are related to carbohydrate production and storage which are illustrated in Figure 7. When a perennial plant enters dormancy the carbohydrates located in the leaves and stems are translocated to the roots and buds where they are placed in reserve to initiate the following year's growth. Excessive defoliation during this period reduces carbohydrate reserves which can adversely affect subsequent year's growth, and if this is repeated over a period of successive years, it will eventually result in plant death.
The same relationship is true of annual species except that their carbohydrates are reserved in seeds. Heavy defoliation during time of flowering and seed set reduces or prevents seed production, meaning that there will be less plants and forage the following year.
The most critical time in a perennial plant's growth cycle is the period when it emerges from dormancy. About 90% of the reserved carbohydrates are required to initiate new leaf and stem growth and all of the carbohydrates manufactured by the new leaves are used to make more leaves and stems. The plant rebuilds its carbohydrate reserves only when it has sufficient leaf area to manufacture the amount of carbohydrates required to carry on its normal activities (see Figure 7). Continual and excessive defoliation during this period causes serious damage to the plant's health and nutrition, thus reducing the current year's productivity. If such use continues over a succession of years, the plant will eventually die. Wilson, et al. (1966) found that three or more years of severe defoliation during spring would eliminate Agropyron spicatum, a valuable grass in the Western United States. Cook (1971) found that 50% defoliation was too severe for spring harvesting of desert shrubs and
grasses and 25% defoliation was more reasonable.
It has been incorrectly postulated that 100% defoliation during the dormant season will not injure plants. Many of the herbaceous species, especially the grasses, are characterized by basal buds where carbohydrates are also stored (Figure 7) and if these buds are consumed during dormancy, a large percent of the stored carbohydrates are consumed as well. In addition to roots, shrubs also store carbohydrates in terminal and axillary buds and their consumption will adversely affect production and health. Besides, the unused mantel of vegetation is not wasted. It keeps the soil safe from washing and blowing, it soaks up rain when it falls and saves soil moisture from evaporation. And leftover vegetation sustains the microscopic life in a soil which constantly renews the natural fertility of the land.
Defoliation and Roots
The effects of defoliation upon the too often forgotten roots are of extreme importance. A healthy and productive forage plant normally requires a root system several times greater than its above ground parts. The magnitude of the root system of a single plant is often astounding. Povlychenko (1937) found that the total root length of a 3 year old crested wheat grass was over 600 km and Dittmar (1937) discovered that the combined surface of roots and root hairs of a winter rye plant was 103 times that of the above ground parts. Some shrubs have roots that penetrate up to 8 m along with lateral roots of 15 m or more in length. The amount of water available for photosynthesis depends upon the amount of soil moisture absorbed by the roots and it is axiomatic that large root systems can absorb more soil moisture than small systems. Some species have the genetical ability to produce larger root systems than others, which gives them an ecological advantage.
Studies regarding the measurable responses of roots to defoliation are limited because roots cannot be seen and measurements are difficult. It is known that a large percent of grass roots die each year, requiring replacement, although the percent varies between plants of the same species and between species. This is one reason why grasses are great soil builders. It is also known that renewal is essential to overall plant health and productivity. If the nutrients required for renewed growth are inadequate, the size of the root system dwindles which, in turn, reduces photosynthesis efficiency (see Figure 6). Obviously, root growth and function are related to defoliation intensity, frequency and season.
Figure 6. Effects of grazing intensities on forage plant health and environmental stability (Adapted from SCS, USDA).
Figure 7. Carbohydrate reserves stored in grass roots and lower seed stalks in relation to growth stages (Adapted from SCS, USDA).
<section>6</section>
Degree of utilization and livestock production
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Degree of utilization is the proportion of the current year's forage production that is consumed and/or destroyed by grazing animals. It may refer to a single species or to the vegetation as a whole and it can be expressed in quantitative terms such as percent (25, 50, 75, etc.) or in qualitative terms such as light, moderate, heavy, over or destructive. Its synonyms are degree of use, utilization or use, all of which appear in the literature. Degree of use and animal production are inversely related. As use increases, individual animal productivity decreases, and vice versa.
Many investigations of all kinds of pastures, both native and artificial, in various parts of the world have been made and all have shown a curvilinear relationship between degree of use and animal production per hectare. One model developed from thirty years of data on animal weight gain per individual and per hectare as related to ungrazed herbage on the central plains of Colorado, U.S.A. is presented here merely to illustrate the relationship and to point out a high ranking range management fundamental (Bement, 1968). Bement's measure of "ungrazed" forage is a reflection of degree of use and stocking rate.
The utilization-animal relationship may be illustrated by plotting the two animal responses (production per animal and production per hectare) over forage remaining ungrazed at the end of the grazing period as in Figure 8. Up to point "A" in Figure 8, forage supply is not limiting and an animal receives its daily forage requirements and only genetical or other such factors limit production. Beyond this point, forage supply becomes limited and production per animal is reduced because of nutritional stress which becomes worse as the amount of ungrazed forage becomes less due to excessive utilization and stocking.
Point "B" as illustrated in Figure 8 shows when maximum animal production per hectare is reached. This point is always reached when the ungrazed forage per hectare is less than where the optimum, individual production per animal is reached (Point "A"). However, at point "B" individual animal performance and the range vegetation are both stressed due to over utilization. If this continues, the advantage of attaining maximum production per hectare will be short-lived because the vegetation and forage supply will deteriorate and Point "B" will shift down the production scale.
The optimum point of forage availability and degree of use for sustained maximum production, the objective of range management, therefore, lies between Points "A" and "B". And this common balance point comes at the cross-over of the two graphs shown as Point "C" in Figure 8. It can be noticed that production per hectare rapidly declines once the optimum stocking rate (Point "C") is reached. Therefore, undergrazing with less animals can produce a greater total production than overgrazing with more animals. Clearly, the philosophy "more livestock, more animal products" is not true once overgrazing is reached.
Figure 8. Animal production per individual and per hectare as influenced by degree of utilization (Bement, 1968)
Succession
Manipulations that assure proper plant nutrition also assure superior livestock production, and represent a huge step towards desertification reversal. But, as with the word "nutrition," there are other things that one needs to know. Plant succession also plays a major role in either desertification or its reversal, and domestic livestock are right in the middle of it.
Succession is the replacement of one community of plants by another one. There are two kinds of succession, progressive and regressive. The latter is commonly called "retrogression" which will be used in this text. There are two kinds of progressive succession, primary and secondary. Primary succession is the original and simultaneous development of vegetation and its associated soils. The sere was the harmonious development of soils and vegetation, each influencing the other. The nature of the sere and its end product depended on the climatic, edaphic, physiographic, pyric and biotic factors involved in face of chemical and mechanical weathering. The end product was either any of the kinds of rangelands previously mentioned or forests or other kinds of biomes
The sere stopped when an equilibrium between all the factors named above was established. This stage of development is called "climax" by some ecologists and "natural potential" by others. Regardless of its name, the equilibrium stage of primary succession is the highest natural form of development that the environmental factors are capable of producing.
Mother Nature is very forgiving. She always tries to restore what man has destroyed. This is the case of secondary succession. A disturbance of climax will cause retrogression, but, if given the opportunity, nature will make every effort to restore the damage via secondary succession. Secondary succession is much faster than primary because the soil is already formed, although deteriorated and needing restoration as well.
The Climax Rangelands
The Americas' explorers described an abundance of rich and lush natural pastures. Like a sea of grass, some said, which was probably inspired by vegetation shown in Figure 9. Some described the grasses as being up to their stirrups and higher in places. Tall grass prairies like that shown in Figure 10 dominated the Pampas. Chile's annual ranges were dominated by perennials. There was no shortage of forage for the indigenous peoples' llama and alpaca in the Altiplano. The dry and humid tropical savannahs were free of brush and wars were fought for their control in Venezuela. Even the arid areas flourished with grasses and shrubs palatable to livestock.
These rangelands were and still are the Region's heritage. Settlers came with their livestock and one of the world's most colorful and largest livestock industries was built. Having no precedents to follow, the industry's builders thought that the bountiful vegetation would regenerate and last forever. It did not. Misuse has caused retrogression and declining productivity. The heritage is sick, needing medical attention.
Retrogression and Secondary Succession
Retrogression or degeneration is the replacement of a community of plants of higher ecological order with a community of lower ecological order. Disturbance of the stabilized climax through overgrazing or cultivation causes retrogression. Vegetation deterioration is followed by soil degradation. The latter begins with loss of organic matter and structure breakdown followed by erosion. Extreme disturbance can expose parent material and lichen stages where primary succession began. If disturbance is compensated or eliminated in time, succession moves back towards climax. This is called secondary succession which is any succession after the first and primary succession. It usually begins with higher stages of soil development and plant communities, therefore, improvement through secondary succession can be quite rapid.
Knowledge of the processes involved with succession, ether progressive or regressive, better prepares one to analyze and synthesize occurrences in the field. The first step in the process is migration, which is the movement of the progeny of a plant to a new location, whether it be far or close to the mother plant. Migration can occur sexually in the form of seeds or asexually (vegetatively) in the case of some species through stolens (above ground stems which roots at the nodes) rhizomes (below ground stems which send out roots and above-ground shoots at the nodes), tillers (basal buds which form new stems) or bulbs.
Ecesis is the successful establishment of a seed or vegetative reproduction organ. Whether or not ecesis takes place in respect to the species involved depends upon the situation. For example, in an overgrazing situation, ecesis of unpalatable and worthless species is favoured whereas ecesis of palatable species is opposed and the pasture will eventually be dominated by worthless species.
On the other hand, in a properly grazed deferred-rotation grazing system, ecesis of the palatable species is favoured which gives them an opportunity to increase.
Aggregation is the expansion and grouping of newly established plants in the secondary succession or retrogression process. The forces that limit or favour aggregation are the same as those related to ecesis. Competition is the general struggle in which plants and plant species compete for light, space, water and nutrients. Naturally, those species which are genetically superior in respect to leaf and root production will dominate if given the opportunity. Climax is characterized by a dominance of species and ecotypes of species which in most cases are the most productive forage species that an environment can naturally produce. Finally, reaction is the influence that plants and plant material have on the environment, particularly the microclimate where the plants actually live.
The influence of plants on the microclimate may be beneficial or disastrous depending on the circumstances. As a general rule, soil and surface temperatures and evaporation increase and rainfall infiltration decreases with retrogression, making a desert like (xeric) microclimate in which only desert or xerophytic species can live. The reverse happens with secondary succession and the end result is a more humid (mesic) microclimate favourable to mesophytic species, but unfavorable to xerophytes. In secondary succession, reaction creates a home that is "too" good for the species of lower ecological order but "just" right for species of higher order. Assuming all other factors to be equal, there is no barrier to the migration, ecesis and aggregation of the latter and they will move in and dominate. Thus, reaction is not only essential to secondary succession, it is also a catalyst.
When the supply of desirable species becomes limited, the animals then turn to the next most palatable species, which are usually less productive and nourishing and less desirable in respect to soil and water conservation. While the desirable species are decreasing, these species increase to a point, but with continued overuse, they also weaken and die. These species are termed "increasers" or "less desirable" (Figure 11).
Only unpalatable species and grazing evasive species can survive such a system of overgrazing and eventually these will invade and they are termed "invaders" or "undesirable". Invaders are species that were absent or present in very small amounts in the original vegetation, which invade following disturbance or continued overgrazing. Invaders are less productive than increasers and are of very little value as regards soil and water conservation. Some are excessive consumers of water, giving nothing in return, and livestock refuse to graze some species. Eventually the animals are forced to eat some species of invaders or die from starvation, which the productive animals usually do, leaving the least productive and demanding animals which manage to survive, giving little production in return.
The terms decreaser, increaser and invader are used in the United States, where the ecology of individual species are fairly well known. This is not well known in Latin America and the Caribbean and the classification of desirable, less desirable and undesirable is more applicable at this time. These are described as follows:
Desirable:
Highly productive and palatable species that provide good environmental protection.
Less Desirable:
Species that are less productive and palatable than desirable species and which provide less environmental protection.
Undesirable:
Species that yield very little, if any, forage that is not particularly palatable. They impair the ecosystem. They can also be noxious.
An example of secondary succession is given in Figure 12, which illustrates the opposite of retrogression and the fact that desirable species can regain dominance or at least increase with years of proper management. It is doubtful that the original climax will ever be completely re-established, although a climax type of vegetation is a worthy goal. Also, there are some situations where a subclimax is apparently more nourishing than climax, thus yielding higher livestock returns. Nevertheless, the fact that there is a natural phenomenon in which nature tries to restore the climax gives the manipulator a very valuable and most useful tool. He or she knows that in many situations, species composition, plant cover and forage production can be improved along with soil and water conservation through natural and inexpensive secondary succession. It is his or her duty to devise, plan and execute the manipulations required to activate this. Neither retrogression nor secondary
succession follow well-defined patterns. Retrogression patterns depend to a large extent on the kinds of livestock involved.
Retrogression under cattle grazing will likely consist of an increase and/or invasion of short grasses, fortes and browse. There will likely be an increase of tough grasses and browse with sheep and grasses and fortes with goats. Destructive grazing by all three will result in either bare ground Or a kind of vegetation that neither one can or will eat.
Box (1972) pointed out that secondary succession sometimes "jumps" or "bounces" into a new state which may be just as stable as the climax, but different. It is unlikely that it will ever return to the pristine state because it represents a new stable interaction which may be just as productive as the original vegetation. Chile's annual ranges associated with a Mediterranean climate is an example. Introduced species which behave like native species are called "naturalized species." Desirable naturalized species have spread in some areas, creating a new range ecosystem with a different set of actors.
Figure 11. An example of retrogression and range condition related to percent of climax remaining.
Figure 12. An example of range improvement through secondary succession (Adapted from Gonzalez, 1971).
<section>7</section>
Range condition as related to desertification and livestock production
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Range condition and sites as related to grazing capacity and animal production
Range condition is a very important concept and measurement. Consequently, there are various opinions as to what it entails and how it should be measured. The Society for Range Management (SRM) gives two definitions in its Third Edition of "A Glossary of Terms Used in Range Management" (SRM, 1989). These are: (1) a generic term relating to present status of a unit of range in terms of specific values or potentials which must be stated; and (2) following some agencies, the present state of vegetation of a range site in relation to the climax (natural potential) plant community for that site. It is an expression of the relative degree to whiah the kinds, proportions, and amounts of plants in a community resemble that of the climax community for the site.
Fundamentally, range condition is a measure of the deviation from the highest form of vegetation that can be attained with proper and practical management. The key is proper management that leads to maximum sustained livestock production consistent with the conservation and/or improvement of the related natural resources. Agencies in the U.S. have developed guides for determining range condition based on the decreases, increaser and invader classifications. Range condition classes using this method are given in Table 5 and illustrated in Figures 11 and 12.
Table 5. Range condition classification based on percent of climax (natural potential) present for the site
Range condition class Percent of Climax Present or Remaining
Excellent 76 -100
Good 51-75
Fair 26-50
Poor 0-25
Since the ecology of the individual species is not well known in most of the Region's countries, Huss, et al. (1986) developed a modified method for range condition classification based on the desirable species concept. The guidelines for determining condition are as follows:
Desirable Species:
Allow the total percent of all that occur towards range condition classification.
Less Desirable Species:
Allow a total of up to 30%, but no more, of these towards range condition classification.
Undesirable Species:
Do not allow any of these.
The range condition classes using this method are shown in Table 6.
Table 6. Range condition classification based on the proportions of desirable, less desirable and undesirable species. (Adapted from Huss, et al., 1986)
Range condition class Percent Desirable and Allowable Less Desirable Species
Excellent 76-100
Good 51-75
Fair 26-50
Poor 0-25
The general characteristics of the four range condition classes are illustrated in Figure 13. Excellent condition is dominated by highly productive, palatable and deep rooted desirable species. There are a few less desirable ones. Grazing capacity is maximum. The ground is well covered and the soil is filled with desirable roots. The environment is stable and there is no desertification.
Good condition has a reduction of desirable and more less desirable species than excellent. Grazing capacity is slightly less, but satisfactory. Ground cover and root supply are sufficient to stabilize the environment. Everything begins to fall apart with fair condition. Undesirable and high water-using species have invaded, upsetting the water regime. There are only a few desirable species. Grazing capacity is greatly reduced. Ground cover and root production are reduced, creating excessive runoff and erosion hazards. The microclimate has become more arid and desertification symptoms are everywhere.
The situation becomes worse with poor condition, although a desertified state has not been reached in this example. Note that a few desirable and less desirable plants still exist within the cactus plants because they are protected from grazing. A range in this state can be improved via secondary succession with good management. However, with continued destructive grazing, the poor range will become even worse, finally reaching an irreversible state.
Range Sites and Condition
The different kinds of rangelands are large areas controlled by climate and distinguished by the dominance of certain kinds of plants. They are not homogeneous. Upon close inspection, one can find considerable variation in plant communities and productivities. These variations are due to range sites. A range site is an area of land having a combination of physical features significantly different from adjacent areas. Changes from one site to another represent significant differences in potential forage production and/or differences in management requirements for proper range use. Range sites are caused by soil, topographical and/or exposure differences. Man-made structures can also alter the natural environment and create artificial sites.
Books about soils are available and there is no need to dwell on this subject in detail. Soil structure is an important factor causing site differences. Structure is a dispersed system made up of particles of varying size: gravel, coarse sand, fine sand, silt and clay. The proportion of these plus other features determines the production potential of a soil. As a general rule, water infiltration rates increase and water holding capacities decrease with increased sand content. Mineral contents cause significant differences in potential plant production. Deficiencies or excessive amounts, such as salt, affect both forage quantity and quality. Range sites and pedological classifications do not always coincide. Two different kinds of soils adjacent to each other may produce the same kind of vegetation.
Soil depth is a major factor causing sites. Potential declines with soil shallowness. High forage production requires large root systems and shallow soils do not have adequate space for the development of such systems. Topography also influences productivity. In general, productivity and degree of slope are inversely related. The best use of most steep slopes is no use because their watershed values are greater than their forage values. Valleys can produce more than would be expected with an average annual rainfall because of their deep soils and because they receive additional water from surface runoff. Man-made structures can also alter potential.
Sites should be named according to their physical features, not according to vegetation types. Vegetation can change, physical features cannot. While this point might seem trivial, some serious misinterpretations have been made with site delineations made on vegetation types. Poor condition ranges, for example, have been considered as being the potential. Some site names that appear frequently in land capability surveys are wetland, subirrigated, coarse sands, ordinary uplands, valley, steep rocky slopes, shallow uplands, gravel, saline overflow, saline uplands, very shallow uplands, gradual slopes, etc.
Table 7 illustrates the differences in forage production as related to range sites and range condition on Texas' Fort Worth Prairie. The valley site in excellent condition produced two times more forage than poor condition on the same site. Poor condition on the valley site produced almost exactly as much forage as excellent on the ordinary upland and more than excellent on the slopes. From another point of view, it takes 2.5 ha of slopes or 1.7 ha of ordinary upland in excellent condition to produce as much forage as 1 ha of valley in the same condition.
Figure 13. General characteristics of range condition classes in a semiarid area (Adapted from SCS, USDA).
Table 7. Kilograms of dry forage production per hectare as related to range sites and condition on the Fort Worth Prairie, Texas. (Adapted from SCS, USDA)
RANGE CONDITION SITES
Valley Ordinary Upland Slopes
Excellent 5,150 3,090 2,060
Good 4,230 2,575 1,570
Fair 3,520 1,983 1,246
Poor 2,575 1,030 721
Further analysis of the data in Table 7 shows that the poor condition on the valley site produced about one-half as much forage as excellent, whereas poor condition on the other two sites produced around one-third as much as excellent. Range condition in this case was determined by the decreaser, increaser and invader method previously described. With this method, a species can be an invader on one site, an increaser on another site or a decreaser on yet another one, all being in close proximity to each other. A poor condition range on some sites may be poor ecologically, but not so poor from forage production and environmental protection points of view. Lacking expertise in range condition determination methods, the public can be misled by popular articles about the status of rangelands.
González (1966) reported similar relationships as those in Table 7 for the various kinds of rangelands in the state of Chihuahua, Mexico. These are illustrated in Figure 14. There were considerable differences in forage production between the vegetation types, regardless of condition. The potential for the halophytes and shrublands is very low compared to the grasslands. Excellent condition on the various kinds of rangelands produced much more forage than the other condition classes making the attainment of excellent condition a worthy goal. There was considerable variation in production due to sites.
Range condition and sites as related to grazing capacity and animal production
FAO's study entitled "Agriculture: Toward 2000," which pertains to long-term global development up to the year 2000 for the countries and regions of the world, considered two alternatives: (1) continuation of past trends (1961-65 to 1979) in agricultural growth and development and (2) normative targets for accelerated general and agricultural growth. The latter analysis does not pertain to potential growth as it is based on what would be expected to happen with a gradual upgrading of the utilization of resources through appropriate technologies. The results of this study regarding beef production in the Region are presented in Table 8.
Figure 14. Forage production as related to range sites and conditions within various vegetation types in Chihuahua, Mexico (Gonzalez, 1966)
Table 8. Beef balance projections between production and demand for Latin America and the Caribbean up to the year 2000
Thousands of metric tons
HISTORICAL TRENDS^1
Items Years
Production 8,132 9,027 10,017 12,409
Demand 7,731 9,043 10,436 13,731
Balance + 401 - 15 - 419 -1,322
NORMATIVE TRENDS^2
Items Years
Production -- 10,179 12,460 18,417
Demand -- 9,478 11,359 16,338
Balance -- + 701 +1,101 +2,079
1. Continuation of past trends (1961-1979).
2. Accelerated growth with a gradual and possible upgrading of the utilization of resources through appropriate technologies.
It was predicted that if past trends continue, the Region as a whole would have a deficit in respect to demand in 1985 and that the deficit would increase several fold by 2000. This deficit will be particularly serious in the Caribbean, Andean and northeastern Atlantic sub-regions of which many countries are already importers of beef. However, Mexico and Central America, according to the analysis, will not be in deficit until 2000 and the southern countries will still have some surpluses at that time, enabling them to remain in the international trade of beef.
The situation is somewhat brighter for the Region as a whole, but not for some sub-regions, when analyzed from the normative target point of view. The Caribbean and Andean countries are still predicted to have considerable deficits, but the other sub-regions and the Region as a whole will have some surplus up to and beyond the year 2000.
Similar trends are expected regarding mutton, but the predicted future regarding milk supplies can only be considered as bad. All sub-regions are predicted to have a high milk deficit by 2000 even if the normative targets should be met. The predicted deficit by 2000 for the Region is 14.4 million tons if historical trends continue and 6.0 million tons if normative targets are met.
There is no reason to believe that the projected levels of production under the normative analysis cannot be met in some countries, but it will take a greater effort than in the past on the part of all concerned: planners and policy makers, scientists, technicians and producers. Moreover, a passive attitude cannot be taken in that meat and milk deficits can be filled with food crops because deficits are predicted for many of these as well. Therefore, the Region must take full advantage of its livestock producing resources in order to meet the challenge that it is faced with.
The greatest potential for increasing beef production lies with the improvement of reproductive efficiency and annual extraction rates, reduction of death losses and increased grazing capacities. A 1975 FAO study in Chile, Peru, Venezuela, Argentina, Brazil and Colombia showed that grazing pressures on both native and artificial pastures were close to or exceeding grazing capacity and that little progress could be made in future through a simple increase in livestock numbers which would likely decrease production rather than increase it. It was calculated that with an average extraction rate of 12% the total cattle population for these countries would produce around 19 million head for slaughter. Increasing extraction rates through improved management by 1% each year, while maintaining herd numbers equal, would give an increase of 1,654,000 head for slaughter per year and an eventual extraction rate of 18% would yield 9,927,000 more head for slaughter.
Individual animal productivity is related to degree of utilization as shown in Figure 8. However, since this is such an important subject in respect to both livestock production and desertification control, it will be re-emphasized in greater detail in a later subject. The focus here is on the determination of grazing capacity and to illustrate how livestock numbers can be increased without damage to the environment, resulting in increased food production to help meet the ever increasing demand.
It is interesting that there are very few studies regarding the influence of range conditions per se on individual animal performance. The consultant conducted such a study several years ago on twenty ranches in Kerr County, Texas, USA. All ranchers kept records, many do not, and all ranches were grazed with a combination of cattle, sheep and Angora goats. The ranches were divided into those with high poor to fair condition ranges and those with good condition ranges. The average stocking for all ranches was 7.3 ha per animal unit. It was estimated that the degree of use for the poor to fair condition ranges was approaching proper, some being slightly over. The degree of use for the good condition ranges was proper, some being slightly under. While these degrees of use could have influenced animal performance, it was felt that this was not a major contributing factor. All ranchers had good and well managed stock.
The results are given in Table 9. Except for kid hair production, individual performance was better for all the livestock grazing the good range than those grazing poor and fair. There was a much higher percent increase with cattle than with sheep and goats. Since cattle prefer grasses to fortes and browse, this was attributed to a greater abundance of desirable grasses on the good condition ranges than on the poor to fair ones. An increase in sheep production, especially lamb weaning weight was satisfactory. While grown mohair yields increased considerably, kid hair decreased for no apparent reason. It could have been related to age at time of shearing.
Table 9. Average individual animal performance as related to range condition on twenty ranches in Kerr County, Texas (Hues, Unpublished Data)
KIND OF LIVESTOCK RANGE CONDITION PERCENT DIFFERENCE
High Poor to Fair Good
SHEEP
% Lamb Crop 75 82 + 9.33
Weaning Wt. (Ibs) 53 68 +28.30
Wool (lbs/yr) 8.0 8.7 +8.75
ANGORA GOATS
% Kid Crop 63 68 + 7.93
Grown Hair (lbs/yr) 5.0 7.5 + 50.00
Kid Hair (lbs/yr) 3.0 2.2 - 36.36
CATTLE
% Calf Crop 77 95 + 23.37
Weaning Wt. (Ibs) 380 458 +20.52
These data indicate that ranges in good and excellent condition have a better yearlong supply of palatable and nutritious forage than do ranges in poor and fair condition. Livestock respond accordingly. Improved range condition nearly always improves the habitat for wildlife. This is assured by good range management which leaves adequate protective cover. The myth that domestic livestock grazing causes a decline in wild animal numbers is not true in the face of good management.
For example, the 1923 big game populations in the state of Wyoming, USA, which has 50% public lands, most of which allow livestock grazing were: 22,000 elk, 20,000 deer and 13,000 antelope. In 1990, these were: 68,000 elk, 517,000 deer and 344,000 antelope (Anonymous, 1993). Range management was not even born in 1923, and the relatively low wildlife populations were probably due to rangeland abuse. There has been an astounding wildlife increase since that time, a large part of which can be attributed to livestockmen working hand in hand with technicians regarding better use of the range resources. The case of Texas Edwards Plateau as previously described under the section "Continual Destructive Grazing" is another example of livestock and wildlife living together harmoniously.
Grazing capacity cannot be determined easily. Many factors are involved such as weather fluctuations, seasonal variations in forage production and palatability, forage or site accessibility, variations in livestock preferences and many others. Regardless, estimations can be made based on either experience, research results, interpretations and/or certain methodologies. A logical estimation puts one in the "ball park." Once in the ball park, the accuracy of the stocking rate in accordance with the estimated capacity can be monitored with degree of use and range condition trend measures and even livestock performance. These would dictate needed, if any, changes. Range condition and site determinations are essential to grazing capacity estimations.
Grazing capacities are expressed as area per animal unit. An animal unit (abbreviated as A.U.) is one mature reproducing cow with or without calf, or its equivalent. Conversion factors are: cow, 1.0; mature bull, 1.25; weaned calf, 0.6; yearling 12 to 17 months of age, 0.7; yearling 17 to 22 months, 0.75; two-year-old from 22 to 32 months, 0.9; white-tail deer, 0.14; mule deer, 0.2; elk, 0.7; mature ewe, 0.2; ram, 0.2; weaned wether, 0.17; doe goat, 0.17; buck, 0.17; weaned wether, 0.14 and mature horse, 1.25. Capacity can be expressed as area per A.U. per year such as 6 ha/AU/year or as area per A.U. per month (A.U.M.) such as 0.5 ha/A.U./month. The former is usually expressed simply as ha/A.U.. The latter is used with seasonal grazing.
Once the average productivities for the various range conditions on the involved sites are measured, stocking rate guides can be calculated. An A.U. is allotted around 5,000 kg of air-dry forage per year. It might not consume this amount, but it tramples a lot and it is competing with microconsumers. The recommended stocking rate is calculated as follows:
5.000 Kg. of Forage/A.U.
Ha/A.U. = Production/ha x 0.5
Why multiply forage production by 0.5? Because 50% should be left for proper nutrition of the plants. Remember, "take half leave half" is the general rule.
It was shown in Table 7 that the average air dry forage production for a range in excellent condition on an ordinary upland site is 3,090/ha. Using the above formula the estimated grazing capacity would be:
Ha/A.U. = 5.000/3,090 x 0.5 = 3.2 ha/A.U./year
For poor condition, it would be:
Ha/A.U. =5.000/1,030 x 0.5 = 9.7 Ha/A.U./Year
Stocking rate guides can be made with adequate information. Table 10 is an example made from the information in Table 7. There is a range in the recommended stocking rates to allow for variations within condition classes such as very poor, poor, high poor, low fair, high fair, etc. The range is wider for poor and fair than for good and excellent because there is greater variation among them.
Grazing capacity determinations for a specific production unit, private ranch or community grazing area, requires consideration of other factors beside range sites and conditions such as grazing distribution, accessibility and feasibility. A hypothetical example of how all of this could apply to a 5,800 ha ranch is given in Table 11. Only 4,300 ha are grazeable and the grazing capacity is based on the sites and conditions within these 4,300 ha and not the total 5,800 ha. There are many real situations similar to this, clearly showing that all land is not equal. The total recommended stocking rate for the 5,800 ha ranch is 190 A.U.s.
Table 10. An example of a stocking rate guide based on the information in Table 7
SITE HECTARES PER A.U.
Excellent Good Fair Poor
Valley 1 - 2 2 - 3 3 - 4 4 or more
Ordinary Upland 2 - 4 4 - 5 5 - 8 9 or more
Slopes 3 - 5 5 - 8 8 -13 14 or more
Table 11. Hypothetical grazing capacity situation on a 5,800 ha ranch
Sites Condition Hectares Ha/A. U. Accessibility Total A. U. s
1 Good 400 10 Yes 40
1 Fair 600 12 Yes 50
2 Poor 800 20 Yes 40
3 Poor 1,500 25 Yes 60
4 Excellent 2,000 20 No 0
5 Excellent 500 None^1 No 0
TOTAL 5,800 20 -- 190
1. Very erodible, grazing not recommended.
In conclusion, it is obvious that livestock and wildlife numbers can be safely increased and desertification controlled with improvement in range condition. Beautiful spinoffs are more animal products and stabilized range environments. Going back to the ecosystem, the manipulator can use livestock to achieve this. Many methods are available to him or her, needing only implementation.
Range Condition and Sites - the Planner's Tools
Range condition and site analyses and interpretations can be most useful to planners. A dominance of poor condition range is proof that past management was improper. Reconstruction of past management provides valuable information as to what should be avoided, both currently and in future. Stocking rate histories provide information for the formulation of stocking rate guides. The kinds of livestock grazed in past helps to explain the current vegetation status and provides clues regarding changes that might be needed.
The species composition helps to identify managerial needs and practices to be applied. Should the range be grazed only by cattle or sheep or goats or by a combination of these? Is there an adequate amount of desirable and less desirable species for secondary succession? If not, reseeding should be planned as well as the most feasible method. Will secondary succession be retarded or held in check by brush and weed competition? If so, brush and weed control should be planned as well as the method or methods. Is some sort of rotation or deferred rotation grazing system needed to either maintain current composition or enhance succession? This might not be the case with good and excellent ranges and proper yearlong grazing would be sufficient. This is nearly always the case with poor and fair condition ranges and the planner must design an appropriate system.
If there is a grazing distribution problem as shown in Table 11, the analyses will reveal it. Note in Table 11 that sites 2 and 3 are in poor condition, site 1 is in both fair and good condition and site 4 is excellent. This indicates poor grazing distribution. The planner must determine why, and devise solutions. The above are just a few examples of why range condition and site surveys serve as the planner's or the manipulator's tools. There are many more examples. But, above all, the planner must estimate the grazing capacity and convince the livestockman to stock accordingly. This will likely be the planner's most difficult task.
<section>8</section>
Influence of grazing and vegetation on water yields and erosion
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Erosion is a natural process and few lands are without it. Natural erosion on most lands is not faster than soil formation. Accelerated erosion is faster than soil formation which, if continued, can result in considerable soil loss. Erosion is the movement of soil as a result of the forces of water and wind. These forces dislodge and transport the soil particles. Other factors determine the degree of erosion. Erosion is a result of weather (mainly rainfall and wind); soil (texture, structure, detachability, infiltration, transportability); topography (slope degree, length); and vegetation (cover, roots, height).
Surface runoff of water is a normal part of the hydrological cycle and few lands are without it, as well. It contributes to streamflow, although seepage of underground (springs, etc.) water is the most desirable source of streamflow. Excessive runoff contributes to erosion, deprives the ecosystem of needed water and reduces underground water supplies. Many of the factors related to erosion are also related to runoff. Thus, the two are interrelated.
Water erosion and runoff begin with the raindrop which incidentally is not tear-shaped as popularly believed. It is kidney-shaped. The impact of falling raindrops is quite large. Fifty millimeters of rain per hectare deliver enough force to lift 18 cm of soil to a height of one meter. On bare ground or heavily trampled rangelands, large raindrops are delivered in blows that dislodge soil particles. The raindrops themselves further compact the soil. Infiltration is reduced and the excess water runs off, carrying the soil particles with it. An objective of range management is to reduce trampling and to create a kind of vegetation that will intercept the raindrops, reducing their force. Water that trickles down the vegetation to the soil does not splash and dislodge soil particles. Infiltration is enhanced and runoff is reduced.
Hydrologic outputs from woodland, shrubland, and grassland ecosystems have been researched by a variety of methods over a period of years in the United States. There are difficulties in comparing the information, however, because studies have not tested the outputs with any degree of uniformity of methods. Nevertheless, ample evidence exists to point out the negative hydrologic impacts of heavy or abusive grazing in terms of reduced infiltration and increased compaction rates associated with that level of use. What is less well understood is the role that properly balanced grazing strategies would have on the long range hydrologic condition of the rangeland watersheds (Gaither and Buckhouse, 1981). It is not the author's intention to review the literature. Some selected and relevant publications are cited to illustrate certain points. Those wanting further information on rangeland watershed management in arid and semiarid regions are referred to the Society for Range
Management's publication, "Rangeland Hydrology" (Benson, et al., 1972).
Some personal experiences are also worth mentioning. The beneficial effects of improved range was witnessed during a visit to the Khanasiri Range Station in Jordan. The station, located in a 250 mm per year rainfall zone, is characterized by a rough topography and shallow soils, a situation highly subject to runoff and erosion. The vegetation cover was in good to excellent condition owing to years of controlled grazing and proper management. The erodibility of the adjacent lands was considerably less because of an undulating topography and the dominance of the deep and well developed Mediterranean terra rosa soil type. Some of this area was cultivated and the remainder was overgrazed rangeland in poor condition.
A rainstorm occurred prior to and during the visit. Runoff from the ploughed lands was tremendous and the waterways were soon overflowing with red water which was ample testimony as to the amount of erosion that had taken place. There was also considerable runoff from the overgrazed rangelands, but erosion was less as was evidenced by the color of the water. Runoff from the Station's rangelands was practically nil and the small amounts of water that did run off was crystal clear.
A spring was reborn and a dry creek started flowing water on a ranch in Texas following brush control. The owner stated that he had never seen the creek flow water except during floods during forty years of ownership. However, an elderly man over 90 years of age stated he caught fish in the creek as a child, until it dried up. Increased spring and streamflow has been observed on various occasions following range improvement. On one occasion, a spring near extinction was saved by the elimination of phreatophytes.
Runoff-Erosion as related to Range Condition
Changes in vegetal type, modifications of cover and grazing intensities also result in corresponding changes in the hydrological regime. These changes may be beneficial or disastrous. The beneficial changes are more conducive to sustained maximum livestock grazing than disastrous changes. Generally, infiltration increases and runoff and erosion decrease with improvement in range condition. Leithead (1959) found that runoff increased in the Davis Mountain-Big Bend area of Texas as range condition deteriorated and moisture absorption by soil became slower. It was concluded that a range site in good condition could absorb moisture five to six times faster than the same range site in poor condition. Allred (1950) showed that rainfed infiltration rate was drastically reduced with reduction in vegetation cover and organic matter (Table 12). Infiltration rate on bare ground was only 0.5 inches per hour compared with a rate of 1.0 inches per hour on rangelands protected by 750
pounds of forage and organic material per acre and 9.4 inches per hour on rangelands with 5,800 pounds of vegetative material per acre. Organic matter in this case refers to ungrazed plant material on the soil surface in various stages of decomposition. This is also called "mulch" or litter.
Table 12. Relationship between forage and organic matter content and rainfall infiltration rate per hour. (From Allred, 1950)
Pounds of Forage and Organic Material/Acre Inches of Infiltration per hour
Two high elevation watersheds in central Utah were studied to determine differences in surface runoff as related to soil and plant cover. Approximately 3 to 5 times as much surface runoff was produced on the watershed with poorer plant cover. Runoff during the three year period study was 10.33, 8.74 and 5.49% of the total annual rainfall on the area with the poorer plant cover as compared to 4.10, 2.88 and 1.05% for the continuously well-vegetated watershed (Stewart and Forsling, 1931). Aldon and García (1973) stated that average annual rate of sediment production declined 71% in the period 1967-71 compared with the period 1956-66 on a 471-acre watershed on the Rio Puerco drainage in New Mexico. This decline was a result of an increase in plant size and litter production.
Juniper (Juniperus spp. ) and sagebrush (Artemisia spp. ) are undesirable species in the Rocky Mountain range. Gaither (1981) found that sediment values ranged from 1,572 kg/ha in juniper ecosystems to 1,284 kg/ha in sagebrush ecosystems to 431 kg/ha in grassland ecosystems following investigation with a Rocky Mountain infiltrometer set to simulate a 28-minute convectional storm with an intensity of about 10 cm/hr. Rauzi (1960) conducted infiltration studies on rangelands in three locations in the Northern Plains. High condition range sites absorbed water almost three times as much as did low condition range sites. Results indicated that on two of the three areas the amounts of standing vegetation contributed more to infiltration than mulch material. Meeuwig (1970) investigated the influences of vegetation, soil properties and slope gradient on infiltration capacity and soil stability of high elevation herbland on the Wasatch Front in northern Utah under simulated rainfall
conditions. Results emphasized the importance of vegetation and litter cover in maintaining infiltration capacity and soil stability. Infiltration is also affected significantly by soil properties, notably bulk density, aggregation, and moisture content.
Finally, Osborne (1956) classified various rangeland soils in the U.S. as to their inherent credibility based on certain soil characteristics, and then conducted studies to determine their stabilization requirements. He found that the least erodible soils required about 1,500 pounds of vegetal material per acre for stabilization and the most erodible required 5,000 pounds. Except for the highly erodible soils, these levels of productivity were equivalent to those for properly utilized ranges in low good or high fair condition. The results of the study also suggested that some land should not be utilized because of watershed value as illustrated in Table 11.
Runoff-Erosion as related to Grazing Intensity
It is generally considered that livestock compact the soil by trampling, although some disagree, claiming that animals break up surface crusts, enhancing water absorption. Research indicates that runoff and possibly erosion increase with grazing intensity. The influence of trampling cannot be ruled out because there is likely an interaction between trampling and defoliation which reduces the protective cover regardless of range condition.
Blackburn, et al. (1982) conducted a literature review attempting to tie the effects of grazing to hydrologic and watershed response. Rangeland areas were divided into several eco-geographic zones and studied separately. These zones were: sagebrush/grass, salt-desert shrub, southwest semidesert shrub/grass, California grasslands, Northern Great Plains, South Great Plain, pinyon-juniper woodland, ponderosa pine/bunchgrass, high elevation rangeland, eastern hardwood or pine forest. They pointed out that livestock grazing influences water hydrologic properties by removing protective plant cover and by trampling. They found that the literature is filled with examples of the adverse impacts of heavy or abusive grazing on watersheds.
They concluded, however, that runoff was greater with moderate stocking rates compared to no use, but that the differences in erosion were nil as illustrated in Figure 15. Excessive runoff and erosion occurs only with excessive grazing (Figure 15). These and other data indicate that animal production can be sustained without damage to the environment regarding erosion. Several studies have supported this.
Smeins (1975) concluded from his studies that moderate grazing may not increase erosion, but may significantly increase runoff as compared to lightly grazed or ungrazed areas. Moderate grazing has the potential to maintain a favorable forage, may not increase the hazard of erosion, and could possibly produce good quality runoff water for use outside the watershed. In Alberta, Canada, ungrazed areas and areas that had been grazed by cattle at four rates for 10 years were studied. Results indicated that soil erosion by water was not a critical factor in management even after 10 years of heavy grazing. Increasing amounts of standing vegetation and natural mulch were associated with increased water-intake rates (Johnston, 1962). Dunford (1949) measured runoff and erosion over a period of 12 years at the Manitou Experimental Forest near Colorado Springs. Two grazing intensities were studied for their effect on watershed values. Results indicated that moderate grazing would be
allowable on relatively gentle slopes if the resulting loss of runoff water did not cause critical shortages of moisture for vegetative productivity.
Figure 15. Impact of grazing intensities on runoff and erosion (Adapted from Blackburn, et al., 1982).
Water Quality
Water full of sediment is not quality water. The silt fills waterways and reservoirs. It has been shown that quality water from this point of view can be produced with proper grazing and managerial practices. The picture is not so clear from a bacterial point of view. An understanding of relationships between livestock grazing and water contamination is needed in order to properly manage ranges near streams.
Two studies in arid and semiarid areas indicate that water contamination by livestock is minimal. A study in Utah showed that bacterial analyses (fecal and total coliform) of runoff water from infiltrometer plots indicated that the potential public health hazard of livestock grazing on semiarid open range on gentle slopes is probably minimal (Gifford, et al., 1976). In another study, no adverse effects from fecal contamination were detected after cattle grazing was introduced in a semiarid watershed near Coyote Flat in southeastern Utah. The area was seeded to crested wheatgrass in 1967 after pinyon-juniper chaining and windrowing of debris, and it was protected from grazing until 1974 when it was cattle-stocked at 2 ha/AUM. There were no significant changes in fecal and total coliform production, indicating that potential health hazards from fecal pollution during such grazing are minimal. Most dry rangelands such as those covering the southwestern United States have few,
if any, permanent streams. Thus, there is little or no effective streambank area from which bacteria can be flushed into a water course. On most chainings, especially those with debris in place, runoff water cannot flow any distance overland and very little rainfall runs off (Buckhouse, 1976).
Contamination does appear to be a problem in the mountainous areas in the United States, but it is not all due to livestock. Studies on two adjacent pastures along Trout Creek in central Colorado indicated only minor effect of cattle grazing on water quality. Bacterial contamination of the water did, however, increase. Bacterial counts dropped to levels similar to those in the ungrazed pasture after removal of the cattle (Johnson, et al., 1978).
Sources and variations in bacterial indicators were reported by Stephenson et al. (1978) from stream sites over a three-year period on a 233-km² rangeland in southwest Idaho. The occurrence of fecal coliforms was directly related to the presence of cattle on summer range and winter pastures. Fecal coliform counts in adjacent streams were found to increase soon after cattle were turned in and remained high for several months after cattle were removed. Runoff from rainstorms increased both total and fecal coliform concentrations in streams on summer range with limited management and adjacent to winter pastures, but runoff from snowmelt had little effect. Total coliform counts varied more with change in streamflow than did fecal coliform counts. In fenced summer range allotments, under deferred grazing management, the effects were the same, except that bacterial counts were not as high or persistent. The decrease in bacterial concentrations at several downstream sampling sites
indicated that certain stream segments were selfpurifying. The presence or absence of livestock along the streams overshaded any effect that variations in chemical concentration of the water might have had on bacterial concentrations.
White (1976) collected surface water samples from September, 1972 through August, 1973 on the northern slopes of Mount Taylor in west-central New Mexico. The effects of grazing, irrigation, water impoundment, vegetation clearing, and road construction upon the natural water quality was determined. Road construction had the greatest effect on water quality of these land-use practices, but all of the practices had a significant effect on at least one or more of the dissolved constituents. Shinner, et al. (1974) measured the water quality of a watershed for three summers. The standard plate count of 20 c and the aerobic bacteria enumerated on trypticase soy agar at 20 c numbered about 5 x 103 cells/ml in July, and remained at this concentration for the rest of the summer. The standard plate count at 35 c was generally constant at near 50 cells/ml each summer at all sample sites. The total coliforms in 9 of 17 cases exhibited a tenfold increase in numbers in late July or August
over the values of 10 or less per 100 ml found in June. Fecal coliforms in 11 of 17 cases increased 10- to 100-fold in concentration in July or August over values obtained in June or September. Maximum of fecal streptococci were usually seen at all sample sites in July or August except for 1972, when sheep were being grazed in September. A stream in a natural area of the watershed appeared to be less polluted than other streams in the watershed which were influenced by human use.
Synopsis
Upset water regimes created by reduced infiltrations and excess surface runoff and soil erosion are desertification symptoms (Figure 5). These in turn promote other symptoms: microclimate changes, increasing microaridity, decreasing productivity and diminution of usefulness. Studies and experiences have shown that infiltration rates increase and that erosion and runoff decrease with increases in range condition. One study showed, except for highly erodible soils, that stabilization can be attained with low good or high fair condition. Studies have also shown that moderate grazing intensity (proper degree of utilization) can maintain a favourable forage resource without increasing the hazard of erosion. It could produce good quality runoff water for use outside the watershed. Both improved range condition and proper degree of utilization can be achieved with manipulations of livestock. Superior livestock production and desertification control will also be achieved.
The influence of livestock on bacterial contamination of water appears to be minimal in arid and semiarid areas. There is evidence that livestock grazing near mountain streams can contribute to some bacterial contamination, although recreationists contribute as well and probably more.
<section>9</section>
Practices for controlling desertification and improving livestock production
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Grazing systems
Common use
Supplemental pastures
Many range management practices have been developed since the science was born some fifty years ago and new ones are being developed. These practices are aimed at controlling desertification and at obtaining maximum sustained economic animal production. While specifics will vary, the application of these practices, in principle, is badly needed in the Region. Desertification symptoms are widespread and average ruminant production is pitifully low. Of the regions where meat is eaten, only Africa has lower production levels than the Latin America and Caribbean region. A brief review of the livestock production situation is given to reiterate the urgent need for the implementation of sound range and livestock management practices.
Cattle are by far the most important component of the Region's livestock industry. This is mainly due to the vast grazing areas which are more conducive to the production of cattle than other ruminants. Preference has also traditionally been given to cattle over the small ruminants. About 85% of the Region's 324 million head of cattle are in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, Paraguay, Uruguay and Venezuela. Average production per head of cattle is only 30 kgs carcass equivalent. This low level of productivity is due mainly to low reproductive rates, high mortality rates and prolonged fattening. A review of the information from eleven countries at the FAO Expert Consultation for Improving the Reproductive Efficiency of Cattle in Latin America showed that average calf crops were between 50 and 55% with a range as low as 40% in northeastern Brazil to a high of 63% in Argentina. First calving normally occurs at 3 to 4 years of age and the calving interval exceeds 400 days.
This low reproductive efficiency combined with high calf mortality makes it almost impossible to raise productivity because it results in: (1) an insufficient number of animals for sale to justify investments for the better management of the herd; and (2) too small a number of replacement females limits genetic progress.
This is aggravated by prolonged fattening periods of four to six years for animals fattened on pasture, especially tropical ones, to attain slaughter weights. Consequently, herds tend to comprise a large percentage of growing males. As a result, the percentage of breeding cows in the national herds tends to be low. Extraction rates are low, varying from around 10% in Paraguay to 20% in Argentina. Low reproductive efficiency is due to a multitude of interrelated factors such as inadequate nutrition, climatic stress, poor herd management, diseases, breeds, and poor reproductive physiological development in the form of sterility, late puberty and others. Man can have an influence on all of these, except climatic stress. There are many examples of well managed herds in the Region which have reproductive rates of 80% or more and annual extraction rates of 20% and above. This was achieved by improved nutrition, utilization of hybrid vigor and proper herd management.
Productivity indices for dairy cattle, sheep and goats and probably alpacas and llamas are similar to those for beef cattle. There are approximately 34 million dairy cows in the Region yielding an average of only 1,000 liters of milk per cow. Most of the dairy farms in the tropical zone do not specialize in milk because most cows utilized are dual purpose, milked seasonally and in many instances only once a day. There is, however, a notable trend, especially near consumption centers, to establish intensive and specialized dairy operations. Average meat and scoured wool production per head for sheep is 3.5 and 1.6 kg, respectively. Sheep production and husbandry practices vary. In many countries it is mostly at the subsistence level. Sheep are kept in small herds and are grazed during the day mainly by women and children or by tethering. Systematic shearing is not commonly practiced. Wool is plucked throughout the year and spun, weaved and made into cloth by the small farmer
and his family.
Commercial sheep enterprises for wool and meat production exist mainly in Argentina, southern Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and Mexico which have 75% of the Region's sheep population. Argentina is by far the Region's largest sheep producer, most of which are raised in the Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego. Low reproductive efficiency and high perinatal mortality of lambs owing to malnutrition and harsh climatic conditions are major constraints to production in this zone. There are many breeds of hair sheep adapted to tropical conditions. These are encountered on small farms in the Caribbean countries, Venezuela, northeastern Brazil and Mexico. Outstanding qualities of these sheep are their high prolificacy and fecundity. They represent a valuable resource for meat production in tropical areas. However, lamb death losses are very high, which offsets the advantage of multiple births.
Goat numbers per farm vary from two or three on small farms up to several hundred in large enterprises or in semi-nomadic flocks such as those of the Guajira peninsula of Colombia and the Pacific coast of Chile and Peru. Production per animal is generally low owing to inadequate nutrition and management. Lactation periods of around 160 days and daily milk yields between 200 and 300 gr are common. This amounts to only 32 to 48 kg of milk per doe per year. Kid death losses of 50% or more during the first weeks of life are also common as well as average weaning weights of 5 to 8 kg.
The alpaca and llama are of great economic importance to Peru and Bolivia because of their ability to utilize grasslands of the Andean Altiplano at altitudes over 4,000 m where it is difficult to raise sheep and cattle. Llamas, of which there are about 3 million in Bolivia, are used as pack animals, slaughtered for meat and their hair is used in the cottage industry for rug making. The alpaca are valuable for their fibre, meat and skins. Peru, with some 2.9 million head, is the leading alpaca producer followed by Bolivia with 300,000 head. Around 80% of the alpacas in Peru and all of the llamas in Bolivia are reared by small farmers. At least 200,000 Peruvian campesino families depend in one way or another on the raising of alpaca. Data regarding the productivities of these animals were not available. However, it is known that they are below potential.
Proper Stocking
It has been previously mentioned that two ways to increase livestock production and to control desertification are to: (1) increase grazing capacity and (2) improve individual animal performance. The former was described in the section, "Range Condition as Related to Desertification and Livestock Production." The influence of degree of utilization on individual animal production was illustrated in Figure 8 in the section, "Range Plant Nutrition." However, if one had to select one single factor that affects animal productivity the most, that factor would have to be stocking rate as related to degree of use. For this reason, this subject is presented in greater detail here.
Proper use is a degree of utilization of current year's growth which, if continued, will achieve management objectives and maintain or improve the long-term productivity of the site (SRM, 1989). Our objectives are to arrest and reverse desertification and to obtain maximum sustained livestock production. Proper stocking is placing a number of animals on a given area that will result in proper use at the end of the planned grazing season. Continued proper stocking will lead to proper grazing.
The relationship between stocking rate and animal performance is difficult for livestockmen to understand. Yet, it is so simple. Animals wake up every morning with an appetite and a need for nourishment just like people. They need to consume enough forage during the day to satisfy their appetites and to meet their nutritional needs. On the other hand, a range can only produce so much forage. If the number of animals exceeds the forage supply, an animal against animal competition for forage is created and al] go to bed at night with partially filled stomachs. These daily deficiencies accumulate, resulting eventually in poor performance. The general axiom that good management and nutrition will lead to more productive animals better able to resist diseases, temporary periods of undernourishment and adverse climatic conditions cannot be achieved with continual overuse.
Individual animal production decreases with increases in stocking rate as shown in Figure 8, Table 13 and in Figure 16. Table 13 shows the results of a long-term stocking rate study on an experiment station in the United States. The percent calf crop for overgrazing was 20 percentage points less than for undergrazing and 19 less than for proper grazing. The 205 day calf weights for overgrazing was 56 kg and 50 kg less than for undergrazing and proper grazing respectively. While the highest production per animal was obtained with under utilization, the highest per hectare was obtained with proper use. Interpretations of stocking rate studies with qualitative classifications such as heavy, intermediate (moderate) and light (under) can be misleading. Researchers seem to avoid destructive grazing in their studies, probably because they know what the results will be. Thus, "heavy" is usually around 75 to 80% of utilization and destructive grazing would result in drastic and even
more reductions in individual production (See Figure 8). Moderate is usually around 50 to 60% use and light is less than 50%.
Table 13. Long-term influence of degree of use on cattle production at the Miles City, Montana (U.S.A.) Experimental Station. (From Valentine, et al., 1965)
ITEMS DEGREE OF USE
Over Proper Under
% Calf Crop^1 70 89 90
205 Day Calf Weights - Kg 143 193 199
Production/Ha - Kg 10.6 13.9 11.5
^1 Percent weaned based on number of cows bred.
The influence of stocking rate on cow fertility and percent calf crop shown in Figure 16 was provided by a Venezuelan rancher (Carrero Necker, 1990). The ranch was stocked with slightly less than 3,900 cows in 1978 and the calf crop was less than 35%. A serious stocking reduction programme was commenced in 1979 and percent calf crops began to increase. It peaked at around 65% in 1983, almost double that in 1979 with around 600 less cows. The reduction of cow numbers and calf crop in 1984 was due to an outbreak of disease, which is ample evidence why disease control must be an integral part of herd management. With disease control and range improvement due to proper stocking and other measures, a programme to increase stocking rates began in 1985. Calf crops have remained above the 1978 level with many less cows.
Maximum individual animal productivity might not be the most economical. Production per unit area of land is probably a better measure. The interrelationships between production per animal and area as related to stocking rates results in a bell-shaped curve revealing an optimum rate regarding production per unit of land. This is illustrated in Table 13, Figure 8 and again in Figure 17. This relationship can also be shown mathematically. Jones and Sandland (1974) calculated that zero gains per animal can be expected when stocking rate is double that required for optimum gain per hectare resulting in zero production per hectare, as shown in Figure 17.
The principles of proper stocking also apply to sheep, goats, alpacas and llamas. On a farm in Chile, milk production from "Criollo" goats increased 77% with better management, nutrition and disease control. Total wool production increased from around 85 thousand tons to around 95 thousand tons with 13 thousand less sheep on a ranch in Argentina's Patagonia. The reduction was gradual over a fifty year period and the increases in wool production were not only due to adjustments in stocking rates, but also to better management and genetic improvement.
Facing declining animal production and declining economic gains with overuse and lacking technical knowledge, one can understand why livestock owners think that additional stock is a solution to their problems, when in reality it makes things worse. The adage "more livestock - more produce" simply does not work when over utilization is involved. On the other hand, one cannot understand how national or regional progress can be measured by increases in livestock numbers without provision for adequate nutrition. As strange as it might sound, meat, milk and fiber production will increase with less livestock on the Region's rangelands. A great step towards desertification control will also be made.
Grazing systems
A grazing system can be defined as a specialization of grazing management which defines the periods of grazing and non-grazing. It can also be defined as the manipulation of livestock grazing to accomplish a desired result. Scientists and even livestockmen have spent a lot of time designing and testing various grazing systems with varied results.
Many different factors are considered in the design of grazing systems. One is to avoid as far as possible the deleterious effects of defoliation during a plant's most vulnerable stage of growth such as those shown in Figure 7. Plants are almost completely dependent on carbohydrate reserves during these periods and the reserves will not be replaced until there is an adequate amount of leaf area to do so. Defoliation during these vulnerable periods has an adverse effect on plant health and on both current and future year's growth and forage production.
Systems that will enhance secondary succession and range condition improvement is another important consideration. As previously described, succession cannot take place without migration, ecesis and aggregation. In the first place, some sort of rest is needed in order for the desirable and less desirable species to produce seeds or vegetative reproduction organs. In the second place, some rest is needed in order to have successful migration, ecesis and aggregation.
Figure 16. Percent pregnancy, parturition and calf crop as related to stocking rates on a ranch in Venezuela (Carrero Necker, 1990)
Figure 17. Maximum livestock production per hectare is achieved at an optimum stocking rate which results in proper use. Production decreases drastically once the optimum rate is exceeded and it can reach zero at rates double the optimum.
Other considerations are systems that will (1) reduce grazing frequency, (2) result in more efficient use of the forage resources, (3) create forage reserves for use during the non-growing season, (4) reduce costs, (5) favour wildlife and (6) assure acceptable livestock production levels. Of course, desertification arrestment and reversal is a major objective.
Grazing systems are not a panacea. Proper stocking is the backbone of all systems and no system will be successful without it. The consultant has seen many deferred-rotation grazing systems that did more harm than good because they were improperly stocked. There is no one ideal system suitable for all situations. It is not the purpose of this paper to compare the merits and faults of some of the systems, especially the systematic ones. Some of the better known systems are presented which are applicable somewhere in the Region depending on the circumstance. Modifications to fit local conditions will be required and even better systems can be developed.
Yearlong Grazing
This refers to yearlong rangelands which are, or can be, grazed yearlong. Yearlong grazing is the continuous grazing of these ranges for a calendar year. There is evidence that good and excellent range condition can be maintained with continuous proper stocking. This is also true for poor and fair condition, but maintenance of these should not be an objective. Improvement through secondary succession should be the objective. Continuous proper, or even lighter, grazing is not conducive to progressive succession. The amount of less desirable plants is limited and desirable plants are even more limited. Since animals eat what they like first, the desirable species are sought out and are continually grazed, preventing their reproduction. The same is true with less desirable plants to a lesser extent. Thus, some sort of deferment is needed to allow the spread of desirable and less desirable species.
Seasonal Grazing
Some ranges cannot, or should not, be grazed yearlong for various reasons; topography, snow, flooding, seasonal growth patterns and others. A seasonal grazing system is one in which utilization is, or should be, restricted to specific seasons. Examples of seasonal rangelands can be found in the Region's mountainous areas and wet savannahs (llanos). The proper grazing period for a seasonal range is short and attempts to graze it for longer periods results in deterioration and poor livestock performance.
Proper seasonal grazing systems are not systematic in the sense that livestock are moved on fixed dates. They should not be placed on a seasonal range until a state of range readiness is attained which is a stage of growth at which grazing may begin without damage to vegetation or soil. By the same token, they should not remain on a seasonal range until the forage is completely consumed. Some growth must be left for the plants' benefit and for the environment's benefit. Rotation or deferred-rotation grazing systems can be superimposed on some units of a seasonal grazing system to assure timely use and to promote vegetation improvement.
Decision Deferment
It has already been seen that some decision making is involved in seasonal grazing systems. Deferred or deferred-rotation grazing systems based on decisions can also be an effective and inexpensive way to utilize and improve yearlong ranges. Decisions can be based on various measures or observations such as range condition, range condition trend, degree of utilization, range readiness, livestock condition, plant vigor and rainfall. Rainfall is not uniform in the arid and semiarid regions. It may rain quite a lot in one spot and very little or none at all in other spots. One part of a ranch can have more rain that other parts. Decision deferment can be made accordingly. Deferment following some physical improvement practices such as reseeding and brush control is mandatory.
Decision deferment requires trained eyes which most livestock owners do not have. Technical assistance and rancher training is normally needed for the wide-scale implementation of sound decision grazing systems and such services are not available in the Region. This is most unfortunate because this range and livestock management method can be a very effective way to control desertification and improve production at low cost. One reason for designing costly systematic grazing systems is because the "trained and understanding eyes" are lacking.
Systematic Systems
A systematic grazing system is one in which the different pastures or units of the system are either grazed or non-grazed on a fixed schedule or specified calendar dates. These go by many names such as rotation, deferred grazing, deferred-rotation, rest-rotation, high intensity-low frequency, short duration grazing, cell grazing and perhaps many more. Sometimes the system goes by the name of the original designer such as Hormay, Merril or Savory. The wealth of names often creates confusion.
A well designed systematic grazing system requires pastures of more or less equal grazing capacity. This does not necessarily mean equal size depending on the range sites and conditions involved. For example, 143 ha of a slope site in poor condition as shown in Table 7 would be equal to 100 ha of an ordinary upland site in the same condition. Planners must therefore take range sites and condition into consideration when designing systematic systems. Each pasture must also have drinking water and this must be considered as well.
The total grazing capacity for all of the pastures in a system is divided equally into the number of herds involved. A three-herd-four-pasture-deferred-rotation system is taken to illustrate the point. Assume that each pasture has a capacity of 60 A.U.s. This would be divided into three herds consisting of 80 A.U.s each. This creates some overuse of the pastures that are grazed, but this is not continued over the years. Thus, the frequency of over utilization is not serious and any temporary damage that might have been done is repaired with subsequent deferment. The deferment periods are based on the seasons when plants are most vulnerable to defoliation (Figure 7) and when secondary succession is most likely to take place.
Current divisions of many ranches are not compatible to immediate implementation of most systematic systems. This is also true of water development. The cost of additional fences and water might be prohibitive, but considering the success of many systematic systems, the cost could be amortized in the long term. Costs could also be reduced with the use of suspension and/or living fences.
The three herd-four pasture, two herd-three pasture and one herd-two pasture deferred-rotation systems have given good results under certain circumstances. Their fundamental designs are given in Annex I. Hormay and Talbot (1961) found that some grazing after seed formation helped to disseminate and bury the seed and that removal of cured leaves and stems stimulated tiller formation. Hence, the Hormay one herd rest-rotation grazing system evolved, involving three treatments in one year. It is widely used with success on the arid and semiarid seasonal rangelands of western United States. It can be executed without fencing with good planning and with herding. It is felt that the system is applicable on many of the Region's seasonal ranges. The design is given in Annex II.
An example of the high intensity-low frequency systems comes from the Texas Range Station and was designed by the consultant. Six pastures were established and the total grazing capacity of all six was placed into one herd of sheep and cattle. The total A.U.s was composed of 60% cattle and 40% sheep. A pasture was grazed for 25 days and rested 125 before being grazed again. Consequently, each pasture was grazed for 75 days and rested 290 days during the year. There was spectacular and rapid range improvement, but livestock production, especially cattle, was low. Similar results have been obtained in other trials in other locations. It is a good system for rapid improvement if one is willing to sacrifice some animal production. It can be modified in future to take advantage of the improved range condition and at the same time obtain higher livestock production levels. The feasibility and economics of systems involving many more pastures and reduced grazing frequency are
questionable.
Common use
This is in effect a grazing system as it refers to the use of a range by more than one kind of livestock either at the same time or at different times within the same growing season. It is also called "dual use." Examples are grazing either cattle and sheep; cattle and goats; sheep and goats; cattle, sheep and goats; alpaca and llama or sheep, alpaca and llama together. Single use refers to the grazing of only one kind of livestock, cattle only, sheep only, etc. Common use is not applicable on all rangelands for climatic, vegetation and cultural reasons. Some cattlemen will not raise either sheep or goats although these species could contribute significantly to increased came productivity and net income.
Where common use is applicable, it results in more efficient use of the forage resources (grass, fortes, browse), greater total animal production and more secure income than single use. The latter is because of greater versatility regarding markets. When prices for the products of one kind of animal are down, they may be up for the products of the other kind or kinds. Total grazing capacity can often be increased up to 20 or 25% with common use compared with single use. Proper stocking rates are based on the total animal units and the ratio between the different kinds of livestock depends on the vegetation components.
Stocking Rate Flexibility
It is reiterated that any grazing system must be accompanied with proper stocking. If not, it will surely fail. Flexibility refers to the characteristics of a management plan which allows it to accommodate to changing conditions (SRM, 1989). This particularly refers to changes in grazing capacities owing to weather fluctuations. Minor fluctuations in forage production are not of major concern. These tend to offset each other with proper stocking. Major fluctuations, especially those associated with prolonged droughts, are of great concern. Even average proper stocking rates can result in severe over use during these periods resulting in damage to the vegetation that will take years to overcome. Under use during above average rainfall years results in unused forage. While this might represent a slight economic loss, it does not represent an environmental loss. The additional litter and mulch plus increased plant vigor and reproduction better prepares the range for the
oncoming dry years.
Griffiths and Orton (1968) calculated that the probabilities of receiving average and above rainfall in both the semiarid and humid climatic areas of Texas is 40%, i.e., 60% of the years will have below average rainfall. Thus, stocking based on average rainfall would result in over use, varying from slight to severe, 60 years out of 100 which will contribute significantly to desertification.
A mode in a series of statistical data is an average of items that occur the oftenest. Rainfall mode in arid and semiarid zones is always below the average, being around 20% less. Consequently, there is also a forage production and a grazing capacity mode. Stocking according to the mode would reduce the probabilities of over use to around 30 to 40 years out of a hundred rather than 60 or more years. The formation of an elite reproducing herd based on the mode grazing capacity is an important step towards the establishment of a flexible grazing system and the avoidance of desertification. Nothing is lost. Maximum production for the elite herd will be assured for many more years than otherwise. Animals that can be readily sold could be kept during good years to increase profits. Old and poor productive and non-productive animals would be culled during bad years.
Supplementation
The lack of supplementation can be an indirect desertification causal factor. Superior animal productivity requires adequate yearlong nutrition which range forage alone does not always provide. Mineral and, during certain seasons, protein supplementation is often needed. The lack of supplementation adversely affects productivity. Not being aware of this, livestockmen, as with overgrazing, think that more animals are needed to increase total production which in turn causes desertification and poorer animal performance. Appropriate supplementation is needed in order to reap the full benefits of increased grazing capacity and proper stocking.
Range-Cultivated Pasture Integration
Establishment of cultivated pastures in zones with favourable climates and soils is receiving increasing attention. The technologies are known and they are being applied. The grazing capacity of these pastures is several times greater than native vegetation, but establishment and maintenance costs are high. Analyses in Venezuela indicate that cow/calf operations on cultivated pastures are not economical.
Demonstrations in Venezuela indicate that an overall production system in which rangelands are used as breeding grounds and cultivated pastures are used as growing and fattening grounds is not only economical, but is also a more efficient way to use the forage resources. With timely supplementation, heifers on cultivated pastures reach a suitable size for first breeding at an earlier age than usual. Bulls also reach slaughter weights at an earlier age than those on range. Currently, cattle herds on rangelands tend to comprise a large percentage of growing males and females. This would be eliminated with the integration of these two kinds of pastures allowing more space for reproducing cows and an opportunity to establish proper stocking rates on rangelands. Total animal production would also be greater and more efficient.
By-Product Utilization
Better use of the Region's by-products as supplements or feed can reduce the use of grains by the livestock sector. Research has shown that the Region is richer in feed resources than is probably realized. While limitations of space do not permit a comprehensive review of this subject, some examples are highlighted to illustrate the point. The by-products from oil crops such as cotton, sesame, groundnuts, coconuts, African palm, castor beans and sunflowers are excellent sources of protein, as are the inedible parts of fish and livestock.
The fibrous products (leaves, stems, etc.) and/or the non-fibrous products (fruit, pulp, molasses, etc.) of bananas, plantains, coffee, cocoa, pineapple, citrus fruits and sugarcane can all be used as feed and the supply is quite large. Sugarcane has received special scientific attention in this respect because of its high feed yields in the form of whole cane (which is either chopped or derinded for feeding), bagasse or molasses. Roots and tubers and fibrous by-products of many crops also make excellent feeds, especially for small farmers. Particular attention has been paid to cassava (yucca) because of its efficiency in converting solar energy into high yields of starch in the roots and crude protein in the leaves. Manure and poultry litter make good feeds. These are easily collected in production systems where chickens and livestock are concentrated. Animal waste represents a valuable source of energy in that it can be processed into biogas, the residue of which can be
fed or used as fertilizer.
Supplemental pastures
The purpose of a supplemental pasture is to quantitatively or qualitatively augment range forage, particularly during dry seasons. These are popularly called either "protein banks, " "energy banks" or "proteinenergy banks." A supplemental pasture is an area of pasture of forage which is not utilized during the season when there is plenty of animal feed available, but is saved for use during times of scarcity. It is a reserve of forage which is left in the field until it is required by the animals. It therefore represents a form of deferred grazing, since the animals are not allowed access to it until they actually need it. If the bank is large enough, the whole herd or flock can take advantage of it during the worst part of the year. If it is too small to benefit all the animals, it should be given only to the most valuable or most productive ones. In any case, it must be protected from grazing for a large part of the year so that it can accumulate material which will be
utilized later. To be effective, a fodder bank must be securely fenced to keep out all grazing animals during the growth phase (Paterson, et al., 1987).
The fodder shrubs leucaena (Leucaena leucocephala) and quickstick (Gliricidia septum) and highly productive grasses such as sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum) and elephant grass (Pennisetum purpureum) can be used in the tropics. Various saltbush species (Atriplex spp.) can be used in the arid and semiarid areas. Supplementation pastures reduce grazing pressure on ranges to some extent. Better yet, they can be used as incentives for the formation of grazing cooperatives.
Grazing cooperatives
Public and community grazing lands are subjected to destructive grazing owing to the lack of rules and regulations and an authority to enforce them. This is a very complex problem and its solution requires governmental leadership and support. Although it will not be easy, the formation of self-governing grazing cooperatives or associations will be a beginning towards the solution of this problem. These cannot just be formed by governments. The members must be involved in every stage of formation from the start to the end and during its operation. The members, with technical assistance, make the rules and regulations and they enforce them. They must have power to assess penalties for violations.
The formation of grazing cooperatives is made easier with the provision of incentives. The designation of certain range areas for their exclusive use is a very good one. Another is the establishment of protein and energy banks for their exclusive use. The individuals will develop a pride of "ownership" which tends to lead to better care of the land and they are amenable to extension and assistance activities.
There are many other advantages to grazing cooperatives. They pave the way for the more rapid development of other necessities such as marketing facilities, supplementation, livestock improvement and management and many others. A key to the success of a grazing cooperative is a sound and properly executed range and livestock management and improvement plan. Once the members see and gain from the benefits of a cooperative, they will develop more confidence in the range specialist and will therefore be more prone to accept programmes aimed at rationalizing the use of their designated rangelands.
Alternative Fuels
In light of the fact that fuel gathering contributes significantly to desertification on both rangelands and forests, the need for alternative fuel supplies is apparent. Fossil fuels are generally not available to the fuel gatherers and even if they could be made available, they would be too expensive. One solution that has been used successfully in the Near East, is the establishment of "fuel woodlands." However, the users of this fuel reserve must control harvesting to assure sustained production which is not always possible. Supplemental pastures composed of fodder shrubs also produce some fuel which is another advantage of this practice.
The real solution to the problem is the development and implementation of energy resources other than wood and fossil fuels suitable for individual and/or rural village use. Methane generation using animal and agricultural wastes and solar energy offer the best possibilities. The technologies for methane generation are known and the process is widely used in India and China. Small one-burner generators using pig manure have been developed. The technologies for using solar energy for heat are also known. Small inexpensive cooking ovens using solar energy can be made. The subject of alternative fuel supplies deserves greater consideration.
Artificial Reseeding
All too often, the benefits of artificial reseeding of rangeland, as a range improvement practice, have been overemphasized in most parts of the world. Many times, a sparse though highly potential cover of native vegetation has been completely destroyed in efforts, many of them unsuccessful, to reseed. Artificial reseeding should be undertaken only when no source of seed or vegetative reproduction organs remain to naturally start another generation of desirable native forage plants. This is demonstrated in Figure 18 which is a range that had been recommended for artificial reseeding. The recommendation was based on cursory observations. A critical analysis showed that reseeding was not necessary because there were enough severely overgrazed desirable and less desirable shrubs and grasses for secondary succession. Deferment and proper stocking was all that was needed. If one thinks that artificial seeding is needed, it is wise to first defer the area to see if this is true.
Reseeding is costly and risky, especially in arid and semiarid zones. As a general rule, seeding should not be attempted in areas with less than 300 mm of average annual rainfall because they are apt to fail. However, successful seedings have been made in low rainfall areas when made in connection with water harvesting techniques such as pitting, contour furrows and water spreading although these give only shortterm water harvesting benefits. Gifford (1975) concluded that these and other mechanical "improvement" practices are not beneficial from the long-term standpoint of runoff and sediment production. Most research has shown that improvement practices which involve severe mechanical disturbance should not be expected to improve hydrologic conditions. Since the life of most mechanical treatments is relatively short, it is imperative that a desirable vegetative cover be established and properly maintained.
Assuming that artificial seeding is really needed, it should first be attempted on range sites with the highest potential and on favourable soils. Abandoned cultivated fields must be reseeded to restore productivity.
Poor seedbed preparation and seeding practices have been the cause of reseeding failures much more often than has adverse weather, although the latter is usually blamed. But in most years, only the really well prepared seedbed will yield results. Generally speaking, a reseeding will be only as good as the preparation and planting work that went into the seeding operation. This applies not only to arid and semiarid areas but also to high rainfall areas.
Brush Control
Many of the Region's rangelands have been invaded by undesirable brush species. Improper utilization has permitted this invasion in almost all cases and cessation of burning along with excessive use has permitted it in many cases. Brush control is not deforestation. It is the reduction of undesirable woody species on rangelands to reduce their competition with the desirable forage species for water, light, space and nutrients. In a way, the name "brush control" is a misnomer. It is really "species replacement" because the objective is to reduce brush and replace it with desirable and less desirable species. However, brush control is not "eradication" as some think. First, the technologies for eradication do not exist and if they did, they would probably be too expensive. Second, brush has some desirable attributes. It provides food and cover for many wildlife species and some species provide forage for certain livestock enterprises such as goat production. Thus, the planning
of brush control programmes is important. Grasses are by far the Region's most important forage producers and environmental stabilizers. Most species are sun lovers as they simply do not grow well under shade. Moreover, grasses that do grow under shade, even desirable species, are not liked by livestock. Thus, the interception of light by brush greatly reduces forage production and one of the reasons for brush control is to reduce this competition. The competition between woody and herbaceous plants for nutrients is debatable, but there likely is some.
Dense brush takes a lot of space, leaving very little for grazing. Furthermore, it is difficult to manage livestock in dense brush. Grazing capacities have been increased several fold with brush control merely because it provides more space for grazing. A good management plan, however, would leave some brush for wildlife. Brush species in general are inefficient users of water. Dwyer and De Garmo (1970) showed that desert shrubs require about 2.5 times more water per unit of growth than do desert grasses and some grass species required more than others. It has been estimated that some short grass species require from 300 to 400 kg of water to produce one kilo of air-dry forage, whereas the mesquite (Prosopsis juliflora) requires from 1,700 to 1,900 kg to produce one kilo of growth. Only a fraction, if any, of this growth is forage. This excessive use of water by non-economical plants is in effect desertification. It upsets desired water regimes by reducing underground
recharge and by increasing runoff. Ingebo and Hibbert (1974) reported that annual streamflow increased 22% after the chemical suppression of brush on two small watersheds in Arizona. Sturges (1973) reported that brush control in Wyoming reduced soil moisture loss 24%. As previously mentioned, the consultant has witnessed the rebirth of springs after brush control. Control definitely makes more water available for forage growth. Thus, brush control followed with good management is also a desertification control practice as well as a practice for increasing animal production.
Brush control methods can be divided into four categories: mechanical, chemical, burning and biological. The following descriptions of these are intended as general information and much of these have been taken from Welch (undated).
Mechanical Methods
Equipment used for mechanical brush management is designed to remove either the top growth or the entire plant. Methods that remove only top growth generally provide short term woody plant control because most species will resprout. Methods that effectively remove part of the root system with the top provide longer term control. Some of the methods are hand grubbing, power grubbing, mowing, rollerchopping, root plowing, chaining and railing. Each has its place.
Prescribed or Controlled Burning
This is the use of fire for burning a predetermined area to accomplish a desired result, the fire to be confined to said area. This is more than striking a match. Such burns must be planned and proper preparations made to confine the fire.
A major constraint to effective prescribed burning is the amount and distribution of fuel required to carry the fire. Generally, from 2,000 to 3,000 kg/ha of evenly distributed grass, dead leaves and litter are needed. Grazing deferment during the growing season before burning is normally required to achieve an adequate fuel load. In many situations, the degree of brush infestation limits the area's capability to support a fire. Some brush control treatment before burning may be required to produce adequate amounts and distribution of fuel. Therefore, prescribed burning often is used in combination with other brush control practices and as a maintenance measure. An ideal situation for burning following roller-chopping, and herbicide control is shown in Figure 20. Burns must be deferred to allow recovery of the grass and other forage species.
Biological Methods
Goats prefer browse to other kinds of forage and for this reason they have been successfully used to control brush without damage to grasses and fortes. Goats do not eat any and everything as commonly believed. To the contrary, they are selective browsers or grazers. Therefore, the brush to be controlled must be palatable to them. The control process is in effect frequent over defoliation. Consequently, all leaves and stems must be accessible to grazing and for this reason, control with goats is usually an adjunct to other brush control methods which reduce brush height. Finally, they must be grazed in a two pasture high intensity-high frequency rotation based on decision. They are moved when the browse is heavily consumed and when they commence eating grass by necessity. The goat stocking rate is reduced in accordance with brush decline.
<section>a</section>
A look at the future
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
The future does not look bright in light of the many constraints that will hinder progress. Some of the most outstanding ones follow, which are not listed in an order of importance.
1. Domestic livestock development in general and range livestock development in particular are given the lowest of priorities by national policy makers and planners and by bilateral and international assistance organizations and agencies. The value and importance of the rangeland resource is not fully realized and the range management science is relatively unknown.
2. No country has an agency with mandates and adequate qualified manpower and financial resources to carry out activities related to the care, development and improvement of rangelands.
3. There is an extreme shortage of trained and qualified personnel in the field of range management. Some of the countries have only one or two range professionals, some have none, and all need more. Many of those who have studied abroad are assigned to fields other than range management. In some cases, solutions to range problems are being prescribed by professionals of other disciplines (agriculturalists, veterinarians, foresters, etc.) and their prescriptions are too often incompatible with the ecological limitations of the land involved. Some prescriptions often lead to desertification.
4. Only a few universities offer degrees in animal husbandry and classes in this and related subjects are normally taught, if at all, in connection with veterinary medicine or agronomy curricula. Consequently, the subject is usually relegated to a secondary position. No university offers a B.Sc. degree in range management and only a few offer elective courses. A student can graduate with a degree in animal husbandry without having studied a single course in either range or cultivated pasture management or, for that matter, forage crop production.
5. There are no range management text books in Spanish.
6. Research in the countries is conducted by government agencies and universities, or both, and there are some examples of autonomous research stations. While national research programmes often place emphasis on crops, there is nearly always some animal production research. In general, emphasis is placed on beef, dairy and/or dual-purpose cattle research, especially in respect to genetics, breeding and adaptability. Less attention is paid to herd, pasture and range management systems.
7. Many of the research results do not reach other researchers in the same country because of the lack of publication media and coordinated programmes. It is even more serious that many results do not reach the producers because extension activities have not, on the whole, been really effective. Many programmes are oriented more towards the promotion of new technologies through the mass media and publications than through the establishment of demonstrations and field trials and provision of technical assistance at the producer level. This is partly due to an insufficient number of extension workers and supporting facilities, but also to the general lack of orientation of programme activities. Moreover, it has been noted that many extension personnel lack training in extension techniques and therefore are not in a position design and implement informative and easily understood demonstration and information dissemination programmes.
8. Inter-communication between research and extension institutions is limited, which reduces the effectivity of both. Nor are extension specialists adequately consulted by researchers on the kinds of investigations needed to provide information tailored to fit the conditions of the ranchers with which they work.
9. Many producers do not normally participate in policy formulation and execution. It is usually those producers who treat their properties as meat or milk enterprises who form associations or unions and act as speakers before the government in relation to policies to be adopted. The traditional ranchers and small farmers often do not participate in these associations, making it difficult for the government to mobilize the industry for the execution of effective campaigns.
10. Highways and rural roads are inadequate making on-the-ranch extension activities difficult.
11. Funds for agriculture development are limited and most are used for crop development.
These obstacles, except perhaps the latter one, are not insurmountable. They can be overcome with a concerted effort by all concerned, planners, policy makers, landowners, institutions, universities, bilateral and international organizations and the public. The effort must be made if people intend to live and depend on these lands forever.
<section>b</section>
Summary and conclusions
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Special interest groups, notably vegetarians, are blaming domestic livestock, particularly cattle, for world calamities ranging from global warming to poverty, deforestation, water pollution and desertification. While scientists state that these accusations are not based on fact, they are parroted by the news media. The public is being misinformed and it is not surprising that many individuals are supportive of a call for an ecological renaissance eliminating domestic livestock grazing. This document presents the proper view that livestock can be used to arrest and reverse the desertification process and at the same time, enhance improved animal production. It focuses on FAO's Latin America and the Caribbean region, rangelands and ruminant stock.
To eliminate livestock grazing would be the calamity of all ages.
Domestic livestock have supported mankind for centuries and they must continue to do so. They provide people with nutritious food, clothing, comfort, employment, security, stability, energy, fuel, fertilizer and medicines made from inedible by-products. Small quantities of meat and milk added to cereal and root diets can prevent the adverse effects of protein deficiency such as the killer disease kwashiorkor. Animals provide many people with the energy required to produce their food crops and they provide full and/or parttime employment for 81 million people in Latin America and the Caribbean alone.
The basic importance of ruminants to mankind lies in the fact that these animals obtain their nourishment from fibrous forage and agricultural and industrial by-products which people cannot directly consume or utilize. About 50% of the earth's land surface is incapable of producing anything other than fibrous forage and this land would be of little use to mankind without ruminant livestock. Without ruminants, the disposal of millions of tons of waste products created by the food crop processing industries alone would be the straw that broke the camel's back in an already overburdened garbage disposal system.
At least 50% of the Region is either too dry, too wet, too steep, too shallow, too infertile and/or too fragile to sustain cultivation or to support arborescent forests. These are the Region's rangelands which provide ninety or more percent of the food consumed by millions of head of cattle, sheep, goats, alpaca, llama, equines and wildlife. Rangelands are also the Region's watersheds. There are approximately 1,026.5 million hectares of rangelands, and considering that one square meter of land yields one liter of water for each millimeter of rain, and assuming that 15% of this water either runs off or percolates to an aquifer, the amount of water that the rangelands yield is beyond imagination. Rangelands also have wildlife, recreational and aesthetic values.
A fundamental importance of rangelands is the fact that they are a natural renewable resource and their renewability is remarkable. The Region's ranges have been and are being abused and are producing only a fraction of their potential. Fortunately, most have not deteriorated to a stage in which production cannot be improved through natural renewable processes. Unfortunately, rangelands do not receive the attention they deserve by planners, policy makers, livestockmen and bi-lateral and international assistance organizations.
If man intends to live and depend upon these lands on a sustained basis, this abuse must stop. Sustainable use and management must become the rule rather than the exception.
Desertification is the degradation of both the living organisms and non-living environment of an ecosystem caused by man's interventions and abuses. The process is marked by increasing microaridity and erosion and declining productivity. The end product is a desert-like state in which total photosynthesis is of little use to man and beast. This state is called "decertified". Some claim that desertification is caused by a changing macroclimate, but the rapidity in which desertification is occurring in some areas indicates that this is not the case. Such rapid rates of vegetation change would require a climatic change of huge magnitude and one that certainly could be measured by meteorological instruments. However, there is no evidence of this.
If there is a permanent warming trend due to a greenhouse effect, this again is due to man's activities such as the prodigious use of fossil fuels and the excessive use of other products that release gases into the atmosphere. Domestic ruminants do generate methane, but so do ruminant wildlife, coal mines and human and agricultural wastes. Claims that domestic ruminants contribute significantly to global methane production and global warming is highly questionable and yet to be proven scientifically.
Desertification is caused by the cultivation of lands incapable of sustaining agriculture, deforestation, an ever increasing population, fuel gathering, lack of land use policies and continual destructive grazing. Examples of the enormity of these causal factors are given in the text. There is no evidence that deforestation of tropical forests is due to the American hamburger trade. This is attributed to lack of land use policies and populations that are outgrowing land capacity. The fundamental cause of desertification on either arable, forest or rangelands is use beyond their capabilities.
Man has caused and is causing desertification and only man can undo what he has done and is doing.
Technologies which will allow man to better control his environment and to enhance and assure his quality of life are known and new ones are being continually developed. If the professional alarmists and special interest groups are serious, one would think that they would be more interested in supporting the implementation of these technologies, rather than making spectacular and illogical recommendations. It appears that they are either unaware of the technologies or prefer to ignore them. Their constructive contributions could be most helpful and beneficial.
Desertification is a process which can be diagnosed by symptoms or manifestations such as vegetation composition changes, upset water regimes, soil erosion, microclimate changes, increasing microaridity, decreasing productivity, increasingly sparse vegetation and diminution of usefulness. The process has stages which are technically measurable on ranges and probably also on forest and arable lands. There are also rates. It may take hundreds of years of grazing for ranges to reach a decertified and nonrenewable state. The tractor and plough can create a decertified range in just a few years. The ax or bulldozer can cause a decertified tropical forest in days.
To understand desertification on rangelands, its control and reversal, one must have some knowledge of certain plant physiological, ecological and environmental phenomena and principles. An attempt is made to describe and illustrate these in a manner that can be readily understood by the uninformed. Moreover, to understand the role of domestic livestock in desertification control, one must also know that livestock can be manipulated in order to achieve a desired effect for both the animals and environment. Ways and means for achieving this are also described and illustrated, hopefully, in a convincing and understandable manner. These plant physiological, ecological and environmental phenomena, functions and principles are all a part of range management.
Range management is a relatively new discipline defined as: "The science and art of planning and directing rangeland use in order to obtain maximum sustained economic livestock production consistent with the conservation and/or improvement of the related natural resources, soil, water, vegetation, wildlife and recreation. " Range management has two objectives; (1) obtaining maximum sustained economic livestock production and (2) conservation and/or improvement of the related natural resources. Scientific range management stands on the premise that the range resources can be improved and grazed perpetually by domestic stock and, at the same time, produce high-quality watersheds, wildlife, recreation, desertification control and, where suitable, forest products. Research and practical application of range management principles and practices have shown this to be true and as solid as the Rock of Gibraltar.
In order to achieve these objectives, the manager must not only plan and direct rangeland use for maximum forage production, he must also see that the forage is efficiently converted by animals on a sustainable basis into consumable products. Plant husbandry and animal husbandry can never be considered separately in range management. This is illustrated as follows;
Poor Producers + Poor Converters = Very Low Production
Poor Producers + Good Converters = Low Production
Good Producers + Poor Converters = Low Production
Good Producers + Good Converters = Maximum Production.
Unfortunately, range management, all practical purposes, is unknown in the Region.
Plants are living organisms that have nutritional requirements the same as people and livestock. A major and most important difference between plants and animals is in their sources of energy. Plants can use energy supplied by the sun to change inorganic matter taken from the earth and from the air into organic compounds. Animals cannot secure directly from the sun the energy necessary for their life. They must live on the organic energy-rich compounds built by plants. Plants must be properly nourished in order to carry out photosynthesis and to build complex organic compounds and they must provide that nourishment themselves. Their role is twofold: first to feed themselves and second to feed man and his animals. It is imperative that plants be properly fed so that they can successfully carry out both roles. A system of grazing that does not permit plants to properly feed themselves will result in eventual plant death due to starvation, poor animal production and
desertification.
It is the range manager's responsibility to plan, direct and manipulate grazing in such a manner that the range forage plants can adequately feed themselves and live to produce forage and to protect the environment. The nutritional status of forage plants depends on defoliation or grazing intensity, frequency and season of use. As a general rule, 50 to 60% defoliation will leave enough leaf area for adequate nutrition of the plant. Thus, the range manager has adopted the slogan "take half - leave half." The technicalities regarding plant utilization are explained in the text. With knowledge of these, grazing can be manipulated to assure healthy and productive forage plants and maximum sustained animal production.
The rangeland ecosystem is a complex phenomenon involving a multitude of interrelated functions with each influencing the others. The system's major components are: producers, converters, soils, decomposers and microconsumers, microclimate and manipulators. Desertification is the degradation of these components. Plants are the producers and their well-being influences the well- being of the other components. Vegetation can be manipulated and be made either more or less efficient in gross energy production depending on the physiological and ecological responses to manipulations. Energy outputs below potential, resulting in declining productivity is a desertification symptom.
Animals are converters and the impact they have on the ecosystem can be significant but controlled. The impact can either improve or impair the overall function of the system. Modern day people are the great manipulators and domestic stock are their principal tool. They can manipulate grazing to either destroy, improve or maintain a rangeland ecosystem, but improvement with subsequent maintenance must be the objective. This can be achieved with the application of range management principles and practices.
The Americas' explorers described an abundance of rich and lush natural pastures. Like a sea of grass, some said, and some described the grasses as being up to their stirrups and higher in places. Tall grass prairies dominated the Pampas. Chile's annual ranges were dominated by perennials. There was no shortage of forage for the indigenous peoples' llamas and alpacas in the Altiplano. The dry and humid tropical savannahs were free of brush and even the arid areas flourished with grasses and shrubs palatable to livestock. These were the Region's "climax" rangelands. They represented the "natural potential" and the highest form of natural development that the environmental factors were capable of producing. Settlers came with their livestock and one of the world's most colorful and largest livestock industries was built. Having no precedents to follow, the industry's builders thought that the bountiful vegetation would regenerate and last forever. It did not, because of an
ecological phenomenon called "succession." This is nature's way of replacing one community of plants by another one and there are two kinds: progressive and regressive (retrogression). Retrogression is the replacement of a community of higher ecological order with one of a lower order which can be caused by continual destructive grazing. This is why the bountiful vegetation encountered by the settlers did not regenerate and last forever. Misuse caused retrogression and declining productivity.
There are two kinds of progressive succession: primary and secondary. Primary is the historic development of vegetation and soils which terminated in climax. Secondary is any progressive succession after primary.
Mother Nature is very forgiving. She always tries to restore what man has destroyed. This is the case of secondary succession. A disturbance of climax will cause retrogression, but, if given the opportunity, nature will make every effort to restore the damage via secondary succession. Secondary succession is much faster than primary because the soil is already formed, although deteriorated and needing restoration as well. Secondary succession gives the manipulator a very valuable and useful tool.
The fact that one community of plants can replace another is important for desertification control and livestock production. Range condition is a measure of the stage of succession in relation to climax or natural potential as determined by the proportions of desirable, less desirable and undesirable species. Condition is classified as being either excellent, good, fair or poor. Grazing capacity increases with an increase in range condition. Grazing capacities of good and excellent condition ranges are several times higher than on poor and fair condition ranges. Environmental stability also increases with an increase in range condition. Other features involving range condition and range sites are presented in the text.
Upset water regimes created by reduced infiltration and excess surface runoff and soil erosion are desertification symptoms. These in turn promote increasing microaridity, decreasing productivity and diminution of usefulness. Studies and experiences have shown that infiltration increases and that erosion and runoff decrease with increases in range condition. One study showed, except for highly erodible soils, that stabilization can be attained with low good or high fair condition ranges. Studies have also shown that moderate grazing intensity (proper degree of utilization) can maintain a favourable forage resource without increasing the hazard of erosion. It could produce good quality runoff water for use outside the watershed. Both improved range condition and proper degree of utilization can be achieved with manipulations of livestock. Superior livestock production and desertification control will also be achieved.
The influence of livestock on bacterial contamination of water appears to be minimal in arid and semiarid areas. There is evidence that livestock grazing near mountain streams can contribute to some bacterial contamination, although recreationists contribute as well and probably more.
Many range management practices have been developed since the science was born some fifty years ago and new ones are being developed. These practices are aimed at controlling desertification and at obtaining maximum sustained animal production. While specifics will vary, the application of these practices in principle is badly needed in the Region. Desertification symptoms are widespread and average ruminant production is pitifully low. Of the regions where meat is eaten, only Africa has lower production levels than the Latin American and Caribbean region.
Paramount among these practices is proper stocking. Proper use is a degree of utilization of current year's growth which, if continued, will achieve management objectives and maintain or improve the long-term productivity of the site. Our objectives are to arrest and reverse desertification and to obtain maximum sustained livestock production. Proper stocking is placing a number of animals on a given area that will result in proper use at the end of the planned grazing season. No range management practice will be successful if it is not accompanied with proper stocking.
If one had to select a single factor that affects per animal and per unit land area production the most, that factor would have to be stocking rate as related to degree of forage use. For this reason, a considerable amount of the text is dedicated to this subject.
Meat and milk demand exceeds supply in most countries. There are two ways to increase production and at the same time control desertification: (1) increased grazing capacity and (2) increased individual animal productivity. The former can be achieved with improved range condition and proper stocking will contribute significantly to the latter. The relationship between stocking rates and animal production show that the adage "more livestock - more produce" is not always true. As strange as it might sound, total livestock production in the Region will be greater with less animals than at present and a great step towards desertification control will have been taken. Other practices designed to arrest and reverse the desertification process and to obtain maximum sustained economic livestock production are described in the text.
In conclusion, the grazing animal is a part of the vegetation's environment and the vegetation a part of the animal's. So long as the two live together, the welfare of each is dependent on the other. A grazing method that causes desertification is neither in the interest of the vegetation's welfare nor in the animal's. Domestic livestock grazing is a useful management tool to prevent this. Thus, animals can play a major role in desertification control. It is up to man to see that they do. However, a look into the future is not bright because of the numerous constraints that must be overcome. Some outstanding ones are listed.
<section>c</section>
Recommendations
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Conservation, Paul Sears said, is an attitude as well as a concept and a cause. The attitude is that of harmony between men and the life forces of the earth, forces greater than men, but of which man is a part and in which he does play both a destructive and a constructive part. The concept is that man's part should be constructive. The cause is nothing less than the survival of prosperity on earth. The way through establishment of a continuing relationship between man and his environment, establishment of understanding and discipline by which there is consumed each year less raw material taken from earth, sea, and air than nature and man together create.
The development of this philosophy among planners, landowners, policy makers and assistance organizations would result in lasting desertification control. All of the previously named constraints would eventually be overcome. Perhaps the following would contribute to the acceptance and development of such a philosophy.
* Establishment of national commissions composed of qualified scientists, educators and producers to make a comprehensive study of the kinds and extent of rangelands; their importance in respect to animal production, watershed, wildlife and recreation; their present condition in respect to their potential (range condition); vegetation trends in respect to desertification and their managerial needs. A commission would make recommendations and continually monitor the rangeland utilization, management and development situation. It could eventually lead to the formation of a range improvement and development agency.
* Formation and execution of a promotion campaign to improve the image of rangelands and to create an awareness of their importance and a better understanding of range management among national planners and policy makers, international organizations, educators, producers, businesses and industries related to animal agribusiness.
* Inclusion of range management courses in the universities' undergraduate animal husbandry curricula and, where possible, the creation of range management curricula. The universities, with the support of the government, should also conduct range management short courses for animal production technicians, veterinarians, extensionists, rural development workers and others.
* Inclusion of range management, development and improvement activities in national research, extension and rural development programmes. (Teaching livestockmen how to manage the resource is the most efficacious way to increase animal production and avert environment disaster.)
* Greater support by assistance organizations.
<section>d</section>
References
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Aldon, E.F. and G. Garcia. 1973. Seventeen year sediment production from a semiarid watershed in the Southwest. USDA, Forest Service, Rocky Mtn. Forest and Range Expt. Sta., U.S.A. Res. Note RM248.
Allred, B.W. 1950. Practical grassland management. Sheep and Goat Raiser Mag. San Angelo, Texas, U.S.A.
Allred, B.W. 1968. Range Management Training Handbook for Saudi Arabia. PL: PEC/4. FAO, Rome, Italy.
Anonymous. 1993. Update. Riverside and Landowners Protection Coalition, Inc. Vol. No. 1, Boerne, Texas, U.S.A.
ASRM. 1964. A glossary of terms used in range management. American Society of Range Manage. Denver, Colorado, U.S.A.
Barbaroux, E. 1969. Efectos de altura y frecuencia de corte sobre la produccion de forraje de pasto buffer (Cenchrus cliliaris). Tesis Sin Publicar. ITESM, Monterrey, N.L., Mexico.
Belk, K.E., H.R. Cross and H.O. Huerta-Leidenz. 1990A. Deforestation and meat production.
In A perspective on beef as a component in diets for Americans. H.R. Cross and F.M. Byers (Eds.) Texas A&M Univ., College Station, Texas, U.S.A.
Belk, K.E., H.O. Huerta-Leidenz and H.R. Cross. 1990B. Factors involved in the deforestation of tropical forests. A report to the National Cattlemen's Assoc. pp. 12-16. Dept. Anim. Sci., Texas A&M Univ., College Station, Texas, U.S.A. (As cited by Belk, et al., 1990A.)
Bement, R.E. 1969. A stocking rate guide for beef production on blue grama range. J. Range Manage. 22: 8386.
Billings, W.E. 1966. Plants and the ecosystem. Wadsworth Publ. Co., Inc. Belmont, California, U.S.A.
Blackburn, W.H., R.W. Knight and M.K. Wood. 1982. Impact of grazing on watersheds. Texas A&M Univ., Texas Agric. Expt. Sta. MP-1496, College Station, Texas, U.S.A.
Box, T.W. 1992. Rangeland desertification and Clement's ghost. Rangelands, Vol. 14 (6).
Branson, F.A., G.F. Gifford and J.R. Owen. 1972. Rangeland Hydrology. Soc. for Range Manage. Denver, Colorado, U.S.A. Range Sci. Series No. 1. 84 p.
Buckhouse, J. C. and G. F. Gifford. 1976. Water quality implications of cattle grazing on a semiarid watershed in southeastern Utah. J. Range Manage. 29 (2).
Byers, F.M. 1990. Fossil energy use in beef production. In A perspective on beef as a component in diets for Americans. H.R. Cross and F.M. Byers (Eds.) Texas A&M Univ., College Station, Texas, U.S.A.
Cardozo, A. 1984. Desarrollo ganadero en granjas pequeñas de las zones aridas de Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador y Peru. FAO, RLAC, Santiago, Chile.
Carrero Necker, C. 1990. Cria comercial de came en nuestro hato de sabanas inundables de Barinas. VI Cursillo Sobre Bovinos de Came, Universidad Central de Venezuela. Maracay, Venezuela.
Cook, W.C. 1971. Effects of season and intensity of use on desert vegetation. Utah Agric. Expt. Sta. Bull. 483. Logan, Utah, U.S.A.
Cross, R.H. and F.M. Byers. 1990. Current issues in food production; In A perspective on beef as a component in diets for Americana. Texas A&M Univ., College Station, Texas, U.S.A.
Dittmer, H.J. 1927. A quantitative study of the roots and root hairs of a winter rye plant Secale cereale). Amer. J. Botany. Vol. 24: 417420.
Dunford, E.G. 1949. Relation of grazing to runoff and erosion on bunchgrass ranges. USDA, Forest Service, Rock Mtn. Forest and Range Expt. Sta. Res. Note RM-7.
Dwyer, D.D. and H.C. De Garmo. 1970. Greenhouse productivity and water use efficiency of selected desert shrubs and grasses under four soil-moisture levels. New Mexico Agric. Ext. Sta. New Mexico State Univ. Bull. 570.
FAO. 1973. Man's influence on the hydrological cycle. Irrigation and Drainage Paper, Special Issue No. 17. FAO, Rome, Italy.
FAO. 1976. Desert creep and range management in the Near East. Mission Rep. FAO of the UN, RNEA, Cairo, Egypt.
FAO. 1991. Production Yearbook Vol. 45. FAO, Rome, Italy.
FAO, RLAC. 1988. Some guidelines for designing integrated farming systems. GAN-29. Santiago, Chile.
Gaither, R.E. 1981. Storm runoff characteristics of various plant communities within the Range Validation Area. M.S. Thesis. Oregon State Univ. Corvallis, Oregon, U.S.A.
Gaither, R.E. and J.C. Buckhouse. 1981. Hydrologic outputs from woodland, shrubland, and grassland ecosystems in relation to grazing management strategies. Special Rpt. 640, Agric. xpt. Sta., Oregon State Univ. Corvallis, Oregon, U.S.A.
Gifford, Gerald F. 1975. Beneficial and detrimental effects of range improvement practices on runoff and erosion. In: Watershed Management, Proc. Symp. Comm. on Watershed Manage., Irrigation and Drainage Div., Amer. Soc. of Civ. Engr., Utah Sec. Utah State Univ. Logan, Utah, U.S.A. Aug. 1113. Pp. 216-248.
Gifford, G.F., J.C. Buckhouse and F.E. Busby. 1976. Hydrologic impact of burning and grazing on a chained pinyon-juniper site in southeastern Utah. Utah Water Res. Lab., Logan, Utah, U.S.A. Publ. PRJNR 012-1. 22p.
González, M.H. 1966. Relación entre la condición de pastizal y la producción forrajera en diversos sitios de pastizal y tipos vegetativos en el estado de Chihuahua. Rancho Expt. La Campana. Chihuahua, Mexico.
Gonzalez, M.H. 1971. "Qué es condición de pastizal?" Rancho Expt. La Campana. Chihuahua, Mexico, Pastizales, Vol. 2 (1).
Griffiths, J.F. and R. Orton. 1968. Agroclimatic Atlas of Texas. Texas Agric. Expt. Sta. MP-888. College Station, Texas, U.S.A.
Hormay, A.L. and M.W. Talbot. 1961. Rest-rotation grazing. A new management system for perennial bunchgrass ranges. USDA, USFS, Res. Rpt. 51.
Huss, D.L. 1985. Rationalizing rangeland use in the Near East by modernizing transhumance grazing. Publ. In Emerging Technology and Management for Ruminants Edited by F.H. Baker and M.E. Miller. Winrock Intl. Westview Press. Boulder, Colorado, U.S.A.
Huss, D.L., A.E. Bernardón, D.L. Anderson and J. María Brun. 1986. Principios de Manejo de Praderas Naturales. INTA, Buenos Aries, Argentina and FAO, RLAC, Santiago, Chile.
Huss, D.L. and E.L. Aguirre. 1974. Fundamentos de Manejo de Pastizales. ITESM, Monterrey, N.L., Mexico.
Ingebo, P. A. and A. R. Hibbert. 1974. Runoff and erosion after brush suppression on the natural drainage watersheds in central Arizona (U.S.A.). USDA, Forest Service, Rocky Mtn. Forest and Range Expt. Sta. Res. Note RM-275.
Johnson, S. R., H. L. Gary, and Stanley L. Ponce. 1978. Range cattle impacts on stream water quality in the Colorado front range (U.S.A.). USDA, Forest Service, Rocky Mtn. Forest and Range Expt. Sta. Res. Note RM-359.
Johnston, A. 1962. Effects of grazing intensity and cover on the water-intake rate of fescue grassland. J. Range Manage. 15 (2).
Jones, R.J. and R.L. Sandland. 1974. The relation between animal gains and stocking rates. J. Agric. Sci. 83.
Juneidi, M. and D.L. Huss. 1978. Rangeland resources of the Gulf and Arabian Peninsula countries and their managerial problems and needs. FAO, RNEA, Cairo, Egypt.
Kassila, V.L. 1983. Location and potential feed use. In Straw and Other Fibrous By-products as Feed. Sundstal and Owen (Eds.). Elsevier Publ. Co.
Kunkel, H.O. 1990. World hunger and starvation - - grain versus meat production. In: Current issues in food production; a perspective on beef as a component in diets for Americans. H.R. Cross and F.M. Byers (Eds.) Texas A&M Univ., College Station, Texas, U.S.A.
Lamprey, H.F. 1975. Report on the desert encroachment reconnaissance in Northern Sudan. UNESCO-UNEP Consultant Rpt. Typewritten.
Leithead, Horace L. 1959. Runoff in relation to range condition in the Big Bend-Davis Mountain section of Texas (U.S.A.). J. Range Manage. 12 (2).
Meenwig, Richard O. 1970. Infiltration and soil erosion as influenced by vegetation and soil in northern Utah (U.S.A.).
Miller, F.C. 1938. Plant Physiology. 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill Book Co, Inc. New York, New York, U.S.A.
Norris, J.J. 1972. A glimpse at the future of rangelands international aspects. Unpubl. presentation, 1972. Annual SRM Mtg., Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
Osborne, B. 1956. Cover requirements for the protection of range site and biota. J. Range Manage. 9: 75-80.
Paterson, R.T., G.A. Proverbs, J.M. Keoghan. 1987. The management and use of forage banks. CARDI. Univ. Campus, St. Augustine, Trinidad, West Indies.
Povlychenko, T. K. 1937. The soil block washing method in quantitative root study. Canadian J. Res. Vol. 15: 33-57.
Rauzi, F. 1960. Water-intake studies on range soils at three locations in the Northern Plains (U.S.A.). J. Range Manage. 13 (4).
Skinner, Q. D., J. C. Adams, P. A. Rechard, and A. A. Beetle. 1974. Effect of summer use of a mountain watershed on bacterial water quality. J. Environ. Quality 3 (4).
Smeins, F. E. 1975. Effects of livestock grazing on runoff and erosion. In: Watershed Management, Proc. Symp. Comm. on Watershed Manage., Irrigation and Drainage Div., Amer. Soc. of Civ. Engr., Utah Sec. Utah State Univ., Logan, Utah, U.S.A. Aug. 11-13.
SRM. 1989. A glossary of terms used in range management. Third Ed. Soc. Range Manage., Denver, Colorado, U.S.A.
Stephenson, G.R. and L.V. Street. 1978. Bacterial variations in streams from a southwest Idaho rangeland watershed (U.S.A.). J. Environ. Qual. 7 (1).
Stewart, G. and C.L. Forsling. 1931. Surface runoff and erosion in relation to soil and plant cover on high grazing lands in central Utah (U.S.A.). J. Amer. Soc. Agrom. 23: 815-832.
Stuart, G.E. 1992. Maya heartland under siege. National Geographic. Vol. 182, No. 5.
Sturges, D. L. 1973. Soil moisture response to spraying big sagebrush the year of treatment. J. Range Manage. 26 (6).
Welch, T.G. (Undated) Brush management methods. Texas Agric. Ext. Service. B-5004. College Station, Texas, U.S.A.
Williams, R.E., B.W. Allred, R.M. Denio and H.A. Paulsen, Jr. 1968. Conservation development and use of the world's rangelands. J. Range Manage. 21: 355-360.
Wilsie, C.P. 1962. Crop Adaptation and Distribution. W.H. Freeman and Co. San Francisco, California, U.S.A.
Wilson, A.M., G.A. Harris and D.H. Yates. 1966. Accumulative effects of clipping and yield of Blue-Bunch wheatgrass. J. Range Manage. Vol. 19: 90-91.
World Resources Institute and International Institute for Environment and Development. 1986.
World Resources 1986. An Assessment of the Resource Base that Supports the Global Economy. Basic Books, Inc. New York, New York, U.S.A. As cited by Belk, et al., 1990A.
<section>e</section>
Annex I
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Fundamental Designs for the Four, Three and Two Pasture Deferred-Rotation Grazing Systems.
A. Three Herd-Four Pasture (Merril) System
Pastures
Design
Year Deferment Periods Grazed
Yearlong
4 months 4 months 4 months
5 Return to same rotation as in first year
B. Two Herd-Three Pasture System
Pastures
Design
Year Deferment Periods Grazed
Yearlong
6 months 6 months
4 Return to same rotation as in first year
C. One Herd-Two Pasture System
Pastures
Design
Year Deferment Periods¹
3 months 6 months 3 months
3 Return to rotation as in first year
^1Can be modified to 31/2 - 5 - 31/2 month deferment periods.
<section>f</section>
Annex II
Back to contents - Previous file
A -Schematic illustration of the Rest Rotation Grazing System (Harmay and Talbot, 1961).
A - FULL GRAZING: Provides maximum forage for livestock. Improves plant composition by using all forage plants.
B - GRAZING AFTER SEED RIPENS: Unmolested plants gain vigor and produce seed more readily during the growing season. When the seed is ripe it is easily knocked to the ground, trampled in and planted by livestock. Grazing after seed ripens ensures establishment of new seedlings.
C - REST DURING ENTIRE GROWING SEASON: The rest pasture is the one grazed when seed was ripe the year before. Plants are protected from all livestock grazing during seedling establishment, and older plants gain vigor. This rest is essential for a healthy rangeland.
Schematic illustration of the Rest Rotation Grazing System
SERIES: ARID AND SEMI-ARID ZONES
N° Title
1 CONSULTA DE EXPERTOS SOBRE EL AVANCE DE LA AGROFORESTERIA EN ZONAS ARIDAS Y SEMIARIDAS DE AMERICA LATINA Y EL CARIBE.
2 EL PAPEL DE LOS ANIMALES DOMESTICOS EN EL CONTROL DE LA DESERTIFICACION.
2/ING THE ROLE OF DOMESTIC LIVESTOCK IN DESERTIFICATION CONTROL.
3 INFORME DEL TALLER DE EXPERTOS SOBRE CONSERVACION Y USO SOSTENIBLE DE LA BIODIVERSIDAD EN ZONAS ARIDAS Y SEMIARIDAS DE AMERICA LATINA Y EL CARIBE.
4 lNFORME DE LA CONSULTA DE EXPERTOS EN MANEJO DE CUENCAS HIDROGRAFICAS EN ZONAS ARIDAS Y SEMIARIDAS DE AMERICA LATINA.
5 INFORME DEL I CURSO TALLER SOBRE TECNICAS APROPIADAS PARA LA PROPAGACION DE ESPECIES DE IMPORTANCIA ECONOMICA PARA LAS ZONAS ARIDAS Y SEMIARIDAS DE AMERICA LATINA Y EL CARIBE.
