<title>Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants in the Near East - Proceedings of the </title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The Near East region is a major center of plant diversity. It provides a wide range of plants of great value to mankind. The number of species of higher plants of the region is estimated to be 25000 vascular plant species. Forests of the region are rich in plant genetic resources. They provide food that supplement the agricultural and contributes to household nutrition, fodder, fertilizer, fiber, medicine, essential oils, dyes, gums, resins, and construction materials. Some of these products are internationally used in food, medicines, flavorings, perfumes, and confection besides providing additional employment and income to the local people.
To increase awareness on Non-Wood Forest Products (NWFP) and to strengthen national collaboration on the regional level, FAO's Wood and Non-Wood Products Utilization Branch (FOPW) has organized various regional and global expert consultations.
In the light of the above-mentioned situation, and because of the uniqueness of forests and rangelands and their products in the region, an expert meeting on NWFP was held in Cairo, 19-21 May 1997. It was focused on medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants in the Near East countries with the following objectives: i) to discuss the present resource situation and utilization status of medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants as well as other NWFP in the Near East region, their potential and the problems and issues to be faced for their sustainable development; ii) to identify and propose priorities of action for conservation and sustainable development of medicinal , culinary and aromatic plants products in the Near East; and iii) to exchange ideas for establishing a regional network on medicinal plants in the region. The meeting attracted 23 participants from 10 different countries and 2 organizations in the Near East region.
This proceeding is published to disseminate the information and recommendations of the meeting and to establish networks among the region's countries.
It is hoped that the outcome of the proceeding will contribute in raising the awareness on the NWFP products in the region and understanding their importance for the local needs and national economies.
A.Y. Bukhari
Assistant Director General/
Regional Representative
Regional Office for the Near East
Acronyms
ACSAD Arab Centre for the Study of Arid Zones and Dry Lands
AOAD Arab Organization for Agricultural Development
CIFOR Centre for International Forestry Research
CIHEAM Centre International des Hautes Études Agronomiques Méditerranéennes
COFO Committee on Forestry (FAO)
CSD United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FOPW Wood and Non-Wood Utilization Branch (Forest Department FAO)
GAC Gum Arabic Company
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GNP Gross National Product
HPS Hand Picked Selected
IIED International Institute for Environment and Development
ICMAP International Council for Medicinal and Aromatic Plants
IPF Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests
IPGRI-WANA International Plant Genetic Resources Institute, Regional Office for
West Asia and North Africa
IRIS Interactive Regional Information System
IUCN World Conservation Union
IUFRO International Union of Forestry Research Organisations
LEAD Leiden Ethnosystems and Development Programme
MAICh Mediterranean Agronomic Institute of Chania
MAP Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants
MAPRI Medicinal and Aromatic Plants Research Institute
MEDUSA Regional Network for the Identification, Conservation and Use of Wild Plants in the Mediterranean Region
MOALR Central Administration for Afforestation
NEFC Near East Forestry Commission
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
NWFP Non-Wood Forest Products
RNE Regional Office for the Near East (FAO)
SUST Sudan University for Science and Technology
SYP Syrian Pound
DT Tunisian Dinar
UNEP United Nations Environmental Programme
UNCED United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
WHO World Health Organization
WWF World Wide Fund for Nature
<section>2</section>
Summary report and conclusions
BACKGROUND
Since 1991, in an effort to increase awareness of Non-Wood Forest Products (NWFP) and to strengthen national collaboration at the regional level, FAO has collaborated with other interested agencies to conduct a series of regional expert meetings on NWFP. FAO's Wood and Non-wood Products Utilization Branch (FOPW) has co-organized various regional expert consultations in: Asia and the Pacific Region (Bangkok, Thailand, 1991); Anglophone African Countries (Arusha, Tanzania, 1993); Latin America and the Caribbean (Santiago, Chile, 1994); the Congo Basin (Limbe, Cameroon, 1998) and the Boreal Forests (Joensuu, Finland, 1998). Two global expert consultations have also been organized: "Social, Economic and Cultural Dimensions of NWFP" (Bangkok, Thailand, 1994), and the "Inter-regional Expert Consultation on NWFP" (Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 1995).
The Near East region had not yet been covered by such an effort, and the "FAO International Expert Meeting on Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants in the Near East" was the first Expert Meeting in the Near East on NWFP. Because of the uniqueness of the region's forest and rangelands and its products, the focus of the meeting was on medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants, as these are among the most important NWFP of the Mediterranean region.
The meeting was jointly organized by the FAO Regional Office for the Near East (RNE) and the Forest Products Division (FOP) and was held at the Egyptian International Centre for Agriculture in Cairo, Egypt, from 19 to 21 May 1997.
OBJECTIVES
The specific objectives of the Expert Meeting were to:
* Gain a better insight into the present resource situation and utilization status of Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants (MAP) of the Near East region, their potential, and the problems and issues to be addressed for their sustainable development;
* Identify and propose priorities for action at various levels and propose programmes and projects to support national/regional efforts for resource conservation and sustainable development of MAP products in the Near East.
The focus of the meeting was on medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants gathered from wild sources (such as on forest and/or on range lands) in the Near East, so as to differentiate these products from those obtained as agriculture cash crops (on irrigated or on rainfed lands). It was also noted during the meeting that the notion "forest land" (defined by FAO as land with a minimum of 10% tree cover), should encompass also the very extensive "range lands" (lands with a tree cover of less than 10% and mostly used for extensive grazing) in the region.
See Annex 1 for the Agenda of the meeting
PARTICIPANTS
The meeting was attended by 23 participants (including two observers and two resource persons from FAO). All invited experts came from countries of the Near East region, i.e.: Tunisia, Syria, Iran, Turkey, Cyprus, Yemen, Jordan, Sudan and Egypt. Observers included Mr. Hennawi from the Arab Organization for Agricultural Development (AOAD), and Mr. Heywood, who's participation at the meeting was sponsored by the Mediterranean Agronomic Institute of Chania (MAICh/MEDUSA). Some officers from the Egyptian International Centre for Agriculture also occasionally attended the meeting. The 19 experts invited by the organizers were selected on the basis of their specialized knowledge of NWFP in general and MAP in particular, and on the basis of their role in the management and utilization of forest resources in their country. They participated to the meeting in their personal capacity and not as representatives of their governments. See Annex 2 for the List of Participants.
SUMMARY REPORT OF THE MEETING
The meeting was opened by Dr. Mamdouch Charaf Eddin, Vice Minister of Agriculture, on behalf of Dr. Youssif Wally, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Agriculture and Land Reclamation of Egypt. In his speech he underlined the importance that the Egyptian government gives to the sustainable utilization of its forest resources, and the need for close cooperation with countries in the Near East region in this regard. Dr. Abdel Azeem El Gazzar, Director of the Egyptian International Centre for Agriculture, and Dr. Reyadh Mamdouh, Under Secretary of State for Afforestation, emphasized the important contribution of these forest resources to socio-economic development and to food security.
Dr. Mamdouch Charaf Eddin stressed that the meeting was timely planned, as it underscored the importance that the international community attaches to sustainable forestry development in the region. He also emphasized that the meeting was designed to facilitate an open dialogue among experts, and that it would make a direct contribution to the technical discussions on the development and utilization of NWFP in the Near East, and the role they play in the sustainable development of forest resources in the region.
Mr. Reyadh highlighted the important contributions of medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants and other NWFPs towards: (i) improving nutrition and health of the rural population in the Near East region; (ii) providing additional income for landless people; (iii) conserving the biological diversity of Near East forest resources. He also stressed the need for scientifically sound management and utilization of these resources, which should be fully compatible with the principles of sustainable forest management.
Speaking on behalf of FAO, Mr. A. Al Fares and Mr. P. Vantomme welcomed the participants, thanked the Government of Egypt for hosting this important meeting, and briefed the participants on the background and objectives of the meeting and its expected outcome.
The meeting elected Mr. Reyadh as Chairman and Messrs. Khater and Gavrilides as Rapporteurs. Mr. Vantomme of FAO HQ (FOPW) and Mr. Al Fares of the Regional Office for the Near East (RNE) served as Secretaries for the meeting.
The programme of the meeting was articulated in two technical sessions: i) Overview of the Resource Situation and the Present Status of Utilization of the Major Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants in the Near East Region; ii) Product Development and Policy/Institutional Issues. Each session included presentation of keynote papers, country reports and case studies, followed by general discussions.
The first session began with the presentation of three regional papers: "Plant Resources and their Diversity in the Near East" (V. Heywood), "The State of Agriculture, Forestry and the Environment in the Near East", (A. Alfares), and "Major Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants Gathered from Wild Sources in the Near East: Product Utilization and Trends" (P.Vantomme). The meeting was further briefed on the resource and utilization status of medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants through detailed country reports. Countries covered included: Turkey, Jordan, Syria, Yemen, Egypt, Cyprus, Tunisia, and Iran. The meeting was informed on the experience gained by these countries in the development and use of their NWFP, with particular reference to progress made in forest management, harvesting, processing and trade practices.
The second session covered the presentation and discussion of case studies documenting the situation, trends and needs of selected products: Mushroom production in Turkey, Jordan and Syria; NWFP in Turkey; Afforestation with Jatropha curcas in Egypt; Gum Arabic production in Sudan (including the production and marketing of new gums like Karaya, Sterculia setigera) and Medicinal and Aromatic plants in Arab countries. Three studies that had been commissioned by FAO-RNE on MAP in Pakistan, Sudan and Turkey were also presented. In this proceeding, only a summary of these three studies is given, copies of the entire documents are available from FAO-RNE.
RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The meeting provided a useful overview of the specific characteristics of the many NWFP and their resource/utilization status in the region. The outcome of the discussions of the meeting was presented and discussed in plenary until an agreement by consensus was reached on all recommendations. A copy of the key recommendations were then distributed to each participant at the closing session.
The following are the main findings of the meeting and the corresponding recommended actions to be taken:
Information on the resources
It was found that there is a lack of:
* an agreed list of species (including important micro-organism) with standard names, synonyms, and agreed taxonomy;
* information on properties, distribution and dynamics of species and their associated ecosystems;
* information on how plants are utilized, harvested, cultivated and propagated;
* reliable production and trade statistics;
* germplasm/certified/authenticated stock for cultivation;
* data on the socio-economic contribution of MAP and other NWFP to rural development;
* data on the various values of NWFP, including their contribution to income generation, soil conservation, food security, and maintenance of biodiversity.
Some information on the above is partially available from many and often very different sources, however this information base is still far from being comprehensive and adequate to cover the whole Near East region.
Proposed action
à Establish a regional metadatabase on medicinal, culinary and aromatic (and other NWFP) resources of the Near East based on existing efforts/databases;
à Create a "Directory on Who in the Near East is doing What on NWFP and Where" (including the utilization of the work done by AOAD, MEDUSA, IUCN, and others);
à Improve networking among key institutes in the region to strengthen information exchange, technology transfer, development of regional statistics and propagation methods (need for a regional training programme/center).
Conservation/protection/utilization of the resources
It was found that regulations and forest/rangeland legislation dealing with ownership, user rights, protection, utilization and harvesting of wild populations, at national/sub-regional level are inadequate. This situation is leading to over-harvesting and increased degradation of the natural resources, resulting in the inability of the wild populations to regenerate. It was also found that there was a lack of participatory and integrated forest resource management (combining wood production, grazing and NWFP).
Proposed action
à Review present national forest legislation in the region to identify critical gaps;
à Assist governments in the development of comprehensive strategies to address in a multidisciplinary manner the conservation and sustainable development of their medicinal, aromatic and culinary (and other NWFP) resources;
à Set aside gene reserves/conservation centres. This would require carrying out a feasibility study for establishing regional gene banks on MAP of the Near East.
The need for regional action programmes was mentioned, including developing field
projects to:
à Define the role of local people and develop participatory approaches with rural populations for improved conservation/utilization of the resources;
à Strengthen regional research collaboration.
Product Development and Policy/institutional aspects
It was found that there is urgent need for:
* Establishing an integrated approach towards NWFP development (and NOT to focus on one species only);
* Achieving optimization of the use of the products: improve industrialization, better techniques for harvesting, processing, etc.;
* Promoting the domestication of resources when relevant (as sometimes supply from both wild and farmed sources is desirable for social reasons);
* Setting up regional organizations/networks (or Centre) on given products;
* Improving the quality standards of products.
Proposed action
à Prepare marketing studies on important NWFP and MAP;
à Organize training workshops on specific topics (quality, marketing, involvement of local people, forest policy, extension).
CONCLUDING OVERALL RECOMMENDATIONS
The Meeting recommended that the development and promotion of NWFP between countries in the Near East should be strengthened through improved networking, and/or regional development projects/common programmes and, in this regard, close collaboration and coordination should be sought with, and among, the Arab agencies and institutions working in the same or related fields.
The Meeting recommended that a review of national forest policies and regulations in the region be carried out so as to identify critical gaps which could impede a sustainable conservation and development of NWFP.
The Meeting recommended that each country to become involved in a process of promotion of NWFP and that this process be developed simultaneously at regional, sub-regional and national levels.
The Meeting recommended that every effort be made to promote the exchange of information and experience related to this field, through, in particular, the organization of meetings between experts.
The Meeting finally recommended that follow-up action be taken and requested FAO to take a lead in the identification and formulation of a regional project to promote the sustainable development of NWFP in the Mediterranean basin, and to prepare a project document for submission to interested donors. This effort is to be carried out in close collaboration with relevant sub-regional organizations (such as ACSAD, AOAD and others) and with agencies from the countries concerned.
<section>3</section>
SESSION 1
Regional overview of the resource situation and the status of utilization of the medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants in the Near East
Plant resources and their diversity in the Near East
V. Heywood
University of Reading
FORESTS
Under the FAO regional structure, the Near East region includes the following 30 countries: Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Cyprus, Djibouti, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tadjikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates and Yemen.
According to FAO (The State of the World's Forests, 1997), the total area of forests and woodlands in the region in 1995 was about 131 million, i.e. 2% of the land area of the region.
The largest forest area is in Sudan (41.6 million ha), followed by Iran (11.4 million ha), Turkey (8.9 million ha), Morocco (8.4 million ha), Kyrgyzstan (7.3 million ha), Algeria (1.87 million ha), and Afghanistan (1.4 million ha). The forest and woodland area in the remaining countries is less than one million ha. Countries like Bahrain, Malta, Oman and Qatar have no forests. Egypt, Kuwait and United Arab Emirates have only man-made plantations. The land area, population numbers, GNP/person and forest area of the countries in the region is shown in Table (1).
Due to the prevailing harsh climatic conditions of the region, forestland is mostly comprised of savannah areas, open woodlands, and land with scattered trees and xerophytic shrubs. However, in the Atlas mountains of Morocco, highlands of Cyprus, Pakistan, Turkey, the Caspian sea and Southern Sudan, temperate forests and high rain zones are found.
In countries lacking natural forests, fast growing and multipurpose tree species (i.e., eucalyptus, casuarina, poplars and acacias) are planted in the form of windbreaks or shelterbelts around the farms, highways, public facilities and in the agroforestry systems. These help to meet the local needs for wood and to protect the agricultural crops against wind as well as providing amenity and amelioration of the environment. In countries that have natural forests, such plantations provide significant amounts of wood (e.g. 4 million m^3/annum of wood are made in Turkey mainly from poplar plantations) and even greater amounts than the natural forest production (e.g. Iraq, Iran, Lebanon Syria and Tunisia).
In general, the forestlands in the Near East countries are state owned, although there are some variations among the countries regarding ownership and the rights of forest dwellers and local populations. Many countries in the region have enacted laws and legislations to regulate the use of forests by local populations and protect them against damaging interventions.
According to FAO statistics (Table 2), the forest area of the region decreased during the period 1990-1995. The main causes for degradation are: over exploitation of wood for fuel by rural populations, overgrazing and the increase in need for wood and non-wood products and services of forests by the growing population in the region.
Deforestation in the region during this period was very high. The most affected countries were Sudan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Algeria. The forests are used as a source of timber, fuelwood and other wood products. Fuelwood and charcoal are the most important products in the region. For example, in Sudan, the consumption of fuelwood (firewood and charcoal) represented the largest share of total consumption. Wood for construction, maintenance and furniture accounted for 7.2%, 3.8% and 1.5% respectively. In Turkey, the average annual wood production of state owned forests is around 7-7.5 million m^3 of round wood and 6-9 million m^3 of fuelwood.
NWFP include medicinal and aromatic plants, herbs and spices, gums, resins, tannins, fibers, mushrooms, honey, fruits and nuts for nutrition, fodder for animals as well as wildlife products. There are also other very important services provided by the forests in the region. Protection of soil and water resources is a primary function of forests and wood plantations. Forests play a vital role in combating desertification and preventing soil erosion in fragile regions (Sudan, Yemen and North Africa countries), as well as protecting watersheds in mountainous areas (Yemen and Cyprus). Shelterbelts and windbreaks protect fields, cities and infrastructure, ensure environmental stability and increase soil productivity by mitigating the effects of climatic fluctuations in many countries of the region (Egypt, Libya, Iraq, Sudan, Syria and Turkey). Amenity and recreation are also among the important functions of forest areas. In line with the rapid urbanization in many countries of
the region, demands for recreation activities have shown rapid increase. For example, in Turkey 428 recreation sites covering 15 946 hectares have been established, and 32 national parks covering an area of 649 486 hectares. Forests play a significant role in the preservation of biodiversity and the gene reserves in the region. They provide work opportunities and additional income to the rural population living in and around forests.
Floristic Diversity of the Near East Region
The flora of the Near East region is diverse and comprises some 23 000 vascular plant species of which 6 700 are endemic to the region (Table 3). The flora of the Middle East is estimated at 15 000 species by Heller (1991). These figures can be compared with 25 000 for the flora of the Mediterranean region.
In some countries such as Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, Cyprus, Israel and Turkey, modern inventories of flora have been completed while in other countries, such as Iraq, Iran and the Arabian Peninsula, they are still in the stage of development. A recent checklist of the flora of Egypt has been published (Boulos 1995) and in the same year another catalogue of the flora was published by El Hadidi & Fayed (1995). The first of seven projected volumes of the "Flora of the Arabian Peninsula and Socotra" was published in 1996 (Miller & Cope 1996). This aims to provide a regional framework for the floras of the countries of the Arabian Peninsula (Saudi Arabia, Republic of Yemen including the Socotran Archipelago, Oman, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Bahrain and Kuwait). Another major floristic work is the "Conspectus Florae Orientalis" (Heller & Heyn 1980-94), an annotated catalogue of the flora of the Middle East. This synthetic catalogue is in some ways a supplement and update of
the taxa listed in Boissier's classic "Flora Orientalist" that was completed over a century ago.
Nineteen "centres of diversity" were recognized in the Middle East and South West Asia. They include the Levantine Uplands of Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Israel and Jordan which form part of the "Fertile Crescent", of major importance for agriculture. The region also contains Vavilov's Near Eastern Center of Origin of Crop Plants and the Near Eastern Complex recognized by Harlan (1992) where a wide variety of cultivated plants were domesticated, as well as in neighboring areas such as the Mediterranean.
DIVERSITY OF MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS, HERBS AND SPICES
The use of medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants, herbs and spices in the region goes back thousands of years and forms an important part of various cultures. Although many of the species concerned have fallen into disuse, traditional medicines still play a major role in health care systems. A list of the most important medicinal and essential oil and perfume plants is given in Table (4). The most important plant families are: Boraginaceae, Caryophyllaceae, Chenopodiaceae, Compositae, Cruciferae, Gramineae, Labiatae, Leguminosae, Liliaceae, Rosaceae.
In Turkey, more than 500 medicinal and aromatic plants are being used. Whole or parts of plants of about 250 species are exported (Koyuncu, 1995). Turkey is also rich in aromatic plants and Baser (1993) estimates that a third of the flora of Turkey consists of aromatic plants used for fragrance, flavoring or containing essential oil. In Tunisia, 152 medicinal plants have been recorded together with 38 essential oil plants (Chemli, 1997). Amongst the 1500 or so plants used in Iraq, a large number serve medicinal and aromatic purposes. Some of them are cultivated (Chakravarty,1976).
In the Arabian Peninsula oleo-gum-resins are found in Boswellia and Commiphora of the family Burseraceae. These are produced in resin ducts in the bark. Boswellia sacra, the most celebrated plant of Dhofar, and one that played a key role in its economy until recent times, was widely used as a medicinal plant for a whole range of ailments by physicians. Three species of Commiphora are used medicinally in preparations made from their resinous wood or from the resins: C. oliacea (or C. Copobasamum), the famous Balm of Gilead (Meccamyrrh), C. Foliacea, whose wood is widely used, and C. habessinica whose resin is very valuable as a medecine.
Information about the medicinal and aromatic plants of the region is scattered in a range of different works. Some are little more than briefly annotated lists of the common species to be found in a particular country (e.g. "Medicinal plants of Iraq". F. M. Karim & S.A. Quraan, 1986). In other countries such as Pakistan and Yemen, they contain detailed information about actual uses, how they are traded and so on.
The introduction of more extensive farming of medicinal plants should be considered. This requires more information about which species grow in the wild, their conservation status, how intensively wild species are harvested, how extensively they are cultivated and what are the existing and potential markets (local, national and international). This also requires the participation of the local community and its indigenous knowledge, and proper analysis of the socio-economic, cultural, agricultural, technical, scientific and conservation factors involved.
INTERNATIONAL ACTIONS AND NETWORKS
One of the difficulties in planning action related to medicinal plant species is the lack of detailed information on their identity, geographical distribution, current uses, conservation status in the wild, cultivation practices, and trade statistics. Moreover, the range of interest groups involved with medicinal plants is remarkably wide. For this reason a recommendation was made at the first World Congress of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants for Human Welfare held in 1992 to set up an international coordinating body. Subsequently an International Council for Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (ICMAP) was created in 1993. The aim of this body is to provide a forum for more effective cooperation between the various organizations and individual scientists, technologists and other specialists working in the field of medicinal and aromatic plants. Activities involve formulation of new ideas, actions, strategies and promotion of education and training in all fields related to these
plants.
More specifically the objectives of ICMAP include:
* Organization of World Congresses on medicinal and aromatic plants;
* Publication of a newsletter;
* Establishment of a clearing house mechanism and information system on MAP;
* Improvement of information exchange with industrial users;
* Promotion of knowledge of the uses of traditional medicine systems and phytomedicines;
* Establishment of task forces on areas such as genetic resources and traditional medicine.
A regional network for the Identification, Conservation and Use of Wild Plants in the Mediterranean Region called MEDUSA was established during a workshop on "Identification of Wild Food and Non-Food Plants of the Mediterranean Region" held on 28-29 June, 1996 at the Mediterranean Agronomic Institute of Chania (MAICh). This network is financially supported by the Directorate General of the European Union, CIHEAM, and MAICh.
The general aim of the Network is to propose methods for the economic and social development of rural areas of the Mediterranean region, using ecologically based management systems that will ensure the sustainable use and conservation of plant resources of the area. These plant genetic resources are of actual or potential importance to agriculture, various industries and human health, and consequently improve the quality of life.
The specific objectives of the Network are:
* The identification of native and naturalized plants of the Mediterranean region, used as: food (including food and beverages, for humans); food additives (including processing agents and additive ingredients used in food preparations); animal food (including forage and fodder for vertebrates); bee plants (including pollen or nectar sources for honey production); invertebrate food (including plants eaten by invertebrates useful to humans e.g. silkworms); materials (including woods, fibers, tannins, latex, resins, essential oils, waxes, oils); fuels (including fuelwood, charcoal, fuel alcohol); social uses (including masticators, anti-smoking devices, hallucinogens, psychoactive drugs, contraceptives, and plants for ritual or religious purposes); vertebrate poisons (including poisonous plants for hunting and fishing); non-vertebrate poisons (including mollusicides, herbicides, insecticides, bacteriacides and fungicides); medicines (for human and veterinary uses);
environmental uses (ornamental, hedges, windbreaks, soil improvement, erosion control, and indication of metals, pollution or underground water); and gene sources (including wild relatives of major crops).
* The creation of an Interactive Regional Information System (IRIS) containing scientific plant names, vernacular names, plant description, chemical data, distribution, habitat description, uses, conservation status, present and past ways of trading and marketing, indigenous knowledge (ethnobiological and ethnopharmacological), and references to literature sources.
* The preliminary evaluation of the conservation status and potential utilization in agriculture of these plants as alternative minor crops.
The network includes representatives of international organizations, such as CIHEAM-MAICh, IUCN, ICMAP, FAO, IPGRI-WANA and LEAD which form the Steering Committee, and representatives from the countries of the Mediterranean basin (initially Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Egypt, Turkey, Greece, Italy, France, Spain and Portugal). It is envisaged that the Network will eventually include members from all the Mediterranean countries and other international organizations.
OTHER NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS
Food
The Near East forests provide a wide range of foods. Edible fruits are particularly important as they provide essential nutrients to the diet of local people. Examples of some edible fruit forest trees are: Pistacia, Pinus pinea and carob in Syria, Iran and Turkey; walnut, mulberry, tamarind, mango and Zizyphus sp. in Pakistan; and Andansonia digitata, Balanites aegyptiaca and Zizyphus sp. in Sudan. In countries that have no natural forests like Egypt, fruits of Ficus sycamorus, Eugenia jambolana and Morus sp. are consumed.
Forage
Many trees and shrubs and Savannah grassland in the Near East countries are used as forage for cattle, sheep, goats and wildlife (animals, birds and insects). Acacias are the most valuable forage trees in the region. Acacia saligna is the main forage source in the sand dune areas along the north coast of Egypt in the Sinai Peninsula. In Sudan, cattle eat pods and leaves of Acacia arabica, A. torotilis and A. senegal. Prosopis juliflora also produces palatable and nutritive pods and leaves that are eaten by camels, cattle, sheep and goats (in Egypt and Sudan).
Biochemicals
There are a number of plant species in the region which are sources of biochemicals. For example, in Sudan, tannin extracted from the bark of acacias is used widely in the leather tanning industry. In Turkey, red dye material is extracted from Alkanna spp. and yellow dye from Datsia cannabira, Anchonium elichryrifolium and Berberis spp. The dyes of Rhubia tinctorium is used for coloring, medicines and foods. In Tunisia Lowsania inermis, Punica granatum, Alkanna tinctoria and Rubia tinctorium are used as a source for dyes.
Gums and Resins
Gum arabic which is an exude of Acacia senegal is the most important NWFP in Sudan . It is the second export commodity in Sudan.
In Pakistan gum and tannin are obtained from A. arabica. Several other species, such as Balsamodenron sp., Pinus roxburghii and Boswellia gabra are sources of gum and resins.
In Turkey gum and resins are extracted from Abies sp., Pinus brutia and Astragalus sp..
Ornamentals
In some Near East countries (e.g.Turkey), bulbous plants are used for ornaments as well as in pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries. They have traditionally been used in the floristic trade locally and are now also being sold abroad. The export of flowers earned 2 374 000 US$ in 1995. Some of the most important bulbous plants are: Eranthis hyemalis, Anemone blande, Leucozum aestivum and Cyclamen hederifolium.
Honey
Some of the Near East countries are important producers of natural honey from Acacia and Eucalyptus species. Turkey is one of the major producers.
Cork
The North African countries are the main exporters of cork. The annual cork production in Tunisia is 8000 tons. The most important species for cork production in the region is Quercus suber.
Mushrooms
The lower plants in the forests of the region including mushrooms, morels, truffles and other fungi supply a number of minor foods. Pakistan and Afghanistan are the main producers of morels in the world trade. The activities of the FAO "Forestry and Food Security Project in the Mediterranean and Near East Region (Turkey Syria and Jordan)" include cultivation of mushroom. The most commonly cultivated and exported mushroom in the project is Agaricus bisporas.
FOREST SERVICES
Soil protection and erosion control
One of the major roles of forests in the Near East region is to reduce soil erosion and water run off and therefore conserve the fragile mountain ecosystems. Windbreaks and shelterbelts protect fields and urban areas in the region. In addition, forestlands and plantations play a major role in combating desertification and stabilizing sand dunes in nearly all countries of the region.
Recreation, tourism and wildlife protection
The rapid urbanization in the region increased the demand for parks and reserves. Parks and reserves offer a number of recreational facilities such as hunting, fishing, bird watching, camping as well as conserving the indigenous biodiversity. In Turkey for example, there are 32 national parks covering a total area of some 650 000ha, 11 nature parks, 32 nature reserves and 118 wildlife reserves.
REFERENCES
Baser, H.C. (1992). Essential Oils of Anatolian Labiatae: A Profile. Acta Horticulturae 333: 217 - 238.
Boulos, L. (1995). Flora of Egypt Checklist. Al Hadara Publishing, Cairo.
Chakravarty, H.L. (1976). Plant Wealth of Iraq. A dictionary of Economic plants. Vol. 1.
Chemli, R. (1997). Plants Médicinales, Aromatiques et Culinaires de la Flore de Tunisie. FAO/RNE, Caire.
El Hadidi, Nabil & Fayed, Abel-Aziz. (1995). Materials for Excursion Flora of Egypt. Taeckholmia 15. Cairo University Herbarium, Giza.
Garadat, A. (1993). First Work on Plant Genetic Resources in Yemen. 12-14 December 1993.
Harlan, J.R. (1992). Crops & Man. Second edition. Amercan Society of Agronomy, Inc., Crop Science Society of America, Inc., Madison.
Heller. D. (1991). Conspectus Florae Orientalis. Botanica Chronica 10: 55-61.
Koyuncu, M. (1995). Medicinal and Aromatic Plants in Turkey. Ankara University. Ankara.
Karim, Fawzi M.& Qurann, Saleh A. (1996). Medicinal Plants: Rescuing a Global Heritage. The World Bank, Washington DC.
Miller, A.G. & Cope, T.A. (1996). Flora of the Arabian Peninsula and Socotra.
Palevitch, Z.Y.D. (1982). Effect of Drought on the Secondary Metabolites of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants - a Review. In: Atal, C.K. & Kapur, B.M. (eds), Cultivation and Utilization of Medicinal plants. Regional Research Laboratory, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Jammu-Tawa.
FAO. (1997). State of the World's Forests. Rome. Italy.
Younis Haggag, M. (1997). Herbal medicine in Egypt. In: Heywood, V.H. (Ed.), Identification of Wild Food and Non-Food plants of the Mediterranean Region Workshop. Options Mediterranéenes, Serie Seminaire Mediterranéennes. CIHEAM/MAICh, Chania.
Table (1): Basic data and forest cover in the Near East region.
Country
Land area 1994
1000 ha.
Population in 1995 (million)
GNP/ person
Forest area 1995
1000 ha
% of land area
Afghanistan
C
Algeria
Azerbijan
Bahrain
Cyprus
Djibouti
Egypt
n.a
Iran
n.a.
Iraq
G
Jordan
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Lebanon
G
Libya
n.a.
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
n.a.
Somalia
C
Sudan
C
Syria
G
Tajikistan
Tunisia
Turkey
U.A.E
Yemen
C
G
n.a.
Total
Source: FAO. (1997). State of the World's Forests.
Key:
C: Estimated to be low income ($725 or less)
E: Estimated to be upper middle income ($2.896 to $8.955)
G: Estimated to be lower middle income ($726 to $2.895)
n.a: No figures available.
Table (2): Changes in forest cover in the region (1990 - 1995).
Country
Forest area 1990 1000 ha
Forest area 1995
1000 ha
Annual change
1000 ha
Rate (%)
Afghanistan 
Algeria 
Azerbijan 
Bahrain 
Cyprus 
Djibouti 
Egypt 
Iran 
Iraq 
Jordan 
Kuwait 
Kyrgyzstan 
Lebanon 
Libya 
Malta 
Mauritania 
Morocco 
Oman 
Pakistan 
Qatar 
Saudi Arabia
Somalia 
Sudan 
Syria 
Tajikistan 
Tunisia 
Turkey 
Turkmenistan
U.A.E 
Yemen 
FAO. (1997). State of the World's Forests.
Table (3): Floristic diversity in the countries of the Near East and South West Asia
Country Vascular plant species
Endemic species
% Endemic species
Bahrain 
Egypt 
Iran 
Iraq 
Israel 
Jordan 
Kuwait 
Lebanon 
Oman 
Qatar 
Saudi Arabia 
Sinai (Egypt) 
Syria 
Turkey 
United Arab Emirates
Yemen 
Socotra (Yemen) 
Source: Boulos et al. (1994).
Table (4): Major indigenous medicinal and aromatic plants of the Middle East and Southwest Asia
Achillea frragrantissima Juniperus phoenicea
Achillea santolina Lavandula dentata
Achillea graecorum Leontice leontopetalum
Alkanna strigosa Marrubium spp.
Aloe perryi Mentha pulegium
Aloe dhufarensis Myrtus communis
Aloe inermis Nerium oleander
Ammi spp. Ocimum Kilmandscharicum
Anagyris foetida Origanum syriacum
Anastatica hierochuntica Otostegia fruticosa
Artemisia herba-alba Papaver somniferum
Artemisia judaica Peganum harmala
Boswellia sacra Retama raetam
Cannabis sativa Rhamnus spp.
Calamintha incana Rhus tripartita
Calotropis procera Rhus communis
Catha edulis Ricinus communis
Cassia enna Ruta chalepensis
Citrrulus colycinthis Salvia fruticosa
Commiphora foliacea Symphytum spp.
Commiphora ileadensis Teucrium polium
Commiphora parviflora Thymelaea hirsuta
Commiphora soctrana Thymus spp
Crocus sativus Tribulus terrestris
Cymbopogon proximus Urginea maritima
Cynoglossum creticum Verbacscum sinuatum
Datura stramonium Verbena officinalis
Digitalis spp. Ziziphus jujuba
Dracaena cinnabari 
Source: Boulos et al. 1994.
Ephedra alata 
Eryngium campestre 
Ferula asa-foetida 
Foeniculum vulgare 
Glycyrrhiza spp. 
Gypsophila spp. 
Haplophyllum tuberculatum
Hyoscyamus spp. 
Table (5): Medicinal plants adapted to arid zone conditions of the Middle East
Genus / Species
Active Constituents Medicinal properties
Calotropis procera Mudar bark calotropine Various, fixing agent for perfumes
Boswellia Odoriferous gum resin Various, aromatic stimulant
Commiphora Gum resins, myrrh Various, aromatic stimulant
Capparis spinosa Rutin Used for arteriosclerosis,
diuretic, chills, renal disinfectant, tonic
Spergularia marina Triterpene, saponine Expectorant
Gypsophila Saponosides Tonic, diaphoretic alterative, skin diseases
Salsola Alkaloids Hypotensive
Artemisia cina Santonine Anthelmintic
A. herba-alba Thujone, santonine Vermifuge
Convolvulus scammonia Resin Purgative
Citrrullus colocynthis Colocynthin, elaterin Purgative
Globularia alypum Anthraquinone glucosides Purgative
Cymbopogon proximus Geraniol, citral Antiseptic, insect
Repellents, perfume
Hyssopus officinalis Essential oils Carminative, antiseptic
Rosmarinus offcinalis Chloritic, perfume
Thymus
Alhagi maurarum Manna from leaves Laxative and purgative
Cassia angustifolia Anthraglucosides Purgative
C. acutifolia
C. obovata
Acacia seyal Gum Emollient, emulsifier
Astragalus Gum tragacanth Emulsifier
Trigonella foenum-graecum Diosgenin Tonic, restorative,
Precursor of steroids
Androcymbium gramineum Colchicine Anti-mitotic properties
Urginea martitma Scillarin A and
other glycosides Cardiac stimulant,
diuretic
Fraxinus ornus Manna: mannitol and galactoside-
saccharose Laxative
Rhamus alaternus Anthraglucosides Purgative, laxative
Paliurus Heteroside Diuretic
Ammi majus 9-nethoxy-psoralen Psoriasis
Dorema ammoniacum Sap contains gum
Genus/ Species Active constituents Medicinal properties
Ferula asaapoetida Antispasmodic
Zygophyllum Hypoglycaemic
Tribulus terrestris Hepatic toxin Sheep poison
Peganum harmala Alkaloids, harmaline Hallucinogen,
Anthelmintic
Balanites aegyptiaca Sapogenins, diosgenin Precursor of steroids
Source: modified from Palevitch (1982).
<section>4</section>
Production of medicinal, culinary and aromatic
plants in Turkey
M. Kizmaz, Director of Research and Planning Division
General Directorate of Forests
INTRODUCTION
Due to Turkey's varied climate and geographic conditions, a vast number of trees, shrubs and herbaceous plants grow in the country. Of the 11 000 plant species existing in Europe, 9 500 grow in Turkey, of which 3 000 are endemic. The NWFP derived from the leaves, flowers, seeds, roots and corms of plants which grow in the 8.8 million ha of forest land, provide the essential input for medicines, cosmetics, perfumery and various foods.
Collection of NWFP is strictly controlled and efforts are undertaken to minimize the effects of forestry operations which affect endangered species. Sustainable forest management permits the collection of plants species that grow in abundance, particularly in areas where such harvesting can improve the living standards of the local population. Where no management plans exist or where there is no market demand, such collection is forbidden.
In recent years, efforts have been made to encourage the cultivation of NWFP and production methods have been developed. Table (1) shows the 1996 production figures for some of the most important NWFP in the country.
PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES
Figures for NWFP production are calculated through unit price, contract and daily payment in the forest village cooperatives, where these exist, or by external surveys where organized production programs do not exist.
Where a production program does not exist, an inventory of woody, herbaceous and tuberous plants is made, either annually or periodically. As part of Turkey's five-year plan, attention was paid to the trend in demand of domestic and foreign markets for NWFP. By the end of 1996, 62 plant species had been surveyed and production capacities determined. On the basis of this inventory, production plans for some plant species are prepared and local populations are encouraged to concentrate on production of these species which are sold at tariff price. Production plans indicate suitable drying and storage facilities, rotation and production techniques, while propagation methods (vegetative or generative) are also included in the plans. In this context, the "FAO Forestry and Food Security in Near East and Mediterranean Regions" project, aimed at the reproduction of medicinal and aromatic plants in Konya, was carried out successfully. The new project entitled "The Development of
Non-wood Forest
Products in the Black Sea Area" has also been able to grow medicinal, aromatic and bulbous plants in forest areas.
In Turkey, the production of medicinal and aromatic bulbous plants in their natural sites for sustainable management aims to:
* enhance the living standards of forest villagers through employment in production areas;
* decrease the damage made by villagers on the natural resources in forests;
* sustain cultivation and production of rare and endangered medicinal and aromatic plants by limiting their production even in the face of high domestic and foreign demand;
* conserve the biological and genetic diversity of important natural resources by limiting production;
* improve the economic value of medicinal and aromatic plants by offering only high quality produce for export.
Bulbous plants
Bulbous plants have landscape and cultural as well as medicinal and cosmetic importance. In particular, export for ornamental purposes has increased compared with domestic consumption for other purposes. However, often bulbs are collected irrespective of size. This indiscriminate harvesting causes economic loss and endangers species. A regulation made by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs came into force to regulate over harvesting and export of bulbs. According to this regulation, a steering committee established from among representatives of various related ministries, universities and NGOs decides the quota and restricts some plant species to be collected annually. The firms are informed of quota and production areas by the governmental organization. Thus damage resulting from over production is, to some extent, prevented.
The collection of bulbous plants for export depends on the tariff price and is undertaken by specially authorized forest dwellers. The bulbs are transported only with the permission of local forest district authorities and are labelled with an origin and phytosanitary certificate.
Some of the most important bulbous plants exported are: Corms of Galanthus L. for flowers; Eranthis pyemalis (L) Salisb for flowers; Anemone blanda schott et Kotschy for flowers; Leucozum aestivum L. for flowers and medicine; Cyclamen hederifolium Aitom for flowers; Fritillaria imperialis L. for flowers; Sternbergia colcihicifolia waldst et Kit for flowers; Sternbergia candida Mathew et T. Baytop for flowers; Sternbergia schubertii schenk for flowers; Lilium candidum L for flowers; Tulipa humulis Herbert for flowers; Geranium tuberosum L for flowers; Colchicum sperciosum stev. for flowers; Muscari Miller for flowers; Ornithogalum nutans L for flowers; Allium noseum L for flowers; Gladiolus L for flowers; Urginea maritima (L) Baker for medicine;Pancratium maritimum L for flowers; Narcissus seratinus L for flowers.
The collection of the following species is forbidden at all times: Orchis sp., Centiana lutea L., Rocus sativus, Crocus sp., Arisarum vulgare tang. Stenbergia lutea, Stenbergia Candida.
Mushrooms
There are at least 100 000 fleshy mushrooms species in Turkey as estimated by Guler in 1988. Approximately 100 of these are edible. Some of them such as Morchella spp., Boletus edulis, Cantherellus cibarus, Lactarius songuifluis and Amenita coesdria are not cultivable. Others, such as shirtake mushrooms that have significant importance, can be cultivated. Waste materials used for the production of saprophytic mushrooms are very profitable in the villages.
The mushrooms collected for export and consumption in domestic markets in Turkey are:
1. Morchella esculata
2. Boletus edulis Fr.
3. Boletus luteus Fr.
4. Boletus bovinus (Linn) Fr.
5. Boletus elegans Fr.
6. Boletus badius Fr.
7. Amanita caesarea (Fr) Quelet
8. Armillania mella (Fr) Kummer
9. Lactarius volemus (Fr.) Fr
10. Lacttarius deliciosus (Fr) S.F. Gray
11. Chroogomhus rutillus (Fr) O.K.Miller
12. Agaricus campestris Fr.
13. Fistlina hepatica Fr.
14. Pleurotus connucoprae (Pers.) Rolland
15. Lactarius salmohicolor Heim et Leclair
16. Hydnum repandum (L.ex.Fr) Fr.
17. Morchella conica var delisiosa Fr.
18. Tricholoma terreum (Fr.) Kummer.
19. Sparasis crispa (Wulf. Ex. Fr) Fr.
PROTECTION OF NWFP SPECIES
Due to the industrial processing of natural raw materials, demand for medicinal and aromatic plant production is increasing rapidly. Because of this demand, over production has been permitted, incompatible production techniques have been used, and early collection has been taking place. Thus the destruction of species is increasing rapidly and some important endemic species are consequently in danger of extinction. As a result, some regulations have been introduced related to production techniques and effective protection and control of excessive production, including certificates for collection and export.
The level of industrial processing of medicinal and aromatic plants in Turkey is low. These plants are therefore exported as raw material whereas most of the finished products are imported as industrial goods. As a result, the followings problems arise:
* The selling price of the raw products is low, while the cost of the imported finished products is high;
* Labor-intensive payment is low;
* The companies involved in import/export and processing of the raw materials gain more benefit than the producers;
* Imported products are more expensive due to the fact that they are processed abroad.
In addition, endemic plants which are of prime importance in terms of market demand require:
* designation of potential production areas;
* sustainable production to meet demand;
* determination of gene reserve areas to ensure the sustainability of endemic plants;
* prevention of over-exportation in order to conserve gene resources from being eroded to protect biodiversity.
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Encourage companies dealing with the trade of medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants to set up a fund which should be used to support research and developments covering the rehabilitation of MAP ecosystems.
2. Implement production plans which introduce proper production techniques for plants included in the NWFP inventories.
3. Revise the production plans at the end of the rotation period by comparing new plans with previous ones.
4. Promote the contribution of private companies to the cultivation of medicinal culinary and aromatic plants.
5. Enforce export quotas in order to prevent over production resulting from high demand and market competition.
6. Draw up legal and organizational regulations in order to prevent destructive illegal collection.
7. Encourage the cultivation of native plant species by forest dwellers by providing forest villagers with training, technical and financial assistance.
8. Determine the market value of potential NWFP.
9. Develop processing activities in Turkey using innovative techniques and quality standards to bring products up to international market levels.
10. Develop the medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants industry by providing required establishment and support.
11. Strengthen international cooperation and obtain external financial resources to support innovative cultivation techniques.
12. Provide training in the utilization of NWFP and employ trained personnel locally.
13. Improve preservation and storage methods to maintain a high quality of the products.
14. Inform custom officers about species banned and train them to be conversant with export quotas.
15. Take account of the conservation of gene resources and the sustainability of bio-diversity in production, conservation and breeding plans.
REFERENCES
Anonymous. (1995). Orman Tali Urunlerinin Uretim va Satrs Esaslari. OGM. Iseletme ve pazarlama Dairesi Baskanligi Tebling No: 283
Anonymous. (1996). Orman Urunlerinden Faydalanmak Isteyenlere Verilecek Izinlere Ait Yonetmelik. OGM. Isletme ve Pazarlama Dairesi Baskanligi Teblig. No: 289
Anonymous. (1991). Turkiye'nin Ekonomik Deger Tasiyan Geofitleri uzerinde Taksonomik ve Ekolojik Arastirmalar. OGM. Isleme ve Pazarlama Dairesi Baskanligi Yayin No: 669
Anonymous. Uikemizdeki Bazi Onemli Orman Tali Urunlerinin Teshis ve Tanitm Klavuzu. OGM. Yayin No: 659
Isik, K. (1996). Biyolojik Cesitlilik ve Orman Gen Kaynaklarimiz. Orman Bakanligi Yaym No: 103
Kayacik, H. (1981). Orman ve park Agaclarinin Ozel Sistematigi 2 Cilt. I.U.Or.Fak. Yayin No: 287 224 S. Istanbul
Kayacik, H. (1982). Orman ve park Agaclarinin Ozel Sistematigi 3. Cilt. Kurtulmus, Matbaasi 291 S. Istanbul
Sumer, S. (1987). Turkiye'nin Yenen Mantarlari Erus Matbacilik Topkapi Ticaret Merkezi No: 289 Cevizlibag-Istanbul
Yaltirik F. (1989). Otsu Bitkiler Sistematigi. Dilek Matbaasi Istanbul.
Table (1) : Production figures for some important NWFP
PRODUCT
Unit 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996
Resin Ton 
Storax Kg. 
Leaves of Laurus nobilis L. Ton 
Resinous wood Ton 
Incense Kg. 
Leaves of Salvia sp. Ton 
Leaves of Thymus sp. Ton 
Seeds of P.pinea (with coat) Ton 
Mushrooms Ton 
Leaves of Rhus L. Ton 
Leaves of Rosmarinus officinalis L. Ton 
Leaves of Laurocerasus officinalisalis Roemer Ton 
Flowers of Tiatal L. Ton 
Fruits of Castanea sativa Mill Ton 
Corms of Galanthus L. Ton 
Table (2) : Uses of NWFP in Turkey
PLANT NAME
PRODUCT
USES
1. Pinus brutia Ten resin paint, polishing paper, chewing gum
2. Liquidambar orientalis
Mill styrox Medicine, perfume
Liquidambar orientalis
Mill incense used in mosques
3. Laurus nobilis L. leaves foods, perfume, leather and alcohol
4. Pinus pinea L. fruit foods
5. Quercus infectoria Oliv.
Subsp. Infectoria gall Paint, textile dyes, medicine, leather, ink
6. Quercus thaburensis Decne fruit medicine, leather, textile dyes
7. Juniperus Communis L.
Subsp. Naa. fruit medicine, alcohol
8. Tilia tomentosa moench
Tilia platyphyllos scop
Tilia rubra DC. flower
barks
foods, medicine, cosmetic, rush mat
9. Betula pendula Roth leaves, barks, twigs medicine
10. Eucaluptus sp. leaves, barks medicine, foods (liquor)
11. Ceratonia siliqua L. fruit
seeds foods, medicine, textile dye, cosmetics, alcoholic drinks, paper
12. Castanea sativa Mill fruit,
bark Foods, medicine
leather, textile dye
13. Rhamnus petiolaris Boiss fruits foods, paints, medicine, textile dye
14. Cerasus mahaleb L. fruits,
seeds foods, cosmetic, medicine, textile dye
15. Pistacia terebinthus L. gum turpentine, wood,
fruits, gull medicine, textile dye, alcoholic drinks
16. Pistacia lentiscus L. gum foods, medicine, perfume, alcoholic drink, paints, polish, chewing-gum
17. Rhus L. leaves
fruits medicine, textile dye, leather, foods,
18. Erica arborea L. twig with flowers, roots,
twig medicine, tobacco pipe
19. Astragalus spp. L. gum Pharmaceutics, medicine, textile, glue
20. Glycyrrhiza glabra L. roots, rhizomes medicine, beer, foods
21. Salvia officinalis L. leaves medicine, cosmetics
22. Centiana lutea L. roots of 4 - 5 years old plant medicine
23. Dryopteris-flix-mas (L)
schott rhizomes medicine
24. Viburnum opulus L breaks, leaves,fruits alcoholic drinks, medicine
25. Atropa belladonna L. leaves
roots
fruits medicine, chemistry
26. Althea officinalis L. flowers
leaves
roots medicine
27- Ricinus communis L. seeds
oil of seed medicine, plane engine oil
28- Vitex agnus-castus L. flowers with twig
seeds medicine, textile dye
29- Simmondsia chinensis
(Link) schneied seeds foods, cosmetic, shoe polish oil, car polish oil
30- Galanthus L. corn
herbaceous stem medicine
31- Rhamnus frangula L. barks
flowers medicine
32- Capparis ovata, C. spinosa L. buds foods, medicine, alcoholic drinks
33- Laurocerasus officinalis
Roemer fresh leaves
fruits foods, medicine,
alcoholic drinks
34- Foeniculum vulgare Mill
Subsp vulgare seeds foods, medicine, perfumes, alcoholic drinks
35- Origanum heracleoticum L. branch
flowers
leaves medicine
36- Matricaria chamomilla L. flowers medicine, cosmetic
37- Rosmarinus officinalis L. leaves flowers medicine, cosmetic
38- Lavandula officinalis L. flowers medicine, cosmetic
39- Valeriana officinalis L. rhizomes, roots medicine
40- Gypsophilla L. roots foods, medicine, cleaning material
41- Thymus sp. flowers,
leaves medicine, chemistry, perfume, cosmetic, foods
42- Digitalis grandiflora L. leaves medicine
<section>5</section>
Medicinal and aromatic plants in Syria
T. Wahbe, Agronomist
Ministry of Agriculture
INTRODUCTION
The total area of Syria is 185 186 km^2. It is bounded North by Turkey, East by Iraq, South by Jordan and West by Palestine, Lebanon and the Mediterranean. The population of the country is about 16 million. The country can be divided into 4 climatic zones: the mountain region, with annual rainfall of 800 - 1200 mm; the Mediterranean zone, with annual rainfall less than 600 mm; the central zone, with 300 - 600 mm annual rainfall; and the desert area with 100 - 200 mm rainfall.
Syria has a diverse base of flora and genetic resources. About 3 459 species belonging to 865 genus and 131 families grow in Syria. The production of non-wood forest products (NWFP) in Syria during the period 1990 - 1995 is shown in Table (1).
The medicinal, aromatic and toxic wild plants constitute a high proportion of the flora in Syria. Many plants, such as Matricaria spp., Thymus sp., Artimisia, fungi and truffle, are collected directly from the wild by rural people to make traditional medicines. A research programme was developed to enhance the production of medicinal plants in the country. Under this programme the following important studies were carried out:
* Survey of medicinal, aromatic, toxic and ornamental plants in Syria;
* Preparation of a primary document on 400 plants species belonging to 72 plant families;
* Collection and storage of seeds for conservation of genetic resources;
* Identification of Myrtys spp species, their distribution and propagation;
* Survey of Rosa spp., and its geographical distribution. The study indicated that growing species are: Rosa canina, R. caninavar and R. degavensis, R. dumetorum, R. dumetorumvar, R. orientalis, R. sicula, R. glutionosa, R. phoenicia;
* Studies were carried out on some agricultural treatments such as the optimum planting time, distance between plants and fertilization on Matrieoria, Trigonella and Nigella crops.
THREATS FACING MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS
Medicinal and aromatic plants are threatened by the flowing factors:
* Degradation of forest by fires, overgrazing, removal of trees for fuel and the lack of management plants;
* Urban expansion in forest areas;
* Scarcity of water;
* Unsustainable harvesting of wild medicinal plants.
CONSERVATION OF MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC RESOURCES
The degradation of medicinal plants has a negative impact on the general health of people. Attempts are therefore being made by governmental institutions and the private sector to conserve the medicinal resources through:
1. Formulation of a clear policy for production, transport and marketing based on the local and international needs of medicinal plants raw material.
2. Coordination between all sectors (ministries, organizations, universities and research centers) concerned with medicinal plants.
3. Survey of medicinal and aromatic genetic resources and establishment of gene resource banks.
4. Establishment of pharmaceutical and insecticide industries based on medicinal, aromatic and toxic plants.
5. Support of research on medicinal plants, training of technical staff and improvement of production techniques.
6. Formulation of extension programs for rural people on the conservation and importance of medicinal and aromatic plants.
7. Cultivation of medicinal plants.
8. Protection of endangered species.
9. Creation of botanical gardens for medicinal and aromatic plants.
10. Implementation of breeding programmes for raising the productivity of the medicinal plants.
Table (1) : Production and value of non-wood forest products in Syria (1994)
Product 
Prod/
tons
Value
(1000 SYP)
Prod/
tons
Value
(1000 SYP)
Prod/
tons
Value
(1000 SYP)
Prod/
tons
Value
(1000 SYP)
Myrtus branches 
Magorana leaves 
Glycyrrhizo
roots
Carob pods 
Rhus sp 
Grape fruits and leaves
Pistacia fruits 
Ferns 
Humus 
Total 
SYP = Syrian Pound (1000 SYP = 47,62 US-$, average exchange rate in 1990-93)
Source: Wahbe (1997).
Table (2): Production of medicinal and aromatic plants in Syria (1994)
Crop 
Irrigation type
Production in tons
Lupinus 
Rainfed
Rhus sp 
Rainfed
Pimpinella 
Irrigated
Arthamus tinctoreos
Rainfed
Foeniculun 
Irrigated
Nigella sativea
Irrigated
Rainfed
Sesamum indicum
Irigated
Irrigated
Petrose linum 
Irrigated
Coriandrum sativum 
Irrigated
Rosa 
Irrigated
Mentha 
Irrigated
Allium cepa
Irrigated
Rainfed
Allium cepa 
Irrigated
Upinus sp 
Rainfed
Pimpinell sp
Irrigated
Rainfed
Cuminum sp
Irrigated
Rainfed
Nigella sativa
Irrigated
Rainfed
Coriandrum
sativum
Irrigated
Rainfed
Mentha sp
Irrigated
Rainfed
Lepidium sativum 
Irrigated
Pertoselinium
Irrigated
Rainfed
Allium
sativum
Irregated
Rainfed
Allium cepa 
Irrigated
Lupinus sp 
Rainfed
Pimpinell sp
Irrigated
Rainfed
Cuminum sp
Irrigated
Rainfed
Nigella sativa
Irrigated
Rainfed
Coriandrum
sativum
Irrigated
Rainfed
Lepidium Sativum 
Irrigated
Pertoselinium
Irrigated
Rainfed
Allium
Sativum
Irrigated
Rainfed
Allium cepa 
Irrigated
Table (3) : Prices of important plant species
Name of Plants
Price L.S / kg
Matricaria Chamomilla
Matricaria aurea
Thymus sp.
Salvia
Micromeria myrtifolia
Majorana sp
Althea sp.
Glycyrrhiza sp.
Paronychia argentea
Lippia citrio dora
Laurus nobilis
Artemisia sp
Equisetum te lmateia
Ceratonia siliqua
Cynara cardunculus
Lepidium sativum
Foeniculum sp
Fungi
Truflle
Anabasis syriaca
Amygdalus communis
Rosa damascena
Carthamos binctoria
Acacia senegal
Astragallus gummifera
Celtis tournejortii
Table (4) : Common Medicinal and Aromatic Plants Sold in Local Markets
Parts Used Botanical Name 
Price L.S / kg
Dried Ceratonia siliqua 
Pistacia palaesting 
Thymus cilicius 
Organum syriacum 
Matricaria aurea 
Salvia aramiensis 
Laurus nobilis 
Micromeria myrtifolia
Rhus coriaria 
Quercus calliprinos 
Equisetum telmateia 
Ferula cassii 
Rubia tinctorium 
Celtis tournefortii 
Fresh Silybum marianum 
Cnicus benedictus. 
Matricaria aurea 
Malva sylvestris 
Taraxacum officinale 
Origanum syriacum 
Salvia aramiensis 
Thymus cilicicus 
Micromeria myrtifolia
Rumex patientia 
Crithmum maritimum 
Nasturtium officinale
<section>6</section>
The cultivation of aromatic and medicinal plants in Cyprus
G. Georgiou and A. Gavrilides
Department of Agriculture
Initiatives related to the cultivation of aromatic and medicinal plants in Cyprus began in 1991. During this year the "Project for the Development of Aromatic and Medicinal plants in Cyprus" was set up.
The project entails the following actions:
* Establishment of trial plantations with both local and imported aromatic plants, such as Oregano, Sage, Lavender, Tarragon, Dictamus, Hyssope, Mint, Bay, Rosemary, Thyme, Sideritis, Melissa etc., with the intention of defining those areas of Cyprus where these plants grow best, and are economically viable.
* Establishment of a nursery and seedling stock production unit to meet the farmers' requirements.
* Installation of a distillation unit for distillation trials.
* Allocation of longterm, low interest loans to interested farmers up to L30.000 for the establishment of viable aromatic plantations.
At the end of the evaluation of the trails it was found that all the aforementioned aromatic plants grow well in all parts of the island, but in the quality and quantity of production of plants is higher in semi-mountainous areas.
The main aromatic plants that are promoted by the Department of Agriculture are:
Oregano, Sage, Mint, Basil, Tarragon, and Lavender and to a lesser extent Marjoram, Bay, Dictamus, Rosemary, Mellssa, Thyme and Siderlitis. There is a great demand for such products in the countries of the E.U. and other countries because of their excellent quality, which is attributed to the favourable climatic conditions of Cyprus.
Medicinal herbs, culinary and aromatic plants in the
agriculture of Iran
S.Y. Riazi, Deputy General Director
Flowers, Ornamental plants, Medicinal herbs and Edible mushroom affairs
Ministry of Agriculture
INTRODUCTION
Iran is located in the semi southern part of the north temperate zone of Asia, and extends into the Iranian plateau. Iran's total area is 1 648 195 km^2 and comprises mountains, plains, salt deserts, rangelands, forestlands, inland waters and plantations. Approximately 33% of the total land (51 million hectares) is characterized by good to medium fertility. The average rainfall is about 400 billion cubic meters. Nearly 70% of this amount evaporates. At least 70 billion cubic meters of water is used in the agriculture sector.
The rangelands cover approximately 90 million hectares which extend from the north Elburz mountains to the western areas and other parts of the country. Based on the type of vegetation, the rangelands can be classified as: i) Herb dominated grazing areas (14 million hectares); ii) Shrub dominated grazing areas (60 million hectares), which are situated at low elevation levels of the warmer regions; and iii) Desert grazing areas (approximately 16 million hectares). Forestland covers only 7% of the total land area (12.4 million hectares). The forest regions of the country are classified into the following five categories:
i. Caspian forest area - The area comprises 1.9 million hectares which extend to the northern part of the Elburz mountain range in a relatively narrow shaped band. These forests are the only forests in the country that are used commercially for wood production.
ii. Semi humid Arasbaran forests - The area comprises about 144 000 hectares in the East Azarbaijan province.
iii. Zagros forest areas - This region comprises over 4.7 million hectares which extend from west Azarbaijan to Firouzabad in the Fars province. The area is characterized by over grazing and harsh climatic conditions.
iv. Desert forest areas - This area comprises about 2.97 million hectares.
v. The Gulf and Oman forest areas - These cover nearly 2.58 million hectares and spread over parts of the west and south including the southern sea borderlands. Due to severe climatic factors, the vegetation in this area is in a poor state.
Agricultural land comprises a total of 23.8 million hectares where wheat, barely, rice, cotton, sugar beet, pulses, oil seeds, vegetables, fruits, and to some extent, medicinal herbs and plants are grown. With the Persian Gulf in the South and the Caspian sea in the North, in addition to extensive inland water resources, Iran also has a great potential for production of edible and non edible fishes and other aquatic products.
Agriculture is the most important sector of Iran's economy. The added value's share of agriculture next to the petroleum is about 17.6%. The value in general, is considerable. The volume of agricultural exports for 1996 amounted to 627 000 tons. Dried fruits represented 60% of this figure.
Pistachio, both as an edible dried nut and medicinal fruit, is a very valuable product. With an annual export of nearly 56 000 tons, pistachio and its kernel constitute one of the most important non-oil export commodities.
Date (i.e. fruit of palm tree) is another major exportable commodity. The main regions under palm cultivation are Khuzistan, Fars, Aerman, Boushehr, Oistan, Eaiuchestan, and some desert marginal lands. The whole land under date cultivation is estimated to produce 538 520 tons annually.
Grape, either fresh or in the form of raisin, is another important product. Vineyards extend from 2 500 meters altitude in the Salavatabad gorge in Hamedan to desert low lands in Sistan and Daluchestan. One fourth of the grape harvested is dried and exported as raisin. 47 727 tons of raisin are exported each year, which amounts to 10% of the world export of this product.
Citrus is considered yet another highly important horticulture product. Citrus is valued for its strong vitamin content and for the different flavour it adds to food dishes. In addition, citrus peel contains odorous essence, and its residue is used in animal feeding. The main areas under citrus cultivation in the country are Ahuzistan, Aazenderan, Fars, Kerman, and regions bordering Oman and Persian Gulf sea. The total areas under plantation exceed 913950 hectares with an annual production of over 2 146 925 tons.
Pomegranate is also grown in Iran. The main production centers are found in Saveh, Yazed, Kashan, Khorasan, Isfahan, Ars, Kermanshahan, and Mazanderan. Pomegranate is used as a fresh fruit or is made into a seasonal sauce. Its skin and seeds are largely used in industry, dye making, and pharmaceutics. The area under pomegranate cultivation is estimated to be 540 594 hectares with an annual production of 496 215 tons, and an annual export volume of 9 532 tons.
Medicinal, culinary, and aromatic herbs have traditionally been used in Iran for generations and they have always been regarded as an integral part of farming and agriculture. Atraphaxix spinosa, fenngreek, sweet root, almonds, Atropa belladonna, Salvadora persica, Nigella, and Anchusia officinalis are amongst some of the plants used by the Iranian people.
Currently, research on medicinal plants and herbs is taken into great consideration by the government and the private sector in Iran. Research is carried out by medical universities, pharmaceutical institutes, experimental farms, research centers, and agricultural faculties. The Horticulture Department of the Ministry of Agriculture now also deals with medicinal plants and herbs affairs.
Cumin
Cumin is a herbaceous, annual plant which belongs to the Cyminum species and the Ambelifera family. Depending on climatic conditions, the plant height varies from 15-50 centimeters. The tape root grows at a right angle, elongated form and penetrates the earth up to 30 cm in depth. The root thickness is approximately 0.5 cm. Its flowers are generally small, white, or slightly violet, and made up of five parts. The calyx, flowering part or cup, is composed of 5 sharp, pointed epicalyx. The corolla is made up of 5 petals.
The main areas of cumin cultivation in Iran are: East of Khorasan, Sabzevar (at an altitude of 880 metres), between Sarakhs and Salehabad (at an altitude of 700-900 meters), Birjand, Gonabad, Sorkhe, Garmsar and Kerman. The plant fits into the farming pattern of any given area. It has a short growing season of 100-120 days, needs little irrigation, adapts easily to various soils, and requires medium fertility soil. Sowing takes place from end December to mid March. In the plant rotation, cumin follows the summer crops and its maintenance has little or no effect on the progress of other cultivated crops. The plant needs to be weeded regularly, especially during the early growing stage, as it has no resistance to weeds. As a result, chemical weed controlling is practiced extensively. In India, 1 kg per hectare of "Fluchloralin" is recommended, both as a pre-plant and pre-emergence toxicant. On the other hand, cumin is subjected to few insects such as aphids, weevils, mites,
thrips, and some plant diseases like Alteranaria, Fusaria, polygomi, Eloidogyme, Incogneta, and Pseudemona cumin.
Harvesting takes place from the end of April to the first half of May. The yield per hectares varies from 200-1000 kg.in non-irrigated and irrigated farms. The area under cultivation of cumin is 50 000 hectares with an annual production of 50 000 tons.
Cumin is mainly used as a remedy for stomach acidity, epilepsy, heartburn, colic, cough, constipation and flatulence. It is used to increase the milk of mothers during breast feeding and constitutes an ingredient of baby food together with other nutrients. Cumin is also used as a toxicant for the eradication of harmful insects, and as a repellent in pest control. It is commonly used as an additive in confectionery and in the food and beverage industries. Cumin also finds useful application in the perfumery business.
<section>7</section>
Medicinal, aromatic and culinary plants of Tunisian
flora
R. Chemli
Faculty of Pharmacy
Table (1) : State of vascular flora of Tunisia
Group
Family
Genus
Species
Pteridophyted 
Gymnospermes 
Chlamydospermes
Monocotyledones
Dicotyledones 
Total 
Table (2) : Natural reserves
Reserves Governorate
Area (ha)
Dar Fatma Jendouba 
Ain Zana Jendouba 
Majen Dj. Chitane Bizerte 
Ain Chrichira Kairouan 
Dj. Toiati Kairouan 
Khechem of Kaleb Kasserine 
Etella Kasserine 
Dj. Serdj Siliana 
Dj. Bouramli Gafsa 
El haouaria Nabeul 
Dj. Khroufa Beja 
Chikly Tunis 
Sebkhat Kelbia Sousse 
Kneiss Sfax 
Table (3) : National Parks
Parks Governorates Area (ha)
Zembra - Zembretta Nabeul 
Bouhedma Gafsa - Bouzid
Chaambi Kasserine 
Ichkeul Bizerte 
Boukornine Ben Arous 
El Feija Jendouba 
Jbil Kebili 
Didi toui Medenine 
Table (4): Value of exported essential oils in Tunisia 1993 - 1996.
Product Value
(1000 DT) and quantity (tons) 1993 1994 1995 1996
Orange oil Value
Quantity
Other citrus oils Value
Quantity
Rosmarin oil Value
Quantity
Menthol oil Value
Quantity
Oil of white artemisia Value
Quantity
Other essential oils Value
Quantity
Citron essential oil Value
Quantity
Lavender oil Value
Quantity
Concentrated solutions Value
Quantity
Total Terpenoid products Value
Quantity
Water of orange flowers Value
Quantity
Other water solutions of essential oils Value
Quantity
Other aromatic oils Value
Quantity
Total (1000 DT)
Total (Tons)
DT = Tunisian Dinar (1DT = 1.02 US-$, average exchange rate in 1993-96)
Table (5): Tunisian exports of essential oils to importing countries
Countries Value (1000 Dt)/
Quantity (tons) 1993 1994 1995 1996
Algeria Value
Quantity
Germany Value
Quantity
Saudi Arabia Value
Quantity
Belgium Value
Quantity
Spain Value
Quantity
France Value
Quantity
Italy Value
Quantity
Libya Value
Quantity
United Kingdom Value
Quantity
Switzerland Value
Quantity
U.S.A. Value
Quantity
Taiwan Value
Quantity
Benin Value
Quantity
Senegal Value
Quantity
Jordan Value
Quantity
Others Value
Quantity
Total Value
Total Quantity
DT = Tunisian Dinar (1DT = 1.02 US-$, average exchange rate in 1993-96)
Medicinal plants of Tunisian flora
1. Agrimonia eupatoria
2. Agropyrum repens Boiss.
3. Ajuga iva L.
4. Alchemilla arvensis L.
5. Alnus glutinusa Gaertn.
6. Aloc vera L.
7. Althaea officinalis L.
8. Ammi majus L.
9. Ammi visnaga L.
10. Anenome coronaria L.
11. Anethum graveolens L.
12. Artemisia campestris L.
13. Artemisia herba alba Asso
14. Artemisia vulgaris L.
15. Asparagus officinalis L.
16. Asteriscus pygmaeus Coss.
17. Astragalus armatus Will.
18. Astragalus caprinus L.
19. Ballota hirsuta Murb.
20. Bellis annua L.
21. Borago officinalis Benth.
22. Brassica nigra Coss.
23. Calendula arvensis L.
24. Calmintha officinalis Monch
25. Capparis spinosa L.
26. Capsella bursa pastoris L.
27. Carthamus tinctorius L.
28. Centaurea calcitrapa L.
29. Centaurea cyanus L.
30. Centaurea nicaeensis All.
31. Centaurium umbellatum Beck.
32. Ceratonia siliqua L.
33. Chenopodium album L.
34. Cichorium intybus L.
35. Cistus crispus L.
36. Citrullus colocynthis Schard.
37. Clematis flammula L.
38. Cleome arabica L.
39. Crataegus oxyacantha L.
40. Cupressus sempervirens L.
41. Cynara cardunculus L.
42. Cynoglossum cheirifolium L.
43. Cynomorium coccineum L.
44. Datura metel L.
45. Datura stramonium L.
46. Diplotaxis harra Boiss.
47. Dryopterx filix mas Schoot.
48. Ecballium elaterium L.
49. Equisetum telmateia Ehrh.
50. Erica multiflora L.
51. Erigeron canadensis L.
52. Euphorbia helioscopia L.
53. Ferula communis L.
54. Fraxinus angustifolia Vahl.
55. Fumaria officinalis L.
56. Geranium robertianum L.
57. Aucium corniculatum Curt.
58. Globularia alypum L.
59. Hedera helix L.
60. Hertia cheirifolia OK.
61. Hyosayamus albus L.
62. Hyoscyamus niger L.
63. Hypericum perforatum L.
64. Inula viscosa Ait.
65. Jasminum fruticans L.
66. Juglans regia L.
67. Juniperus oxycedrus Ball.
68. Juniperus phoenicea L.
69. Laurus nobilis L.
70. Lavandula dentata L.
71. Lavandula multifida L.
72. Lavandula stoechas L.
73. Linum usitatissimum ssp.
74. Lipidium sativum L.
75. Lippia citriodora Kunth.
76. Lithospermum arvense L.
77. Malva sylvestris L.
78. Mandragora autumnalis Spreng
79. Marrubium sp.
80. Matricaria aurea L.
81. Melilotus sp.
82. Melissa officinalis L.
83. Mentha aquatica L.
84. Mentha pulegium L
85. Mentha rotundifolia L.
86. Mentha viridis L.
87. Mercurialis annua L
88. Morus sp.
89. Myrtus communis L.
90. Nerium oleander L.
91. Nicautiana glauca Graham.
92. Nitraria tridentata Asch.
93. Origanum glandulosum Desf.
94. Origanum majorana L.
95. Papaver rhoeas L.
96. Papaver somniferum L.
97. Parietaria officinalis L.
98. Peganum harmala L.
99. Pergularia tomentosa L.
100. Periploca laevigata Ait.
101. Phlomis sp.
102. Pinus halepensis Miller.
103. Pistacia lentiscus L.
104. Pistacia terebinthus L.
105. Pituranthos scoparius Benth.
106. Plantago albicans L.
107. Plantago lanceolota L.
108. Plantago major L.
109. Plantago psyllium L.
110. Polygala sp.
111. Polyganum aviculare L.
112. Populus alba L.
113. Populus nigra L.
114. Quercus coccifera L.
115. Quercus ilex L.
116. Quercus suber L.
117. Reseda alba L.
118. Retama raetam Webb.
119. Rhamnus frangula L.
120. Rhus oxyacantha Schusb.
121. Ricinus communis L.
122. Rosa canina L.
123. Rosa gallica L.
124. Rosmarinus officinals L.
125. Ruscus aculeatus L.
126. Ruta Chalepensis L.
127. Ruta montana L.
128. Salix alba L.
129. Salvia officinalis L.
130. Salvia sclaraea L.
131. Sambuscus nigra L.
132. Scilla maritima L.
133. Solanum dulcamara L.
134. Solanum nigrum L.
135. Solanum sodomaeum L.
136. Solidago virga aurea L.
137. Sonchus tenerrimus L.
138. Stachys officinalis L.
139. Taraxacum officinalis Wigg.
140. Teucrium capitatum L.
141. Teucrium polium L.
142. Thymus capitatus L.
143. Thymus hirtus ssp algeriensis Boiss.
144. Urtica sp.
145. Valeriana tuberosa L.
146. Verbena officinalis L.
147. Viola odorata L.
148. Viola tricolor L.
149. Vitex agnus castus L.
150. Vitis vinifera L.
151. Zizyphus lotus L.
Essential oil plants of Tunisian Flora
1. Anethum graveolens L.
2. Apium graveolens L.
3. Calmintha officinalis L.
4. Carum carvi L.
5. Cuminum cyminum L.
6. Cupressus sempervirens L.
7. Foeniculum vulgare Mill
8. Jasminum fruticans L.
9. Juniperus oxycedrus L.
10. Juniperus phoenicea L.
11. Laurus nobilus L.
12. Lavendula multifida L.
13. Lavendula stoechas L.
14. Lavendula dentata L.
15. Lippia citriodora Kunth
16. Matricaria aurea L.
17. Matricaria pubescens Desf
18. Melissa officinalis L.
19. Mentha aquatica L.
20. Mentha pulegium L.
21. Mentha rotundifolia L.
22. Myrtus communis L.
23. Origanum glandulosum Desf
24. Origanum majorona L.
25. Pinus halepensis Mill
26. Pinus Pinaster Solland
27. Piturantos Scoparius Coss ofDur
28. Rosa canina L.
29. Rosmarinus officinalis L.
30. Ruta chalepensis L.
31. Ruta montana L.
32. Salvia Sclaraea
33. Salvia officinalis L.
34. Thymus capitatus L.
35. Thymus hirtus Willd
36. Thymus Vulgaris
37. Verbena officinalis L.
38. Viola odorata L
Alimentary Plants
1. Apium graveolens
2. Asparagus acutifolius.
3. Beta Vulgaris
4. Bunium incrassatum
5. Capparis spinosa
6. Ceratonia siliqua
7. Corchurus olitorius
8. Cynara cardunculus
9. Ficus carica
10. Malva sylvestris
11. Opuntia ficus indica
12. Oxalis cernua
13. Portulaca oleracea
14. Sonchus tenerrimus
15. Trefesia ivalispora
16. Ziziphus lotus
Plants used for spices
1. Allium roseum
2. Anethum graveolens
3. Carthamus tinctorius
4. Carum carvi
5. Coriandrum sativum
6. Cuminum cyminum
7. Foeniculum vulgare
8. Laurus nobilis
9. Lavandula multifida
10. Nigella sativa
11. Origanum majorona
12. Rosmarinus officinalis
13. Sinapsis alba
14. Thymus capitatus
Forage plants
1. Acacia radiana
2. Acacia tortilus
3. Anthyllus sericea lagasca Sp
4. Arthrophytum schimittianum
5. Asragalus tenuifolius
6. Atriplex halimus
7. Calligonum comosum
8. Ceratoniza siliqua
9. Dactylus glomerata
10. Ebenus pinnata
11. Gymnocarpos decander
12. Hedysarum carnosum
13. Lotus creticus
14. Medicago sativa L. ssp tenatina
15. Rhantherium suaveolens
16. Salsola vermiculata
17. Stipa parviflora
18. Stipa tenecissima
19. Teragnnolobus purpureus
20. Ziziphus lotus
Honey plants
1. Acacia cyanophylla
2. Alnus glutinosa
3. Arbutus unedo
4. Arbutus unedo
5. Artemisia herba alba
6. Borago officinalis
7. Clematis flammula
8. Erica arborea
9. Erica multiflora
10. Eucalyptus camaldulensis
11. Eucalyptus gomphocephala
12. Genista tricuspidata
13. Hedera helix
14. Lavandula stoechas
15. Lavandula stoechas
16. Melilotus macrocarpa
17. Opuntia ficus indica
18. Populus alba
19. Rosmarinus officinalis
20. Smilax aspera
21. Thymus capitatus
Plants used as a source for dyes
1. Lawsonia inermis L.
2. Punica granatum L.
3. Opuntia Ficus indica L.
4. Alkanna tinctoria Tausch.
5. Rubia tinctorium Bouquet.
Toxic plants
1. Atractylis gummifera L.
2. Atropa belladona L.
3. Bryonia dioica Jacq.
4. Citrullus colocyntis Schard
5. Datura stramonium L.Ecballium elaterium Rich.
6. Hyosyamus niger L.
7. Mercurialis annua L.
8. Nerium oleander L.
9. Ricinus communus L.
<section>8</section>
Rare plants of Socotra Island, Republic of Yemen
A. Majid, National Project Director of Forestry Development
FAO (GCP/YM/021)
INTRODUCTION
The flora of Socotra is famous world wide. More than 750 have been recorded to grow on the Island of which 250 species do not grow in other parts of the world.
IUCN published a book entitled the red book information on the most rare 200 plant species in the world. The following 7 rare species are found on Socotra island: Dirachma socotrana, Aloe squarrosa, Dendrosicyos socotranus, Taverniera sericophylla, Dorstenia gigas, Begonia socotrana, and Punica protopunica.
BOTANICAL DESCRIPTION AND GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF
THE MOST IMPORTANT PLANT SPECIES IN THE ISLAND
Punica Protopunica
A small tree that can reach a height of 3 meters. Its flowers are bright red and the fruit color changes from green to dark red when ripe. The tree grows all over the Island, mostly in single specimens.
Comiphora socotrana
A small deciduous tree with small serrate leaves which grows only in Socotra in hilly areas.
Comipora ornifolia
A medium size tree which reaches up to 8 meters. The fruits look like small grapes. It grows only in Socotra in hilly areas.
Boswellia ameero
A small tree with scaly bark, lobbed dark green leaves and bright red flowers. The tree is native to Socotra Island. It produces medium quality chewing gum.
Begonia Socotrana
This herb of global leaves and bright rose flowers, grows on the moist groves in the mountain areas of the Island. It is a very rare and valuable ornamental plant.
Aloe squarrosa
This type of Aloe is associated with Aloe perry . Leaves are white spotted and flowers are red.
This is also a very rare plant which grows only on mountainous areas on the north edge of the island.
Adenium obesum subsp. socotranum
This is a tree of swollen pole which produces abundant quantities of pale red flowers and is very poisonous.
Cephalocroton socotranus
A small tree which produces yellow flowers and exists only on Socotra's mountains. The wood is used for incense.
Dracaena cinnabari
This tree has a dense crown, pale yellow flowers and black fruits. It is native to Socotra Island only.
Dendrosicyos socotranus
This is one of the most famous trees in Socotra. It grows on the coastal plains and hills. It is the only tree in the Curbitaceae family.
Zizyphus spina - christi
This is a medium sized to tall tree of yellow edible, fruits. It is native to the Arab Peninsula.
Jatropha unicostata
This small tree has shiny green leaves and reaches up to 2 m high. It grows only on Socotra Island.
Euphorbia arbuscula
It is a leafless tree of erect stem and produces resinous exudates. The fruits are brown. The tree exists only on the coastal plains of Socotra.
Arthrocarpum qracile
It is a small tree that reaches maximum 3 m. The leaves are lobbed and the flowers are small and yellow. It grows only in Socotra.
Dorstenia gigas
This is a small fleshy plant with a swolllen bottle like stem. The leaves are dark green. It grows only in Socotra
Sterculia africana subsp Socotrana
This is one of the largest trees in Socotra. It grows on hills and is native only to the Island.
Croton socotranus
It is a tree which has a straight stem that reaches up to 3 m. It grows on coastal plains. It has a significant role in soil stabilization.
Maerua socotrana
This small tree of weeping branches has attractive white flowers.It grows on coastal plains and hills. It is native only to Socotra.
Aloe perryi
This fleshy cactus of orange and yellow flowers, grows only in Socotra, all over the Island.
<section>9</section>
SESSION 2
Product development and policy/institutional issues
NWFP production in the project villages in Turkey
(Beykavagi, Dulgerler, Kupluce)
E. Yazici, Assistant National Coordinator
FAO (GCP/INT/539/ITA)
INTRODUCTION
The project on "Forestry and Food Security in the Mediterranean and the Near East Region", (GCP/INT/539/ITA), covers three countries namely Syria, Jordan and Turkey. The first phase of the project commenced in 1992 and finished in 1995. The second phase terminated in 1998. Within the framework of its agreement with the Government of Italy, FAO is assisting in the implementation of the project. The contribution of the donor government (Italy) is estimated to be about 2.5 million US$. In Turkey, the villages of Beykavagi, Kupluce and Dulgerler in the Konya Province have been selected as project pilot villages.
The project aims to establish an integrated forest and range resource management approach in the three countries based on people's participation. The project promotes this approach through four main components:
* Testing different models in selected areas;
* Training the direct target groups in subjects like community forestry, agro-forestry, silvo-pastoralism, environment protection and resource management;
* Developing institutional support;
* Providing forestry extension.
The approach adopted in the second phase is both participatory, in terms of involving local communities with the aim of sharing responsibilities and benefits, and integrated, in so far as it emphasizes the multiple use of the resources as well as the interdisciplinary, interdepartmental character of the efforts needed. In order to ensure the participation of people in the conservation of natural resources, specific critical areas were selected as pilot sites where deterioration of the vegetation cover had already affected people's life directly. The approach adopted combines environmental conservation measures with the development of income earning activities in order that the local people can derive tangible benefits from the project.
In line with this strategy, the project gives priority to the NWFP as a way to increase the villagers' income and ensure sustainable utilization of the natural resources. Several activities related to the use and development of NWFP have been carried out in project pilot villages. These include development of fodder crops, fruit and nuts, seedlings, production of honey and mushrooms.
THE MOST IMPORTANT NWFP IN THE PROJECT AREA
Honey
The project area is placed between Central Anatolia, that has a semi-arid climate, and the Mediterranean region, characterized by a milder climate. Due to the existing diversity of climatic conditions, the project area contains very rich flora including trees and shrubs such as Pinus nigria, Juniperus sp., Quercus sp., Cedrus Libani, Pistacia terebinthus, Cistus lavrifolius and Prunus amygdalus, and herbs such as Salvia officinalis, Thymus Seryllum, Orchis anatolica, Rhus cotinus and Astragallus alepecuroides. These plants are important for bee-keeping activites. Honey production is supported by the project by supplying beehives and swarms of bees, seedlings of multipurpose trees such as Robinia pseudoacacia, seeds of Sainfoin and Hungarian wetch, and by giving regular training on the subject. Fruit and nut trees are being planted on terraces to provide suitable food for bees.
Cultivated and wild mushrooms
Some wild mushrooms, notably Terfezia boudieri, are frequently found and collected from the forest areas. Most of the wild mushrooms collected are consumed in the village households and the surplus is sold at the market both in fresh and dried form. Mushroom cultivation is supported by the project by supplying mushroom sacks, providing training on both cultivation techniques and wild mushroom harvesting techniques, and helping villagers to market their products.
Medicinal and aromatic herbs
Important medicinal and aromatic herbs include Rhus cariaia, Thymus seryllum, Salvia officinalis, Nepeta cataria and Cistus aurifolius. These plants are mostly used for traditional health treatment, making tea and flavouring dishes. Among these, Rhus cariaia and pistacia terebinthus seeds are collected in large amounts and have a market value. The project is supporting this activity by training the villagers, especially women and children.
Walnut (Juglans regia)
Walnuts grow abundantly in the project area. Its fruits, leaves, pericarp, roots, etc. are commonly used for aromatic, medicinal and industrial utilization purposes. In order to improve walnut growing in the project area, some seedlings, including grafted seedlings, have been planted in the marginal areas with the active participation of the villagers.
Almond (Prunus amygdalus)
Almond is one of the most important multipurpose trees growing in the region. Fruits of the tree are collected by the villagers while still green or after maturing and are sold on the market. In the project area, most of the harvest of almonds is used for household consumption.
Capparis spinosa
It can grow in dry and bare soils where agriculture crop growing is not profitable. The plant gives fruit in the first year. Villagers collect the green buds of the plant before blooming. They keep them in 20-23% salty water for preservation. The plant has been introduced as a new NWFP in the project area.
Rose hip (Rosa canina)
It is a low demanding species which grows easily even in poor and arid lands. It tends to grow along roadsides and is cultivated at the periphery of garden plots. Another important characteristic of this plant is that its fruit contains vitamins C, A and B, organic acids, tannin and saccharine. Villagers collect its fruits and use them for making fruit juices, marmalades, jams, nectars and syrups. The rest is sold on the market.
Pistachio (Pistacia terebinthus)
Villagers collect the fruits of the tree in the August-September period. After collection, the fruits are dried under the sun. The villagers also produce "pistachio oil" from its fruits. Terebentin chiotica (gum) can be obtained from its stem. Pistacia vera can be grafted on Pistacia terebinthus and it produces pistachio.
Sumac (Rhus cotinus)
This plant is resistant to poor soil and grows on hillsides to prevent soil erosion. The leaves and fruits are very rich in myrisetin, oil and organic acids. After collection, the leaves are dried and sold on the market. In industry, it is mainly used for processing of hides. Local people also use its leaves and fruits as medicine and spices.
Cistus laurifolius
Cistus can be cultivated in Pinus nigra ecosystems and controls soil erosion in areas where over grazing, especially goat grazing, is evident. Leaves and flowers of the plant are currently being collected locally by the villagers and utilized for traditional health treatments. It has potential to develop into a drug raw material to be traded.
Forage
Because of existing limited and degraded range areas, young shoots and leaves of trees such as Quercus sp. and Pinus nigra are used by the villagers for winter feeding when the other feeding resources run out. It can be said that roughly 70% of the goat feeding, and 30% of the sheep feeding needs are supplied from the forest areas.
ACTIONS CARRIED OUT FOR IMPROVING NWFP PRODUCTION IN THE PROJECT AREA
Training and Extension
The project community forestry expert and the woman issues expert regularly meet with the village groups, including young women and children, to discuss project activities and encourage greater participation. Some extension materials such as booklets, handouts, videotapes etc. have been prepared and delivered to the villagers by the project. Several workshops and in-service training sessions on mushroom cultivation, bee keeping, agro-forestry techniques etc. have also been organized under the project.
Material and supplies
In order to promote NWFP production in the project villages, materials such as beehives, mushroom sacks and seeds have been purchased and delivered to the villagers.
RESULTS OBTAINED
As Table (1) shows, honey and mushroom production have increased to a very satisfactory level. The total production of cultivated mushroom in the project area has reached 3 827 kg. The table also points out that the number of trees in walnut plantations has increased with the help of the project. Walnut production in the project villages in 1996 was 3 350 kg. The Ministry of Forestry has started to plant walnut trees in forestry sites. The same applies to almond, rose hip and Capparis sp. plantations. Training on harvesting and marketing techniques also supported the production of other NWFP.
The project also identified plants that naturally grow in the area, such as Tilia cordata, Pistacia terebinthus, Capparis spionza, Rosa canina, Prunus amygdalus, Rhus cotinus and Cistus laurifolius, as products with a potential for sustainable economic growth in the future.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Project level
NWFP play an important role as a source of income and food supply in addition to promoting the sustainable management of forest resources in the project area. NWFP activities are labour intensive with low capital requirements and are therefore well suited to the economic conditions of the villagers. Some specific recommendations can be summarized as follows:
1. It is recommended to involve rural women and children who are primary collectors of NWFP, in all aspects of NWFP management and trained in product marketing and value-added processing techniques.
2. It is recommended to establish cooperatives involved in the marketing of NWFP.
3. It is recommended to introduce domesticated rose hip varieties through controlled breeding of good varieties of almond and walnut to the projects area.
4. It is recommended to give more importance to Capparis sipinosa, as it is an effective erosion control plant and a good source of income source for villagers.
5. It is recommended to grow Melissa officinalis (Common balm), Salvia officinalis (sage) and Salvia triloba (Sage of West Anatolia) in nurseries and then transfer them to the project sites.
6. It is recommended to reduce uncontrolled harvesting of products through proper training and extension in order to achieve sustainable harvesting rates of the wild resources.
7. It is recommended to clearly define land tenure issues strengthen institutional support for sustainable management of forest resources.
Regional level
The Near East region is characterized by limited forest resources. Over the years, these resources have been degraded by overuse and misuse by humans and animals. The existing unfavourable environmental conditions also helped to aggravate this situation.
It is therefore important today to try and alleviate the pressure exerted by forest villagers on the natural resources. This can be achieved through the promotion of activities such as development of NWFP, agroforestry and community forestry which both help to conserve the environment and provide an alternative source of income to the forest dwellers. Regional cooperation in this respect is essential, and FAO has an important role to play in linking national efforts in this field, through, amongst other possibilities, the organization of regional meetings and projects.
Table (1) : NWFP production in the project villages in 1996.
NWFP
Estimated Total Production in the Villages
Utilization
of the
Products (*)
Beykavaoy
Dulgerier
Kuplice
Total (kg)
Honey 
H, S
Walnut (Junglans regia) 
H, S
Capparis sipinoza 
S
Cultivated Mushroom
Agaricus bisporus 
H, S
Wild Mushroom.
Terfezia boudieri and others 
Dried
H, S
Fresh
H, S
Rosa Canina (Rosa hip) 
H, S, A
Prunus amygdalus (Almond)
H, S
Pistacia terebinthus 
H
Medicinal and Aromatic plants
Salvia officinalis 
A
Nepeta cataria 
A
Thymus seryllum 
A
Tillia cordata 
A
Veronica cymbalaria 
A
Rubus fruticosus 
H
Orchis anatolica 
S
Rubus cotinus 
H, S, M
Rumex tuberosus 
H, S, M
Lactuca serriola 
H
Cistus laurifolius 
M
Verbascum pulverulentum 
A, M
Viscum album 
A, M
Onopardum illyricium 
A, M
Urtica diocia 
H, A, M
Portulaca oleracea 
H, S
Rumex obtusifolius 
H, S
Russella cestrum-elegans 
H, S, M
Atropa belladonna 
A, S, M
Posreiea butiminosa 
H
Prunus spinosa 
H
Ranunculus ticaria 
A, S
Astragatlus atepecuroldes
A, M
Malva silvestris 
H, S, M, A
S = Sold on the market
M = Used for treatment H = Household Consumption
A = Used for aromatic purposes
<title>Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants in the Near East - Proceedings of the </title>
Edible mushroom production in forest villages
of Turkey, Syria and Jordan
B. Cavalcaselle
INTRODUCTION
The FAO Project "Forestry and Food Security in the Mediterranean and the Near East Region" (GCP/INT/539/ITA), operating in Jordan, Syria and Turkey, is a long term programme which aims to achieve integrated resources management through the active participation of the local populations. The first phase of the project (1992-94) was funded by the Italian Government (2.599.000 USD), with an additional funding of 2.507.470 USD for the second period (1995- 97).
During it's first phase the project undertook action for the improvement of agroforestry, community forestry and NWFP activities in the three recipient countries. The results of both the consultancies and field observations show that, due to insufficient quantities of mushrooms in the project areas of Jordan and Syria, the collection of wild mushroom would not improve the income of the local populations in a substantial way.
However, since the primary objective of the project is to ensure food security for the rural populations, it was decided to evaluate the cultivation of Agaricus bisporus as a promising income generating activity for some of the project villages, located not only in Turkey, but also in Syria and Jordan. The selection of this species, instead of others, such as Pleurotus ostreatus and Pleurotus sayu cayu, depended on the fact that marketing of Agaricus bisporus is well organized and easier than marketing of Pleurotus ostreatus and other similar species.
THE STATUS OF UTILIZATION OF EDIBLE MUSHROOM SPECIES IN THE NATURAL FORESTS OF JORDAN, SYRIA AND TURKEY
The surveys carried out in the three countries generally showed that, due to lack of knowledge on wild mushroom species, the interest in edible mushrooms is relatively low in both Jordan and Syria. However, three specific species, Cantharellus cibarius, Boletus aereus and Morcchella esulenta, are very much appreciated by the local populations, although they can only be found for a very short period of the year. Agaricus campestris is also well known and frequently eaten, as is Lapiota procera. Another popular specie, the desert truffle, grows in all three countries in steppe areas, in symbiosis with Helianthemum racemosum and Cistus sp. Finally, two other species, belonging to the genus Tirmania and Terfezia (Ascomycetae), can be found in the project area. These are usually collected during March and April and sold in the local markets, as well as exported to other Arabic countries (Kuwait, United Arab Emirates, etc.).
The production and collection of wild mushrooms (Basidiomycetae) in Syria is mainly concentrated in native oak and pine forests located in the governorates of Lattakia, Tartous,
Hama, Idleb and Aleppo. According to the information gathered from the villagers themselves, it appears that the amount harvested is very limited. An exception to this general situation is the collection of Pleurotus ostreatus which is frequently found on Poplar stumps, especially in the plantations located along the Euphrates and Khabour rivers. About 4-5 tons of this mushroom are sold on the Aleppo market each year at 30-60 SYP/kg (1 SYP corresponds to 0.02 US-$) .
In Turkey, more data is available on wild species such as Boletus, Morchella, Lactarius and Cantharellus cibarius. According to Pacioni (1991), the production of Boletus, Morchella, Lactarius and Cantharellus Cibarius is very important for the country. Infact, about 22 tons of Boletus and 10.5 tons of Cantharellus were exported in 1989. These figures increased respectively to 730 tons and 160 tons in 1990. The main production areas are located in the Marmara and Black Sea regions (Kastamonu, Bursa, Bolu, Istanbul, Amasya, Giresun, Sinop, Balikesir, Zonguldag, Ordu, Artvin, Erzurum), but small quantities are also produced in South-West Anatolia (Mugla, Denizli, Antalya, Izmir, Isparta).
More recent surveys conducted in 1993 for a group of villages located in the Samsun, Erzurum and Sinop provinces showed that Cantharellus Cibarius, Morchella sp., Boletus edulis, Lactarius deliciosum and Russula delica were the species collected more frequently. The quantities collected and their estimated prices for a total of 14 villages located in the above provinces are summarized in Table (1). The fresh natural production of Boletus and Cantharellus cibarius is mainly exported to Italy, Germany and other European countries.
Other species, such as Lactarius delicious, L. sanguifluus and Vinosus, which live in symbiosis with Pinus sp., are mainly utilized in the Turkish domestic market. They can also be found in Syria and Jordan in Pinus brutia and P. halepensis forests. Pacioni (1991) mentions that the officially recorded production of these species in 1989 was almost 37 tons. However, the actual figures are much higher because a large share of the natural production is sold in village markets or directly consumed by the family of the collector and therefore is not recorded. Another wild mushroom which grows in Turkey is Morchella. Its production occurs mainly in Denizli, Mugla and the Black Sea region. More than 47 tons have been reported as being produced and traded in 1989 (Pacioni, 1991). Finally, P. ostreatus, in North Anatolia, P. ferulae in the Izmir region and P. eringyi in South Anatolia are traditionally collected by the local villagers from Poplar stumps or trunks. Officially, about 6
tons of fresh products were traded during 1989. Artificial production of such species, both on Poplar trunks or in inoculated straw bags, is increasing. The spores are produced locally in specialized laboratories.
THE ROLE OF THE FAO PROJECT IN PROMOTING
EDIBLE MUSHROOM COLLECTION AND CULTIVATION IN THE FOREST VILLAGES
The cultivation of Agaricus bisporus was introduced first in Turkey and then extended to Jordan and Syria. The results obtained in the three countries are summarized in Table (2), (3) and (4). The methodology initially adopted in Syria for Agaricus cultivation was different from that applied in Turkey and Jordan. As a result of this activity, Agaricus now continues to be cultivated by villagers in Syria and Turkey without project support.
Jordan, with its characteristically higher temperatures in May and June, is less suitable for Agaricus cultivation. Therefore the perspectives of increasing the villagers income level through such activity in Jordan are less favorable than in Syria and Turkey.
CONCLUSIONS
From the results achieved up to now, conclusions on the future potentialities for edible mushroom cultivation in the three countries can be summarized as follows:
1. The cultivation of Agaricus bisporus at the village level is a suitable way for increasing the income of villagers in the three countries.
2. Other species belonging to the genus Pleurotus and Lentinus could also be cultivated with satisfactory results. More information about cultivation techniques of Pleurotus, Lentinus and Agaricus bisporus can be found in Rambelli (1985) and Quimio et Al (1990).
3. A network for exchanging reciprocal information on the results achieved with different methodologies and edible mushroom species should be developed.
4. Every country should develop a clear policy aimed at the sustainable exploitation of wild mushroom and truffles in order to increase the villagers' income and well-being. This should include providing training courses for the villagers on identification, collection, culinary characteristics and cultivation of the potentially important species.
REFERENCES
Agaoglu, et al. (1993). A Preliminary Inventory of Non-Wood Forest Products in Certain Villages of Vezirkporu, Duragan and Uzndere districts. GCP/TUR/SWI Consultancy Report. Turkey.
Chang, S. T. (1978). Volvariella Volvacea. The Biology and Cultivation of Edible Mushrooms. Academic Press. N Y.
FAO. (1983). Growing Mushrooms: Oyster Jew's Ear and Straw Mushroom Regular Program. RAPA, No. 75. Bangkok.
Guler, M. (1994). The Status of Past and Current, Edible Mushroom Cultivation in Konya: Its problems and recommendations. FAO project, GCP/INT/539/ITA, Consultancy Report for Turkey.
Najjab, N. (1996). Mushroom Cultivation in Forest Villages. GCP/INT/539/ITA. Consultancy Report for Jordan.
Pacioni, G. (1991). TCP/TUR/8852 (T). Consultancy Report. FAO, Rome.
Quimio, T. H et al. (1990). Technical Guidelines for Mushroom Growing in the Tropics. Plant Production and Protection paper No. 106. FAO, Rome.
Rambelli, A. (1985). Manual on Mushroom Cultivation. Plant Production and Protection Paper No. 43. FAO, Rome.
Wassim, A.H. (1994). Rapport sur les Produits Forestiers Non-Ligneux dans les Forêts Syriénnes. FAO project, CP/INT/539/ITA, Consultancy Report for Syria.
Table (1) : Estimated quantities (kg) and value (US$) of mushrooms collected in 14 forest villages located in Turkey (1990).
Villages Cantha-rellus cibarius
(kg) Boletus
edulis
(kg) Morchella
sp.
(kg) Lactarius sp.
(kg) Russula
sp.
(kg) Armillaria
mellea
(kg) Agricus sp.
(kg) Others
(kg)
Beyardic
Ortakoy
Kirencik
Hacimahmutlu
300 (x)
Koseli
Camliyainac
Altincanak
Dikyar
Karakoy
Sofular
Saridibek
Tahtakopru
Daricayalani
Daricay
Total
Kg. 26 095
Value
US$ 106 680
Source : Agaoglu, 1991
The value in US$ is calculated according to the TL/USD exchange rate in October 1990.
Table (2) : Mushrooms produced by the project in Turkey during the first phase (1992-94) in the Konya province
Period: 19.05 - 12.08.92
Period: 20.09 - 29.11.93
Period: 24.06 - 30.11.94
Village 
Fam
Bags
Total (kg)
Kg/
Bag
Fam
Bags
Total
(kg)
Kg/
bag
Fam
Bags
Total (kg)
Kg/
Bag
Eldes 
Buluck 
Beykavagi 
Bagricurt 
Kucukmushine
Total 
Fam: No. of families provided with compost sacs inoculated with Agricus bisporus, and techincal assistance from the project.
Bags: Plastic sacs filled with 12 kg of compost inoculated with Agricus bisporus and covered with casing soil.
Table (3) : Mushroom produced by the project in Jordan during 1994 - 96
Production 1994 Production 1995 Production 1996
District Village Fam Bags Total (kg) Kg/
bag Fam Bags Total (kg) Kg/
bag Fam Bags Total (kg) Kg/
bag
Jerash Sakeb 1 10 24 2.4 5 245 312 1.3 5 250 210 0.9
Majdal 2 20 57 2.8 5 255 425 1.7
Debbim 1 10 29 29 3 180 1.2
Reymoon 1 10 18 1.8
Ketteh 1 10 19 1.9
Total 5 6 60 147 2.5 10 500 737 1.5 8 400 390 1.0
Ajloun Eshtafeua 1 10 22 2.2 5 200 250 1.3
Rasson 5 250 194 0.8
Ajloun 1 10 10 1.0
Smaidieh 2 10 22 2.2
Total 5 5 50 68 1.4 10 450 444 1.0
Salt Ira
Yarqa
Bayoda 1 10 29 2.9 5 275 165 0.6
Eleyqoon 2 20 50 2.5 5 235 105 0.5
Subeihi 1 10 28 2.8
Total 5 4 40 107 2.7 10 510 270 0.5
Total 15 15 150 322 2.2 20 950 1181 1.2 18 910 660 0.7
Fam: No. of families provided with compost sacs inoculated with Agaricus bisporus, with the related casing soil and techincal assistance from the project.
Bags: Plastic sacs filled with 12 kg of compost inoculated with Agaricus bisporus and covered with casing soil.
Table (4) : Mushrooms produced by the project in Syria during the period 1995 -96
1995 Production
1996 Production ^(3)
Province
Village 
Fam
Bags
Total (kg)
Kg/bag
Fam
Bags
Total\ (kg)
Kg/bag
Qunaitra
Trunje 
Total 
Aleppo
Maarasat Al-Khatib
Total 
Lattakia
Al-Fajer 
Al-Zeitounah
Total 
Note: The market price in Syria ranges between 2 and 3 US$/kg.
1. Produced locally after re-inoculating the compost prepared by the villagers with new spawn kindly supplied by the consultant.
2. Estimated production.
3. 50% of the cost was supported by the villagers.
<title>Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants in the Near East - Proceedings of the </title>
<section>1</section>
The cultivation of Jatropha curcas in Egypt
M. Reyadh, Under Secretary of State for Afforestation
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation
INTRODUCTION
The "Greening" of Egypt represents a huge challenge for the government. Afforestation has a very important role in meeting this challenge. Several initiatives have been taken in recent years in different parts of the country to promote afforestation. The Central Administration for Afforestation (MOALR) is now taking up cultivation of Jatropha curcas in many sites of the country, especially in the South. This paper describes the botanical features and potential uses of Jatropha curcas for the future.
BOTANICAL FEATURES
It is a small tree or shrub with smooth gray bark, which exudes a whitish colored, watery, latex when cut. Normally, it grows between three and five meters in height, but can attain a height of up to eight or ten meters under favourable conditions.
Leaves
It has large green to pale-green leaves, alternate to sub-opposite, three-to five-lobed with a spiral phyllotaxis.
Flowers
The petiole length ranges between 6-23 mm. The inflorescence is formed in the leaf axil. Flowers are formed terminally, individually, with female flowers usually slightly larger and occurs in the hot seasons. In conditions where continuous growth occurs, an unbalance of pistillate or staminate flower production results in a higher number of female flowers.
Fruits
Fruits are produced in winter when the shrub is leafless, or it may produce several crops during the year if soil moisture is good and temperatures are sufficiently high. Each inflorescence yields a bunch of approximately 10 or more ovoid fruits. A three, bi-valved cocci is formed after the seeds mature and the fleshy exocarp dries.
Seeds
The seeds become mature when the capsule changes from green to yellow, after two to four months from fertilization. The blackish, thin shelled seeds are oblong and resemble small castor seeds.
Ecological Requirements
Jatropha curcas grows almost anywhere - even on gravelly, sandy and saline soils. It can thrive on the poorest stony soil. It can grow even in the crevices of rocks. The leaves shed during the winter months form mulch around the base of the plant. The organic matter from shed leaves enhance earth-worm activity in the soil around the root-zone of the plants, which improves the fertility of the soil.
Regarding climate, Jatropha curcas is found in the tropics and subtropics and likes heat, although it does well even in lower temperatures and can withstand a light frost. Its water requirement is extremely low and it can stand long periods of drought by shedding most of its leaves to reduce transpiration loss. Jatropha is also suitable for preventing soil erosion and shifting of sand dunes.
USES OF JATROPHA
Oil Crop
Analysis of the Jatropha seed shows the following chemical composition:
- Moisture 6.20 %
- Protein 18.00 %
- Fat 38.00 %
- Carbohydrates 17.00 %
- Fiber 15.50 %
- Ash 5.30 %
The oil content is 35 - 40% in the seeds and 50 - 60% in the kernel. The oil contains 21% saturated fatty acids and 79% unsaturated fatty acids.There are some chemical elements in the seed which are poisonous and render the oil not appropriate for human consumption.
Raw material
Oil has a very high saponification value and is being extensively used for making soap in some countries. Also, the oil is used as an illuminant as it burns without emitting smoke.
Medicinal plant
The latex of Jatropha contains an alkaloid known as "jatrophine" which is believed to have anti-cancerous properties. It is also used as an external application for skin diseases and rheumatism and for sores on domestic livestock. In additon, the tender twigs of the plant are used for cleaning teeth, while the juice of the leaf is used as an external application for piles. Finally, the roots are reported to be used as an antidote for snake-bites.
Raw material for dye
The bark of Jatropha curcas yields a dark blue dye which is used for colouring cloth, fishing nets and lines.
Soil enrichment
Jatropha oil cake is rich in nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium and can be used as organic manure.
Feed
Jatropha leaves are used as food for the tusser silkworm.
Insecticide/ pesticide
The seeds are considered anthelimintic in Brazil, and the leaves are used for fumigating houses against bed-bugs. Also, the ether extract shows antibiotic activity against Styphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli.
Alternative to Diesel
It is significant to point out that, the non-edible vegetable oil of Jatropha curcas has the requisite potential of providing a promising and commercially viable alternative to diesel oil since it has desirable physicochemical and performance characteristics comparable to diesel. Cars could be run with Jatropha curcas without requiring much change in design.
The chemical analysis of Jatropha curcas oil is given in Table (1).
ITEM
VALUE
Acid value 
Saponification value 
Iodine value 
Viscosity (31^oC) "Fatty acid"
Palmitic acid % 
Stearic acid % 
Oleic acid % 
Linoleic acid % 
Other acids % 
The comparison of properties of Jatropha oil and standard specifications of diesel oil are shown in Table (2):
Specification Standard specification of Jatropha oil Standard specification of Diesel
Specific gravity 
Flash point 
240/110 °C
50 °C
Carbon residue 
0.15 or less
Cetane value 
50.0 up
Distillation point 
295 °C
350 °C
Kinematics Viscosity
50.73 cs
2.7 cs up
Sulpher % 
1.2 % or less
Calorific value 
9 470 kcal/kg
10 170kcal/kg
Pour point 
8 °C
10 °C
Colour 
4 or less
The seeds were imported from India five years ago, and were cultivated in the southern part of Egypt and irrigated by treated sewage water. It is worth mentioning that the cultivation has been very successful. It is now producing seeds, and the next step consists in studying the best means of making use and of its oil product.
Table (3) : Physical and chemical properties of diesel fuel and Curcas oil
PROPERTY CURCAS OIL DIESEL OIL
Viscosity (cp) (30 °C) 
Speciflc gravity (15 °C/4 °C)
Solidfying Point (°C) 
Cetane Value 
Flash Point (°C) 
Carbon Residue (%) 
Distillation (°C) 
Sulfur (%) 
Acid Value 
Saponification Value 
Iodine Value^3 
Refractive Index (30°C) 
REFERENCES
Anonymous. A note on Jatropha Curcas (pinhao)
Banerjee, A,K. (1989). Shrubs in Tropical Forest Ecosystems, Examples from India. World Bank Technical Paper Number 103.
Calvin, M.(1985). Fuel Oils from Higher plants: Prepared for the U.S. Department of Energy.
Shri Ashouk K. Raina, BAIF, PUNE . Jatropha Curcas - A fence against energy crisis
Norman Jones and Joan H. Miller. Jatropha Curcas - A multi-purpose species for problematic sites. The World Bank.
Jatropha Curcas
- Multipurpose plants and Source of Energy for Future by, Edgar Munch and Joachim Kiefer (GTZ).
Oil Gloom To Oil Boom; Jatropha curcas by, Vinayak Patel and Kawarjit Singh, Agro-Forestry Federation, Maharashtra, India.
<section>2</section>
Gum arabic in Sudan: production and
socio-economic aspects
H. O. Abdel Nour
INTRODUCTION
The Sudan is the largest country in Africa covering a land area of 2 506 800 km^2. It stretches in length over 2 000 kilometers, from 3' 30 to 23 degrees north, and over 1 800 km in breadth, from 12' 30 to 39 degrees East. Its great length gives the Sudan a unique range of ecological systems. It extends from dry, sandy desert in the north and north central regions through the thorny low trees of the low rainfall savannah in the central belt, to the broadleaf high rainfall savannah and lofty closed canopy tropical forests in the southern parts of the central belt and in the south. There is a variation of clay soils in the east and sandy soils in the west containing remarkable variety of flora.
In 1993 the population was 26.41 million. The bulk of the population (78%) lives in the North, particularly in the central belt, and 22% live in the South.
THE NATURAL FORESTS IN SUDAN
Harrison and Jackson (1958) recognize five major divisions in the natural forests in the Sudan.
The Desert
Desert conditions prevail over the northern parts of Sudan where the rainfall does not exceed 75 mm per annum. Vegetation is virtually absent except along water courses and as ephemeral herbs and grasses which appear soon after the rare showers.
The Semi Desert
The semi-desert extends from East to West in the area immediately south of the desert and stretches to the northern central parts of the Northern States. The rainfall varies from 75 mm to 300 mm increasing southward and westward and is unreliable. There are various types of skeletal desert soils varying from clays to desert gravel pavements and sands. The vegetation is a mixture of grasses and herbs with occasional bushes that grow along channels. The most abundant species are Acacia tortilis, replaced or associated with A. raddiana, Ziziphus spina-christi, Capparis decidua and Balanites aegyptiaca along water channels.
Savannah Woodland
This type of woodland extends across the central belt and covers most of the Southern States. Rainfall varies from 300 mm to over 1500 mm. The savannah woodland is divided into two main zones; the low rainfall savannah (300 mm to 800 mm) and the high rainfall savannah (over 800 mm per annum).
The low rainfall savannah has principally heavy dark clay soils in the east, dominated by thorny acacias such as Acacia mellifera and Acacia seyal, A.senegal and Balanites aegyptiaca. Further south, where the soil tends to be lighter, with frequent rocky fragments, species change to broadleaf such as Combretum hartmannianum, Anogeissus leiocarpus and Terminalia brownii in mixture with Acacias. West of the Nile, the soil changes abruptly although the same species exist. In addition, the following broadleaf species grow in this area: Combretum hartmannianum, C. cordofanum, Terminalia laxiflora, Gauria senegalensis, Dalbergia melanxylon, Adansonia digitata, Tamarindus indica, Albizzia sericocephela, Sclerocarya birrea and Prosopis africana.
Acacia senegal, the source of gum arabic, is the second export commodity of the country. It grows principally in the Western Nile belt where it is mixed with Acacia seyal (a source of lower grade gum arabic) and with Balanites aegyptiaca which grows mostly in the southern parts of the region.
The High Rainfall Savanna covers the southern parts of the Northern States and the whole of the Southern States. The soil is mostly laterite and red loam. The tree species are predominantly broadleaf comprising some valuable timber species such as Khaya senegalensis, Isoberlinia doka, Daniellia oliveri, Afzelia africana, Anogeissus leiocarpus and various species of Combretum and Terminalia. Where the rainfall exceeds 1500 mm, there are closed tropical forests containing valuable species such as Khaya grandifoliola and Entandrophragma angolensis.
The Flood Region
The region lies adjacent to the White Nile in the central parts of the Upper Nile States, the northern and western parts of Equatoria and Bahr el Ghazal States in the South. The region is is permanently flooded by the White Nile in the areas adjacent to the channel and temporarily flooded by rains in the areas further from the river. Trees exist only in some isolated higher areas, composed mostly of thorny acacias.
Mountain vegetation
There are four mountain areas in the Sudan. These areas are the ranges of the Imatong and Dongatana, the Didinga in the South of Equatoria State, the Red Sea hills in the East, and Jebal in the West of Dafur State. The mountain ranges in Equatoria contain the usual tropical forest Marra species plus some coniferous species such as Podocarpus melanjianus and Juniperus procera in addition to Olea hochstetteri and O. chrysophylla. The latter also grow in Jebal Marra and the Red Sea hills.
PRODUCTS AND BENEFITS FROM SUDAN'S FORESTS
The forestry sector contributes more than 10% of the GDP, besides the indirect benefits of environmental protection, soil amelioration, more opportunities for rural population etc.
Perhaps the most tangible benefit derived by the people of Sudan from their forests is fuel wood (fire wood and charcoal).
WOOD PRODUCTS
According to a recently conducted survey (Forest Products Survey, 1996), Sudan consumed five million tons of oil equivalent in energy, 77.8% of which was in the form of wood and charcoal, 8.4% from other biomass, 6.5% as pertroleum products and 7.3% as hydroelectric power.
NWFP FROM SUDAN'S FORESTS
Gum arabic
The most important NWFP in the Sudan is gum arabic which is an exudate of Acacia senegal known as gum hashab and A. seyal. Gum arabic is the second export commodity and hard currency earner as shown in Table (2). In this respect, Sudan commands over 80% of the world's gum arabic production and trade. Both species spread naturally in the central belt of the low rainfall savannah where they exist in pure or mixed stands, in the clay plains in the East and sandy soils in the West. Besides its significant economic role for the country, gum arabic plays an important part in rural life, providing a steady income to rural families especially in dry years when crops fail.
In an attempt to protect gum users against production fluctuations, Sudan has embarked on a steady A. senegal planting programme since the late fifties. From the early nineties, A. senegal plantations make up more than 50% of the annual afforestation/reforestation programmes with an annual average of 60 000 feddans (25200 ha). The total area of A. senegal planted in 1996 was 669291 feddans (281102 ha).
Over the years Sudan has developed a complete protocol of gum arabic husbandry from seed collection through nursery techniques, planting, tending, tapping, collection, cleaning, grading, processing and marketing.
Gum arabic production
Gum arabic from the Sudan is a product of Acacia senegal and A. seyal species. Acacia senegal var. senegal is the only variety which grows in the Sudan and is the main source of commercial gum arabic (hashab). On the other hand, both varieties of Acacia seyal i.e. var. seyal and var. fistula are found in Sudan. The former is characterised by normal spines and green, white or red bark while var. fistula is characterised by inflated spines (ant-gallsand a whitish bark. Both varieties produce a commercial gum referred to as "talha" (Chikami et al 1997).
Production of gum arabic is concentrated in the "gum belt" an area of central Sudan roughly between latitudes 10^o and 14^o North. Two areas outside these borders are in the north east (Faw-Gedared-Kassala) and in the south east along the Blue Nile/Upper Nile border.
The Gum belt's gross area is estimated to cover 520,000 square kilometers, roughly one fifth of Sudan's total area. It spans over 12 states: Western Darfur, N. Darfur, S. Darfur, N. Kordofan, W. Kordofan, S. Kordofan, White Nile, Upper Nile Jonglie, Sennar, Blie Nile and Gedaref. The belt covers parts of the clay and sandy plains. The sandy plains are in the first seven states and the clay plains are in the latter five states.
Management aspects
Gum hashab in Sudan is derived from both natural stands and plantations and collected by tapping of the trees. Gum talha, on the other hand, comes mostly from natural stands and through natural exudation. Managemennt of the resources for gum production falls into one of two systems: hashab owner or hashab renter.
Regeneration of Acacia senegal resources
Acacia senegal occurs naturally in pure stands on the sandy soils of Kordofan and Darfur, in rotational bush-fallow cultivation system and in areas where no cropping activity is practised. It also grows naturally in the central clay plains of central and eastern Sudan, through rarely in pure stands. The natural regeneration of Acacia senegal comes mainly from the natural seed fall.
Artificial regeneration of hashab is carried out both by direct sowing of seeds and transplanting of seedlings. More than 50% of gum arabic produced in Sudan is obtained from plantations or naturally regenerated stands. Plantations and naturally regenerated stands are owned by individuals, government or cooperative bodies. A. senegal also regenerates by coppicing.
Potential of gum arabic production in the Sudan
The elements necessary for quantifying the production potential of gum include land use trends, areas currently under A. senegal and A. seyal, tree densities, and current production trends.
Recent estimates of production potential indicate that it is possible to double Sudan's current production (i.e. to 50,000-80,000 tonnes) from existing natural tree stocks, plantations raised through afforestation over the last decade, and plantations to be established up through the year 2000.
Constraints and opportunities of improving management of the resource
Beside the drought spells, perhaps the most important man-influenced constraint which faced the gum production was the reduction of forest cover in the gumbelt of Sudan. This was brought about by the extensive expansion in agriculture for crop production, particularly mechanized rainfed farming and omittance of the hashab tree from the traditional tree fallow system, influenced by the declining prices of gum as compared to those of such crops as sesame and groundunts.
A number of polices, legislation programmes and projects were implemented by the Sudanese Government to redress the situation. These brought the reduction of forest cover to a halt, reversed the process and helped to increase the number of gum Acacia trees substantially.
PRODUCTION, TRADE AND MARKETING, SUPPLY AND DEMAND TRENDS
Production
In modern times, recorded Gum arabic production during the 1950s averaged just over 40 000 tonnes/year. Since then, there have been fluctuations in production. Five year annual averages for the period 1960 - 94 are given in Table (1).
The data in Table (1) shows a drastic drop in production (more than half) in the last decade compared to that in the 1960s (when it averaged over 84,000 tonnes/year).
Table (1) : Gum arabic production in Sudan. (5- year annual averages), 1960-94 (tonnes).
Annual
Average
Gum hashab
Gum talha
Source: Gum Arabic Company (GAC), Sudan
Exports
The gum export trade is given in Table (2). Exports of gum arabic from Sudan in volume and value for the period 1988-94 are given in Table (3). Gum hashab is separated from gum talha.
Table (2) The Gum Arabic Export Trade (Sudan)
Years
A. senegal
Tons
A. seyal
Tons
Total Gum Exports
Tons
Value
(USD)
Table (3) : Gum arabic: exports from Sudan, 1988-94 (tons; US $ millions)
Total 
FOB value 
Gum hashab
Gum talha 
Source: Gum arabic Company (GAC), Sudan
The biggest international market collectively is in Europe. Total recorded imports of Sudanese gum arabic into the European Community are given in Table (4) for 1988-93.
Table (4) : Gum arabic: imports into the European Community, 1988-93 (tons)
Total 
France 
UK 
Italy 
Germany 
Denmark 
Belgium/Lux
Spain 
Greece 
Netherlands
Portugal 
Ireland 
Source: Eurostat.
Production methodologies
Gum collection (tapping)
Gum hashab is collected from A. senegal by tapping, whereas all gum talha (from A. seyal) is collected as a result of natural exudation. Tapping begins when the trees are just starting to shed their leaves. Ore traditional methods of tapping involved making small incisions into the tree with an axe which, over the years was replaced with a specially designed tool. After this superficial injury, tears of gum form on the exposed surfaces and are left to dry and harden. After five weeks the first collection of gum is made, with further collections from the same trees at approximately 15-day intervals until the end of February, up to five or six collections in total.
Post-harvest handling
At present little cleaning or sorting is undertaken by the producer (collector) of the gum. Some degree of cleaning and sorting may be undertaken by small village traders to whom the producer sells his gum, but it is usually undertaken by the large traders after it has been sold and prior to selling it to the Gum Arabic Company (GAC). If the GAC buys the gum, it cleans and sorts at its own warehouses in the regional centres of the gum belt.
On arrival at the GAC depot at Port Sudan, every consignment of gum hashab is recleaned, sorted and graded in preparation for export.
Grades and prices
The outputs from the cleaning and sorting operation are graded and sold according to the following main designations: Hand Picked Selected (HPS); Cleaned; Siftings; Dust; Red.
Gum talha was formerly sold only as one grade (cleaned). However, from 1995 it is cleaned and sorted into three grades: Super; Standard clean; Siftings.
Constraints and opportunities of improving production and marketing
Security of supply is a major concern of end-users of gum arabic. Sudan's large planting programme of Acacia (principally A. senegal) is an important step in increasing the gum arabic resource. The size of the A. seyal resource in Sudan gives the greatest opportunity for increased production to gum talha.
Maintenance of high levels of production of gum arabic, requires the cooperation of the producer, to provide more attractive crops or products. If high production levels can be maintained, and if the market does not acquire the extra gum immediately, the possibility of creating buffer stocks to safeguard against years of low production is possible.
Constraints and opportunities for improving quality and quality control
As already mentioned, problems of quality and quality control in Sudan are minimal. However, there is still room for further improvement. First, it is essential to know whether gum arabic produced from the two soil types - the sandy soil and clay soil - have different intrinsic qualities. There is good human resource capacity in Sudan in the area of quality and quality control; at the University of Khartoum, Sudan University for Science & Technology (SUST) and GAC laboratory at Port Sudan.
Gum production is a well-established activity. All appears to be favourable for its sustainable growth including policies, legislation, institutions, resource management and development and quality control. However, certain aspects such as productivity and chemistry still require further research.
Gum talha (A. seyal) has intrinsically different properties, which make it suited to many of the application for which hashab is used. Collection and cleaning practices in Sudan have traditionally kept the two types of gum separate.
The progressive drop in world consumption since the seventies, brought about by fluctuations in production and price, put the gum trade in a critical situation. The corrective measures undertaken by Sudan since the early eighties, particularly restocking of the gum belt, expansion of growing stock and prices, encouraged production to rise to the levels of the sixties.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Cooperation and support are needed in the following areas:
1. Research on aspects including inter alia breeding, selection, productivity and chemistry of gum producing trees.
2. Expansion of the resources through restocking of areas in both sandy soils and plains covered by such activities.
3. Finance and management of buffer stock in Sudan and in consumer countries.
REFERENCES
Chikami, B.N., Casadei, E., Coppen, J.J.W., Abdel Nour, H.O. and Cesareo, D. (1997). A Reivew of production, Markets and Quality Control of Gum Arabic in Africa. FAO. Technical Cooperation Programme. TCP/RAF/4557. Rome.
Harrison and Jackson. (1958). Ecological Classification of the Vegetation of the Sudan.
<section>3</section>
Medicinal, aromatic and toxic plants in Arab countries
H. M. El-Hennawy, Plant Production Expert
AOAD
INTRODUCTION
Many Arab countries are principally made up of desert land except the savannah belt in the Sudan, and other areas that have a Mediterranean climate. The variety of flora depends on the amount, distribution and fluctuations in rainfall. In vast areas, rainfall is erratic, insufficient and less than l00 mm. However, some areas are suitable for rainfed agriculture. The wide variation in rainfall has resulted in diverse ecological habitats, ranging from barren deserts to moist habitats, including temperate forests in the North to tropical forests in the South as well as semi-arid and savannah habitats.
Medicinal, aromatic and toxic plants play a significant role in the life of people and are present in innumerable forms. These plants are used as raw materials for medicines, cosmetics, perfumery, insecticides and in the food industry. The most common species of aromatic plants in the region are roses, lemon grass, peppermint and eucalyptus. A number of medicinal plants also produce essential oils as well as being used for perfumery e.g. Petroselinum sativum, Daucus carota, Anerthum graveolens and Pimpinella anisum, etc.
Desert encroachment, urban expansion and excessive grazing has resulted in the depletion of plant resources of the region. The Arab Organization for Agricultural Development (AOAD) carried out two studies on the medicinal, aromatic and toxic plants in Arab countries. Of 814 recorded species, 23 are used in pharmaceutical preparation, 55 in cosmetics and perfumery, 34 in food industries and 10 as insecticides.
COMMON MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS OF THE REGION
Family: Umbelifera
Petroselinum sativum, Apium graveolen, Anethum graveolens, Daucus carota, Cuminum cyminum, Carum carvi, Pimpinella anisum, Foeniculum vulgare, Coriandrum sativum. Volatile oils from seeds and fruits of some of the aforementioned plants are used for stomach disorders, flatulence and against kidney stones. Ammi majus is used for skin ailments, and also for cosmetics.
Family: Legunimosae
Cassia aculifolia (laxative);Glycyrhiza glabra (laxative, stomach ulcers);Tamarindus indica (cool drink, laxative, malaria); Trigonella foenugraecum (tonic, pepesia); Acacia spp. (dye, gum, perfumes); Cyamopsis tetragonolooba (anti-diabetic).
Family : Compositae
Artemisia absinthum; Matricaria chamomillia (tonic, stimulant and cosmetics); Silybum marianum (skin ailments, hepatoprotective).
Family : Solanaceae
Atropa belladona (anti-inflammatory, bronchial asthma); Datura stirmonium (prophylaxis); Hyoscyamus muticus (anaesthetic); Capsicum annuum (anti-rheumatic, anti-inflammatory, spices).
Family : Gamine
Agropyron repens (laxative); Arando donax; Cymbopogon citratus (perfumes, anti-worm).
Family : Rosaceae
Rosa damoscana (perfumes, cosmetics).
Family : Liliaceae
Collchicum autumnate (sedative, anti-inflammatory); Urginea maritima (cardiac ailments); Aloe vera (healing of wounds, cosmetics).
Family : Rutaceae
Citrus sp. (cosmetics, perfumes, pectin)
Family : Labiatae
Mentha pulegium (perfumes); Origanum vulare (anti-flatulant, anti-rheumatic and healing of wounds); Rosmarinus officinals (tonic, kidney diseases, food industry, cosmetics); Ocimum basilicum (cold diseases, prophyloxis, tooth diseases, perfumes, cosmetics).
Family : Curciferae
Brassica alba (lumbago, rheumatoid arthritis).
Family : Euphorbiacea
Ricinus communis (laxative); Croton tiglium (laxative).
Family : Oleaceae
Olea europea (bronchial diseases); Jasminum grandflorum (cosmetics, perfumes, flavors).
Family : Malvacea
Hibiscus sabdariffa (hypotensive, flavors, drinks).
Family : Scrophulariaceae
Digitalis purpurea (cardiac drugs).
Family : Punicaceae
Punica granatum (anti-diarrheic, dye).
Family : Rhamnaceae
Rhamnus purshianus(laxative).
Family : Zygophyllaceae
Guaiacum officinale (laxative and stimulant); Peganum hanala (headache).
Family : Ranunculaceae
Nigella staiva (chest diseases, diuretic).
Family : Iridaceae
Crocus sativus (food industry , against colds, hypnotic).
Family : Taxaceae
Taxus baccata (sedative, tranquiliser, cancer diseases).
Family : Apocynaceae
Vinca rosa (cancer diseases, particularly leukemia).
Family : Cucurbitaceae
Citrullus colocynthis (laxative, skin diseases of cattle and domestic animals).
Family : Balanitaceae
Ballnites egyptia (laxative, food oils, soap).
Family : Salvadoraceae
Salvadora persica (anti-inflammatory, dental cleaning).
PROBLEMS AND CONSTRAINTS FOR THE EXPLOITATION OF MEDICAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS
* Lack of information on wild medicinal and aromatic plants and their geographical distribution in the countries of the region and their proper utilization;
* Lack of information in the region on the ways to enhance commercial exchange between countries;
* The uncontrolled and excessive cutting and grazing that has caused irreparable loss to the wild medicinal and aromatic plants in the region;
* The variation in the local names of the same plant between the countries and even in the same country is a constraint in synthesizing useful information;
* The proper management of medicinal plant raw material from collection to processing requiring the cooperation of researchers and technicians of several organizations and institutions;
* The lack of research in the development of techniques for propagation and regeneration of medicinal plants in their natural habitats due to the poor transport facilities to the hilly and desert areas where they grow.
CONSTRAINTS FOR THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF MEDICINAL PLANTS
* Lack of field studies on the cultivation and regeneration of medicinal plants;
* Lack of marketing information regarding the international organization dealing with medicinal plants for capturing world market share;
* The serious competition with the professional international suppliers in other countries such as China and India;
* Insufficient knowledge of the export companies and personnel with standards restrictions. This results in low prices for medicinal herbs and drugs;
* Lack of technologies for the management of medicinal plants and their supplies.
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Development of strategies for collecting , surveying and identification of medicinal and aromatic plants in the region, their habitats and field studies for their regeneration.
2. Development of a regional research center for medicinal and aromatic plants.
3. Encouragement to small industries to supply the local markets with medicinal and aromatic commodities.
4. Introduction and cultivation of some non-native (exotic) medicinal plants under the different climatic and edaphic conditions of the region.
5. Encouragement and financing of research programs on regeneration and management of important and aromatic plants in the region.
REFERENCES
A.O.A.D (1988) . Medicinal, Aromatic and Toxic Plants in Arab countries. Part I.
A.O.A.D (1988) . Medicinal, Aromatic and Toxic Plants in Arab countries. Part II.
A.O.A.D (1989). Medicinal Plants in Arab Countries Symposium. Development strategies Kater.
<section>4</section>
ANNEXES
1. Agenda
INTERNATIONAL EXPERT MEETING ON
MEDICINAL, CULINARY AND AROMATIC PLANTS in the Near East
AGENDA
FIRST DAY: MONDAY 19 MAY
08.30 - 09.00 Registration
09.00 - 09.30 Opening session
Inaugural speeches by representatives of the host country and the FAO
Host Country:
- Mr. Mamdouh Charaf Eddin: Vice-Minister of Agriculture, Egypt
- Mr. M. Reyadh, Undersecretary of Afforestation Direc., MOA Egypt FAO:
- Mr. A. Al Fares, Regional Forestry Officer, RNE, Cairo
- Mr. P. Vantomme, Forestry Officer, FAO, Rome
09.30 - 10.00 Coffee break
TECHNICAL SESSION 1: Regional overview of the resource situation and the present status of utilization of the major Medicinal, Culinary and Aromatic Plants in the region.
ELECTION OF CHAIRMAN AND RAPPORTEUR(S) FOR THE MEETING
10.00 - 10.4 0 Key presentation: Resource description and situation:
- Plant resources and their diversity in the NE: Mr. V. Heywood
- The state of agriculture, forestry and environment in the NE : Mr. A. Al Fares
10.4 0 - 11.00 Key presentation: Product utilization status and trends:
- Major medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants gathered from wild sources in the NE: product utilization status and trends: Mr. P. Vantomme
11.00 - 12.30 Presentation of country papers
- Turkey: Mr. M. Kizmaz
- Jordan: Mr. M. ElAbbadi
- Syria: Mr. T. Wahbe
- Yemen: Mr. A. A. Majid
- Egypt: Mr. R. Khater
12.30 - 13.00 Coffee break
13.00 - 14.00 Continuation of presentation of country papers
- Cyprus: Mr. G. Georgiou
- Tunisia: Mr. R. Chemli
- Iran: Mr. S. Y. Riazi
14.00 - 14.30 Discussion
14.30 - 15.00 Concluding remarks on session 1
SECOND DAY: TUESDAY 20 MAY
TECHNICAL SESSION 2: Product development and Policy / Institutional issues
09.00 - 09.30 Mushroom production: Mr. Yezeci and Mr. Bawadekji
09.30 - 10.00 Gum arabic production: Mr. Awoda
10.00 - 10.30 Medicinal and Aromatic Plants in Arab Countries: Mr. Hennawi
10.30 - 11.00 Discussion and winding up on product development
11.00 - 11.30 Coffee break
11.30 - 11.50 Policy and institutional aspects for NWFP development in the NE: Mr. Vantomme
11.50 - 12.10 Examples of existing networks on NWFP in the NE : Mr. Heywood
12.10 - 12.30 Jatropha curcas in Egypt: Mr. Reyadh
12.30 - 13.00 General discussion and proposed action(s)/recommendations for follow-up
13.00 -14.30 Concluding session: recommendations raised and closure
14.30 -15.00 Closure of meeting
THIRD DAY: WEDNESDAY 21 MAY
Field excursion
2. List of participants
List of Participants
Dr. Mamdouh REYADH
Under Secretary of State for Afforestation
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation
Dokki, Cairo, Egypt
Tel: + + 20 2 337 3790
Fax: + + 20 2 335 4983 Prof. Dr. Hussin M. El-HENNAWY
Plant production Expert
Arab Organization of Agricultural Development
11 El-Eslah El-Zaraii str.
Doki, Cairo, Egypt
Tel: + + 20 2 336 5795 / 3365798
Fax: + + 20 2 336 5799
Prof. Rachid CHEMLI
Faculte de Pharmacie
onastir 5000, Tunisie
Tel: + + 216 3 461 000
Fax: + + 216 3 461 830
Eng. Enayat ABDEL AZIZ
General Manager for Afforestation
Ministry of Agriculture
Cairo, Egypt
Prof. Abdul-Hakim BAWADIKJI
Universite d'Alep
Faculte d'Agronomie
B.P. 420 Alep, Syrie
Tel: + + 963 21 757 483
Fax: + + 963 21 216 805
Mr. Yakout MOHAMED
Egyptian Dund for Technical Cooperation with
African Countries 4 El-Zafere st. Apt6
Agouza, Giza, Cairo, Egypt
Tel: + + 20 2 3030 970
Eng. Tagrid WAHBE
Agronome
Ministere de l'Agriculture
Center de la Recherche Agricole
B.P. 113 Damasucs, Syrie
Tel: + 963 531 3038
Fax: + 963 532 3029 Mr. George GEORGIOU
Agricultural officer
Aromatic Plants
Agriculture Department
Nicosia, Cyprus
Tel: 02992141
Fax: 022361425
Eng. Seyed Yahya RIAZI
Deputy General Director of
Flower, Ornamental plans,
Medical plants and Mushroom Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture
Horticulture Section
Tehran, Iran
Tel: + + 821 222 3482
Mr. Antonios GAVRILIDES
Agricultural Officer
Aromatic Plants
Agriculture Department
Nicosia, Cyprus
Tel: 02992141
Fax: 022361 425
Prof. Vernon HEYWOOD
School of Plant Seciences
The University of Reading
Whiteknights, P.O. Box 221
Reading RGG GAS, UK
Tel: + + 44 118 9780185
Fax: + + 44 118 9891745
Email: v.h.heywood @ reading.ac.uk
Prof. Dr. Mortada Reada KHATER
Horticultural Research Institute, ARC
Giza, Egypt
Tel: + + 02 2 337 2626
Mr. Ekrem YAZICI
Assistant National Coordinator
GCP / INT / 539 / ITA "Forestry and Food Security"
Division Director
Ministry of Forestry Ankara, Turkey
Tel: + + 90- 312- 4177730
Fax: + + 90 312 4179160
Mr. Moustafa KIZMAZ
Division Dicector
General Directorate of Forest
Turkey
Tel: + + 90 312 2234505
Fax: + + 90 312 4179160 / 2128482
Eng. Amer A. Aghbari MAJID
National Project Director of Forestry Development
FAO (GCP/YM/020)
Sanaa, Yemen
Tel: 207331 Eng. Mouhamed ABDEL SATTAR
Ms. M. AbDEL SALAM
Ms. Soheer Fathy AHMED
Mr. Gad Elkarim AHMED
Under- secretary of Afforestation
Ministry of Agriculture
Cairo, Egypt
Eng. Mousa K.A.W. ABBADI
General Director of Forests and Range
Department
Ministry of Agriculture
Ammam, Jordan
P.O.Box: 2099
Tel: 837472
Fax: 837929
Mr. A. ALFARES
Regional Forestry Offeicer
FAO, RNE P.O. Box: 2223
Cairo, Egypt.
Tel: + + 20 2 3316000
Fax: + + 20 2 3495981
Email: Adnan.Alfares@fao.org.
El Hag Makki AWOUDA
General Manager
Forest National Corporation
Khartoum, Sudan
Tel: + + 249 11 471575
Fax: + + 249 11 472659
Mr. Paul. VANTOMME
Forest Officer (Non Wood Forest Products)
Forestry Department. FAO
Rome, Italy
Tel: + + 39 06 57054064
Fax: + +39 06 57055618
Email: Paul.Vantomme@fao.org
<section>5</section>
3. Background documents
Medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants in Pakistan
Aftab Saeed
Department of Academic Research, Karachi
INTRODUCTION
Pakistan is a developing country of South Asia, spreading over an area of 87.98 million hectares. The country is situated between latitude 23^° and 37° North and longitude 61° and 76° East. The annual rainfall ranges from 125 mm in the South to 875 mm in sub-mountainous and northern plains. About 70% of the rain falls during the monsoon season (July-September). However, occasional showers also occur during the winter. The summer months, except in mountainous areas, are very hot, while the winter months are mild in the plains and extremely severe in hilly regions.
Pakistan is the ninth most densely populated country in the world. According to the latest estimates, the population of the country is over 120 million. The state-owned forest area, under the control of the Forest Department, is 4.58 million hectares, only 5.2 % of the total area of Pakistan, Azad Jammu and Kashmir. Annual production of timber and fuelwood is 0.482 million m^3 and 0.234 million m^3 respectively.
A survey of the naturally available plant wealth of Pakistan shows that medicinal plants grow in abundance in Hazara, Malak and Kurram Agency, Murree Hills, Azad Kashmir, Northern Areas and Baluchistan, or are cultivated on farmlands in Punjab, Sindh, Baluchistan, North West Frontier Province and Kashmir. According to the surveys carried out by the Pakistan Forest Institute (1989), 500 tons of medicinal plants are produced in Hazara and Malakand, 16 tons in Murree Hills, 38 tons in Azad Kashmir and about 24 tons in Northern Areas. These plants are collected from the wild, dried and processed and sold in the local markets or exported to other countries. Pakistan obtains more than 80 % of its medicaments from higher plants. Medicinal plants are used as:
* Health care products in traditional medicine (either as raw, single herb preparations or as manufactured finished products, including substances of psychotropic and ritual/religious value);
* Raw material for the pharmaceutical industry for extraction of essential oils, fixed oils, tannins, gums and resins, and pharmacologically active constituents like alkaloids, glycosides, flavonoids, etc.;
* Culinary additions, spices and colourings;
* Natural cosmetics and in perfumes;
* Health foods either distributed through pharmacies under prescription or as "over-the-counter" medicines.
MEDICINALLY IMPORTANT PLANT SPECIES OF AZAD KASHMIR FOREST AREAS
In Azad Kashmir, about 70 % of the productive areas were surveyed. The approximate annual yield of plants in the reserves of medicinal herbs in Gureze and Sharda Forest Ranges/Shard Forest Division and Keran Range of Keran Forest Division are shown inTable (1) :
Table (1): Important medicinal plant species of Kashmir forests,
North Western Frontier Province and Baluchistan.
Plant names Parts used Approximate
Annual Yield (tons)
Aconitum chasmanthum Roots
Aconitum heterophyllum Roots
Acontium sp. Leaves
Adianthum capillus Whole plant
Angelica glauca Roots
Artemisia vulgaris Leaves/ shoots
Atropa acuminata Roots
Berberis lycium Roots
Dioscorea deltoidea Rhizome
Dioscorea deltoidea Twigs
Geranium wallichianum Roots
Myrtus communs Fruits
Paeonia emodi Rhizome
Podophyllum emodi Rhizome
Polygonum amplexicauler Roots
Rheum emodi Roots
Saxifraga ciliata Roots
Thymus serphyllum Leaves
Valeriana wallichii Rhizome
Zizyphus vulgaris Fruits
The quantitative surveys of some of the above mentioned pharmacopoeially important medicinal plants, conducted in different forests of the North West Frontier Province and Baluchistan reveal that substantial quantities of such crude drug plants can be procured.
CONSUMPTION OF ESSENTIAL OILS IN PAKISTAN
The actual supply/demand of herbs and medicinal plants is in the range of 20,000 tonnes per annum. About 14,000 tonnes of herbs were imported in 1989-1990 while about 106 tonnes of herbs and 3,083 tonnes of medicinally-used plants were exported in that year. Essential oils of Anise, Caraway, Coriander, Fennel, Lavender, Spearmint and Rosemary are extensively used as flavours for domestic consumption and for export.
Consumption of essential oils in Pakistan has been estimated by the Agricultural Development Bank of Pakistan and values are shown in Table (2).
Table (2) : Annual consumption (Kg) of essential oils in Pakistan.
Products
Consumption (kg)
Eucalyptus oil 
Pepper mint oil
Menthol 
Lemon oil 
Orange oil 
Herbaceous oils
Other oils 
Total 
MARKETING STRUCTURE
Trade of crude vegetable drugs is very erratic in Pakistan. Prices fluctuate greatly due to variations in external and internal demands within the country. Traders frequently underpay collectors of the raw materials and sell the products at a large profit. Hence the availability of particular crude drugs remains very unstable and market trends cannot be easily determined.
Reasons for fluctuation in price :
* The margin of profit earned by the traders is very large since they purchase the crude drugs at nominal rates and obtain the maximum price from the consumers.
* The export of crude drugs from Pakistan is very erratic due to the "Standards restrictions" imposed by the developed countries of the world. Essential Oils of Anise, Caraway, Coriander, Fennel, Lavender, Sperarmint and Rosemary are extensively used as flavours both in domestic consumption and abroad. Raw material for these culinary herbs is cultivated to obtain the product.
CULTIVATION, REGENERATION, PROPAGATION OF PAKESTANI MEDICINAL PLANTS
A variety of medicinal plants grow in the temperate hilly region of Pakistan. These plants gained importance in the allopathic system of medicine after Europeans investigated into their curative values. Plants such as Digitalis purpurea, Atropa belladonna, Colchicum sp. (Suranjan talkh), and many others were used in British and American pharmacopoeias, and a number of life-saving drugs are currently in use. This has resulted in the depletion of the existing stock and presently most of the plants are found scattered in the distant areas.
Some other species are also endangered through indiscriminate exploitation by the collectors. For quite a few of these valuable plants, either the quality has deteriorated or they have become extinct. Development of the technology of propagation and regeneration of medicinal plants in their natural habitat is essential for the conservation of this natural resource. Studies carried out by the Medicinal Plants Branch have revealed that temperate medicinal plants acquire perennial habits and therefore take more time to reach the stage of commercial exploitation.
MEDICINAL AND PHARMACEUTICAL VALUE OF SHRUBS IN PAKISTAN
Wild roses (Rosa lacerans and R. beggeriana), which are widely spread in Northern Pakistan, have a high content of Vitamin C. Substances extracted from shrubs are widely used in tanning industry. Young leaves, twigs and flowers of Tamarix articulata and Calligonum polygnoides are rich in tanning substance. Their galls may have up to 15 % tannins. Several acacias also contain tanning substances. The bark of A. decurrents contains up to 40 % tannins. Shrubs are the major source of firewood for the rural population of Pakistan. Charcoal is a valuable commodity in many desert areas. Shrubs are also used for building products, frames of houses and small wood industries.
Table (4). Common medicinal shrubs of Pakistan
Botanical name Geographical distribution
Acacia modesta Pothwar, Salt Range
Atriplex nummularia Tharparker, Baluchistan Uplands
Artemisia maritima Quetta, Lasbella, Kharan
Alhagi camelorum Thal, Sibi, chagai, Kharan
Caragona ambigua Baluchistan Uplands
Ephedra foliata Baluchistan Uplands
Holoxylon recurvum Thal, Cholistan, D.G. Khan Kahu
Holoxylon griffithii Northrn Baluchistan
Olea cuspidata Pothwar, Salt Range
Opuntia ficus - indica Tharparkar, Sindh
Prosopis cineraria Thal, Cholistan, Tharparkar
Pistacia khinjuk Baluchistan Upland
Salsola foetida Thal, Cholistan, D.G. Khan
Ziziphus nummularia Pothwar, Salt Ranges, Sindh
MEDICINAL PLANTS WITH STRONG POTENTIAL
Some drugs can be administered alone or as poly-pharmaceutical (following the principles of therapeutics) in the form of decoctions, infusions, tablets, powders, confections, electuaries, preserves, conserves, syrups, linctus, calcined preparations (Kushta) etc. In the field of preventive and primary health care, it is notable that most of the Unani Medicines are not directly curative and therefore are not liable to produce harmful side effects in contrast with some chemical or synthetic drugs.
Examples of simple and compound preparations
Simple natural drugs
Arora, R.B. (1965) found that Nardostachys jatamansi D.C. (Balchhar) was effective against hypertension of all grades. Peruvoside from Thevetia neriifolia Juss (Pila-Kaner) exhibited cardiotonic activity equipotent to ouabain. Caccinea glauca Savi (Kundur) was reported to possess potent diuretic activity. Antiarrythmic attributes of Rauwolfia (Asrol) and Acorus (Wajj) as well as anti-convulsant activity of Acorus (in dose of 30 mg./kg. given intraperitoneally) afforded protection against the development of hind limb toxic extension in the electrically induced convulsion. Anticoagulant and coronary dilator activity of coumarins against coronary thrombosis, thrombo- embolic episodes and spasmodic conditions of blood vessels have been reported from Calophyllum inophyllum Linn. (Champa) and Dalbergia sissoo Roxb. (Sheesham) constituents.
The recognized publications of CSIR, New Delhi (Chopra et al. 1956 Chopra, 1958), The Wealth of India-Raw Materials (1978) contain authentic information on thousands of the indigenous medicinal plants.
Anti-inflammatory drugs
Nimbidin from the oil of seeds of Azadirachta indica was found to reduce acute paw oedema. The present significant anti-inflammatory findings on nimbidin may substantiate the use of Neem oil in the treatment of rheumatic conditions (Pillai and Santhakumari, 1981). Bavachinin isolated from the seeds possesses marked anti-inflammatory antipyretic and mild analgesic properties. It showed no effect on CNS and minimum lethal dose is greater than 1000 mg/kg, ip in mice. 25-100 mg/kg ip (Anand et al., 1978).
Cell healing
Fractions of leaf extract from local types, such as Aloe vera syn. A. barbadensis and A. Saponaria, were tested by in vitro assays for the presence of lectin like activities and for effects on the attachment and growth of human normal and tumour cells (Winters et al. 1981). Fractions of extracts of fresh leaves had high levels of a lectin like substance. Substances in fluid fractions from fresh leaves were found to markedly promote attachment and growth of human normal but not tumour cells, and to enhance healing of wounded cell monolayers.
Antifungal and antiviral activity
Mangniferin isolated from leaf extract of Mangifera indica (Mango) have marked anti-influenza virus activity. It has anti-virus activity against skin diseases and the mucous membrane. Oral or topical compositions are useful for the treatment of diseases caused by herpes virus. The positive therapeutic effect of magniferin co-tanning ointment was demonstrated treating skin eruptions in children.
Fruits of Zizyphus Jujuba (Unnab) play a significant role in the pathophysiology of bronchial asthma and allergic diseases. The fruit is used in China for such diseases (Jyong-chyulyong and Kigonichi 1980). Buds of Syzygium aromaticum syn. Eugenia aromatica (Laung) contain eugeniin tannin. It has antiviral activity against herpes simplex virus at concentration (Takachi and Tanaka, 1981) of 10ug/ml. The alcoholic extract of ripe dried coconut shell of Cocus nucifera (Nariyal) showed antifungal activity at a dose of 100 ug/ml of Sabouraud's medium against all dermatophytes tested except E. flocossum for which the effective concentration is 200 ug/ml. (Venkataraman et al. 1980).
Antimicrobial activity
The aqueous extract (1:10) from seeds of Moringa oleifera was tested against fungi including Candida and Penicillium and bacteria from Bacillus, Proteus, Streptococeus and Mycobacterium spp. Remarkable results were obtained. Ripe and unripe Carica papaya fruits extract showed significant activity on pathogenic bacteria. Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus cereus, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Shigella flexneri (Emeruwa, 1982).
Hypocholesterolemic agents
The alcohol extract of the Commiphora mukul and C. mukul was found to be most potent in lowering serum cholesterol level as well as cholesterol / phospholipid ratio (C/P).
Antidiabetic effect
Ficus sp, F. glomerata, F. religiosa etc. contain an active principle-sitosterol D-glycoside which showed a hypoglycaemic effect in fasting and alloxan diabetic rabbits (Oliver Bever, 1980). The fruit and seed of Syzygium cumini, are used as antidiabetics, in doses of 1- 2.5 g/kg. LD in mice is 4 g/kg. Gymnema sylvestre leaves which are chewed, reduce glycosuria, normalize the blood sugar in diabetic subjects in 3-4 weeks but when used in combination with insulin a prompt response was observed. The active substance is gymnemic acid.
The above mentioned plant materials have moderate action and can be useful in bringing symptomatic relief in mild cases of diabetes. In some cases their prolonged administration might delay the establishment of a more serious diabetic disease. Valeriana officinalis components, present in the oxygen fraction, are relatively important in causing the sedative activity.
Antiepileptic activity of Lavandula.
In secondary epilepsy, administration of 1.5 gms. pulverized powder for selective time duration proved useful.
The natural polypharmaceuticals
Khamira Abresham Hakim Arshadwalais extensively used in the management and treatment of hypertension, arrhythmia, palpitation and cardiac debility. The individual ingredients of this preparation included Bombyx mori Cocoon, Nardostachys jotamansi, Moschus moschiferus etc.
Joshanda is a reputed remedy to relieve common cold and influenza. It comprises seven active ingredients all of herbal origin [ viz. Althaea officinalis (Khatmi), Cordia latifolia (Sapistan), Glycyrrhiza glabra (Mulathi), Malva sylvestris (Khubazi), Onosma bracteatum (Gaozaban), Viola odorata (Banafsha) and Zizyphus jujuba (Unnab) ].
Safoof-Satawar includes Glycyrrhiza glabra, Asparagus racemosus, Ammomum subulatum and Carum carvi in its composition. The compound drug (in dose of 6-grams equally divided and administrated for 6- weeks) acts safely and gives relief in cases of acid peptic disease.
Safoof Khashkhash with five major ingredients (viz. Seeds of Lactuca Sativa, seeds of Portulaca oleracea, seeds of Papaver sominiferum, flowers of Nymphaea lotus and dried fruits of Coriandrum sativum) the powder compound preparation is found to be effective against hypertension. The polypharmaceutical effect is attributed to the sedatives, analgesic and diuretic activities of its ingredients.
Icterene,a plant-based preparation, is of hepatoprotective activity and is useful in treatment of infectious hepatitis.
REFERENCES
Anand, K.K., Sharma, M.L., Bupinder Singh and Ray Ghatak, B.J. (1978). Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 16, 1216-1217.
Arora, R.B. (1965). Cardiovascular Pharmacotherapeutics of Six Medicinal Plants Indigenous to Pakistan and 33India. In: Hamdard Pharmacopoeia of Eastern Medicine, Hamdard Foundation Pakistan (1969) 422-448 pp.
Chopra, R.N., Nayar, S.L. and Chopra, I.C. (1956). Glossary of Indian Medicinal Plants, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, 330 pp.
Chopra, R.N., Chopra, I.C., Handa, K.L. and Kapur, L.D. (1958). Chopr's Indigenous Drugs of India. U.N.Dhur and Sons Pvt. Ltd. Calcutta, 816 pp.
Eilert,U., Wolters B. & Nahrstedt, A.(1982). Planta Medica, 42, 55-61.
Emeruwa, A.C. (1991). Journal of National Products, 45(2), 123-127 pp. In: The Conservation of Medicinal Plants. Ed. et.al (1991), (Reference Olayiwola, A.).
Pillai, N.R. & Santhakumari G. (1981). Planta Medica, Volume 43, 59-63.
Szymova M. (1952) Chemical Abstract 47: 2412.
Takechi M. and Tanaka Y. (1981) Planta Medica, 42, 69-74.
The Wealth of India, Raw Materials - A Dictionary of Indian Raw Materials and Industrial Products (1948 - 1976) Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, Vols. I-XI. Venkataraman, S., Ramanujam T.R. and Venkata-Subbu V.S. (1980). Journal of Ethno-pharmacology, 2, 291-293.
<section>6</section>
Medicinal, and aromatic plants in Sudan
Dr. M. S. Eltohami
Medicinal & Aromatic Plants Research Institute (MAPRI)
INTRODUCTION
Sudan is the largest country in Africa with an area of 2 496 138 km^2. It lies between latitudes 3º N and 23º N and longitudes 21º E and 39º E. It has common boundaries with nine countries: Egypt, Libya, Chad, Central Africa, Zaire, Uganda, Kenya, Ethiopia and Eritrea.
The climate of Sudan ranges from completely arid to tropical zones with a wide range of bioclimatic regions, from the almost barren deserts in the North to the tropical rain forests in the extreme South of the country. The diversity of the climate of Sudan is responsible for its very rich flora. Research on medicinal and aromatic plants began a long time ago, but this was carried out in a scattered and unstructured fashion until the establishment of the Medicinal and Aromatic Plants Research Institute (MAPRI) in 1972.
The medicinal and aromatic plants found in Sudan are both wild (Table 1) and cultivated (Table 2).
USES OF WILD MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS
The dried exudation from the stem and branches of Acacia senegal is used as a demulcent, suspending and emulsifying agent. It is also used in textiles, confectionery and pastes. It contains mainly magnesium, calcium and potassium salts of glycosidal acid (known as Arabic acid), and enzyme oxydase.
The dried mucilaginous substance obtained from leaves of Aloes sp., Aloe crassipes, found in northern and eastern Sudan, and A. sinkatana, found in the East, is used in small doses as a laxative.
The roots of Balanites aegyptiaca contain steroidal sapogenins, whereas the bulb contains sugars and saponins. The leaves and fruit contain disogenin, while the kernel has a high oil and valuable protein content. The maceration of the fruit and seeds is used as a laxative and anthelmintic. It is used in the food, animal feed and pharmaceutical industry as a precursor.
The essential oil of Ocimum basilicum obtained by distillation is used in perfumery, production of aroma and in the food industry as a flavouring agent. It contains volatile oil containing cineol, pinene, methyl chavicol, d-camphor and ocimene.
The resin of Citrullus colocynthis is used as a gastro-intestinal stimulant and as a powerful purgative, as well as a hydrogogue cathartic and anti-rheumatic cure in traditional medicine.
Cymbopogon proximus
contains a bitter oleo resin, a toxic volatile oil and a saponin used extensively in indigenous medicine as a diuretic, colic painkiller and antipyretic in fever.
Datur stamonium, D. metel, and D. innoxia are sources of commercial hyoscyamine. They contain alkaloids, hyoscine, hyoscyamine, as well as atropine. The constituents of Hyoscyamus muticus (hyoscyamine, atropine and hyoscine) relieve pain caused by the excessive use purgatives. It is also used as a cerebral and spinal sedative.
The leaves of Eucalyptus globulus are used as astringents in the form of cigarettes in cases of asthma. The oil is used as an antispasmodic, deodorant and anti-irritant.
The resin, gum, and volatile oil of Boswellia papyrifera are used to make incense and as an ingredient in plasters and fuming pastilles.
Gum exudates of Acacia nilotica are used as an antidiarrhoetic. Pods of Acacia seyal contain more than 20 % proteins and are very nourishing for livestock.
Fruits of Tamarindus indica are used as a gentle laxative, refrigerant and against malaria. They contain free and combined organic acids (tartaric, malic, and citric), potassium tartarate and 25-40 % invert sugars.
USES OF CULTIVATED MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS
The steam distilled fruit oil of Pimpinella anisum is an ingredient of carminative and expectorant medicines for children. The greatest quantities of Anise, however, are used to flavor liqueurs and in confectionery and perfumery. It contains 3 % essential oil (Aniseed oil) with 90% anethole.
Solenostemma arghel contains an acidic resin, glycoside, choline, phytosterols and amyrine. It is used in indigenous medicine as an effective remedy for coughs. The infusion of its leaves is used for gastro-intestinal cramps and infections of the urinary tract.
The ripe seeds of Black cumin (Nigella sativa) have camphor like scent and bitterness and an aromatic taste. They are used in cooking and as substitute for peper and can be sprinkled on bread and cakes.
The dried fruits of Ammi majus contains ammoidin, ammidin and magudin as well as oils and protein. They are used for treatment of leucoderma and skin diseases.
Capsicum fruits (Capsicum minimum) contain up to 0.14 % pungent principle capsicin, non -pungent alkaloid, fixed oil and vitamin C. The fresh fruit is used as stimulant and stomach disorders and is mainly applied externally in the form of extracts, tinctures, ointments and plasters to treat rheumatism and sciatica.
Ricinus communis is medicinally used as a strong purgative, for cosmetic preparations, lubricant and disinfectants. Castor beans, which contain about 50 % oil, are an extremely toxic albumin (ricin) and an alkaloid ricinine.
Caraway (Carum carvi) is stomachic, antispasmodic, carminative galactogogic, antispasmodic and anthelmintic. The fruit is widely used as a flavoring agent in food products such as bread, cheese, pickles and sauce. The main constituents include essential oil (3-5 %) with carvone, limonene and tannins.
Dried coriander (Coriandrum sativum) is used extensively for both bulk and flavor in sausages, corned beef and similar meat products. Some coriander seed is distilled and the solvent extracted gives an essential oil.
Oleoresin seeds contain up to 0.07 % of essential oil, the principal constituent of which is dextro linalol.
Seeds of cumin (Cuminum cyminum) are used as a condiment, an agreeable aromatic and in veterinary medicine.
Fennel oil (Foeniculm vulgare) is used in European countries in the flavoring of food and liqueurs and in the perfumery industry. Pharmaceutically it is used as an agreeable aromatic and carminative. The main constituents are essential oils (up to 6 %) with anethole and fenchone.
Fenugreek seeds (Trigonella foenum-graceum) include a fixed oil (about 70%), a mucilage and sapogenins (1-2 %). Seeds are generally found in most blends of curry powder and foodstuffs and animal feed.
Guar gum, extracted from the dried ripe seeds of Cyamposis tetragonoloba, contain 25% proteins and 1.6 % fat. It is used in sizing of paper and, mixed with starch, as a valuable textile size as well as a stabilizer in emulsions thickener in food, pharmaceutical and cosmetic products. Much attention had been drawn to guar as a possible oral hypoglycemic agent.
The sepals of Hibiscus sabdariffa contain flavonoids and red pigment comprising gossipten and hibiscin together with phytosterolin and organic acids malic ,citric, tartaric, ascorbic and hibiscic acids. These seeds also contain a high percentage of mucilage (62 %) and a fixed oil. The ripe calyces are used as hot and cold beverages. Medicinally it is used as antispasmodic, hypotensive, antimicrobial and for relaxation of the uterine muscle.
The fruits of Ammi visnaga have the effect of relaxing muscles and lowering tonicity of the ureter. A decoction is used to ease the passage of kidney calculi. It is also the source of khellin.
The dried leaves of Lawsonia inermis (Henna) contain Lawasone, tannin mucilage and fat. They are used as a dye for hair, skin and nails; medicinally it is used as a fungicide.
A volatile oil, distilled from the leaves of lemon grass (Cymbopogon citratus), is used in perfumery, cosmetics and soap.
Peanut oil is a refined oil obtained from the seeds of one or more of the cultivated varieties of Arachis hypogaea. It is an edible oil which resembles olive oil, hence its use as a vehicle for liniments and as a lubricant, and in particular as a solvent for injections. It saponifies slowly but yields excellent white soap.
The leaves of Cassia acutifolia contain sennosides, aloe-emodin and rhein. The water extract of the leaves and the fruit is taken as a laxative.
SOCIO-ECONOMIC ASPECTS
In the past, people depended exclusively on herbal remedies or traditional medicine. They also used some wild plants for cosmetics and perfumery by extracting the oils with primitive methods. In recent years, however, medicinal plants have represented a primary health source for the pharmaceutical industry. Large quantities are used for the preparation of infusions and decoctions both in the countries where traditional medicine is still of great therapeutic, social and economic importance, and in the production of important pharmaceutical products abroad.
The government is now giving greater attention to the cultivation of crops in demand on the world market. The increase in size and number of irrigated schemes has changed the composition of some flora, leading to the disappearance of some plants and decreasing the area and the availability of others. Some of these important herbs are not cultivated in commercial quantity but are gathered haphazardly. For example, the poor organization and collection of this plant has led to a decrease in its quality and as a consequence decrease in its value and price.
On the other hand, the Government has imported some improved hybrids and varieties which have adapted to the Sudanese environment e.g. hyoscine contains plants (Datura inermis, Hyocyamus niger). If these are cultivated on a large scale, they could represent an important source of hard currency, besides satisfying the market needs.
The analysis of price and cost indicated that the price of export in dollars is stable. The greater part of costs is for labour. Salaries increased rapidly in the face of the continuous increase in the price of consumption and the higher cost of the main social services. For some plants such as Umbilefferous, 60 % of the cost is for labor because its harvest depends mainly on hand labor. Occasionally labor costs may rise up to 80 % or more as in the case of Senna and Rosella in rainfed areas. Mechanized crops like sesame and roundnut have a relatively low cost due to a low requirement of labor.
Prices depend on the efficiency of production and the competition in the world market. More attention to the productivity of the land and labor efficiency is required. Decreasing production costs by introducing mechanized systems in the agricultural work will lead to a negative impact in the social side by increasing unemployment. A solution to this problem is to develop the industrial sector especially where there is an abundance of the raw material. If the pharmaceutical industry is developed and all stages of production is undertaken within the country, this would open up opportunity for jobs and simultaneously lower the prices of drugs thus saving considerable hard currency which is presently paid for export of similar drugs. This, in turn, would lead to an increase in the standards of living of the population and improve welfare.
Table (1) : Wild medicinal and aromatic plants of the Sudan.
Scientific name Local name (s)
Acacia nilotica (Linn.) Willd.exDel Sunt, Garad (fruit)
Subsp. nilotica Brenan 
Subsp. tomentosa (Benth.) 
Acacia senegal (Linn.) Willd var senegal Hashab
Acacia seyal Del. Talh
Var. seyal Brenan 
Var. fistula (Schweinf.) Olive. 
Aloe spp. Sabbar
Agremone mexicana L Agresone
Ambrosia maritima L. Damsisa
Balanites aegyptiaca Del. Heglig, Laloub
Boswellia papyrifera (Del.) Hochst. Targ - Targ, Gafal, Luban
Citrillus colocynthis (L.) Schard Handal
Cymbopogon proximus (Hochst.) Staph. Mahareb
Datura innoxia Mill Alsakran
Datura metel Mill 
Dioscoerea spp. Dioscera
Hapolophyllum tuberculata (Forssk.) A.Juss Haza
Rauvolfia vomitoria Afz Rawolfia
Solanum nigrum L. Enab el Deib , Elmugad el aswad
Tamarindus indica L. Aradib
Table (2) : Cultivated medicinal and aromatic of the Sudan
Scientific name Local name (s)
Azadirchta indica A. Juss Neem
Brassica nigra (L) Koch. Khardal aswad
Carcica papaya L Babai
Datura stramonium L. Sakran
Foeniculum vulgare Mill Shamur
Grewia tenax ( Forssk.) Fiori Godeim
Hibiscus sabdariffa L. Karkadeh
Hyoscyamus muticus L Sakran musri
Nicotiana rustica L. Tuback, Gamsha
Nigella sativa L. Kamoon Aswad
Ocimum basilicum L. Reehan
Ricinus communis L. Khirwi
Senna alexandria Miller Senna Maka
Solenostemma arghel (Del) Hayne Hargel
Medicinal and aromatic plants in Turkey
Prof. Dr. M. Koyuncu
Ankara Üniversitesi
MEDICINAL PLANTS AND THEIR IMPORTANCE
The term "medicinal plants" is used to determine the plants or plant products used by human beings in the protection against, or treatment of, illnesses. This clarifies that not every plant is a medicinal plant. Further research is needed to identify other plants with useful medicinal properties.
The term "herbal drug" determines the part/parts of a plant used for preparing medicines (for example: leaves, flowers, seeds, roots, barks, stems etc.).
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), 80% of the world population uses medicinal plants in the treatment of diseases and in African countries, this rate is much higher.
Medicinal plants contain biologically active chemical substances such as coumarins, volatile oils, alkaloids etc. In addition to these substances, plants contain other chemical compounds. These can act as agents to prevent undesirable side effects of the main active substances orto assist in the assimilation of the main substances. Opium juice, for example, contains other chemical compounds in additon tomorphine, and reports show that it gives fewer side effects than morphine administered on its own. The saponins found in the leaft extracts of Digitalis purpurea also assist the cardio-active heterosites to penetrate the blood more easily.
Folk medicines incuding herbal medicines and teas, in which the active compounds of the plants are directly used, are the most commonly used of medicinal plants. The use of pure active compounds, obtained from medicinal plants, is also widely used. 400 compounds, derived from plants, are currently used in the preparation of drugs such as vincristin and vinblastin. These compounds are used in the cure of cancer and can only be obtained from the plant Catharanthus roseus (Rose periwinkle). They cannnot be produced synthetically, and their market price per year is 100 million dollars.
The indiscriminate collection, and lack of replacement of these plants, is cause for serious concern since many of them risk extinction. A plan to replace such species is urgently required, since these medicinal plants are essential for treatment of many important diseases where other cures have yet to be found.
THE SITUATION OF MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS IN TURKEY
More than 9.000 flowering plants grow in Turkey of which 30% are endemic. These plants are used mainly as food, medicines, spices, dyes, in fiber and herbal tea preparation, in the perfume industry, as well as for ornaments. The use of these plants forms part of the culture and tradition of the region in which they grow They are most commonly found in the old cities and towns of Istanbul, Kayseri, Gaziantep, Diyarbak>r, Malatya, Sivas, Erzurum. These traditions are far less radicated in the newer settlements.
In recent years,drugs derived from plants have been the cause of great interest. Several papers have been published on this subject although not all have a reliable scientific background. Others, prepared by the the Faculty of Pharmacies are, however, scientifically reliable (Baytop, 1984)
The Turkish Faculty of Pharmacies is presently undertaking further studies in medicinal and aromatic plants and, in the past two years, a masters program on Phytotherapy has been set up.
The over 500 medicinal and aromatic plants found in Turkey include Allium (Onion), Origanum (Oregan), Mentha (mint) and Thymus (Thyme) which are used for flavouring. Salvia (Sage) and Sideritis species are used in hot drinks. Other species are used in food, as dyes and for ornamentation. Some of these plants contain poisonous compounds.
The importance of herbs is receiving increasing attention. Many developed countries are collecting new plants from gene centers all over the world, in order to conserve biological diversity and also to add new types of plants to their indigenous flora. Turkey now has a flourishing trade in medicinal, culinary and aromatic plants. These plants originate from the regions of Izmir, Istanbul, Antalya and Giresun. Exact figures for plants collected and exported are not available but an estimated 250 species are probably in commercial use. Some of them are gathered as a whole while only the useful parts (stems, leaves, roots, bulbs, rhizomes etc.) are collected in other cases. In the recent years some of them have been sold widely as ornaments after being dried and colored.
The outlook for improvement in production of native plants is good but to improve the profit margin, more plants should be processed within the country and not exported in their raw state. The desired quality and quantity can only be obtained by improved cultivation of these plants. At present income from export of medicinal and aromatic plants is greater than that from main forest products. In 1993 Turkey earned more than 80 million dollars from forest by-products (medicinal and aromatic plants, geophyts etc.) as compared to 50 million dollars from main forest products.
The protection of these plants is of vital importance. Present rates of collection are leading to the possible extinction of various species such as Gentiana lutea (Yellow Gentian), which is an important medicinal plant, in West and Northwest mountains of Anatolia; Galanthus (Snowdrop) and Cyclamen species and Orchids that produce salep. Origanum (Oregano), Salvia (Sage), Sideritis, Glycyrrhiza (Licorice) and Laurus (Laurel) are also over exploited. Further legislation is required to control excessive collection and export of these plants.
