<title>Report of the Conference of FAO Twenty-third Session Rome, 9-28 November 1985</title>
<section>1</section>
I. COUNCIL (until 31 December 1986)
Independent Chairman: Lassaad Ben Osman
Austria*
Afghanistan**
Argentina*
Australia**
Bangladesh**
Brazil *
Bulgaria*
Cameroon***
Canada*
China***
Colombia*
Congo*
Cuba*
Czechoslovakia*
Denmark*
Ecuador**
Egypt**
France**
Gambia*
Germany, Federal Republic of***
India**
Indonesia*
Iraq**.
Italy **
Japan***
Lebanon*
Liberia**
Malaysia***
Mexico*
Nicaragua*
Niger***
Pakistan*
Philippines**
Sao Tome and Principe*
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of**
Senegal**
Tanzania**
Thailand***
Trinidad and Tobago*
Tunisia*
Turkey*
Uganda*
United Kingdom**
United States of America*
Venezuela***
Yemen, People's Democratic Republic of*
Yugoslavia*
Zambia***
Zimbabwe*
* Term of office until 31 December 1986.
** Term of office until conclusion of Twenty-fourth Session of the Conference, November 1987.
*** Term of office until 31 December 1988.
<section>2</section>
II. COUNCIL (as from 1 January 1987)
Independent Chairman: Lassaad Ben Osman
Afghanistan*
Algeria***
Argentina*
Australia*
Bangladesh*
Brazil***
Cameroon*
Canada***
China**
Colombia***
Cuba***
Denmark*
Ecuador*
Egypt *
France*
Gabon***
Gambia***
Germany, Federal Republic of**
Hungary*
India*
Indonesia*
Iraq**
Italy*
Japan
Lebanon***
Liberia*
Libya***
Madagascar*
Malaysia*
Mexico**
Nicaragua*
Niger**
Pakistan*
Philippines*
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of*
Senegal*
Spain***
Switzerland
Tanzania*
Thailand**
Trinidad and Tobago***
Turkey**
United Kingdom*
United States of America***
Venezuela**
Yugoslavia*
Zaire***
Zambia*
Zimbabwe*
* Term of office until conclusion of Twenty-fourth Session of the Conference, November 1987.
** Term of office until 31 December 1988.
*** Term of office until conclusion of Twenty-fifth Session of the Conference, November 1989.
<section>3</section>
III. Introduction
A. Fourteenth McDougall Memorial Lecture
B. Presentation of the B.R. Sen Awards for 1984 and 1985
C. Presentation of the A.H. Boerma Award 1984-85
D. In Memoriam
E. Volcanic Eruption in Colombia
F. Tribute to Dr M.S. Swaminathan as Independent Chairman of the Council
G. Retirement of Mr Edward M. West
H. Tribute to the Memory of Mr Jean E. Carroz
A. Fourteenth McDougall Memorial Lecture
1. The fourteenth in the series of lectures at regular Conference sessions in memory of Frank Lidgett McDougall, a founding father of the Organization, was delivered by His Excellency Alan Garcia Pérez, President of Peru.
B. Presentation of the B.R. Sen Awards for 1984 and 1985
2. The B.R. Sen Award was presented to Mr. Alfred G. Scherer (Federal Republic of Germany) for his work in the strengthening of the organization and management capabilities of the Nepal Food Corporation. Mr Scherer's association with FAO started in 1964. In 1965 he was FAO/OPAS (Operational Assistance) Horticultural and Marketing Adviser to Uganda and, in 1970, while retaining the position of Special Adviser to the Government, he was appointed Project Manager of the UNDP (United Nations Development Programme)/FAO Marketing and Storage Development Project, and in that capacity made a major contribution to the improvement of the operational and managerial efficiency of the Produce Marketing Board of Uganda. Mr Scherer was transferred to Brazil in 1975 as FAO Marketing Economist associated with the Companhia Brasileira de Alimentos (COBAL); in 1978 he became the Senior Marketing, Management and Training Adviser/Team Leader of the UNDP/FAO Project "Centre for Human Resource
Development in Agricultural Marketing" attached to COBAL where he distinguished himself in the organization of the COBAL training centre which offered in-service training programmes for 10 000 staff members. In 1983, Mr Scherer was transferred to Kathmandu as Team Leader/Management and Organization Adviser to the UNDP/FAO Technical Assistance Project for Strengthening the Nepal Food Corporation where he developed an improved system for operational and statistical data collection and management information and contributed to the improvement of communications between the Corporation's Headquarters and its field offices. He was also instrumental in developing a suitable planning methodology for maintaining optimal inventory levels at various procurement and distribution stores, for minimizing transportation costs, and determining staff training needs and the development of a comprehensive training programme. In this work, Mr Scherer gave particular emphasis to the practical
training and development of middle-level management and operational manpower indispensable to the efficient implementation of the government food policy; he thus made a significant contribution in strengthening the food security policies and programmes of Nepal. His outstanding technical competence displayed throughout his career coupled with his continuing efforts in promoting small farmer development through an integrated and practical marketing/production approach, led to the achievements which culminated in the bestowal of the award.
3. The B.R. Sen Award for 1985 was presented to Mr Lawrence Kwadjo Danso (Ghana) for improving the productivity of forest lands in North East Thailand through integrated rural development. When first employed by FAO in 1980, Mr Danso was appointed to the post of Forestry Officer/Chief Technical Adviser on the Project for the Development of Reforestation in North Eastern Thailand, with duty station in Korat. Mr Danso, responsible for advising and assisting the government in the overall planning, as well as the implementation and direction of all project activities, designed and helped to execute under difficult circumstances various preparatory activities, and guided the identification, demarcation and mapping of the pilot area. In cooperation with other government and non-government agencies, he carried out analytical studies of the project area as a basis for the preparation of a realistic work plan comprising institutional arrangements and changes in organizational
structures and procedures. He also designed and implemented a training programme for the project's national staff with an aim to make their involvement more productive. In order to ensure more effective on-site management and technical guidance, Mr Danso moved the site of the project to Khao Poo Luang, about 150 km from Korat, for over a year. The work undertaken by Mr Danso had broken new ground in the application of rural sociology to the problems of settlement in forest areas. He had demonstrated through personal achievement the appropriateness of FAO's policy of forestry for rural development.
C. Presentation of the A.H. Boerma Award 1984-85
4. The A.H. Boerma Award is presented biennially to a journalist or journalists whose work has helped to focus public attention on important aspects of the world food problem, with the likely result of having increased public support of measures leading to its solution.
5. On this, the fourth occasion, the Award for 1984-85 was shared by a noted television cameraman and producer, Mr Mohamed Amin of Kenya, and a distinguished journalist and writer, Ms Claire Brisset of France.
6. The Awards were presented by the Director-General to Mr Amin for his widely televised news coverage of the famine in Ethiopia, and for his documentary film on the famine afflicting more than 20 African countries, "African Calvary: Uncertain Redemption". Ms Brisset received the Award for her coverage of the problems of the Third World in many French-language journals of repute over a period of many years, with particular emphasis on the malnourished, especially children.
D. In Memoriam
7. The Conference observed one minute of silence in memory of staff members who had died in the service of the Organization since the Conference last met.
E. Volcanic Eruption in Colombia
8. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 1/85
AID FOR COLOMBIA
THE CONFERENCE,
Deeply touched by the extremely large number of human lives, property and crop losses that have recently struck Colombia due to the eruption of the volcano "Nevado del Ruiz",
Concerned with the suffering of thousands of people left without means of subsistence and shelter,
Recognizing the dimension of the tasks that Colombia has to initiate without delay,
1. Expresses its solidarity to the people and the Government of Colombia;
2. Commends the efforts made by the authorities and the people of Colombia to conduct urgently an assistance programme in the affected areas;
3. Notes with satisfaction the quick action taken by FAO and WFP in assisting the populations of the affected areas;
4. Urges all Member States, the United Nations System Organizations concerned and the International Community as a whole, to offer to the Government of Colombia the necessary aid to enable it to meet the critical situation of the people affected and the hard task of reconstruction;
5. Encourages the Director-General of FAO and the Executive Director of WFP (World Food Programme) to take additional steps on request in order to assist the Government of Colombia in appropriate ways, in the sectors of food and agriculture, to enable the Government to meet the needs of the severely affected population.
(Adopted 28 November 1985)
F. Tribute to Dr M.S. Swaminathan as Independent Chairman of the Council
9. The Conference paid tribute to the outgoing Independent Chairman of the Council and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 2/85
TRIBUTE TO DR M.S. SWAMINATHAN, AS INDEPENDENT CHAIRMAN OF THE COUNCIL
THE CONFERENCE,
Considering that the term of office of Dr M.S. Swaminathan, Independent Chairman of the FAO Council since November 1981, expires at the close of the Twenty-third Session of the Conference, Conscious of the fact that the outgoing Independent Chairman had been actively associated with the work of the FAO Council since 1979,
1. Pays tribute to the guidance he has given to the Council in its debates during the four years of his Chairmanship;
2. Expresses to Dr M.S. Swaminathan its sincere thanks and warmest wishes.
(Adopted 25 November 1985)
G. Retirement of Mr Edward M. West
10. In tribute to the Deputy Director-General whose retirement would shortly take place, the Conference adopted the following Resolution by acclamation
Resolution 3/85
RETIREMENT OF MR EDWARD M. WEST
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that Mr Edward M. West will shortly retire from the Organization after four years of service as Deputy Director-General,
Mindful of his earlier services to the Organization as a member of the Programme Committee and Vice-Chairman of the Fifteenth Session of the Conference and subsequently as Assistant Director-General of the Office of Programme, Budget and Evaluation,
Recognizing his long and exceptionally outstanding services and unfailing dedication to the aims of the Organization,
Expresses to Mr Edward M. West its thanks and deep appreciation of the distinguished contribution he has made to the work of FAO, and conveys to him its warm wishes for a continued active life, good health and happiness.
(Adopted 25 November 1985)
H. Tribute to the Memory of Mr Jean E. Carroz
11. The Conference observed a minute of silence in memory of Mr Jean E. Carroz, Assistant Director-General of the Fisheries Department, who died on 25 November 1985. The Director-General and delegations paid tribute to his outstanding contribution and the dedication he had shown throughout his career in the Organization.
<section>4</section>
IV. Procedure of the session
A. Election of Chairman and Vice-Chairmen of the Conference
B. Appointment of the General Committee and the Credentials Committee
C. Adoption of the Agenda
D. Arrangements for the Session and Allocation of Agenda Items
E. Admission of Observers
A. Election of Chairman and Vice-Chairmen of the Conference
12. The Council had nominated and the Conference elected Jean Baptiste Yonke (Cameroon) as Chairman of the Twenty-third Session of the Conference.
13. Upon recommendation of the Eighty-eighth Session of the Council, and in order to facilitate the election of the Vice-Chairmen, the Conference decided to suspend, during its Twenty-third Session, the application of the provision of Rule VIII of the General Rules of the Organization (GRO) which established at three the number of Vice-Chairmen of the Conference.
14. The Conference then approved the appointment of the four Vice-Chairmen of the Conference recommended by the Nominations Committee, as follows:
L.P. Duthie (Australia)
R.L. Cheltenham (Barbados)
S.B. Singh (India)
A.O. Dawarda (Libya)
B. Appointment of the General Committee and the Credentials Committee
15. The Nominations Committee recommended and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Members of the General Committee
China Norway
Cyprus United States of America
France Venezuela
Morocco
Members of the Credentials Committee
Austria Tonga
Burkina Faso United Arab Emirates
Costa Rica United States of America
Czechoslovakia Zambia
Thailand 
C. Adoption of the Agenda
16. The Conference adopted its Agenda as amended by the General Committee, and as given in Appendix A to this report.
D. Arrangements for the Session and Allocation of Agenda Items
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen
Resolutions Committee of the Conference
Right of Reply
Verbatim Records
Verification of Credentials
Voting Rights
Informal Meeting of Observers from International Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)
17. The Conference adopted the arrangements and Timetable proposed by the Eighty-eighth Session of the Council, as amended by the General Committee.
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen
18. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendations to establish three Commissions to consider and report upon Parts I, II and III of the Agenda.
19. In accordance with Rule VII-1 and Rule XXIV-5(b) of the General Rules of the Organization, the Eighty-eighth Session of the Council had nominated the following Chairmen of the Commissions:
Commission I: Roger Martin (Belgium)
Commission II: Gonzalo Bula Hoyos (Colombia)
Commission III: Gamal Ahmed (Sudan)
20. The Conference appointed the foregoing officers and, taking into consideration the proposals of the General Committee, in accordance with Rule XIII-2 GRO, also appointed:
Vice-Chairmen of Commission I: J. Ladan (Nigeria)
A. Khaled (Yemen, People's Democratic Republic of)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission II: J. Winkel (Germany, Federal Republic of)
A. Qadir (Pakistan)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission III: I.P. Alvarenga (El Salvador)
L. Zelko (Hungary)
Resolutions Committee of the Conference
21. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the Eighty-eighth Session of the Council to establish a Resolutions Committee of seven members, one from each FAO region, and appointed the following:
Africa: Liberia
Asia: Indonesia
Europe: Turkey
Latin America and the Caribbean: Cuba
Near East: Iran, Islamic Republic of
North America: Canada
Southwest Pacific: New Zealand
22. The Conference agreed to the recommendation of the General Committee that the Resolutions Committee should be chaired by the current Chairman of the Programme Committee, in order to have the full benefit of his experience.
23. The Conference approved the functions of the Resolutions Committee and the criteria for the formulation of resolutions, as given in document C 85/12, Appendix D.
Right of Reply
24. The Conference confirmed the decision taken at its nine previous sessions to the effect that, when a member wished to reply to criticisms of his Government's policy, he should preferably do so on the afternoon of the day on which such criticism had been voiced after all those wishing to participate in the discussion had had an opportunity to speak.
Verbatim Records
25. As provided for in Rule XVIII GRO, verbatim records were kept of all Conference Plenary and Commission meetings. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the General Committee that statements could be inserted in the verbatim records when time did not permit them to be delivered, taking into consideration, however, the conditions laid down by the General Committee.
Verification of Credentials
26. The credentials of delegations of 150 Member Nations were found valid. Eight Member Nations did not send a delegation to the Conference.
27. The credentials of the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to FAO and of the Observer from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Sovereign Order of Malta were found valid.
28. The names of the representatives of the international organizations attending the Conference, including the United Nations and Specialized Agencies were duly deposited as prescribed under Rule 111-2 GRO.
Voting Rights
29. The Conference noted that, in accordance with Article III-4 of the Constitution, ten Member Nations at the beginning of the Session had no right to vote in the Conference as the amount of their arrears of contributions to the Organization exceeded the amount of the contributions due from them for the two preceding calendar years. Subsequently, seven of these Member Nations regularized their positions. In addition, the Conference decided to permit two Member Nations (Chad and Paraguay) to vote after having adopted resolutions 3/ permitting the liquidation of their arrears over a period of ten years. One Member Nation in arrears (Democratic Kampuchea) had no right to vote at the Conference.
Informal Meeting of Observers from International Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)
30. The Eighty-seventh Session of the Council had suggested that an informal meeting of representatives of international non-governmental organizations admitted as observers to the Twenty-third Session of the Conference should be convened on Tuesday 12 November. The meeting elected Mrs Sarojini Pillay (International Alliance of Women) as Chairman, and the report of its deliberations was communicated to the Conference.
E. Admission of Observers
Applicants for Membership
Observer from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR)
Liberation Movements
Intergovernmental and International Non-Governmental Organizations
Fortieth Anniversary of FAO
Applicants for Membership
31. As was customary, the Director-General had provisionally invited the applicants for membership (Cook Islands and Solomon Islands) to be represented by observers until their admission to the Organization had been decided upon. The Conference approved the Director-General's action.
Observer from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR)
32. The Conference confirmed the invitation sent by the Director-General to the Government of the USSR to attend the session in an observer capacity.
Liberation Movements
33. The Conference approved the invitations issued by the Director--General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and those African Liberation Movements recognized by OAU (Organization of African Unity) to attend the session as observers.
Intergovernmental and International Non-Governmental Organizations
34. The Conference approved the list of international organizations to which the Director-General had extended a provisional invitation to the Conference session, and invited the representatives of those organizations to participate in the activities of the Conference as observers.
35. The Conference concurred with the recommendation of the General Committee that, in accordance with Rule XVII-3 GRO, the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), the International Cooperative Alliance (ICA) the International Federation of Agricultural Producers (IFAP) and the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) should be granted speaking time to address Plenary.
Fortieth Anniversary of FAO
36. The Constitution of FAO was signed by the original Member Nations in Quebec City, Canada, on 16 October 1945, thereby bringing the Organization into existence. The date is commemorated annually as World Food Day, following a decision of the FAO Conference in 1979.
37. The Conference noted that the Fortieth Anniversary of FAO was celebrated worldwide on World Food Day 1985. Regional events were organized by the FAO Regional Offices for Africa in Buea (Cameroon), for Latin America and the Caribbean in Santiago (Chile); and for Asia and the Pacific in Bangkok (Thailand), while national events took place in more than 140 countries.
38. At FAO Headquarters, a special ceremony was addressed by His Excellency Francesco Cossiga, President of the Italian Republic. Before the ceremony President Cossiga had unveiled a plaque to mark the start of work on an extension of the Headquarters buildings. These new buildings would permit all FAO staff in Rome to work at the Terme di Caracalla complex, and would avoid the need to rent accommodations in other parts of the city. The Conference was informed that the Italian Government had budgeted 25 000 million lire to finance the work.
39. Messages were sent to the Director-General by more than 80 Heads of State and Government, Ministers and other prominent personalities conveying their congratulations and good wishes on the occasion of the anniversary.
40. A series of exhibitions on the history and work of FAO were arranged on the FAO premises. One traced the founding of the International Institute for Agriculture established in Rome in 1905 at the instigation of David Lubin, and which was the precursor of FAO. A booklet entitled "FAO - the First Forty Years" was prepared, reviewing the main themes of the Organization's work in the past four decades. A special number of CERES, the FAO Review on Agriculture and Development, was devoted entirely to interviews with Heads of State or Government.
41. On 10 November, the first Sunday after the opening of the Conference, a special Mass was held at St. Peter's Basilica to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the Organization and of the United Nations. In his homily on that occasion, His Holiness Pope John Paul II paid tribute to the work of FAO, and voiced his strong support for multilateral cooperation in the search for international social justice.
42. In the course of the Conference, the City of Rome inaugurated an FAO Park planted with trees chosen to represent different FAO regions. Member Nations were invited by the Mayor of Rome to contribute additional trees, both to beautify the park and to express its character as a symbol of global cooperation.
43. The Conference set aside one day - 14 November - to commemorate the anniversary. On that day, addresses were delivered by two specially invited Heads of State: His Excellency President Soeharto of Indonesia, and His Excellency President François Mitterrand of France.
44. President Soeharto, after congratulating FAO on its anniversary, described the way in which Indonesia had more than doubled its food production in 15 years, thus achieving self-sufficiency. He announced a gift of 100 000 tons of paddy rice to FAO, collected by Indonesian farmers for the benefit of families suffering from hunger in other countries, especially in Africa.
45. President Mitterrand recalled the origins of FAO, and reiterated the commitment of France to finding solutions for the problems of developing countries. He felt that three main directions should be followed: reform of the international monetary system; full participation by developing nations in multilateral trade negotiations; and a global approach to the problems of debt and development.
46. Following the addresses by the two Heads of State, statements were made by the Director-General and by Heads of Delegation on behalf of the various regions. It was generally stressed that substantial progress had been made toward the goals established in 1945, but that even more remained to be accomplished before the age-old scourges of hunger and malnutrition could be vanquished. The tasks ahead might well be even more difficult than those in the past, as a result of increasing pressure of population on land resources. FAO and its Member Nations, as well as all concerned with food problems, would need to intensify their efforts in the years to come.
47. The Conference extended its thanks to all who had commemorated the anniversary in ceremonies held round the world. The Conference expressed its deep appreciation to President Cossiga of Italy, President Soeharto of Indonesia and President Mitterrand of France for honouring the Organization by their participation in the anniversary celebrations at FAO Headquarters. The Conference also expressed its deep appreciation to President Alan Garcia Pérez of Peru, whose participation in the Conference as the McDougall Memorial lecturer represented an important contribution to the celebration of the fortieth anniversary.
48. The Conference expressed its appreciation to the Director-General and staff of the Organization for having taken the initiative for this celebration, and expressed its satisfaction with the way in which it had been organized.
<section>5</section>
V. Major trends and policies in food and agriculture
A. Statements by Heads of Delegations in the General Discussion
B. World Food and Agriculture Situation
C. Progress Report on International Agricultural Adjustment including Agricultural Protectionism
D. Report of the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development (June-July 1984)
E. Adoption of the World Food Security Compact
F. Programme for the 1990 Census of Agriculture
A. Statements by Heads of Delegations in the General Discussion
49. The Plenary General Discussion was opened by the Director-General. The text of his statement is given in Appendix D. Following, this, 138 speakers participated in the discussion: the Independent Chairman of the Council, 124 Heads of Delegations - of which 98 were Ministers or Vice-Ministers, the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to FAO, representatives of four UN bodies (United Nations, United Nations Development Programme, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), World Food Council (WFC)), the European Economic Community (EEC), the Organization of African Unity, the Arab Organization for Agricultural Development (AOAD), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (African liberation movement) and observers from three international non-governmental organizations having consultative status with FAO. The statements of six Member Nations and one international nongovernmental organization in consultative status with FAO were
inserted in the records.
B. World Food and Agriculture Situation
State of Food and Agriculture (SOFA)
Critical Situation in Africa
Study of Agricultural Price Policies
Importance and Complexity of Price Policies
Key Domestic Issues in Pricing Policy
Agricultural Pricing Policies in Developed Countries
Follow-up to the Report
Forestry: The Manifesto of Mexico (Ninth World Forestry Congress, July 1985)
State of Food and Agriculture (SOFA)
50. The Conference reviewed the world and regional food and agricultural situation on the basis of the Director-General's Report, The State of Food and Agriculture 1985 and its Supplement. It concurred with his assessment of the situation.
51. The Conference agreed that the early 1980s had been dominated by the economic recession that had had very negative consequences for food and agricultural production and food consumption, especially in developing countries. While the economic recovery had been strong in some industrialized countries, it had been less so in the majority of developing countries and had affected them unevenly. It was noted that this recovery in the developed countries had not had a beneficial effect on the growth of most developing countries. The problems of external debt in those countries, a decline in their flows of financial resources, declining international prices of their main export commodities and contracting export markets for agricultural products contributing to declining terms of trade, continued to pose serious obstacles to the resumption of widespread economic growth.
52. The Conference underlined the problems currently affecting agricultural commodity markets and the links between more liberalized trade, the expansion of export earnings and adequate servicing of international debt. The Conference called on Member States to reduce protectionism, including export subsidies and similar measures in agricultural markets, so that producers of agricultural products could expand their output and trade. It looked to the prospective round of multilateral trade negotiations under the auspices of GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) to resolve these grave problems.
53. Recognizing the difficulties in overcoming problems of financing international debt, the Conference also called for solutions that permitted economic adjustments to take place without jeopardizing the standard of living of the more economically vulnerable populations.
54. The Conference welcomed the longer-term analysis presented in the documents as well as the regional coverage. It noted that the regional experience during the early 1980s, both with regard to economic issues and progress in the food and agricultural sectors, had been extremely diverse, having been very negative for some regions but more positive in others.
55. There was continued and unanimous concern for Africa. The region had experienced average annual declines in per caput income and merchandise exports of nearly 2 percent and 3 percent respectively in the early 1980s. During this time, its debt-service ratio had nearly doubled. This overall situation had been accompanied by a decline in per caput food and agricultural production of nearly 2 percent a year, largely as a consequence of drought. Despite rising food imports, per caput food supplies had steadily declined. The Conference welcomed the widespread improvements in the food and agricultural situation in Africa during the current crop year, although it noted that economic problems continued at crisis levels and rendered the region still vulnerable to unfavourable weather conditions.
56. The Conference drew the attention of the international community to the need for continued support for long-term development efforts in Africa, although emergency aid would still need to be maintained in some cases. Support was expressed for FAO's efforts in the field of rehabilitation of agriculture in Africa. The Conference stressed the need for an early and adequate replenishment of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), with its emphasis on small farm agriculture, typical in much of Africa. Support was also given to other initiatives, both bilateral and multilateral, aimed at financing the development of Africa over the long term.
57. The Conference also stated that food aid should play a continuing and important role in agricultural development in Africa. Seven million tons out of the total shipments of more than 12 million tons of food aid in cereals had been devoted to meeting Africa's food aid needs in 1984/85, but emergency needs in 1985/86 would be significantly lower.
58. The recent economic and agricultural situation also had been very discouraging in Latin America and the Caribbean in the early 1980s. Per caput incomes also had declined in the region, the growing external debt was US$360000 million, debt-service ratios were at very high levels (more than 40 percent of export earnings) and inflation rates had soared. Following the increases in the 1970s, agricultural production per caput and exports also had fallen. The problems of protectionism and extreme competition in agricultural markets, which caused the displacement of exports from low-cost producing countries, were particularly stressed. Similarly, declining food imports pointed to a deteriorating nutritional situation.
59. Some difficulties were being experienced in the Near East Region, although in part this stemmed from the worsening external economic environment. Declining agricultural production of some countries confronting rising demand for food had led to greatly increased food imports. Declining export earnings made the continued financing of such imports difficult and budgetary constraints were leading to pressures to reduce food subsidies, which contributed to social tensions in the region.
60. The Conference welcomed the progress that had been achieved in China and the Far East despite the recent difficult economic environment. Although deep-seated problems remained, incomes had increased significantly as had agricultural production. Per caput farm income had reportedly increased in China by 15 percent in 1084-. Overall per caput incomes had increased by an annual average of nearly 4 percent in the Far East in the early 1980s. Agricultural production had increased by between 7 percent to 8 percent and by nearly 4 percent a year in China and the Far East respectively in the early 1980s. The debt-service ratio had been relatively stable in this region at about 10 percent of export earnings. The Conference noted the important role that pragmatic, flexible and consistent policies had played in achieving this performance, not only in agriculture but in the overall economic and financial framework.
61. The Conference noted the unequal progress in agricultural development in developed countries between different regions. In some cases there were problems of structural surpluses. The Conference was informed that the work on agricultural trade under the 1982 Ministerial Mandate of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) was striving to promote policies in developed countries leading to their coordinated adjustment. It was also informed that the Commission of the European Economic Community had not yet made formal proposals regarding the Common Agricultural Policy but that proposals would be made to the Council of Ministers before the end of the year.
62. The Conference considered that the immediate situation regarding global food and agriculture was more favourable because of ample supplies. Cereal production was expected to attain a record level in 1985. Cereal stocks, at a forecast 21 percent of expected consumption by the end of 1985/86, were an adequate safeguard for world food security. Nevertheless, concern was expressed at the situation of excessively low commodity prices, which created, great difficulties, and at the fact that undernutrition was widespread.
63. Governments of developing countries should place priority on achieving a progressive agricultural sector, both with regard to their policies toward the sector and allocations of investment. The focus of efforts to increase food and agricultural output should be on improved technology appropriate for use by small-scale farmers. Increased emphasis was being placed on agricultural research and improved access to modern inputs, with greater regard to the environment problems, which were multiplying. Less centralized decision-making and greater participation at the local level in project planning and monitoring were being more widely adopted. The important roles of women in food production were being more appreciated. So was the role of secondary crops in food security and nutrition. Financial and budgetary constraints, however, prevented as rapid progress as was required. In some cases, the high costs of inputs on world markets were inhibiting their greater use in low-income
countries.
64. The Conference stressed the importance of the protection and conservation of forests in temperate and tropical regions and the importance of government intervention to prevent the blind exploitation of land leading to the destruction of forests and grassland. The scientific management of watersheds, soil conservation and tree planting should be promoted. Forestry and agricultural activities could be integrated in such practices as agrosylviculture. The role of forestry in contributing to the domestic economy and to export incomes in some countries was also emphasized.
65. The Conference noted that these matters had been elaborated in the Mexico Manifesto - the declaration of the Ninth World Forestry Congress held in Mexico in July 1985. It welcomed the initiative of France in convening a conference on trees and forests in 1986 which would address the problems of forest damage in Europe and deforestation in Africa.
Critical Situation in Africa
66. The Conference reviewed the situation of food and agriculture in Africa on the basis of the report presented by the Director-General. It concurred with the main points contained in the report which had been submitted in response to Resolution 1/87 "The Food Situation in Africa" of the Eighty-seventh Session of the FAO Council.
67. The Conference noted that FAO had been warning of a deteriorating food situation since 1976 and that, on the basis of information provided through the Global Information Early Warning System (GIEWS), the Director--General had as early as the spring of 1983 appealed for additional international assistance to meet the food emergency conditions arising in Africa. The Conference appreciated the continuing efforts of the Director-General to draw the attention of the International Community to the plight of the African countries affected by acute food shortages.
68. The Conference expressed full support for the GIEWS and its proposed reinforcement. It noted with satisfaction that the system had brought the magnitude of the needs of the affected countries to the prompt attention of the international community.
69. The Conference expressed its deep concern at the economic and financial situation in Africa and its implications for agriculture. Indeed, the latest economic reports indicated that GDP (Gross Domestic Product) in Africa was rising by only 2.2 percent in 1985, even lower than the 2.6 percent growth of 1984. Inflation remained high and there was a decline in primary product export prices and deterioration of returns to exports. The debt burden was still rising. Its servicing was expected to reach on average 32 percent of export earnings in 1985. Furthermore, without anticipating the outcome for 1984, development aid on concessional terms between 1980 and 1983 had regrettably declined. In view of this, the Conference appealed to all states who could contribute to improving this situation to carry out all measures likely to increase the resources of the countries concerned which could be devoted to their economic development. Concern was expressed at the negative impact of
the Republic of South Africa's policies on attempts to resolve the current food and agricultural crisis in southern Africa.
70. The Conference expressed its satisfaction at the improvement in the food supply position in many African countries as a result of good harvests in most of the countries which had been most affected by drought in 1983 and 1984. It noted that, following favourable weather conditions throughout the growing season in the majority of countries, the region's aggregate output of cereals was expected to increase by about 30 percent, with the production of the Sahelian countries rising by some 60 percent.
71. The Conference stressed that, despite the improvement in the overall food supply position, large amounts of food assistance would still be needed in Africa during 1986. Emergency food aid would continue to be required by several countries, particularly Angola, Botswana, Cape Verde, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Sudan and possibly Lesotho. Many of the other countries which had been affected by the prolonged drought would continue to need to import cereals in 1986. Although a substantial part would be covered by commercial imports, some external food assistance would be needed. It noted that the total food aid requirements of the 21 most affected countries were provisionally forecast by GIEWS at about 3 million tons for 1985/86, less than half the amount required in the previous year.
72. The Conference noted with concern that, despite all the efforts which had been made by the international community and the governments of the affected countries to expedite deliveries and remove logistic constraints, a substantial amount of pledged assistance either had not been received or distributed in time and would have to be carried forward into the 1985/86 season. It urged the international community and the governments of the countries concerned to ensure that the arrival and distribution of this aid was carefully planned to take account of available storage capacities and to avoid disruption of markets in recipient countries. The Conference endorsed the need to reinforce national early warning systems and the level of preparedness and to increase national and regional food reserves, as well as to improve the procedures for marketing and distributing food assistance in the recipient countries, in order that they would be better prepared for any similar
emergencies in the future.
73. The Conference noted that several of the African countries affected by the 1984 drought would have surpluses of cereals available for export in 1985/86. It urged the international community to take measures, when appropriate, to mobilize these local surpluses, such as funding triangular transactions, in order to meet the deficits in 1985/86 in neighbouring countries.
74. The Conference emphasized that the improvement in food and agriculture production this year in Africa should not divert attention from the rehabilitation and other measures required to resolve the underlying structural difficulties, in order to facilitate agriculture aid rural development and to safeguard food security in the region. It stressed the need for the expansion of international support to such long-term measures and for well-coordinated efforts of the Governments, as well as of bilateral and multilateral agencies, involved. It reiterated that the long-term solution to the food and agricultural problems of the region rested with the African Governments themselves, as underlined in the declaration of the Twenty-first OAU Summit. Some members emphasized that the underlying structural difficulties included problems of economic structure, development policies, population growth and desertification.
75. The Conference expressed full support for the Agricultural Rehabilitation Programme for Africa (ARPA) and appreciated the steps taken by the Director-General to launch this Programme which was important for the recovery of African agriculture. The Conference considered ARPA, with its short- and medium-term projects for recovery, as a link between the emergency situation in Africa and the long-term requirements for agricultural development.
76. The Conference endorsed the action taken to refocus the FAO Regular Programme and to use part of its savings in order to assist and support countries identified as most in need of agricultural rehabilitation. The need for FAO to continue to strengthen cooperation with other organizations with a view to long term development was also emphasized.
77. The Conference requested the Director-General to continue his efforts for financing the ARPA programme and urged the international community and donors to respond to his appeal for further financing.
78. The Conference appreciated the assistance given by FAO to the OAU Secretariat in preparing the Special Programme of Action for Improvement of the Food Situation and Rehabilitation of Agriculture in Africa. It also appreciated the offer made by the Director-General to provide technical assistance, mobilize resources and assist in the implementation of this programme, as well as the Special Emergency Assistance Fund for Drought and Famine in Africa, and the OAU Special Emergency Fund.
79. The Conference welcomed the proposal to carry out an in-depth study of agricultural and food problems in Africa which had been endorsed by the Thirteenth FAO Regional Conference. It noted that the problems of African agriculture could only be tackled within the framework of the total economy, including an examination of the external forces - debt, trade conditions, migration, aid flows - which have such a major impact on it. The Conference welcomed the Director-General's decision to seek the advice of African experts on the study's findings before its submission to the Fourteenth Regional Conference for Africa to be held next September, in Brazzaville, Congo.
80. Given the crucial importance of the food and agricultural sectors in Africa, the Conference emphasized the important role of FAO in the preparations for and the deliberations of a Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly on Africa's critical economic situation and supported the offer of the Director-General to prepare documentation on food and agriculture.
81. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 4/85
THE CRITICAL SITUATION OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE IN AFRICA I/
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling Resolution 1/83 of its Twenty-second Session on the critical situation of food and agriculture in Africa, a situation which, since then, has dramatically deepened and spread into a continental food crisis inflicting untold suffering upon 30 million Africans in 25 countries,
Gratified by the hope engendered in Africa, thanks to the return of abundant rains this year in most of the African countries affected by the drought, and with the prospect of bumper harvests which should cover most of the food deficits in many affected countries,
Expressing appreciation of the action conducted by WFP throughout the food crisis in Africa despite the difficulties of all kinds it has had to face,
Realizing that Africa has been profoundly affected over the years by a series of natural calamities and political, social and economic crisis, and that the resulting hunger will not disappear merely because the rains have come back,
Concerned by the fact that the destabilizing acts of aggression of South Africa are having a negative impact on agricultural production and food security in southern Africa. a/, b/, c/
Recalling the Addis Ababa Declaration, adopted at the Twenty-first OAU Summit (July 1985), on the Current Economic Situation in Africa, wherein African Heads of State and Government pledged themselves to progressively increase the share of public investments to the agricultural sector to attain the minimum target of 20 to 25 percent by 1989, and called for:
a) the convening of a Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly to deliberate on the critical economic situation in Africa,
b) the preparation of an international conference on Africa's external debt, and
c) the creation of a special Fund,
Noting with satisfaction the role played by the Director-General of FAO in informing and mobilizing world opinion since early 1983 on the massive dimensions of the African famine, thanks to the accurate forecast of the FAO Global Information and Early Warning System,
Welcoming with satisfaction the timely Agricultural Rehabilitation Programme for Africa, geared to relaunch agricultural and livestock production within 1985-87 with the support and funding of both the developed and the developing countries, with the aim of reconciling emergency aid with long-term development objectives,
Concerned, however, by the increase in basic development requirements at a time when official development assistance to the agricultural sector on favourable conditions is falling and the International Fund for Agricultural Development, which plays a fundamental role in the agricultural development of many developing countries and particularly the food-deficit, low-income, African countries is encountering difficulties in replenishing its resources,
1. Supports the objectives of the Harare Declaration on the Food Crisis in
Africa, adopted by the Thirteenth Regional Conference for Africa, and requests the Director-General of FAO to continue to help African countries implement its principles;
2. Commends the Director-General of FAO for his efforts to focus the attention of the international community on the African Food Crisis and to define, under the Agricultural Rehabilitation Programme for Africa, a set of appropriate measures to overcome this crisis and its disastrous consequences;
3. Endorses the actions taken by the Secretariat and the Director-General to prepare the ARPA;
4. Welcomes the reallocation of US$22.5 million under the 1984-85 Regular Programme for the immediate implementation of rehabilitation projects under ARPA and for financing supporting activities;
5. Supports the priority given to the Global Information and Early Warning System and to the development needs of Africa in FAO's Programme of Work and Budget for 1986-87;
6. Asks that the policies and programmes of the African countries and external aid and assistance programmes give priority to the rehabilitation and development of food production;
7. Encourages the efforts now being made at the Fortieth Session of the United Nations General Assembly to convene a Special Session of the General Assembly at Ministerial level to consider in depth the critical economic situation in Africa, in accordance with the appeal made by African Heads of State and Government at the Twenty-first OAU Summit;
8. Fully recognizes the importance of Africa's debt problems and the close link between external debt and agricultural development and takes note with attention of the appeal made by African Heads of State and Government with a view to the urgent preparation of an international conference on Africa's external debt. d/, e/, f/
9. Appeals to all IFAD Member Nations to finalize negotiations on the second replenishment of this institution's resources without delay, and in any event before the Ninth Session of the Governing Council;
10. Requests all the donor countries to facilitate achievement of the World Food Programme's pledge targets for 1987-88 as proposed by the CFA (Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes), including contributions in cash, so as to: a) encourage the use of triangular transactions and b) accelerate the delivery of food aid and other supplies;
11. Stresses the urgent need for concerted international measures aimed at mitigating the adverse effects on agricultural production and food security of southern African states of destabilizing acts of aggression by South Africa; a/, b/, c/
12. Expresses its gratitude to the international community, including the United Nations System, for its support and aid to Africa, and requests it to continue this assistance, with special attention underlining the Importance of the priority programme adopted by the Twenty-first OAU Summit;
13. Asks the Director-General of FAO to monitor the implementation of this Resolution within the terms of FAO's mandate and report on it to the Conference.
a/ The delegate of the United States of America stated that his government did not consider the introduction of political issues appropriate for consideration in FAO.
b/ The Member Nations of the European Economic Community, Spain, Portugal, Israel and Japan made the following declaration: "In the text voted by the Conference, preambular paragraph 5 and operative paragraph 11 raised objections on our part. Our governments have, on various occasions, condemned South Africa's policy of apartheid and the repressive measures associated with this policy. However, FAO is a specialized agency of the United Nations which by virtue of its statutes is a technical organization in which it is not appropriate to deal with political questions, which come within the province of other United Nations bodies. The Member Nations of the European Economic Community, Spain, Portugal, Israel and Japan regret that they had to abstain on the resolution as a whole, but the voting procedure imposed on us by the majority did not allow us any other way of expressing our reservations, which related only to certain paragraphs".
c/ The delegate of Côte-d'Ivoire, on behalf of the whole African Group (50 countries), and Colombia, Cuba, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Mexico and Nicaragua, which had strongly supported the present Resolution, rejected the concept of politicization of FAO as referred to by countries which abstained from voting or voted against the Resolution on the Critical Situation in Africa, given the fact that this Resolution repeated the terms of ECOSOC (Economic and Social Council) Resolution 1985/80 as adopted on 26 July 1985 by consensus and which had been adapted to the field of food and agriculture in keeping with the mandate assigned to FAO.
d/ The Member Nations of the European Economic Community, Spain and Portugal recalled that a constructive dialogue had developed within the framework of the competent international agencies, and in particular the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the Club de Paris, for defining appropriate strategies for approaching the debt problem presently confronting African and other developing countries. They continued to think that a case-by-case approach was the most effective way of implementing the relevant paragraphs of the declaration on Africa adopted last year by the General Assembly of the United Nations.
e/ The delegates of the United Kingdom and of the United States of America considered that FAO did not have any substantive competence in matters relating to external debt. They also considered that the reference in the text to the close link between external debt and agricultural development was an over-simplification of a much more complicated interaction which could not be specified in isolation.
f/ The delegate of Cuba considered that external debt problems were closely related to agricultural development and food production, and that independently of negotiations between heads of state in other fora, governments and people had the sovereign right to discuss the consequences of the external debt on their social, economic and political processes.
Study of Agricultural Price Policies
82. The Conference reviewed agricultural price policies on the basis of the report of the Director-General. It noted that the report drew on the results of the examination of the subject by the four FAO Regional Conferences in 1984 and that a preliminary version had been discussed in depth by the Committee on Agriculture (COAG) in March 1985.
83. The Conference welcomed the revised report as a valuable contribution, which went far toward filling a gap in knowledge of current price policy practices and problems. It was well informed and comprehensive and succeeded in combining analytical insight with practical, down-to-earth suggestions for improved formulation and application of price policies.
84. While agricultural price policies were necessarily country specific, their general framework and the issues with which they dealt often had much in common. By identifying key issues and options and by gathering more facts on recent or existing price policies, including the extent of price bias, the report was a useful guide to member countries, especially developing countries. It should also be taken into account by other international bodies.
85. The report should lead to follow-up action by both countries and by FAO. The subject, however, required deeper and more disaggregated analysis of certain aspects, particularly the bearing of protection on agricultural prices and trade.
Importance and Complexity of Price Policies
86. The Conference stressed the importance of agricultural price policies at all stages of development, both in market economy and centrally-planned countries. Prices exerted a major influence on production, consumption and trade and all governments Intervened to some extent - and often to a considerable extent - in the pricing of agricultural commodities and inputs to production. These interventions had international as well as national impacts.
87. The Conference underlined the great influence of non-price factors on production, such as agricultural structure (farm size, cropping pattern, technology, income level, etc.), transport and its infrastructure as well as the availability of inputs. If these other prerequisites were not available, price incentives alone would not result in adequate growth. Nevertheless, a sound price policy was often the missing ingredient in agricultural policies. Price policies which hampered or excessively promoted the growth of farm output or which paid insufficient attention to the nutritional problems of the very poor could inflict high economic and social costs.
88. The Conference noted that significant modifications to price policy were taking place in many countries, developed as well as developing and centrally planned as well as market economies. The general thrust of the modifications was to try to bring consumer prices closer to costs and to provide remunerative prices to producers. A number of developing countries were giving greater priority to food crops in contrast to export crops. Price policy bias against agriculture had been reduced in a number of instances. Subsidies were also being reduced.
89. Repeated attention was drawn during discussion to the complexity of price policies. This arose primarily from the multiple role of prices in providing farm incomes, in relating supply to demand and in giving signals for resource allocation and production decisions. A number of Influences and potential conflicts had therefore to be brought into balance, e.g. interests of producers and consumers, urban and rural populations, large farmers and small farmers, and priorities to be given to cash crops and food crops, respectively. At times, price policy decisions which were politically and socially unpopular had to be taken.
90. The Conference gave particular attention to
(a) internal issues faced by developing countries in deciding upon and applying their price policies and
(b) the effects on developing countries of agricultural protection in developed countries.
Key Domestic Issues in Pricing Policy
91. The Conference emphasized the need to apply multiple economic criteria in recommendations concerning the level of prices, although the final decision could be influenced by broader political and social considerations. Market prospects, cost of production and international prices all had to be taken into account. A number of countries used additional criteria.
92. The Conference agreed that the major function of producer price policies in developing countries was to give adequate incentives to farmers to increase output and returns by, for example, where appropriate, switching crops, increasing productivity and adopting better technologies. For this purpose it was essential that price bias against agriculture should be eliminated or reduced to the greatest extent possible. The Conference further agreed, however, on the necessity of cushioning the impact of incentive food prices on the food consumption of poor people. Policies must not neglect their effects on distribution.
93. The Conference emphasized the importance of food subsidies in meeting this problem but it agreed that they should be in the form of targeted subsidies available only to the very poor and other vulnerable groups. Rural and not only urban populations should be enabled to benefit. It was difficult to target food subsidies effectively; this was an area in which the exchange of country experience would be most valuable in finding the best system.
94. The Conference pointed to the need for macro-economic links to be taken fully into account when decisions were being made on agricultural price policy and on broader economic policy which had implications for the sector. It was particularly desirable that the influence of exchange rates on producer prices of agricultural products be assessed with care. Appropriate institutional arrangements could ensure that price policy was properly integrated not only in agricultural policy but also in overall national development strategies.
95. The Conference noted that uncertainty still remained as to the role of input subsidies as against output price incentives for raising production. Output incentives were often appropriate although in some circumstances subsidies on inputs such as fertilizer, seeds or credit could be effective, especially in countries at early stages of development where the use of new technologies needed to be promoted.
96. The Conference emphasized that policies to ensure reasonable price stabilization were essential, both for consumers and producers. It could reduce risks of producers in adopting new technologies. Some price movement within seasons and from one year to another were normal but these should be kept within predetermined limits which respected minimum guaranteed prices. Government intervention in market prices could achieve such stabilization goals.
97. The Conference expressed its concern that price policies could have adverse effects on the distribution of income within agriculture, especially in the short or medium term. Farmers who practiced largely subsistence agriculture received little benefit from output price incentives. The Conference therefore stressed the need for countries to ensure that the fullest use was also made of other measures which directly benefited small farmers and landless labourers, in accordance with the objectives and the plan of action of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD).
98. The Conference agreed with the need for effective administration of price policies. One aspect was marketing. The Conference agreed that it was desirable to promote efficiency through competition. Likewise, it was stated that often this could best be achieved through a combination of parastatal and private marketing channels. Some members referred to the negative effect provoked in many cases by the activities of intermediaries. Improved transport and extension of roads were urgently needed in some regions. Marketing arrangements should also make adequate provision for quality differences in the application of agricultural pricing schemes.
99. The Conference stressed the basic importance of planning and administration capacity and the availability of statistical and other information in determining the effectiveness of the application of price policies. The development of national capacity in these fields had to be given adequate priority in resources devoted to training and appreciation was expressed for FAO assistance of this kind.
Agricultural Pricing Policies in Developed Countries
100. The Conference discussed at length the extent and bearing of agricultural pricing policies in some developed countries on world agricultural trade, prices and supplies and on the external environment faced by other countries in formulating their price policies.
101. The Conference agreed that it was an issue of fundamental importance to all countries. It was also one of great complexity. The full consequences could not yet be assessed with confidence although their nature, direction and broad magnitudes were now the subject of increasing research.
102. Most studies pointed to lower and more unstable international prices as general results of protectionism; they also pointed to severely limited access to markets of major products, such as grains, sugar and meat. The Conference agreed that these results did in fact follow, inter alia, from protection. It also agreed that protection was not the only cause for price fluctuations in world markets, noting a number of factors such as exchange rate fluctuations. The Conference furthermore believed that assessments of the removal of protection limited to only one or a few commodities often gave misleading results and that a reliable assessment of a comprehensive reduction of protection along a broad front was not yet available. Existing and recent studies did suggest however that elimination or reduction of protection could lead to a substantial increase in the export earnings of those countries with comparative advantages in the production of commodities widely and heavily
protected in developed countries.
103. The Conference also noted that the position regarding protection varied widely amongst developed countries and amongst commodities. Some countries, for instance, which had introduced a system of price guarantees for limited amounts, protected their staple food commodities only to the point when approximate self-sufficiency was reached and thereafter restricted production. In small countries using this system, protection had only limited effects on world markets. Other countries continued their protection beyond self-sufficiency and then opted to subsidize exports. Some countries which historically had exported a significant proportion of their output at world market prices often strongly protected their production of import-competing products.
104. Many members linked the guiding principles for the setting of agricultural prices to the guidelines for International Agricultural Adjustment which constituted the overall framework for the solution of agricultural issues.
105. Some members expressed the view that protection in some developed countries had been a success in terms of goals of increased production and enhanced food security. They also suggested that presently high producer prices in their countries would eventually be reduced but that structural adjustments had first to be taken further. A number of developed countries also informed the Conference of a number of changes which they had made to improve agricultural trade prospects, including trade with developing countries.
106. The Conference expressed the hope that forthcoming negotiations in GATT would therefore provide a sorely needed improvement in the policies and practices affecting world agricultural trade, including a significant limitation of protectionist policies, and improvement of the export opportunities needed to make fuller and more assured use of existing comparative advantages, taking into account the special characteristics of agriculture.
<section>6</section>
Follow-up to the Report
107. The Conference expressed its strong wish that the interest aroused by the Director-General's report should give rise to follow-up action by both countries and by FAO.
108. Countries should make use of the study as an overall guide which policy makers and administrators could consult in the course of development and modification of their national price policies. The Conference drew attention to the useful checklist of suggestions concerning price policies contained in paragraph 329 of document C 85/19.
109. The Conference agreed with the FAO follow-up action proposed by the Director-General. The emphasis of this action would shift from global analysis to work at the country level. This would include:
- assisting developing countries in improving the collection and quality of their price data, in undertaking analyses of their national price policies and in training staff so that countries could themselves analyse costs and benefits of alternative policies;
- promoting an exchange of experience in price policies amongst developing countries, in both formulation and implementation;
- maintaining and updating the statistical series, including data on price policies, which constitute the quantitative component of the study;
- monitoring policy changes in developing countries and, after an appropriate length of time, assessing their experience. This could be the subject of a special chapter in a future State of Food and Agriculture while some of the developments would also be monitored in the biennial report on International Agricultural Adjustment;
- continuing to organize national, sub-regional and regional workshops on pricing policies;
The Director-General's report on price policies should be published at an early date.
110. The Conference suggested that follow-up actions be reviewed at a future meeting of the Committee on Agriculture.
Forestry: The Manifesto of Mexico (Ninth World Forestry Congress, July 1985)
111. The Conference expressed its appreciation to the people and Government of Mexico for organizing the Ninth World Forestry Congress and its satisfaction with the assistance and support provided by FAO.
112. The Conference agreed that the Manifesto of Mexico reflected the current critical situation of world forestry. It highlighted the need for urgent separate and collective action by Member Nations to safeguard the world's forest resources with a view to contributing to environmental stability, especially through the control of floods and desertification, and to socio-economic development through the production of wood for industries and energy, the provision of employment and support to agriculture.
113. The Conference noted that many governments had intensified their efforts to conserve and develop their forest resources particularly during 1985 which was declared by the FAO Council as the International Year of the Forest. The Conference considered that the "Principles and Guidelines" embodied in the Manifesto of Mexico were relevant to both developed and developing countries and provided a "Code of Conduct" for forest conservation. It invited all Member Nations to ensure, within the context of their national policies and priorities, that the far-reaching concepts and principles stated in the Manifesto of Mexico be made more widely known and given adequate attention in the formulation of forest development strategies and programmes.
114. The Conference noted that while the Manifesto of Mexico did not contain recommendations specifically addressed to FAO, it recognized and supported FAO's policies, strategies and programmes in forestry. The Conference welcomed, in particular, the support expressed by the Congress to the International Year of the Forest declared by the FAO Council, the Plan of Action on Tropical Forests adopted by the Committee on Forest Development in the Tropics and to the appeal of the Fourteenth FAO Regional Conference for Europe for more concerted national and regional efforts to decrease atmospheric pollution and to control forest fires and pests. Several members felt that the Manifesto of Mexico opened up new horizons for FAO in the forestry sector, creating a new challenge for the Organization in responding to requests by Member Nations for assistance to their own endeavours in implementing the principles and guidelines embodied in the Manifesto. In order to respond adequately to
this new challenge, high priority should be accorded to forestry in FAO's Programme of Work and Budget in the future.
115. Most members supported the proposal made by Austria and endorsed by the World Forestry Congress that a World Fund be created for the development and conservation of forest resources. A small number questioned the establishment of such a Fund and stated their reservations. Many members, while supporting the principle underlying the creation of such a Fund, considered that this proposal needed more detailed analysis and study before action could be taken thereon-. It was suggested that an appropriate forum for further discussion on this subject would be the next session of the Committee on Forestry (COFO).
116. The Conference noted the offer of the delegate of Austria to host the Tenth World Forestry Congress in 1990 and of the delegate of the Federal Republic of Germany to host a subsequent Congress.
117. Considering the aforementioned positions, the Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 5/85
ENDORSEMENT OF THE MEXICO MANIFESTO OF THE IX WORLD FORESTRY CONGRESS
THE CONFERENCE,
Reaffirming the importance of the Ninth World Forestry Congress, held in Mexico in July 1985, which constitutes a significant effort of the international community in the development, promotion and rational and equitable use of renewable natural resources,
Recalling resolution 2/86 of the FAO Council which declared 1985 the International Year of the Forest, and drew attention to the fact that the destruction of forests has become one of humanity's greatest problems and that the conservation and rational use of the world's forest resources has become imperative,
Recognizing the value of the Mexico Manifesto as a fundamental document summarizing the importance of forests today, both in protecting the environment and as a contribution to development,
Noting with satisfaction that FAO's current programmes In the forestry sector accord fully with the letter and spirit of the Mexico Manifesto,
1. Endorses the Mexico Manifesto as adopted;
2. Urges governments of Member Nations to take into account as appropriate, in the implementation of their development policies, the principles and guidelines set forth in the Manifesto which refer to investment plans and national forestry programmes;
3. Invites international organizations and institutions to ensure observance of the principles set forth in the Manifesto and to lend their financial and technical support to the development of national forestry resources and their rational management, as well as integrated use of forests.
(Adopted 27 November 1985)
C. Progress Report on International Agricultural Adjustment including Agricultural Protectionism
118. The Conference reviewed progress in International Agricultural Adjustment on the basis of the Director-General's Fifth Progress Report. It noted that this was the first report prepared on the basis of the revised guidelines approved by the Twenty-second Session of the Conference and that it paid particular attention to developments in agricultural protectionism following the relevant request of the Eighty-fourth Session of the Council.
119. The Conference noted that the growth of food and agricultural production in the developing countries as a whole during the period 1980-84 came close to meeting the objective of four percent a year as set out in Guideline 1. This development reflected mainly the gains achieved in some large developing countries, while in many other low-income countries production growth continued to lag behind population. The Conference welcomed the tendency of many developing countries to evaluate their policies towards agriculture, including their pricing policies, with a view to enhancing the effectiveness of these policies as incentives to production.
120. The Conference expressed concern that financial resources allocated to agricultural investment in the developing countries, including the share of agriculture in total public expenditure, continued to be inadequate in relation to the size of the sector and in relation to the urgency of the need to increase the production growth rate. It noted, however, that the share of agriculture in total investment and the level of public expenditure allocations to agriculture in developing countries as a group had been maintained in recent years despite the prevalence of worldwide recession and rising indebtedness.
121. The Conference stressed the importance of adequate supply of inputs to farmers in developing countries to ensure the needed improvement in agricultural productivity. In this respect it noted with concern the slowdown in the expansion of area under cultivation and irrigation as well as in fertilizer consumption. It called for the reversal of these trends and for increased attention to be devoted to the supply of improved seeds. It urged the international community to provide increased assistance in these fields to the developing countries.
122. The Conference noted with satisfaction the continued effort of many governments in pursuit of the objectives of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development. In general, greater attention was being paid to improving the position of the small farmers and landless peasants and to enhancing participation of rural people, including women and youth, in the development process.
123. The Conference stressed the need to ensure that agricultural inputs and services reached small farmers. It recognized the need for applied research with the effective participation of small farmers and extension workers while ensuring the implementation of appropriate technologies in agricultural production systems. It took note of the progress achieved in this context and stressed the need to adopt extension systems which enable small farmers to adopt technology with better performance.
124. While recognizing the progress made in involving people in development through their own organizations, the Conference considered that this was an area where greater efforts were necessary. It noted with concern that women had not benefited equally with men from agrarian reform programmes in some countries, while they also suffered from lack of adequate access to inputs and services. The Conference felt that special efforts were needed to deal with the problem of the rising rates of unemployment among rural youth.
125. The Conference noted with satisfaction that an increasing number of developing countries had requested FAO's assistance in establishing integrated food and nutrition policies aimed at the rehabilitation of the production of basic foodstuffs and the improvement of the nutrition situation In deprived areas. It stressed the need for more efforts to establish operational goals for the improvement of food consumption levels of specific target groups.
126. The Conference recognized the need for equitable distribution of income to improve the levels of living and nutrition of low-income consumers. It noted that progress in this area depended, among other things, upon improvements in food production, but while some developing countries had made progress in this area, the situation in others, particularly in Africa, had on the whole deteriorated.
127. The Conference noted with satisfaction the increasing awareness of and action taken by Member Governments towards prevention of food losses, through improving processing, handling and marketing of food and ensuring their quality and safety through strengthening food quality control measures.
128. The Conference stressed the need to encourage the production and consumption of traditional local foods.
129. The Conference agreed that protectionism, including restrictions on market access, and the use of export subsidies and other similar practices in agricultural trade had remained persistent, widespread and strong in recent years. It also agreed that resort to such measures was affecting the orderly development of international markets in agricultural and agro-based products and discouraged low-cost producers from exploiting their comparative advantage.
130. The Conference stressed that protectionist measures, particularly those of certain developed countries, had had adverse effects on incomes and rural employment and generally on social and economic development and had also eroded the balance-of-payments position of exporters of agricultural commodities, particularly the developing countries and low-cost producing countries. It stressed that such measures had generally compounded the problems arising from low export prices in international markets, and had thus limited the ability of many developing countries to service their external debts. It also emphasized that the worsening trends in protectionism in agriculture could, if allowed to continue, precipitate an agricultural trade war in which the major losers would be the low-cost exporting countries, especially developing countries as well as global food security. However, Member countries of the European Communities stressed that the EEC was by far the world's largest
importer of agricultural products (20 percent of world trade). Some members noted that the EEC is an area of high consumption and that most of its agricultural imports were tropical products, commodities which the Community largely did not produce itself, and agricultural raw materials. The spokesman of the EEC, speaking on behalf of member countries, stated that developing countries were the largest suppliers to the Community,' their share having risen by more than 5 percent in recent years and accounting for about 30 percent of their agricultural exports.
131. Some members stressed that it was essential to offer agricultural producers stable and incentive prices, taking into account the need to maintain fair income relationships between agricultural and non-agricultural sectors of their economies which would make it possible to ensure domestic food security. Some other members stressed that in pursuing national food and agricultural policies, full account should also be taken of the need to avoid harmful consequences to the food security of other countries.
132. The Conference agreed that all efforts should be made by the inter national community to persuade countries to put an end to protectionist measures including restrictions on market access export subsidies and similar practices which affected international markets. Most members expressed the view that agricultural trade liberalization would be essential for a more efficient allocation of resources in all countries. Some members expressed the view that complete liberalization of agricultural trade would benefit the economically stronger countries: accordingly, the organization of markets was required, in parallel with efforts to achieve freer trade, in order to achieve a fair distribution of the benefits from trade expansion. On the other hand, it was noted that in some countries positive measures had been taken in order to facilitate access of imports of some agricultural products.
133. The Conference noted with satisfaction the efforts of the GATT Committee on Trade in Agriculture, which had examined the current state of agricultural trade and related policies with a view to drawing up recommendations for achieving greater liberalization of agricultural trade. The Conference expressed the hope that the GATT Committee would conclude its work programme with definite and widely accepted recommendations which would clear the way for successful negotiations on liberalizing agricultural trade including elimination of subsidies and improving access to markets in the new round. The Conference further expressed the hope that the preliminary steps being taken in GATT toward new multilateral trade negotiations would be successful and agreed that, during the proposed new round of negotiations, the effective participation of developing countries should be ensured.
134. Some members stressed that negotiations on agricultural protection should take fully into account the special characteristics of agriculture. They also considered that the full range of measures applied should be taken into account in assessments of levels of protection applied by various countries, so as to ensure fair comparisons. In this connection, they referred to the complexities involved in making such assessments and drew attention to differences between the FAO Secretariat calculations of producer subsidy equivalents of support measures, and those made by the OECD Secretariat. Some members expressed doubts about the usefulness of this method for international comparisons of protection levels in view of its exclusion of such characteristics as size of farms and degree of national self-sufficiency. Other members, while supporting the use of such indicative measures of protection, felt greater attention should be devoted to differentiating between those policies
which adversely affected international trade and those policies which did not. In reply to requests of these members for further information about the support measures taken into account In the FAO estimates, the Secretariat indicated the main items included in FAO estimates and informed the Conference that the detailed background information could be provided to interested delegations.
135. The Conference expressed concern that, whereas one of the objectives of Guideline 8 was to ensure greater stability of world markets for agricultural products, the first half of the 1980s had been characterized by sharp reductions in prices on international markets, combined with strong price instability of many commodities. Moreover, this uncertainty had been increased by monetary instability.
136. Concern was widely expressed that international commodity agreements had been under great stress. Many members drew attention to the need to revitalize such agreements and to negotiate new international commodity agreements with economic provisions, particularly on agricultural products of trade interest to developing countries. Some other members stated that reliance should be placed on the free play of market forces in order to ensure greater stability of international markets, rather than on commodity agreements which, according to them, ran the risk of distorting market signals.
137. It was regretted that it had not yet been possible to bring the Agreement on the Common Fund for Commodities, negotiated in 1980, into effect. In this connection, countries which had not yet ratified it, were called upon to do so and at the same time an appeal was made to a major producing and exporting country to reconsider its decision not to ratify the Agreement on the Common Fund.
138. The Conference noted that progress had been achieved in economic and technical cooperation among developing countries but concluded that much more was needed. The main obstacles to future progress in agricultural trade were, inter alia and depending on the country, inadequate export supplies, trade barriers, subsidized exports of developed countries and difficulties in the area of transport, communications and finance. Cooperation in the area of agricultural inputs included joint ventures in the production and procurement of fertilizer and in exports of agricultural machinery and implements from the more industrially advanced developing countries.
139. The Conference generally endorsed the assessment of progress in the establishment of effective world food security. It agreed that measures taken toward this objective had been significant in some areas but limited in others. The Conference noted with satisfaction that many countries had adopted national stock policies in line with, or had pursued stock policies consistent with, the International Undertaking and the Plan of Action on World Food Security. A few members expressed the view that document C 85/21 had overemphasized the role of stocks in world food security and had not paid sufficient attention to other desirable measures for ensuring access to food supplies and stability of markets.
140. The Conference, while regretting that circumstances had necessitated large increases in emergency food aid in recent years, noted with appreciation the response of donors to these emergencies, which had inter alia resulted in the minimum annual target of the International Emergency Food Reserve (IEFR) being met for four years since the inception of the Reserve.
141. The Conference, stressing the crucial importance of timeliness in responding to food emergency situations, endorsed the request of the Committee on World Food Security (CFS) that the proposal, put forward by the Director-General at the CFS, for the prepositioning of food stocks in advance of possible emergencies in disaster-prone areas or in other strategic locations,' be developed further, taking into account donors' experience in this respect.
142. With regard to Guideline 11 on food aid, the Conference noted with satisfaction that cereal food aid shipments in 1984/85 surpassed, for the first time, the minimum annual target recommended by the World Food Conference in 1974. The Conference also noted, however, that food aid still fell well below the 17 - 18.5 million ton level referred to in Guideline 11 as a useful indicator of the overall requirements of food aid by 1985. A few members did not consider it necessary to revise the 10 million target for food aid recommended by the World Food Conference in 1974.
143. The Conference commended the CFS for the detailed consideration it had given to the contribution of food aid to food security at its most recent session, and endorsed its conclusions on this subject. Many members emphasized that instead of disposing of commodity surpluses on world markets with the aid of subsidies, such surpluses generated by the high support policies of certain developed countries, should be channelled so as to promote rural economic development in low-income developing countries. The Conference noted with satisfaction the efforts already being made by the Global Information and Early Warning System to alert donors on food surpluses arising in developing countries from time to time so as to promote triangular transactions, and encouraged the Secretariat to develop further these activities.
144. The Conference expressed its concern that the level of external assistance to agriculture achieved in recent years was still far below the target of US$8300 million at 1975 prices, originally set for the period 1975-80, and that the share of concessional commitments in this assistance had been declining. The reduced availability of assistance and the hardening of its terms contributed to the difficulties faced by developing countries in financing their development programmes and in ensuring the required increase of flows of resources to agriculture as recommended by the guidelines of the International Agricultural Adjustment.
D. Report of the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development (June-July 1984)
145. The Conference commended the Director-General for convening in 1984 the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development at a crucial time in the evolution of world fisheries. Recent developments included the establishment of exclusive economic zones, the levelling off in world fish catches, the widening gap between the supply of and demand for food fish, and the rapidly rising costs of fish harvesting, processing and marketing.
146. The Conference was informed that in 1984 the world catch had reached a record of 82.5 million tons but that the expected catch in 1985 might not reach that level. The high catches of 1984, therefore, did not invalidate the conclusion of the World Fisheries Conference that the fish production from traditional marine sources had stabilized and that further improvement could only be achieved through better management, expansion of inland fisheries and aquaculture, the increased use of by-catches and reduction of post-harvest losses.
147. The Conference noted with appreciation the remarkable consensus achieved at the World Fisheries Conference in endorsing the Strategy for Fisheries Management and Development, in approving five associated Programmes of Action for a period of five years, and in adopting a number of resolutions concerning specific aspects of fisheries management and development.
148. Most members underlined the important role the fisheries sector was playing in their countries' national economies as a source of income and employment, of foreign exchange earnings and of food. In many countries, including some landlocked ones, fish and fishery products provided the principal contribution to animal protein supplies.
149. The Conference noted with satisfaction the vigorous steps taken by governments and FAO to implement the Strategy for Fisheries Management and Development. Several countries had already benefited from the principles and guidelines contained in the Strategy in formulating their own fishery policies. Reference was also made to the organization of various expert consultations and regional workshops on fisheries management and development, including such aspects as development planning, fishing vessel marking, joint ventures, monitoring, control and surveillance.
150. The Conference also noted with satisfaction that the Government of Spain had convened in September 1985 a Ministerial Conference on Fisheries in La Toja, where delegations had confirmed that the Strategy was an effective guide for the proper planning of fisheries and related industries.
151. Within the context of that part of the Strategy concerning international trade in fish and fishery products, the Conference welcomed the establishment of the Sub-Committee on Fish Trade under the Committee on Fisheries (COFI) and noted that preparations had started to hold its first session in October 1986. The Sub-Committee would serve as a forum for consultations on technical and economic aspects of international trade in fish and fishery products. It was hoped that its work would help to identify opportunities for fishery commodity development, to improve the quality of fish products and to increase the participation of developing countries in international fish trade.
152. The Conference agreed that periodic progress reports on the implementation of the Strategy should be submitted as of 1987 to COFI and the FAO governing bodies. These should be based on the analysis and consolidation of data to be submitted by Member Nations and be supplemented by special in-depth studies. It further agreed that a simple and flexible format for national reports be designed by the Secretariat, bearing in mind that these should not place too heavy a burden upon national administrations. The Conference was informed that a request for information would be sent to countries and to organizations concerned with fisheries in early 1986.
153. With regard to the implementation of the Programmes of Action, the Conference noted with satisfaction that the annual indicative target figure of US$15 million for funds channelled through FAO for the execution of specific activities under these Programmes in 1985 had been exceeded. It expressed its appreciation to Australia, Canada, Denmark, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, the United States of America, UNDP and EEC for their contributions and to Canada, China, France, Norway, Poland, Spain, the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth Secretariat for their assistance in kind. It also gratefully noted the new offers of assistance made by the delegations of Czechoslovakia and the USSR.
154. The Conference observed that imbalances still remained in the distribution of the funds between geographic areas and between the different Programmes of Action. It welcomed the efforts made by FAO to reduce these imbalances through a series of consultations with UNDP on fisheries programmes for the next cycle starting in 1987 and with EEC which was in the process of identifying and formulating projects to be funded under the Lomé III Convention. It encouraged FAO to continue these efforts and urged donor countries and agencies to help fill gaps in project funding wherever possible.
155. The Conference agreed that FAO prepare periodic reports on the implementation of the various Programmes of Action. These reports should include information not only on the funds channelled through FAO and on the assistance in kind provided to FAO, but also on the development activities related to the Programmes of Action which were undertaken outside the framework of FAO by individual countries and organizations. The first progress report should be submitted to the Seventeenth Session of the COFI and subsequently to the FAO governing bodies.
156. The Conference expressed its satisfaction with the steps already taken or envisaged by FAO in response to the six special Resolutions adopted by the World Fisheries Conference. With respect to the implementation of the Resolution regarding the Role of the Fisherman, the Conference welcomed the Director-General's decision to select 'fishermen and fishing communities' as one of the themes for World Food Day 1986. This would also give an opportunity to emphasize the role of women in the fisheries sector.
157. The Conference considered that the Programme of Work and Budget in fisheries for 1986-87 fully reflected the needs and priorities identified by the World Fisheries Conference. It noted with appreciation the priority being attached to the promotion of effective management and appropriate utilization of fishery resources. It stressed that the rational management of these resources would make an important contribution to national economic, social and nutritional goals, and to world food security.
158. The Conference strongly endorsed the emphasis being given to technical assistance and advice on fisheries development policies and planning. As key elements in development and management, these were seen as a means of promoting self-reliance by Member Nations in the optimal use of their own fisheries. In this connection, several members highlighted the need for providing technical, economic and legal advice to developing countries wishing to enter into joint ventures and other arrangements.
159. The Conference underlined the special role of inland fisheries and of aquaculture in providing fish as food for rural populations. It called attention to the priority that countries were giving to aquaculture because of the increasing deficit between fish demand and supply. Full support was therefore given to the importance being assigned to inland fisheries and aquaculture in the fisheries programme of FAO.
160. The paramount importance of training in all fisheries disciplines was emphasized and seen as a precondition for achieving self-reliance at all levels. In spite of the number of existing programmes, the Conference emphasized the need for further training, in particular of extension and other field workers. In this context, it expressed its gratitude for the offers of cooperation in fisheries education and training needs by India, the Republic of Korea and Uganda.
161. The Conference stressed the importance of international and regional cooperation in the development and management of fishery resources. It considered that the network of FAO regional fishery bodies was well constituted to secure such cooperation and that the Organization should give high priority to providing technical support to these bodies in order to ensure that they would continue to play a leading role in the conservation and management of fisheries. It also recognized the active role played by FAO and its regional fishery bodies and programmes in the promotion of economic cooperation among developing countries (ECDC) and technical cooperation among developing countries (TCDC). In this context, the Conference expressed its appreciation to Nigeria for its offer to supply outposted personnel in support of the Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic. At the same time, the Conference emphasized that FAO should strengthen its cooperation with fishery bodies
established outside its framework, especially the South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency, the Latin American Organization for Fishery Development and the Permanent Commission for South Pacific.
162. In conclusion, the Conference welcomed the report of the FAO Conference on Fisheries Management and Development and expressed its full support for the measures taken or planned to implement the Strategy and the Programmes of Action.
163. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 6/85
FOLLOW-UP TO THE WORLD CONFERENCE ON FISHERIES MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling its Resolution 4/79 supporting the proposal to hold an FAO Conference on Fisheries Management and Development,
Having considered the Report of the World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development, held in Rome from 27 June to 6 July 1984,
Aware that fish is an important part of daily diets in many countries and provides nearly one-quarter of the world's supply of animal protein and that in many countries fisheries are important sources of employment, income and foreign exchange,
Convinced that by optimum use of the resources at present being exploited, through improved production, management and conservation and reduced wastage, and by greater production from under-used or unexploited marine species and aquaculture, fisheries can increase their contribution to national economic, social and nutritional goals, and to world food security,
Recognizing that the new regime of the oceans has created opportunities to promote the sustained development and rational management of the world's marine fish resources and that the role of inland water fisheries and aquaculture can also be further enhanced, both as sources of food and within the overall context of rural development,
Noting with appreciation Resolution 39/225 of the General Assembly of the United Nations endorsing the Strategy for Fisheries Management and Development and the associated Programmes of Action adopted by the World Fisheries Conference, and inviting FAO in collaboration with the organs, organizations and bodies concerned within the United Nations system, to continue to play its important role in assisting states in their efforts toward the improved management and development of fishery resources,
1. Commends the Director-General for having taken the initiative of convening the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development;
2. Welcomes the adoption by the World Fisheries Conference of a Strategy for Fisheries Management and Development and five associated Programmes of Action;
3. Stresses that primary responsibility for implementing the Strategy at the national level rests with Member Governments but that international assistance, in particular by FAO, will continue to be needed by a number of developing countries;
4. Expresses its appreciation for the extra-budgetary and other forms of support already provided for the implementation of the Programmes of Action and calls upon all bilateral and multilateral donor agencies and financing institutions to provide the further support required to ensure their effective implementation;
5. Notes with satisfaction the measures taken or planned by the Director-General in follow-up to the World Fisheries Conference and invites him to submit a report to the Twenty-fourth Session of the FAO Conference on the progress achieved in implementing the Strategy and Programmes of Action;
6. Urges States, international and regional organizations to cooperate with the Director-General in the preparation of such reports.
(Adopted 27 November 1985)
<section>7</section>
E. Adoption of the World Food Security Compact
164. The Conference noted that the Council at its Eighty-seventh Session had approved the World Food Security Compact as set out in document C 85/23 and had recommended it to the Conference for adoption.
165. In his introduction to this item, the Director-General stated that the Compact was based on the broader concept of world food security adopted by the Conference at its Twenty-second Session, which dealt with three inter-related aspects: namely, expanding production, increasing stability in the flow of supplies, and ensuring access to food by the poor. He emphasized that the Compact crystallized a set of feelings which were widely held throughout the world, and that it was the culmination of efforts by FAO over the past decade to strengthen the basis of world food security. The Director-General recalled that this initiative had received expressions of support from a number of member countries at the highest levels. He further stated that on the occasion of the Fortieth Anniversary of FAO, it was appropriate for the international community to make a moral commitment to strive for world food security.
166. The Conference recalled that the proposal for a World Food Security Compact was put forward by the Director-General to the Committee on World Food Security at its Eighth Session. He further elaborated the proposal at the Committee's Ninth Session. Subsequently, the Committee considered a draft text of the Compact at its Tenth Session. Thereafter, based on a careful review of the elements which were most common in the discussions in the Committee, several improvements had been introduced into the text. Three members dissociated themselves from this text, which was approved by the Council at its Eighty-seventh Session. Another member deplored this attitude, considering it contrary to the spirit of international cooperation. The Conference recognized that the main aim of the Compact was to reaffirm a moral commitment to achieve the ultimate objective of ensuring that all people at all times are in a position to produce or procure the basic food they need. The Conference
observed that the Compact was addressed to governments of both developed and developing countries, to non-governmental organizations, and to individuals with a view to mobilizing support to, and actions for, strengthening food security. It noted that the Compact did not involve any new financial or legal commitments and was strictly voluntary in nature.
167. The overwhelming majority of members gave their full support to the text of the Compact as presented. They considered that it set out the moral values and lines of action which should guide governments, non-governmental organizations and individuals in attaining the commonly shared objective of improved world food security and the elimination of hunger and malnutrition. In their view, the Compact was well-balanced in its presentation of the respective responsibilities of developed and developing countries, nongovernmental organizations and individuals. They stressed that the adoption of the Compact, by reaffirming the moral foundation for action, would strengthen the resolve of all people to pursue the objective of food security. It would also provide a fitting proclamation of commitment to this objective, bearing in mind that this year marked the Fortieth Anniversary of the foundation of FAO. Some members stated that they would have preferred further amendments,
strengthening several aspects of the draft Compact, and improving the language. One member suggested that in the text of the Compact one should refer to the essential role of the media in sensitizing public opinion on food problems. However, they accepted the text of the Compact as presented in the interest of achieving a consensus and in order to permit its prompt and unanimous adoption.
168. While emphasizing the contributions their governments were making to food security, three members expressed the continued reservations of their governments on the Compact. During the discussion, support was given to the principles underlying the call for a compact, as well as for the inter-related aspects of world food security mentioned by the Director-General in his introduction. These members stated that move consultations should have been held in preparing the Compact, and the text should have been more explicit as to its voluntary, nonbinding nature. They also stated that the Compact was unnecessary to stimulate further action in this field, and that it was unbalanced and unclear regarding obligations of developed and developing countries, the role of food trade and that of (NGOs) in strengthening food security.
169. The Conference adopted the World Food Security Compact as given below:
WORLD FOOD SECURITY COMPACT
I. PREAMBLE
Insecurity of food supplies has afflicted mankind throughout history. In modern times, progress In harnessing the forces of nature and in organizing relief for the distressed has mitigated the impact of hunger and malnutrition, but food security has still to reach hundreds of millions of the world's people. More must be done, and quickly.
Food insecurity is not a single, uniform problem. Food shortages are felt at the level of the nation, of the household and of the Individual. There are many different situations in which essential foods may be found lacking, many different causes underlying them, and many different solutions which need to be adopted if food security for all Is to be attained on a lasting basis.
The World Food Security Compact brings together general principles and suggestions for action by governments, organizations and Individuals. Because of the great diversity of circumstances in different areas, actions that are appropriate in one location or situation may not be suitable in another. Measures to strengthen food security must be carefully tailored to match the specific problems they are Intended to resolve.
The governments, organizations and individuals subscribing to the present World Food Security Compact agree to work, In their respective spheres, towards bringing about a higher degree of food security at all levels throughout the world.
II. GENERAL PRINCIPLES
1. World food security is a common responsibility of mankind. The ultimate objective is to ensure that all people at all times are in a position to produce or procure the basic food they need.
2. Achievement of the "fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger" depends utimately on the abolition of poverty. But the hungry cannot wait. The search for world food security must include immediate steps to help the distressed, as well as longer-term measures to bring about economic and social progress. No one can remain indifferent to the fate of those whose daily food is insecure.
3. The achievement of food security should be an integral objective of economic and social plans. Action should be aimed at three specific goals: attaining desirable levels of food production, increasing the stability of food supply, and ensuring access to food supplies on the part of those in need.
4. Food should not be used as a means of exerting political pressure.
III. ACTION BY GOVERNMENTS
1. Governments carry the primary responsibility for ensuring the food security of their peoples, and for banishing chronic hunger and malnutrition from their territory. They should give this objective an overriding priority.
2. Governments of developing countries should promote domestic food production as the first line of attack on food insecurity. They should avoid, as far as they can, the risks that result from an excessive dependence on food imports, notably for feeding urban populations ' In particular, they should ensure that city-dwellers do not acquire a permanent preference for imported basic foods which cannot be grown domestically.
3. Governments of developing countries should re-examine and, if necessary, change their national policies so as to stimulate food production. They should, in particular, ensure that farmers are given adequate incentives to grow more food. The review should extend to policies outside the agricultural sector but with a bearing on food security, such as demography.
4. Governments of developing countries should make advance arrangements for maintaining food security in times of difficulty, especially when faced with drought or other natural disaster. The measures adopted might include an early warning system to detect the buildup of an emergency, the creation of food reserves where this is feasible, and contingency plans for the distribution of relief supplies.
5. Governments of developing countries should undertake measures for improving the economic situation of population groups which are particularly disadvantaged, including those in remote parts of the country. Rural development activities, oriented specifically towards the needs of the poor, should be promoted with special emphasis on the participation of the small farmer. In general, while maintaining incentives for agricultural production, every encouragement should be given to measures which will increase the purchasing power of the poorest strata of the population, in line with the Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development. Governments should make all efforts so that agricultural work receives a higher status.
6. Governments of developing countries should seek to make cooperative arrangements with each other for the purpose of strengthening food security. The specific activities to be carried out in common might include: regional early warning systems for detecting agricultural emergencies; joint activities to increase the availability of seeds, fertilizers and other inputs in the area; programmes for the control of migrant pests and diseases; the exchange of experience and information and possibly the creation of regional or subregional food reserves.
7. Governments should reaffirm their moral as well as economic and political commitment to cooperation with each other in strengthening global food security.
8. Governments of developed countries, whether they be exporters or importers, should consider the interests of the world as a whole when making their policy decisions on food production, stocks and imports. Similarly, arrangements which insulate domestic consumers from price swings in international markets should not result in increased hardship for the weakest and most vulnerable countries. The overall objective should be the development of a world food system characterized by stability and equity.
9. Emergency food aid and other forms of relief should continue to be provided generously to poorer countries. At the same time increasing importance should be attached to measures, in particular to promote agricultural production, which could prevent such emergencies arising in future.
10. Governments of developed countries should continue to seek more effective ways of helping low-income food-deficit countries to secure their imports of essential food supplies, as well as of fertilizers and other agricultural requisites, in times of difficulty. The problems to be envisaged include a major shortage of supplies on international markets, or an economic crisis in the importing country.
11. For many developing nations, food security also depends on their ability to export agricultural and other products in order to import foodstuffs. This fact should be taken into account by the governments of developed countries in negotiations on trade questions. The objective should thus be to recognise the moral dimension in trade relations with a view to striking an equitable balance between domestic interests and the good of the world as a whole.
12. Governments of developed countries should give a specially high priority to helping developing nations where a major effort is being made to overcome the problems of rural poverty, the principal cause of chronic hunger and malnutrition.
IV. ACTION BY NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
1. Non-governmental organizations with a concern for world food security can stimulate, support and complement the actions of governments, in developed and developing countries alike. In particular, they can help to create a climate of opinion favouring measures for food security, thus opening the way for additional steps by governments as suggested in this Compact. Furthermore, they can contribute directly, through operational and other activities, towards building up higher levels of food security in various parts of the Third World.
2. Non-governmental organizations can play an increasingly active role in enlightening public opinion about the problems of food security in an inter-dependent world. Besides the immediate challenge of hunger and malnutrition, they can also provide information on important issues relating to food security, such as the impact on the poorer nations of actions taken by the richer nations in the fields of trade, protectionism and economic adjustment.
3. Non-governmental organizations in all parts of the world can take the lead in organizing more frequent people-to-people contacts between countries, especially between countries at different levels of economic development. Such initiatives should aim at increasing mutual understanding, and at opening up avenues for possible cooperation in practical activities.
V. ACTION BY INDIVIDUALS
1. The individual is called upon not only to work for his own food security and that of his family, but also to recognise that he has a sacred obligation to concern himself with food security of those less fortunate than himself. Failure to provide succour when it is needed is a betrayal of man's duty to his fellow men.
2. At the practical level, individuals can play a unique role in keeping public opinion in the richer nations aware of the need for global cooperation in achieving world food security, which is often overshadowed by domestic problems. Individuals of every background can contribute towards building an atmosphere of concern for the world's food problems.
3. It is essential that work in agriculture (including not only the activities of farmers but also the efforts of researchers, extension agents and other professional categories) be given a higher status than it currently receives. Individuals can play a special role in creating a climate of opinion more favourable to work in agriculture and food production.
4. Individual farmers, in every country and climate, provide the indispensable basis for food security. But the farmer is responsible, not only for food production, but also for the conservation of the soil and other natural resources bequeathed by nature and our ancestors to us who are alive today. The farmer, as custodian of the land resource must conserve it for future generations, avoiding practices which result in erosion or other forms of destruction.
5. Individuals everywhere should interest themselves actively in the efforts of governments and organizations to promote development and food security. The concern of individuals creates the groundswell of support needed by non-governmental organizations. The work of these organizations, in turn, helps to mobilize public opinion for action by governments. Without the active interest of the man-in-the-street, little may be achieved. But interest does not mean blind support: criticism can be constructive. The enemy is indifference.
F. Programme for the 1990 Census of Agriculture
170. The Conference reviewed the programme for the 1990 world census of agriculture on the basis of the document presented.
171. The Conference noted that the 1990 world census of agriculture would be the fifth decennial census of agriculture promoted by FAO. Acknowledging the importance of statistics in agricultural planning, the Conference gave its full support to the 1990 world census of agriculture programme.
172. The Conference expressed its satisfaction with the general approach of placing the census in the broad perspective of a national statistical information system for food and agriculture.
173. Noting that in an integrated system of national food and agricultural statistics, a census of agriculture should collect data on agricultural structure, the Conference stressed the need for sample surveys on specific subjects such as food consumption, prices and employment. In this connection, a request was made for FAO to encourage countries to assemble and report data on fertilizer inventories.
174. The Conference welcomed the preparation of Regional Supplements to the 1990 census of agriculture programme to provide specific recommendations taking into account regional differences in agricultural structure.
175. The Conference stressed the need for explanatory guidelines in order to help implement censuses of agriculture and appreciated the work undertaken by the FAO Secretariat to prepare manuals on the design of questionnaires and for the training and guidance of field enumerators and supervisors.
176. The Conference underlined the importance of training national staff for improving food and agricultural statistics and requested the FAO Secretariat to continue to organize national and regional training courses and workshops for agricultural statisticians.
177. The Conference urged member countries to participate fully in the 1990 world census of agriculture and requested the FAO Secretariat to continue to provide assistance to countries for planning and implementing their censuses of agriculture.
<section>8</section>
VI. Activities and programmes of the organization
A. Programme of Work and Budget 1986-87 and Medium-term Objectives
B. Review of the Regular Programme 1984-85
C. Review of Field Programmes 1984-85
D. Follow-up of Conference Resolutions 8/83 and 9/83 - Plant Genetic Resources
E. International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides
F. United Nations/FAO World Food Programme
G. Relations and Consultations with International Organizations
A. Programme of Work and Budget 1986-87 and Medium-term Objectives
Background
Format and Presentation
Approach
Strategies, Priorities and Objectives
Level of the Budget
General Policy and Direction
Major Programme 2.1: Agriculture
Programme 2.1.1: Natural Resources
Programme 2.1.2: Crops
Programme 2.1.3: Livestock
Programme 2.1.4: Research and Technology Development
Programme 2.1.5: Rural Development
Programme 2.1.6: Nutrition
Programme 2.1.7: Food and Agricultural Information and Analysis
Programme 2.1.8: Food and Agricultural Policy
Major programme 2.2: Fisheries
Major programme 2.3: Forestry
Development support programmes
Technical cooperation programme
Support and common services
Budgetary appropriations 1986-87
Background
178. The Conference expressed full appreciation for the realistic assessment of the world situation and the main background considerations to the formulation of proposals for 1986-87, as contained in the Director-General's Introduction to the Programme of Work and Budget. It particularly welcomed the useful reassertion of the four major functions of FAO under the Regular Programme, i.e.: (a) as a collector and purveyor of information; (b) as a centre for policy analysis; (c) as a forum for intergovernmental discussion; and (d) as a provider of technical assistance at the field level and mobilizer of investment and aid.
179. The Conference recognized that the prospects for the world economy continued to be fraught with considerable uncertainties. The solution to major problems such as the volatility of exchange rates, persistent inflation in most countries, the fluctuations of financial and trade flows and the disequilibrium between job creation and unsatisfied demand continued to defy decision-makers at both national and international levels.
180. The Conference also recognized that, although no country was immune from the negative effects of such worldwide problems, the state of economic and social conditions in most developing countries gave cause for particularly grave concern. Their problems were compounded by severe debt servicing obligations, depressed prices for commodities, problems in international trade, scarce domestic resources for development, and to varying degrees, poverty and wretchedness for large segments of rural and urban populations. Difficulties were most acute in the Least Developed Countries (LDCs).
181. The Conference recognized that, within this economic and social framework, the world food and agricultural situation again reflected mixed performance and largely unresolved issues at both national and international levels. The Conference stressed that the favourable elements represented by a record world cereal production, the replenishment of cereal stocks, though only in some traditional surplus countries, or any temporary respite given to sub-Saharan Africa in its struggle against recurrent food shortages and persistent malnutrition, should not distract the international community and individual Member Nations from the medium- and long-term commitments for action, consistent with international and national development goals.
182. Accordingly, the Conference reiterated its conviction that FAO, within its mandated domain of food and agriculture, should continue to provide policy guidance and leadership in contributing to the solution of international problems, to catalyse international cooperation, and to lend the necessary support at international, regional and country levels, in order to mobilize the external resources for sustained agricultural development and the gradual elimination of rural poverty and malnutrition.
183. The Conference agreed that FAO's Regular and Field programmes played complementary and mutually reinforcing roles in this long-term effort. In view of the limited prospects for significant additional extra-budgetary resources being available to the Organization, an appeal was made to all possible sources of external financing to provide enhanced support to FAO field programmes in future years.
Format and Presentation
184. The Conference agreed that the format and presentation of the Programme of Work and Budget document achieved a satisfactory balance between desirable requirements of economy in size and conciseness on the one hand, and the provision of necessary details in both narrative and tabular forms, on the other.
185. Some members, while largely supporting this favourable assessment, considered that further improvements could be sought toward greater clarity, more precise programme descriptions and increased transparency of the proposals.
Approach
186. The Conference recognized that the task confronting the Director-General before each biennial financial exercise was particularly difficult, as it entailed screening among a vast number of policy and programme initiatives to meet felt needs of Member Nations, individually or collectively. Perceptions of relative importance of specific programme areas and activities, which the Organization needed to cover or implement, necessarily varied among member countries, regions and sub-regions and even at the level of the whole FAO membership. The Conference further recognized that this fine programming effort had to be accompanied by a vigorous search for possible economies, while safeguarding the capacity of the Organization to deliver its programme effectively and efficiently.
187. The Conference agreed that the Director-General's proposed Programme of Work and Budget was a reflection of the above policy parameters. It considered that the end objective of presenting a coherent set of activities, within a financial framework which took into account the present economic and financial situation had, by and large, been reached.
188. The Conference, moreover, expressed particular appreciation for the Director-General's sense of realism, deliberate search for consensus, and goodwill, which had led him to reduce the overall level of additional resources from that proposed In the Summary Programme of Work and Budget, which had been submitted to the Eighty-seventh Session of the FAO Council. The resulting identification of further economies was commended.
189. Thus, the Conference welcomed the proposals involving a net programme increase for FAO's technical and economic programmes, which had been achieved by further reductions in administrative and support areas over those effected for the Programme of Work and Budget 1984-85. In this context it was noted that the net programme increase for the technical and economic programmes was US$9.4 million, but the overall net programme increase had been kept to US$5 million, i.e. 1.1 percent over the 1984-85 base.
190. The Conference commended the continued attention to identifying feasible reductions in administrative and support areas, as well as to systematically eliminating lower-priority activities. It noted with appreciation that the proportion of expenditures on established posts to total expenditures had again been reduced, despite the addition of a few additional posts in well-considered cases. A few members, however, considered that such requirements for new posts should have been met through redeployment within existing staffing levels.
191. The Conference stressed that there were limits to reductions of administrative and support services, beyond which it would be difficult for FAO to deliver approved programmes effectively and, more generally, for the Organization to respond in an efficient and timely manner to the ever-increasing demands for its technical support services.
Strategies, Priorities and Objectives
192. The Conference endorsed the six principal aims which the Director General had established in priority selection for 1986-87: promotion of food production, increasing food security, consolidation of information systems, emphasizing training, enhancement of Economic and Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries and ensuring impact at the field level.
193. The Conference agreed that the choice of strategies and priorities and the specification of medium-term objectives under various programme areas were in full accordance with previous guidance of the Conference and Council. More over they took into account the most recent deliberations and recommendations of FAO bodies providing policy and programme advice, such as FAO Regional Conferences, the Committees of the Council, and the full range of FAO advisory Committees and Commissions. They also took account of deliberations in other inter-governmental fora, as well as of the successful outcome of events such as the 1984 FAO-sponsored World Fisheries Conference, the Ninth World Forestry Congress and the FAO-proclaimed International Year of the Forest.
194. In respect of regional focus, the Conference fully agreed with the overall priority given to Africa. The magnitude of requirements for external assistance of sub-Saharan Africa, was borne out by the food and agriculture emergency experienced in the last two years, and exemplified by the manifold structural problems faced by the fragile economies of the region. While this unanimous support was to be interpreted as the expression of solidarity from all regions, the Conference stressed that a judicious balance had to be retained in the allocation of limited resources, so as to accommodate the requirements of other regions. In this connection, the Conference commended the Director-General's expeditious response to the difficult situation in Africa through the Agricultural Rehabilitation Programme for Africa.
195. The Conference expressed particular appreciation for the increasingly social orientation of many programmes, as exemplified by the emphasis placed on the special requirements of small farmers, women as food producers, and other disadvantaged groups in rural areas, which was apparent throughout the proposed programme of work. The Conference stressed that it was indeed essential to lay the basis for locally-based income-generating activities and for truly participatory approaches to development, in order to contribute efficiently to poverty-alleviation in rural areas.
196. The Conference reiterated its support to the decentralization policy which had been actively pursued in the last ten-year period. This enabled greater practical impact in the field, of the technical and economic programmes of the Organization. The Conference considered that the three major instruments of this decentralization policy, the FAO Regional Offices, the FAO Country Representatives and the Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP), had to continue to play fully complementary roles in that respect, despite the fact that the former two were being stabilized at their current levels.
197. Some members suggested that the time was ripe for reflection over the longer term on the possible future evolution of FAO's role so as to chart a course until and beyond the end of the century.
Level of the Budget
198. Quite a number of members, while recognizing the fundamental importance of FAO's mandate, and appreciating the relevance of its technical and economic programmes in the food and agriculture sector, stressed that financial austerity should be observed by all organizations of the United Nations (UN) System in view of tight budgetary constraints throughout the world, and that this could be achieved by managing the budget on the basis of a zero real growth concept. They stressed that this could, in particular, lead to Increased streamlining of the Organization toward even more efficiency and effectiveness, and was therefore in no way to be interpreted as a relaxation of their Governments' commitment to multilateral cooperation. Many of these members stated that they were not in a position to support the proposed budget level. Others reserved their position. Still others, while hoping that there could be further improvements, stated that they could support the proposed
budget level.
199. The great majority of members considered that the Director-General's proposed net programme increase of 1.1 percent was not commensurate with the magnitude of requirements for FAO policy and programme support at global, regional and national levels. In its view, since FAO was the primary Organization in the UN System dealing with the food and agriculture sector, and of such importance to achieve their development objectives, a higher level of resources was totally justified. This majority, therefore, categorically rejected the application of a concept of zero real growth to international organizations in the UN System and in particular to FAO. The sentiments of realism and search for consensus which had led the Director-General to propose such a modest programme increase were appreciated. Despite the financial difficulties of the countries concerned, this majority endorsed without reservation the Director-General's proposals. It also voiced the hope that these proposals
would be approved unanimously by the whole FAO membership.
200. In summary, the great majority expressed their full support for the proposed budget level; some members were unable to support the proposed budget level; and some other members having reserved their positions until a later stage, subsequently declared their positions at the time of voting.
201. In discussion of the individual chapters, the following main points were made on various programme matters.
General Policy and Direction
202. The Conference endorsed the proposals and commended the substantial budgetary reduction proposed in this chapter, without prejudice to the effective implementation of the well-established programmes which comprised the chapter.
Major Programme 2.1: Agriculture
203. The Conference supported the long-term goals and strategies and the medium-term objectives of the Major Programme: Agriculture. It considered that the selection and balance of programme activities proposed under the constituent programmes and sub-programmes represented a coherent response to these objectives.
204. The Conference particularly welcomed the many activities aimed at increased and more secure availability of modern agricultural inputs such as fertilizers, vaccines, pesticides, seeds, irrigation water, etc., especially for the small farm sector, which it considered as a critical factor in the achievement of more rapid production increases in developing regions.
205. The Conference also noted with satisfaction that in-house coordination on important multidisciplinary issues continued to be ensured through the work of various Inter-Departmental Working Groups such as on Environment and Energy, Science and Technology, Rural Development, Land Use Planning, etc.
Programme 2.1.1: Natural Resources
206. The Conference underlined the importance of sound management and conservation of the natural resource base for sustained agricultural production and supported the activities under this programme.
207. The Conference welcomed the particular emphasis on the development of integrated dryland farming systems, and on the support to soil and water conservation programmes, while maintaining an adequate balance between soil conservation and water quality management.
208. The Conference also endorsed the strengthening of other priority areas such as the enhancement of soil productivity through integrated plant nutrition systems, irrigation development and assessment of crop and population potentials of lands.
Programme 2.1.2: Crops
209. The Conference fully endorsed the absolute priority given in the Crops Programme to increasing food crop production in low-income food-deficit areas. It supported the balance of budget allocations to the specific sub-programmes.
210. The Conference stressed that sustained increases in food crop production would require contemporary and timely efforts including the use of high yielding and well adapted varieties, quality seeds, efficient crop protection practices and appropriate mechanization, as well as the introduction of improved cropping systems.
211. The Conference recalled the well-recognized role of FAO as a conduit for international cooperation in plant protection and pest control, particularly at regional and sub-regional levels, and recommended that such catalytic action be continued.
212. The Conference also emphasized that sufficient attention be given to traditional and secondary crops. It welcomed, in this connection, the proposed activities of demonstration and transfer of low-risk production technologies for small farmers, and the increased activities on roots and tubers, as well as on plantain.
213. The Conference considered as particularly timely and relevant the activities in connection with the Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides, which would lead to significant improvements toward safer management of these essential agricultural inputs.
214. The Conference recognized the importance of adequate handling and storage practices at farm level to maximize benefits to farmers from crop production increases, and supported the corresponding activities for cost-effective farm structures, as well as the proposed expanded commodity coverage of the Prevention of Food Losses (PFL) programme to include perishable fruit and vegetables.
Programme 2.1.3: Livestock
215. The Conference endorsed the proposed activities of the Livestock Programme which were in full accordance with FAO's recognized essential roles in emergency disease control, international cooperation in animal health matters and the development of more efficient livestock production systems in member countries, particularly through the strong training and TCDC components built in the programme.
216. The Conference singled out the proposed activities on the utilization of feed resources and improved feeding systems in animal husbandry systems, including the use of agricultural by-products, as most timely contributions to accelerated rural development.
217. The Conference recommended continued attention to the eradication of major endemic diseases such as rinderpest, food-and-mouth disease, etc., for which the international community looked upon FAO as a source of technical leadership and effective support.
218. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 7/85
THE PAN-AFRICAN RINDERPEST CAMPAIGN
THE CONFERENCE
Recalling the deliberations on the PAN-AFRICAN RINDERPEST CAMPAIGN (PARC) at its previous Sessions,
Considering the activities already carried out by FAO together with the OAU (Organization of the African Unities), OIE (International Office of Epizootics) and donor agencies, particularly the EEC and the World Bank, in combatting this scourge,
Taking note of the recommendations made by the 13th FAO Regional Conference for Africa (Harare, 1984) on the Implementation of PARC, especially on the need to launch this crucial Campaign as soon as possible with multi-donor funds in order to control the dangerous spread in Africa of the terrible scourge of Rinderpest,
Concerned greatly that the Campaign has not yet been launched as announced previously by the major donors to PARC, and worried seriously by the continuous threat of the disease through the movement of animals across national borders, intensified all the more by the recent drought in Africa,
Commending the Director-General of FAO for his prompt assistance with various TCP projects to (a) control the accelerating spread of Rinderpest; (b) strengthen national and regional Rinderpest vaccine-producing laboratories; (c) train personnel for PARC; (d) support the OAU in its leading role in PARC; and (e) prepare PARC projects for 28 countries,
1. Requests the Director-General of FAO to continue giving emergency assistance to affected countries in order to limit the dangerous spread of the Rinderpest disease until the coordinated launching of PARC, and to provide technical assistance for PARC, particularly in field personnel training and improvement of Rinderpest vaccine production.
2. Recognizes fully the technical capabilities vested in FAO for PARC and invites all PARC donors and recipients to fully utilize FAO's technical capacities and resources and ensure the success of PARC.
3. Calls upon donor agencies, particularly the EEC and the World Bank, to strengthen their collaboration with OAU and FAO in launching without further delay the Pan-African Rinderpest Campaign, as laid out in the programme for the Campaign.
(Adopted 28 November 1985)
Programme 2.1.4: Research and Technology Development
219. The Conference endorsed the thrust and detailed activities of this programme, which were in line with the vast and urgent requirements in most developing countries to build an endogenous agricultural research base, commensurate with the socio-economic conditions of each country. It agreed in particular with the emphasis placed on strengthening agricultural research systems, applications of radiation techniques and biotechnology, remote sensing technology, environmental conservation strategies and sustained rural energy systems.
220. Within this overall effort, the Conference emphasized the importance of suitable links between research results and extension through FAO-sponsored training activities.
221. The Conference also emphasized the importance of appropriate technologies for the specific use by small farmers in increasing their productivity and incomes.
Programme 2.1.5: Rural Development
222. The Conference endorsed the medium-term objectives and proposed activities under this programme, which contributed to the coordination and integration of rural development concepts into FAO's technical programmes.
223. The Conference stressed that there should be no relaxation of efforts at international and national levels in the implementation of the Programme of Action of WCARRD, particularly since major institutional reforms and reforms of agrarian structures required long gestation periods. It supported the range of proposed activities for WCARRD follow-up.
224. Particularly in connection with this programme, the Conference welcomed the attention to social aspects of development and to the alleviation of rural poverty through specially designed programmes for rural women producers, youth, rural cooperatives and the landless.
225. The Conference more particularly endorsed the activities at the country level related to women's roles as food producers and in food security, which would include training programmes on women in agricultural production and marketing; it considered that activities in this sector should have an even higher priority in the future. This was in line with the recommendations of the UN Conference on Women held in Nairobi in July 1985.
226. The Conference supported the programmes of marketing extension for small farmers, of improvements of operational efficiency of food marketing and input distribution agencies, and the formulation of sound production input marketing policies and programmes. It considered that progress in marketing and agricultural credit structures was similarly an essential aspect of rapid and sustained rural development.
227. The Conference supported the activities in support of agricultural training and extension and rural communications, while recalling that those included under this programme were to be considered as the tip of a large iceberg, since training activities permeated all FAO technical and economic programmes.
Programme 2.1.6: Nutrition
228. The Conference endorsed the medium-term objectives, and the balance of activities within the programme. It stressed that food and nutritional considerations were essential aspects for successful strategies for agricultural and rural development. This had also to be seen in connection with the broader attention to women's roles in development, mentioned under the preceding Programme, in view of the critical contribution of women to the improvement of the nutritional status of all members of the family particularly in rural areas.
229. The Conference supported the priority given to urban food systems, to the promotion of under-exploited food plants for nutritional improvement, and to the elimination of specific nutritional deficiencies such as Vitamin A deficiency.
Programme 2.1.7: Food and Agricultural Information and Analysis
230. The Conference recalled the essential role of FAO as a major source of statistics and specialized information. It therefore agreed with the medium-term objectives, as well as priority selection and programme activities under this programme.
231. The Conference stressed, in this connection, the magnitude of requirements for assistance to developing countries to strengthen national statistical systems, in order for them to participate more meaningfully in the global system of agricultural statistics, and welcomed the inclusion of substantial training activities to that end.
232. The Conference expressed its full support for the high priority accorded to the substantial strengthening of the Global Information and Early Warning System to be undertaken in 1986-87. It endorsed the various specific actions planned for this purpose, including strengthened assistance to developing countries for the establishment of national early warning systems.
Programme 2.1.8: Food and Agricultural Policy
233. The Conference agreed with the medium-term objectives and proposed programme activities. In particular, it welcomed the continued attention to food security systems and infrastructures; fostering Economic Cooperation between Developing Countries; enhancement of national capacities in programme and project formulation and monitoring and to international trade and commodity issues.
234. The Conference recognized FAO's long-standing role as a forum for intergovernmental discussion, in particular through the FAO Inter-governmental Commodity Groups. It recalled the useful contributions already made by the programme inter alia, to the identification of ECDC opportunities, and looked upon further pioneering work in this area.
235. The Conference stressed that the formulation and implementation of sound price policies should receive increased attention over the short and medium term.
Major programme 2.2: Fisheries
236. The Conference endorsed the programme proposals related to fisheries. It supported the special emphasis to be placed on sound policy formulation and planning, conservation, management and rational utilization of fishery resources in marine and inland waters; aquaculture development; improved fish utilization and promotion of the role of fish in nutrition; use of under-exploited species; strengthening of national and regional data services; and technical support to FAO regional fishery commissions.
237. The Conference recognized that the long-term goals and strategies, medium-term objectives and programme activities under the Major Programme, had been largely influenced by the requirements linked to the implementation of the Strategy for Fisheries Management and Development and of the five Programmes of Action approved by the World Fisheries Conference.
238. The Conference agreed in particular with the proposed substantial increase for Programme 2.2.2, Fisheries Exploitation and Utilization, in particular for Sub-programme 2.2.2.1, Marine Resources and Environment. In this regard, it stressed the importance of conservation, rational management and optimal utilization of fishery resources.
239. The Conference also supported the intensification of work in aquaculture and inland fisheries, particularly since small-scale fisheries development, including related training and investment promotion aspects, was an essential component for rural development in many countries.
Major programme 2.3: Forestry
240. The Conference stressed the critical importance of FAO's Forestry Programmes in assisting member countries to overcome the disastrous effects of environmental degradation through rapid deforestation, especially in tropical areas, and over-exploitation and depletion of forest resources, including fuelwood, and endorsed a greater priority for this programme in the future.
241. The Conference supported the medium-term objectives and balance of pro posed activities of Major Programme 2.3, Forestry. It welcomed the complementary emphases placed on the contribution of forestry to food supplies and food security, and on increasing the participation of rural people in the benefits from forestry activities.
242. The Conference stressed that the conservation and management of forests in the tropics and in arid and semi-arid zones had to form part of integrated strategies for protecting the land and water resource base against erosion and desertification. It also emphasized the multiple roles of forestry which could significantly contribute to income-generating activities in rural areas.
243. The Conference welcomed, in this connection, the increased volume of activities in support of forestry development generated by major events such as the FAO-proclaimed International Year of the Forest, and the Ninth World Forestry Congress in Mexico.
244. The Conference expressed particular support for afforestation and reforestation activities in Programme 2.3.1, Forest Resources and Environment, as well as for activities on watershed management, on seed procurement and conservation of forest gene resources and on wildlife conservation and utilization. It requested that continued attention be placed on broadening the information base on forestry activities.
245. The Conference also expressed appreciation for Programme 2.3.4: Forestry for Rural Development, the main objective of which was to ensure greater participation by rural people in forestry and forest industry activities. It considered timely and of great relevance to actual requirements in developing regions, the emphasis placed on integrated agro-silvo-pastoral systems, capable of meeting at the same time environmental conservation and food production and security objectives.
Development support programmes
246. The Conference endorsed the programme proposals for this chapter, which included substantial net programme reductions, allowing for the transfer of related resources to other chapters.
247. The Conference reiterated the importance it attached to the efficient execution and expansion of FAO field programmes. Therefore, it could not but support the selection of greater impact at field level as one of the main aims of the Director-General for 1986-87. It endorsed the proposals under Major Programme 3.1: Field Programme Planning and Liaison, which included servicing of TCP projects and administrative support to FAO Representatives.
248. In respect of FAO's investment support activities, the Conference regretted that continued difficulties were experienced in the replenishment of resources for multilateral financial institutions, like IFAD and IDA (Inter national Development Association) which provided resources on concessional terms. It made a strong appeal for the early resolution of outstanding problems regarding the second replenishment of IFAD, so that it be given adequate resources to fulfil its mandate. It also expressed satisfaction with the work of FAO's Investment Centre.
249. The Conference stressed that, despite their consolidation at existing levels, it continued to value the essential contribution to FAO developmental action of the Country Representations and the Regional Offices. It noted that the Programme Committee had thoroughly reviewed and endorsed the activities of the latter Offices at its most recent session.
250. The Conference singled out the contribution of Regional Offices to the promotion of Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, particularly through the support provided to regional and sub-regional networks of national institutions, focusing on specific technical or developmental issues.
Technical cooperation programme
251. The Conference expressed its satisfaction with the role, functions and usefulness of the TCP. Its complementary value to other sources of external assistance, its catalytic mode of operation, its multiplier effect and its flexible nature had made the Programme a fundamental and valued component of FAO's action in the field. It was greatly appreciated, particularly by beneficiary countries, in meeting emergency and unforeseen short-term technical assistance requirements.
252. Some members, while acknowledging the beneficial aspects of TCP, expressed reservations regarding the need for an increased budgetary allocation, and the fact that these increases could have undesirable effects on the FAO Regular Programme. They also expressed their belief that the TCP should be limited to activities requiring emergency responses. These countries also reiterated their long-held position that technical assistance should be funded from voluntary sources.
253. The great majority of members gave its full support to the increase in resources proposed for the TCP. It believed that an even larger increase would have been perfectly justified. It regretted the expression of reservation by some members regarding the increased budgetary allocation on the grounds that the main advantages of the TCP lay precisely in its flexibility, freedom of action and the fact that it had at its disposal resources on a stable basis. It reiterated its conviction that TCP, as an integral part of the technical and economic programmes and as a fundamental instrument of the Regular Programme, did not compete in any manner with the other activities of the Regular Programme.
254. In the light of the views expressed in the preceding paragraphs, the Conference considered that the proposed budgetary resources for the TCP made by the Director-General were commensurate with the expressed needs of Member Nations.
255. The Conference noted that an external independent evaluation of the TCP had been commissioned by the Director-General and submitted together with proposals for the implementation of its findings to the Eighty-eighth Session of the Council. Views on these were expressed during the discussion of the Review of the Regular Programme.
Support and common services
256. The Conference appreciated the further substantial economies proposed under these chapters. Some members encouraged further efforts in this regard. It was, however, pointed out that such economies should not jeopardize efficiency.
Budgetary appropriations 1986-87
257. The Conference approved the Programme of Work and Budget and adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 8/85
BUDGETARY APPROPRIATIONS 1986-87
THE CONFERENCE
Having considered the Director-General's Programme of Work and Budget and the conclusions of its Commissions,
Approves the Programme of Work proposed by the Director-General for 1986-87,
Resolves that for the financial period 1986-87,
1. Appropriations are voted for the following purposes: us $
Chapter I - General Policy and Direction 31 542 000
Chapter II - Technical and Economic Programmes 198 924 000
Chapter III - Development Support Programmes 72 541 000
Chapter IV - Technical Cooperation Programme 61 421 000
Chapter V - Support Services 57 406 000
Chapter VI - Common Services 14 566 000
Chapter VII - Contingencies 600 000
Total effective working budget 437 000 000
Chapter VIII - Transfer to Tax Equalization Fund 62 200 000
Total Appropriations (Gross) 499 200 000
2. The appropriations (gross) voted in paragraph 1, shall be financed by assessments on Member Nations, after deduction of Miscellaneous Income in the amount of US$41000000, thus resulting in assessments against Member Nations of US$458200000;
3. In establishing the actual amounts of contributions to be paid by individual Member Nations, the assessment of each Member Nation shall he reduced by any amount standing to its credit in the Tax Equalization Fund provided that the credit of a Member Nation that levies taxes on the salaries, emoluments and indemnities received from FAO by staff members shall be reduced by the estimated amounts of such taxes to be reimbursed to the staff member by FAO;
4. The contributions due from Member Nations in 1986 and 1987 shall be paid in accordance with the scale adopted by the Conference at its Twenty third Session, which contributions, after the deduction of amounts standing to the credit of Member Nations in the Tax Equalization Fund, result in net amounts payable totalling US$397 150 000 as set out in Appendix E to this Report. (Adopted 20 November 1985)
<section>9</section>
B. Review of the Regular Programme 1984-85
258. The Conference examined the Review of the Regular Programme 1984-85 and welcomed the additional improvements made in the document which were in accord with the suggestions made earlier by the Council and by itself. It expressed its satisfaction with the structure, format, content and presentation of the Review.
259. The Review was a comprehensive source of information and analysis on the activities of the Regular Programme, their respective outputs and effects and their links with extra-budgetary funded field activities. The findings were well presented and covered both the results achieved and the constraints encountered in programme implementation. The Conference appreciated the analytical depth and objectivity of the document and urged that this approach be continued in future Reviews.
260. The Conference recognized that the Review was of considerable use to the governing bodies, to FAO's management and even to bilateral donors. It formed a vital element of the wider system of monitoring and evaluation in FAO.
261. The Conference noted that the structure of the fourth Review was balanced; 40 percent was devoted to the performance report (Part I) and 30 percent each to in-depth reviews and special topics (Parts II and III). It further noted that the four Reviews in succession had covered the in-depth evaluation of 2 Programmes, 17 Sub-programmes, 5 programme elements and 7 special topics. Thus, over one-quarter of the technical Sub-programmes included under Major Programmes agriculture, fisheries and forestry had been reviewed in depth.
262. Part I of the Review was a source of comprehensive and useful information on all FAO's Programmes. Although the performance report could not analyse in detail all activities of the Regular Programme, the text had been made more specific by highlighting selected achievements and indicating relevant issues affecting the performance of many technical Sub-programmes. In particular, the focus on country level activities pertaining to small-scale producers had been sharpened. The Conference noted FAO's intensive involvement in training, food production and food security, including the food information system, policy studies to overcome the food crisis in Africa, soil conservation and minor irrigation, the integration of population policy in rural development and strengthening FAO's data bases. It particularly appreciated the improved and extended coverage of Regional Office activities.
263. The Conference welcomed the in-depth reviews of four Sub-programmes and one programme element in Part 11 of the Review. It noted that these five in-depth reviews covered FAO's activities related to small-scale producers, rural poor and women. The coverage was comprehensive and the format used followed a similar pattern: rationale, resources, output, effects and impact, and outlook and issues. It also noted that these reviews covered both the results of Regular Programme activities as well as their corresponding field projects.
264. The Conference urged the Secretariat to make the performance report more result-oriented and to expand the coverage of activities where implementation had fallen short of expectation. The inherent difficulties in measuring the impact of technical assistance activities under the Regular Programme were recognized. The Conference urged the Secretariat to pursue its assessment of impact to the extent possible.
265. The Conference noted the emphasis given by FAO to promoting livestock production in the context of small-scale producers, to devising policies and technologies which could strengthen animal feed security and to assisting developing countries in the control and eradication of animal diseases. It endorsed the increasing involvement of FAO in the promotion of vegetables and considered that the nature of the sector deserved a further comprehensive and integrated approach embodying production, marketing, processing, pricing and profit margins for producers and distributors.
266. The Conference welcomed the emphasis given by FAO to developing inland fisheries - especially aquaculture - a vital area with direct impact on improving human nutrition and increasing the cash income of the rural poor. More work was needed to realize the full potential of this sub-sector, especially in establishing cost-effective systems of fish culture. It noted the significant fuelwood component of FAO's forestry programme which formed an integral part of the Organization's rural development strategy. It considered that in view of the fuelwood crisis In the developing countries, this Sub-programme deserved more attention by the Organization.
267. The Conference recognized the range of activities of FAO relating to the programme Women in Food Systems. While considerable progress had been made by the Organization in promoting the role and involvement of women in rural development through special programmes and projects, the Conference felt that additional emphasis was justified in order to consolidate the achievements, and to make further progress. Special attention was needed to further improve statistics on activities involving women, promote literacy among women and to support organizations directed toward women.
268. The Conference commended the two thematic reviews in Part III on research and ECDC/TCDC which cut across FAO's programmes. It found the two special chapters informative and useful. Both contained invaluable baseline information on FAO's support to research and ECDC/TCDC.
269. The Conference recognized FAO's major role in research, in providing Regular Programme support to member countries in research policy and management and in the transfer of technology for adaptation to local environments through extra-budgetary activities. Another supportive mechanism of the Regular Programme was the exchange of research information. The Conference noted the coordination role exercised by the Inter-Departmental Working Group on Science and Technology and welcomed the participation of FAO in the work of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) and other international and regional research bodies.
270. The Conference endorsed the balanced approach adopted by FAO in strengthening national research capabilities through training, policy advice and management of research, including the monitoring and evaluation of research results. It stressed that the Organization's efforts in strengthening the links between research and extension were most appropriate to ensure that farmers' needs were fully reflected in the design of research programmes and that they reaped the benefits of research.
271. The Conference noted the clear description of ECDC/TCDC activities under each Programme and recognized that the Organization's activities in support of ECDC and TCDC had increased since 1980. It recognized that work in these areas was closely linked to the possibilities of mobilizing extra-budgetary support.
272. Some members cautioned against a dispersal of FAO's Regular Programme resources in too many ECDC/TCDC activities and suggested more emphasis in areas of greatest potential for success. FAO could be more selective in promoting networks, ascertaining first that the institutions concerned had the capacity and commitment required to permit their effective participation. Analyses of successes and failures should continue so that useful ECDC/TCDC models could be applied elsewhere. While imaginative approaches were needed to mobilize resources by participating countries, donor assistance remained crucial, particularly in support of weaker national institutions.
273. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 9/85
ECONOMIC AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
THE CONFERENCE,
Recognizing the increasing importance of economic and technical cooperation among developing countries for the achievement of accepted goals in the food and agricultural sector, while acknowledging that ECDC and TCDC are not substitutes for but complementary to North-South cooperation,
Taking into account the Buenos Aires Plan of Action on TCDC, in particular recommendation 32, urging the governing bodies of organizations of the United Nations system to make every effort to mobilize their organizations to contribute to the implementation of the Plan focusing inter alia on promotional, coordinating, operational and financial issues in order to achieve the objectives of said Plan,
Recalling, as adopted, the Caracas Plan of Action, the Programme of Action of WCARRD, the conclusions of the FAO Technical Consultation on ECDC in Food and Agriculture and the recommendations of the Bucharest Global Meeting on Economic Cooperation among Developing Countries, on cooperative action in food and agricultural production, food security, fisheries, management of natural resources, research and development and transfer of technology in the food and agriculture sector and land reform and rural development,
Recalling further FAO Conference Resolution 9/77, and the recommendations on ECDC and TCDC in the reports of the Twentieth and the Twenty-second Sessions of the FAO Conference and Resolution 9 of the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development,
1. Calls on the developing countries to promote and strengthen their individual and collective self-reliance, and to exert every effort to adopt and/or improve and strengthen national policies and mechanisms as well as national, sub-regional and regional institutions' capacities necessary to identify, formulate and implement inter-country cooperation, and to seize opportunities to exploit potentialities for ECDC/TCDC in the food and agriculture sector, particularly through exchange of experience, the pooling, sharing and utilization of their technical resources, and the development of their complementary capacities;
2. Invites developing countries to cooperate on a regional or sub-regional basis in order to coordinate their agricultural policies and develop trade in food products;
3. Urges developing countries to establish national focal points, as well as sectorial focal points in food and agriculture, where these have not yet been created, with the appropriate responsibilities and budgetary appropriations for the promotion, coordination and execution of ECDC and TCDC projects;
4. Urges the developed countries to provide the appropriate support and financial assistance for the implementation of programmes of economic and technical cooperation among developing countries in the food and agriculture sector, and to encourage and join tripartite cooperative arrangements, aimed at strengthening mutual cooperation among developing countries;
5. Commends the activities related to ECDC and TCDC undertaken so far through the use of FAO's Regular Programme and extra-budgetary resources and stresses the priority given to ECDC and TCDC in the Programme of Work and Budget for 1986-87 as a means of action to further enhance efficiency and effectiveness;
6. Recognizes the dynamic and catalytic role of FAO in assisting developing countries, particularly through the regional and country offices, in identifying areas of cooperation in supporting the preparation and execution of TCDC and ECDC projects, as well as in monitoring and reviewing their implementation;
7. Recognizes that the new category for the TCP which was established by the Council would cover projects catalyzing economic and technical cooperation among developing countries, including inter alia research network, twinning institutions of two developing countries or between institutions of a developing and developed country;
8. Requests the Director-General to adopt all appropriate measures necessary to intensify and step up such activities including inter alia the application of TCDC in programming and project formulation exercise, the use of TCDC as an innovative and cost-effective method of project delivery and increased utilization of developing countries' capacities in regular and field programmes;
(Adopted 28 November 1985)
274. The Conference commended the Director-General's initiative to commission the evaluation of the Technical Cooperation Programme by a panel of independent consultants. The evaluation report of the panel was comprehensive and thorough and discussed fully and openly the main features of this important and successful programme. Some members, while recognizing the value of the panel's report, stated that the coverage of longer-term effects and impact should be further emphasized in future evaluations.
275. In connection with this evaluation, a number of Member Nations reiterated their concerns on some aspects of the TCP. Some of these members expressed a wish for a clearer specification of the criteria governing the programme, for a greater transparency in the operations of the programme, for improved monitoring procedures and recognition of the TCP's implications on other FAO programmes in terms of administrative and technical backstopping. Some members also recalled their position that technical assistance activities in the UN System should be primarily funded by voluntary contributions, inter alia through the central funding mechanism of the UNDP. Some reiterated their objections to raising the ceiling of an individual TCP project to US$ 400 000 and to introducing a new category 'C' intended as a catalyst for inter-country cooperat4lon (TCDC).
276. These concerns were not shared by the large majority of Member Nations. They, in turn, reconfirmed their full support of the TCP as a quick action programme and reiterated their acceptance of its tested criteria and its modality of operation. They were convinced that TCP was fulfilling its objectives, did not duplicate the efforts of other agencies or programmes and was adequately monitored. The large majority of Member Nations was satisfied that the Programme was effective and efficiently managed. They accordingly supported the Director-General's proposals, as approved by the Council, to raise the ceiling of individual TCP projects to the maximum of US$ 400 000 and to introduce the new category 'C' for inter-country cooperation (ECDC/TCDC).
277. In the light of the above, the Conference welcomed the actions taken or to be taken by the Director-General in implementing the recommendations, arising from the evaluation report, which fell within his own authority and in general noted with satisfaction the measures approved by the Council.
C. Review of Field Programmes 1984-85
278. The Conference expressed its appreciation for the quality and comprehensiveness of the Review.
279. In underlining its strong support for FAO's field programmes, the Conference noted with concern the decline which had occurred in the funding of UNDP projects. Within the framework of the UNDP country programming process, the desirability of an increase in the share of the food and agriculture sector in overall UNDP allocations was emphasized, particularly in view of the serious food problems being encountered in African and other Least Developed Countries. In this connection, the role of recipient governments themselves in deciding sectoral allocation of UNDP funds was reaffirmed.
280. The significant increases during the biennium in FAO's Trust Fund programmes were warmly welcomed by the Conference. It was noted that, in 1985, Trust Fund programmes accounted for well over 50 percent of all FAO's field expenditures. Particular appreciation was expressed for Trust Fund support of FAO action programmes covering such areas as agricultural inputs, support to small farmers, foresters and fishermen, and women in development. The Conference also welcomed FAO's expanding role in technical assistance and training in association with the loans and credits of the World Bank and similar international and regional financial institutions. The Conference recognized the important and often complementary role of smaller-scale TCP projects, and noted the increase in TCP activities over the previous biennium. It emphasized that these various forms of assistance and cooperation enabled FAO to provide flexible and appropriate responses to the diverse needs of its
developing member countries.
281. The focus of current field programmes on Africa was strongly endorsed by the Conference. Particular appreciation was expressed for FAO's timely preparation and implementation during 1985 of the Agricultural Rehabilitation Programme for Africa. Nevertheless, it was regretted that the share of current field programme expenditure in Latin America and the Caribbean was relatively small. The Conference took note that innovative TCDC approaches were being pursued by FAO, such as the promotion of technical assistance networks with limited amounts of TCP funding.
282. The Conference expressed its continuing support for and satisfaction with the investment project preparation activities of the Investment Centre. It was noted that, in spite of the substantial decrease which had occurred in the flow of concessional aid for agriculture from such sources as IFAD and IDA, the activities of the Centre remained at a high level, both for practical training in the preparation of investment projects, and for the investment follow-up of field projects.
283. The Conference encouraged close cooperation between FAO and UNDP at the field level. In this connection it was noted that the UNDP Administrator and the FAO Director-General had written two letters encouraging close cooperation, and emphasizing the importance of agriculture in the development process. It was recognized that the FAO Representatives in countries should be more closely associated with the UNDP country programming process.
284. The Conference expressed its appreciation for the candid and objective assessment of the performance of FAO's field projects presented in Chapter 2 of the Review. It agreed that the twin approaches of the FAO Representatives survey and the synthesis of individual project evaluation reports provided a realistic picture of the existing situation in this regard. While the difficulties and problems generally encountered in evaluating technical assistance such as that provided by FAO were recognized, a few members called for a greater level of detail to be provided, when possible, on the impact of field programmes. The Conference recognized the many successful results and outputs which were being achieved by FAO projects.
285. The importance of FAO's extensive evaluation activities was emphasized, and in particular the need to ensure the feedback from evaluation into the conception and design of new projects. In this connection, the Conference gave its full support to the role that FAO Representatives were now playing in appraising project ideas and proposals at country level, and to the continuous measures undertaken throughout the Organization to ensure the maximum efficiency and effectiveness of field projects. In this connection, a few members felt that the independent evaluations carried out by FAO should be, as far as possible, more numerous, systematic and detailed.
286. The Conference considered that Chapter 3 of the Review, which analysed field activities in connection with forestry, was timely and of high interest. In emphasizing the importance of forestry in ensuring food security and in preventing environmental degradation including desertification, the Conference noted with satisfaction the impressive contribution being achieved through FAO's field projects. The change in attitude of foresters and agriculturalists, resulting in increasing cooperation between them, was welcomed. Full support was expressed for the focus on community and rural development approaches to forestry and fuelwood problems, particularly in relation to tropical forests as well as for forest development and tree planting in arid and semi-arid zones such as the Sahel. The need for investment follow-up to forestry activities was stressed, and in this connection the Conference recognized the effective role of the Investment Centre.
287. The Conference noted with appreciation the progressive trends which characterized both the content and the delivery of FAO's field programmes. General support was expressed for the many initiatives and activities which reflected successful follow-up, in terms of field activities, to the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development of 1979. The increasing use of TCDC approaches was also commended, in particular support to TCDC networks for agricultural research, training and other subjects. The Conference underlined the importance of the fullest possible government involvement in field projects, and welcomed the increased use of National Project Directors and national experts in appropriate circumstances.
288. The Conference supported fully the strong emphasis on training within FAO's field programmes. In recognizing the impressive numbers of men and women currently receiving training at all levels under field projects, the Conference stressed the importance of this aspect both in terms of quantity and quality. In this connection, the encouraging outcome of a recent survey of former FAO fellowship holders was noted with satisfaction.
289. In considering the Review, many members referred to the special problems faced by disabled people, particularly in the developing countries. The Conference therefore urged the Director-General to intensify FAO's activities toward the prevention of disability in the rural environment, and to increase technical assistance and support to those developing countries endeavouring to create national plans anti programmes in the field of disability prevention, rehabilitation, and the equalization of opportunities for disabled persons with the aim of improving their quality of life, and the possibilities for their social and economic development.
D. Follow-up of Conference Resolutions 8/83 and 9/83 - Plant Genetic Resources
290. The Conference reaffirmed the significance of plant genetic resources in continued agricultural development and in ensuring food security. It noted that, following the adoption of Conference Resolution 8/83 on the Inter national Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources, 85 Member Nations had officially responded and of these 77 had agreed in principle to adhere to, or expressed support for, the Undertaking. In addition, two non-FAO Member Nations had responded positively.
291. Appeals were made to all countries which had not yet subscribed to the Undertaking to do so. In this connection, countries were urged to clearly spell out their reservations to the Undertaking, in order to establish a constructive dialogue to ensure widest possible adherence. Various members, in reiterating their reservations to the Undertaking, indicated that their national legislation, including plant breeders' rights and other domestic considerations, determined the degree to which they could adhere to the Undertaking. A number of members were of the view that were the Undertaking to be modified, a greater number of countries could adhere to it. A few members reiterated that they could not adhere to the Undertaking in its present form on grounds of principle.
292. The Conference took note of the fact that the membership of the Commission on Plant Genetic Resources had increased from 67 to 77 Member Nations since its first meeting in March 1985. Six more countries had announced their intention of joining the Commission during the Twenty-third Session of the Conference. The studies currently being carried out by the Secretariat to investigate ways and means of allowing participation in the Commission by Member Nations of the United Nations which are not members of FAO were welcomed.
293. The Conference noted that, as recommended by the First Session of the Commission, a Working Group comprising 23 members of the Commission had been established and would meet in February 1986.
294. The Conference took note of the work initiated by the Secretariat on follow-up to the recommendations of the First Session of the Commission. The need to study the various legal aspects of the conservation and exchange of plant genetic resources was emphasized. The majority reiterated the significance of an international network under international jurisdiction on plant genetic resources base collections, both ex situ and in situ, and the overall importance of the unrestricted exchange of plant genetic resources, and emphasized that such a network did not imply duplication or overlapping with existing systems, but was complementary, pointing out that the existing network was responsible only for ex situ collections and for certain edible varieties. A number of members expressed their belief that the existing institutions had the flexibility and were quite adequate to achieve the objectives of the Undertaking.
295. The Conference stressed the importance of linking plant genetic resources with effective plant breeding and seed production activities, above all to the benefit of developing countries. In this respect, it reaffirmed, on the one hand, the global importance of facilitating inter-country movement of plant resources and stressed, on the other hand, the need for increased support to training activities for the maintenance and use of germ plasm.
296. The Conference noted the financial constraints of all countries, particularly of developing countries, to implement fully the objectives of the Undertaking. The majority requested the Director-General to study the feasibility of establishing an international fund for plant genetic resources, in the context of Article 8 of the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources. Other members expressed their belief that such a fund was not necessary in the light of existing funding mechanisms.
297. The Conference reiterated its appreciation for the technical and scientific achievements of the International Board for Plant Genetic Resources (IBPGR) in its area of competence. It emphasized the importance of continued close cooperation between IBPGR and FAO, and particularly with its Commission on Plant Genetic Resources, with a view to avoiding duplication and promoting complementarity. The Conference noted that the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research was reviewing the IBPGR and that the Commission had asked the Director-General of FAO to review the relationship between IBPGR and FAO. In this context, the relationship between IBPGR and FAO was currently the subject of discussions between the Chairman of the CGIAR and the Director-General of FAO. Some members indicated that they were prepared to support the establishment of IBPGR as an autonomous and independent international institution. Many members thought that the existing arrangements
between IBPGR and FAO should be maintained and improved.
<section>a</section>
E. International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides
298. The Conference noted that following a formal request by the Second FAO Government Consultation on International Harmonization of Pesticide Registration Requirements, (Rome, 11-15 October 1982) the document "International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides" had been prepared on the initiative of the Director-General.
299. The Conference further noted that several drafts of the Code had been prepared in consultation with appropriate UN organizations and bodies as well as with pertinent international organizations outside the UN System. It also noted that thereafter, a number of revisions and amendments had been introduced in the light of comments received from individual member countries, other interested organizations, the Committee on Agriculture and the Eighty-seventh and Eighty-eighth Sessions of the Council. The Conference expressed particular appreciation for this type of extensive consultative procedure.
300. The Conference unanimously agreed to the usefulness and timeliness of the Code, particularly in situations where there were no regulations or regulatory infrastructures at the country level. The Conference further agreed to the voluntary nature of the Code, and recommended that it be used as a basis for national legislation where so required.
301. While recognizing the significant improvements introduced in the text, the majority expressed deep concern that the principle of "Prior Informed Consent" no longer appeared in the present version of the Code. They feared that this could lead to an increased flow of highly toxic compounds, banned or severely restricted in the countries of manufacture, to developing countries which were not equipped to handle safely their supply and use. These members, however, recognized the need not to delay the adoption of the Code and accordingly, urged that the principle of "Prior Informed Consent" be considered for inclusion in any future first revision of the Code.
302. The Conference, in noting the additional proposals for amendments, recognized the dynamic nature of the Code, the need for monitoring its observance and for periodical revisions to effectively meet changed conditions . It therefore recommended that such revisions be made after some experience had been gained in the implementation of the Code. Most members suggested there be a first revision within the next biennium.
303. The Conference stressed the need to assist developing countries to establish the appropriate infrastructure for implementation of the various provisions of the Code including, the training of personnel. It also stressed the importance of making known to all concerned at national and international levels the objectives of the Code.
304. In view of the urgency of reducing pesticide hazards and to retain the present spirit of international cooperation and goodwill of all concerned, the Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 10/85
INTERNATIONAL CODE OF CONDUCT ON THE DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF PESTICIDES
THE CONFERENCE,
Recognizing that increased food production is a high priority need in many parts of the world and that this need cannot be met without the use of indispensable agricultural inputs such as pesticides,
Noting that FAO's study entitled "Agriculture: Toward 2000" foresees a steady increase in the worldwide use of pesticides,
Convinced that such growth in pesticide use is likely to take place in spite of necessary intensive parallel efforts to introduce biological and integrated pest control systems,
Acknowledging that pesticides can be hazardous to humans and the environment and that immediate action must be taken by all concerned, including governments, manufacturers, traders and users, to eliminate as far as possible and within the scope of their responsibility, unreasonable risks, not only in the country of origin but also in the countries to which pesticides may be exported,
Being aware that the requirements for the safe and proper use of pesticides in some developed countries have led to the adoption of complex systems of regulations and of enforcement mechanisms, but that many other countries have neither such mechanisms nor the necessary legislation, regulations or infrastructures to control the import, availability, sale or use of pesticides,
Convinced that additional efforts are needed to enable such countries to control pesticides more effectively and to assess the hazards which could result from their use or misuse,
Recognizing that a voluntary International Code of Conduct, based on internationally agreed technical guidelines, would provide a practical framework for the control of pesticides, especially in countries that do not have adequate pesticide registration and control schemes,
Noting that such a draft Code was reviewed by the Committee on Agriculture at its Eighth Session, and endorsed by the Council at its Eighty-eighth Session,
Having further noted the conclusions and recommendations of these bodies,
1. Hereby adopts a voluntary International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides as given in the annex to this Resolution;
2. Recommends that all FAO Member Nations promote the use of this Code in the interests of safer and more efficient use of pesticides and of increased food production;
3. Requests governments to monitor the observance of the Code, in collaboration with the Director-General who will report periodically to the Committee on Agriculture;
4. Invites other United Nations agencies and other international organizations to collaborate in this endeavour within their respective spheres of competence.
(Adopted 28 November 1985)
Annex to Resolution 10/85
INTERNATIONAL CODE OF CONDUCT ON THE DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF PESTICIDES
INTRODUCTION
The action by FAO to develop, in consultation with appropriate UN agencies and other organizations, an International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides, follows and accompanies many other events, some going back 25 years. All these events were designed to benefit the international community and to serve to increase international confidence in the availability, regulation, marketing and use of pesticides for the improvement of agriculture, public health and personal comfort.
One of the basic functions of the Code, which is voluntary in nature, is to serve as a point of reference, particularly until such time as countries have established adequate regulatory infrastructures for pesticides.
The Director-General of FAO in 1981 suggested that such a Code could help to overcome a number of difficulties associated with pesticides. The FAO Panel of Experts on Pesticide Specifications, Registration Requirements and Application Standards, at its meeting in 1982, agreed that activities involving the export and import of pesticides, and thereby their safe use, might be best dealt with through the adoption of a Code of Conduct. To that end a working paper was prepared for the FAO Second Government Consultation on International Harmonization of Pesticide Registration Requirements, Rome, 11-15 October 1982. The formal decision to develop the Code was taken at that Consultation which recommended that FAO in consultation with the appropriate UN organizations and bodies and international organizations outside the UN System, should draft a Code (1).
A number of governments and organizations have expressed concern about the propriety of supplying pesticides to countries which do not have infrastructures to register pesticides and thereby to ensure their safe and effective use. it should be noted that the development of national regulatory programmes is the first priority of FAO activities in this field. There has also been concern over the possibility that residues of certain pesticides, not needed or not permitted in particular countries, are present in imported agricultural commodities produced in other countries where the use of such pesticides is not restricted. While recognizing that it is impossible to eliminate all such occurrences because of diverging pest control needs, it is none the less essential that every effort should be made to apply pesticides only in accordance with good and recognized practices. It is at the same time important for industrially developed countries to recognize, in their regulatory
activities concerning residues, the pest control needs of developing countries, particularly the needs of countries in tropical regions.
In the absence of an effective pesticide registration process and of a governmental infrastructure for controlling the availability of pesticides, some countries importing pesticides must heavily rely on the pesticide industry to promote the safe and proper distribution and use of pesticides. In these circumstances foreign manufacturers, exporters and importers, as well as local formulators, distributors, re-packers, advisers and users must accept a share of the responsibility for safety and efficiency in distribution and use.
The role of the exporting country needs to be considered. Much emphasis has been given recently to the desirability of regulating the export of pesticides from producing countries. It is generally accepted that no company should trade in pesticides without a proper and thorough evaluation of the pesticide, including any risks. However, the fact that a product is not used or registered in a particular exporting country is not necessarily a valid reason for prohibiting the export of that pesticide. Developing countries are mostly situated in tropical and semi-tropical regions. Their climatic, ecological, agronomic, social, economic and environmental conditions and therefore their pest problems are usually quite different from those prevailing in countries in which pesticides are manufactured and exported. The government of the exporting country, therefore, is in no position to judge the suitability, efficacy, safety or fate of the pesticide under the conditions in the country
where it may ultimately be used. Such a judgement must, therefore, be made by the responsible authority in the importing country in consultation with industry and other government authorities in the light of the scientific evaluation that has been made and a detailed knowledge of the conditions prevailing in the country of proposed use.
The export to developing countries of pesticides which have been banned in one or more other countries or whose use has been severely restricted in some industrialized countries has been a subject of public concern which has led to intensive discussions on whether the exporting country should assume responsibility for the marketing and use of such products in the importing country. In this respect it is essential to note that when pesticides are banned it is either for toxicological, environmental or social reasons. Valid and adequate toxicological reasons justifying banning a product are of concern, though not necessarily of equal importance, to most countries. Consequently, such products should not be exported or imported without careful consideration of the toxicological implications for those likely to be exposed.
While a Code of Conduct may not solve all problems, nevertheless it should go a long way towards defining and clarifying the responsibilities of the various parties involved in the development, distribution and use of pesticides, and particularly should be of value in countries which do not yet have control procedures. Where there is a pesticide regulatory process in a country, the need for a Code of Conduct will obviously be less than where there is no such scheme in operation.
The Code of Conduct is not a short or simple document mainly because the nature, properties, uses and effects of pesticides are diverse and therefore require comprehensive consideration. Furthermore, the strong public pressure for banning or restricting the use of some effective and much needed pesticides often stems from a lack of understanding of the many important issues involved. This document is designed, therefore, also to provide the general public with some basic guidance on these issues.
ARTICLE 1 - OBJECTIVES OF THE CODE
1.1 The objectives of this Code are to set forth responsibilities and establish voluntary standards of conduct for all public and private entities engaged in or affecting the distribution and use of pesticides, particularly where there is no or there is inadequate national law to regulate pesticides.
1.2 The Code describes the shared responsibility of many segments of society, including governments, individually or in regional groupings, industry, trade and international institutions to work together so that the benefits to be derived from the necessary and acceptable use of pesticides are achieved without significant adverse effects on people or the environment. To this end all references in this Code to a government or governments shall be deemed to apply equally to regional groupings of states for matters falling within their areas of competence.
1.3 The Code addresses the need for a cooperative effort between governments of exporting and importing countries to promote practices which ensure efficient and safe use, while minimizing health and environmental concerns due to improper handling or use.
1.4 The entities which are addressed by this Code include: international organizations; governments of exporting and., importing countries; industry, including manufacturers, trade associations, formulators and distributors; users; and public sector organizations such as environmental groups, consumer groups, and trade unions.
1.5 The standards of conduct set forth by this Code:
1.5.1 encourage responsible and generally accepted trade practices;
1.5.2 assist countries which have not yet established controls designed to regulate the quality and suitability of pesticide products needed in that country and to address the safe handling and use of such products;
1.5.3 promote practices which encourage the safe and efficient use of pesticides including minimizing adverse effects on humans and the environment and preventing accidental poisoning from improper handling;
1.5.4 ensure that pesticides are used effectively for the improvement of agricultural production and of human, animal and plant health.
1.6 The Code is designed to be used, within the context of national law, as a basis whereby Government authorities, pesticide manufacturers, those engaged in trade and any citizens concerned may judge whether their proposed actions and the actions of others constitute acceptable practices.
ARTICLE 2 - DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Code:
ACTIVE INGREDIENT means the biologically active part of the pesticide present in a formulation.
ADVERTISING means the promotion of the sale and use of pesticides by print and electronic media, signs, displays, gift, demonstration or word of mouth.
BANNED means a pesticide for which all registered uses have been prohibited by final government regulatory action or when requests for all registrations or equivalent action for all uses have not been granted because of health or environmental reasons.
COMMON NAME means the name assigned to a pesticide active ingredient by the International Standards Organization or adopted by national standards authorities to be used as a generic or non-proprietary name for that particular active ingredient only.
DISTINGUISHING NAME means the name under which the pesticide is labelled, registered and promoted by the manufacturer and which, if protected under national legislation, can be used exclusively by the manufacturer to distinguish the product from other pesticides containing the same active ingredient.
DISTRIBUTION means the process by which pesticides are supplied through trade channels on local or international markets.
ENVIRONMENT means surroundings, including water, air, soil and their inter-relationship as well as all relationships between them and any living organisms.
EXTENSION SERVICE means those entities in the country concerned responsible for the transfer of information and advice to farmers regarding practices which improve agricultural practices including production, handling, storage and marketing.
FORMULATION means the combination of various ingredients designed to render the product useful and effective for the purpose claimed, the form of the pesticide as purchased by users.
HAZARD means the likelihood that a pesticide will cause an adverse effect (injury) under the conditions in which it is used.
INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT means a pest management system that, in the context of the associated environment and the population dynamics of the pest species, utilizes all suitable techniques and methods in as compatible a manner as possible and maintains the pest populations at levels below those causing economically unacceptable damage or loss.
LABEL means the written, printed, or graphic matter on, or attached to, the pesticide; or the immediate container thereof and the outside container or wrapper of the retail package of the pesticide.
MANUFACTURER means a corporation or other entity in the public or private sector or any individual engaged in the business or function (whether directly or through an agent or through an entity controlled by or under contract with it) of manufacturing a pesticide active ingredient, its formulation or product.
MARKETING means the overall process of product promotion including advertising, product public relations and information services as well as distribution and selling on local or international markets.
MAXIMUM RESIDUE LIMIT (MRL) means the maximum concentration of a residue that is legally permitted or recognized as acceptable in or on a food, agricultural commodity or animal feedstuff.
PACKAGING means the container together with the protective wrapping used to carry pesticide products via wholesale or retail distribution to users.
PESTICIDE means any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, or controlling any pest, including vectors of human or animal disease, unwanted species of plants or animals causing harm during or otherwise interfering with the production, processing, storage, transport, or marketing of food, agricultural commodities, wood and wood products or animal feedstuffs or which may be administered to animals for the control of insects, arachnids or other pests in or on their bodies. The term includes substances intended for use as a plant-growth regulator, defoliant, desiccant or fruit thinning agent or agent for preventing the premature fall of fruit and substances applied to crops either before or after harvest to protect the commodity from deterioration during storage and transport.
PESTICIDE INDUSTRY means all those organizations and individuals engaged in manufacturing, formulating or marketing pesticides and pesticide products.
PESTICIDE LEGISLATION means any laws or regulations introduced to regulate the manufacture, marketing, storage, labelling, packaging, and use of pesticides in their qualitative, quantitative and environmental aspects.
POISON means a substance that can cause disturbance of structure or function, leading to injury or death when absorbed in relatively small amounts by human beings, plants or animals.
POISONING means occurrence of damage or disturbance caused by a poison, and includes intoxication.
PRODUCT means the pesticide in the form in which it is packaged and sold: it usually contains an active ingredient plus adjuvants and may require dilution prior to use.
PROTECTIVE CLOTHING means any clothes, materials, or devices that are designed to provide protection from pesticides when they are handled or applied.
PUBLIC SECTOR GROUPS means (but is not limited to) scientific associations; farmer groups; citizens organizations; environmental, consumer and health organizations; and labour unions.
REGISTRATION means the process whereby the responsible national government authority approves the sale and use of a pesticide following the evaluation of comprehensive scientific data demonstrating that the product is effective for the purposes intended and not unduly hazardous to human or animal health or the environment .
REPACKAGING means the transfer of pesticide from any commercial package into any other, usually smaller, container for subsequent sale.
RESIDUE means any specified substances in food, agricultural commodities, or animal feed resulting from the use of a pesticide. The term includes any derivatives of a pesticide, such as conversion products, metabolites, reaction products, and impurities considered to be of toxicological significance. The term "pesticide residue" includes residues from unknown or unavoidable sources (e.g., environmental), as well as known uses of the chemical.
RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY means the Government agency or agencies responsible for regulating the manufacture, the distribution or the use of pesticides and more generally for implementing pesticide legislation.
RISK means the expected frequency of undesirable effects arising from exposure to the pesticide.
SEVERELY RESTRICTED - a limited ban - means a pesticide for which virtually all of its registered uses have been prohibited by final government regulatory action, but certain specific registered use(s) remain authorized.
TOXICITY means a physiological or biological property which determines the capacity of a chemical to do harm, or to produce injury to a living organism by other than mechanical means.
TRADER means anyone engaged in trade, including export, import, formulation and domestic distribution.
USE PATTERN embodies the combination of all factors involved in the use of a pesticide, including the concentration of active ingredient in the preparation being applied, the rate of application, time of treatment, number of treatments, use of adjuvants and methods and sites of application which determine the quantity applied, timing of treatment and interval before harvest, etc.
ARTICLE 3 - PESTICIDE MANAGEMENT
3.1 Governments have the overall responsibility and should take the specific powers to regulate the distribution and use of pesticides in their countries.
3.2 The pesticide industry should adhere to the provisions of this Code as a standard for the manufacture, distribution and advertising of pesticides, particularly in countries lacking appropriate legislation and advisory services.
3.3 Governments of exporting countries should assist to the extent possible, directly or through their pesticide industries, to:
3.3.1 provide technical assistance to help other countries, especially those with shortages of technical expertise, in the assessment of the relevant data on pesticides, including those provided by industry (see also Article 4);
3.3.2 ensure that good trading practices are followed in the export of pesticides especially to those countries with no or limited regulatory schemes (see also Articles 8 and 9);
3.4 Manufacturers and traders should observe the following practices in pesticide management, especially in countries without legislation and means of implementing regulations:
3.4.1 supply only pesticides of adequate quality, packaged and labelled as appropriate for each specific market;
3.4.2 pay special attention to formulations, presentation, packaging and labelling in order to reduce hazard to users, to the maximum extent possible consistent with the effective functioning of the pesticide in the particular circumstances in which it is to be used;
3.4.3 provide, with each package of pesticide, information and instructions in a form and language adequate to ensure safe and effective use;
3.4.4 retain an active interest in following their products to the ultimate consumer, keeping track of major uses and the occurrence of any problems arising in the actual use of their products as a basis for determining the need for changes in labelling, use directions, packaging, formulation or product availability.
3.5 Pesticides whose handling and application require the use of uncomfortable and expensive protective clothing and equipment should be avoided, especially in tropical climates for use by small-scale users.
3.6 National and international organizations, governments, and pesticide industries should take action in coordinated efforts to disseminate educational materials of all types to pesticide users, farmers, farmers' organizations, agricultural workers, unions and other interested parties. Similarly, impacted parties should seek and understand educational materials before using pesticides and should follow proper procedures.
3.7 Governments should allocate high priority and adequate resources to the task of effectively managing the availability, distribution and use of pesticides in their countries.
3.8 Concerted efforts should be made by governments and pesticide industries to develop and promote integrated pest management systems and the use of safe, efficient, cost-effective application methods. Public sector groups and international organizations should actively support such activities.
3.9 International organizations should provide information on specific pesticides and give guidance on methods of analysis through the provision of criteria documents, fact sheets, training sessions, etc.
3.10 It is recognized that the development of resistance of pests to pesticides can be a major problem. Therefore, governments, industry, national institutions, international organizations and public sector groups should collaborate in developing strategies which will prolong the useful life of valuable pesticides and reduce the adverse effects resulting from the development of resistant species.
ARTICLE 4 - TESTING OF PESTICIDES
4.1 Pesticide manufacturers are expected to:
4.1.1 ensure that each pesticide and pesticide product is adequately and effectively tested by well recognized procedures and test methods so as to fully evaluate the safety, efficacy (13) and fate (14) with regard to the various anticipated conditions in regions or countries of use;
4.1.2 ensure that such tests are conducted by sound scientific procedures and in accordance with good laboratory practice (2); the data produced by such tests, when evaluated by competent experts, must be capable of showing whether the product can be handled and used safely without unacceptable hazard to human health, plants, animals, wildlife and the environment (14);
4.1.3 make available copies or summaries of the original reports of such tests for assessment by responsible government authorities in all countries where the pesticide is to be offered for sale. Evaluation of the data should be referred to qualified experts;
4.1.4 take care to see that the proposed use pattern, label claims and directions, packages, technical literature and advertising truly reflect the outcome of these scientific tests and assessments;
4.1.5 on request of a country provide advice on methods for the analysis of any active ingredient or formulation that they manufacture and to provide the necessary analytical standards;
4.1.6 provide advice and assistance for training technical staff in relevant analytical work. Formulators should actively support this effort;
4.1.7 conduct residue trials prior to marketing in accordance with FAO Guidelines on Good Analytical Practice (3) and on Crop Residue Data (4 and 15) in order to provide a basis for establishing appropriate maximum residue limits (MRLs).
4.2 Each country should possess or have access to facilities to verify and exercise control over the quality of pesticides offered for sale, to establish the quantity of the active ingredient(s) and the suitability of their formulation (6).
4.3 International organizations and other interested bodies should, within available resources, consider assisting in the establishment of analytical laboratories in pesticide importing countries, either on a country or on a multilateral regional basis; these laboratories should be capable of carrying out product and residue analysis and should have adequate supplies of analytical standards, solvents and reagents.
4.4 Exporting governments and international organizations must play an active role in assisting developing countries with training of personnel in the interpretation and evaluation of test data.
4.5 Industry and Governments should collaborate in conducting post-registration surveillance or monitoring studies to determine the fate and environmental effect of pesticides under field conditions (14).
ARTICLE 5 - REDUCING HEALTH HAZARDS
5.1 Governments which have not already done so should:
5.1.1 implement a pesticide registration and control scheme along the lines set out in Article 6;
5.1.2 decide, and from time to time review, the pesticides to be marketed in their country, their acceptable uses and their availability to each segment of the public;
5.1.3 provide guidance and instructions for the treatment of suspected poisoning by pesticides for their basic health workers, physicians and hospital staff;
5.1.4 establish national or regional poisoning information and control centres at strategic locations to provide immediate guidance on first-aid and medical treatment, accessible at all times by telephone or radio. Governments should collect reliable information about the health aspects of pesticides. Suitably trained people with adequate resources must be made available to ensure that accurate information is collected;
5.1.5 keep extension and advisory services, as well as farmers organizations, adequately informed about the range of pesticide products available for use in each area;
5.1.6 with the cooperation of industry, ensure that where pesticides are available through outlets which also deal in food, medicines, other products for internal consumption or topical application or clothing, they should be physically segregated from other merchandise, so as to avoid any possibility of contamination or of mistaken identity. Where appropriate they should be clearly marked as hazardous materials. Every effort should be made to publicize the dangers of storing foodstuffs and pesticides together.
5.2 Even where a control scheme is in operation industry should:
5.2.1 Cooperate in the periodic re-assessment of the pesticides which are marketed and in providing the poison control centres and other medical practicioners information about hazards;
5.2.2 make every reasonable effort to reduce hazard by:
5.2.2.1 making less toxic formulations available;
5.2.2.2 introducing products in ready-to-use packages and otherwise developing safer and more efficient methods of application;
5.2.2.3 using containers that are not attractive for subsequent reuse and promoting programmes to discourage their reuse;
5.2.2.4 using containers that are safe (e.g. not attractive to or easily opened by children), particularly for the more toxic home-use products;
5.2.2.5 the use of clear and concise labelling;
5.2.3 halt sale and recall products when safe use does not seem possible under any use directions or restrictions.
5.3 Government and industry should further reduce hazards by making provisions for safe storage and disposal of pesticides and containers both at the warehouse and the farm level, and through proper siting and control of wastes from formulating plants.
5.4 To avoid unjustified confusion and alarm amongst the public, public sector groups should consider all available facts and should try to distinguish between major differences in levels of risk amongst pesticides and uses.
5.5 In establishing production facilities in developing countries manufacturers and governments should cooperate to:
5.5.1 adopt engineering standards and safe operating practices appropriate to the nature of the manufacturing operations and the hazards involved;
5.5.2 take all necessary precautions to protect the health and safety of operatives, by-standers and the environment;
5.5.3 maintain quality assurance procedures to ensure that the products manufactured comply to the relevant standards of purity, performance, stability and safety.
ARTICLE 6 - REGULATORY AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
6.1 Governments should:
6.1.1 take action to introduce the necessary legislation for the regulation, including registration, of pesticides and make provisions for its effective enforcement, including the establishment of appropriate educational, advisory, extension and health-care services; "The FAO Guidelines for the Registration and Control of Pesticides" (5) should be followed as far as possible taking full account of local needs, social and economic conditions, levels of literacy, climatic conditions and availability of pesticide application equipment;
6.1.2 strive to establish pesticide registration schemes and infrastructures under which products can be registered prior to domestic use and, accordingly, ensure that each pesticide product is registered under the laws or regulations of the country of use before it can be made available there;
6.1.3 protect the proprietary rights to use of data;
6.1.4 collect and record data on the actual import, formulation and use of pesticides in each country in order to assess the extent of any possible effects on human health or the environment, and to follow trends in use levels for economic and other purposes.
6.2 The pesticides industry should:
6.2.1 provide an objective appraisal together with the necessary supporting data on each product;
6.2.2 ensure that the active ingredient and other ingredients of pesticide preparations marketed, correspond in identity, quality, purity and composition to the substances tested, evaluated and cleared for toxicological and environmental acceptability;
6.2.3 ensure that active ingredients and formulated products for pesticides for which international specifications have been developed conform with the specifications of FAO (6), where intended for use in agriculture; and with WHO pesticide specifications (12), where intended for use in public health;
6.2.4 verify the quality and purity of the pesticides offered for sale;
6.2.5 when problems occur, voluntarily take corrective action and when requested by governments help find solutions to difficulties.
ARTICLE 7 - AVAILABILITY AND USE
7.1 Responsible authorities should give special attention to drafting rules and regulations on the availability of pesticides. These should be compatible with existing levels of training and expertise in handling pesticides by the intended users. The parameters on which such decisions are based vary widely and must be left to the discretion of each government, bearing in mind the situation prevailing in the country.
7.2 In addition, governments should take note of and, where appropriate, follow "The WHO Recommended Classification of Pesticides by Hazard" (7) and associate the hazard class with well recognized hazard symbols as the basis for their own regulatory measures. In any event the type of formulation and method of application should be taken into account in determining the risk and degree of restriction appropriate to the product.
7.3 Two methods of restricting availability can be exercised by the responsible authority: namely, by not registering a product; or, as a condition of registration, by restricting the availability to certain groups of users in accordance with national assessments of hazards involved in the use of the products in the particular country.
7.4 All pesticides, made available to the general public, should be packaged and labelled in a manner which is consistent with the FAO Guidelines on Packaging (8) and Labelling (9) and with appropriate national regulations.
7.5 Prohibition of the importation, sale and purchase of an extremely toxic product may be desirable if control measures or good marketing practices are insufficient to assure that the product can be used safely. However, this is a matter for decision in the light of national circumstances.
ARTICLE 8 - DISTRIBUTION AND TRADE
8.1 Industry should:
8.1.1 test all pesticide products to evaluate safety to human health and the environment prior to marketing as provided for in Article 4, and ensure that all pesticide products are likewise adequately tested for efficacy and stability and crop tolerance under procedures that will predict performance under the conditions prevailing in the region where the product is to be used, before they are offered there for sale;
8.1.2 submit the results of all such tests to the local responsible authority for independent evaluation and approval before the products enter trade channels in that country;
8.1.3 take all necessary steps to ensure that pesticides entering international trade conform to relevant FAO (6), WHO (12) or equivalent specifications for composition and quality (where such specifications have been developed) and to the principles embodied in pertinent FAO guidelines, and in rules and regulations on classification and packaging, marketing, labelling and documentation laid down by international organizations concerned with the mode of transport (ICAO, IMO, RID and IATA in particular);
8.1.4 undertake to see that pesticides which are manufactured for export are subject to the same quality requirements and standards as those applied by the manufacturer to comparable domestic products;
8.1.5 ensure that pesticides manufactured or formulated by a subsidiary company meet appropriate quality requirements and standards which should be consistent with the requirements of the host country and of the parent company;
8.1.6 encourage importing agencies, national or regional formulators, and their respective trade organizations, to cooperate in order to achieve fair practices and safe marketing and distribution practices and to collaborate with authorities in stamping out any malpractices within the industry;
8.1.7 recognize that the recall of a pesticide by a manufacturer and distributor may be desirable when faced with a pesticide which represents an unacceptable hazard to human and animal health and the environment when used as recommended, and should cooperate accordingly;
8.1.8 endeavour to ensure that pesticides are traded by and purchased from reputable traders who preferably should be members of a recognized trade organization;
8.1.9 see that persons involved in the sale of any pesticide are trained adequately to ensure that they are capable of providing the buyer with advice on safe and efficient use;
8.1.10 provide a range of pack sizes and types which are appropriate for the needs of the small-scale farmers and other local users to avoid handling hazards and the risk that resellers will repackage products into unlabelled or inappropriate containers.
8.2 Governments and responsible authorities should take the necessary regulatory measures to prohibit the repackaging, decanting or dispensing of any pesticide in food or beverage containers and should rigidly enforce punitive measures that effectively deter such practices.
8.3 Governments of countries importing food and agricultural commodities should recognize good agricultural practices in countries with which they trade and, in accordance with recommendations of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, should establish a legal basis for the acceptance of pesticide residues resulting from such good agricultural practices (10 and 15).
ARTICLE 9 - INFORMATION EXCHANGE
9.1 The Government of a pesticide exporting country which takes action to ban or severely restrict the use or handling of a pesticide in order to protect health or the environment domestically should notify, directly or indirectly, the designated national authorities in other countries of the action it has taken (16).
9.2 The purpose of the notification regarding control action is to give competent authorities in other countries the opportunity to assess the risks associated with the pesticide, and to make timely and informed decisions as to the importation and use of the pesticides concerned, after taking into account local, public health, economic, environmental and administrative conditions. The minimum information to be provided for this purpose should be:
9.2.1 The identity (common name, distinguishing name and chemical name);
9.2.2 A summary of the control action taken and of the reasons for it. if the control action bans or restricts certain uses but allows other uses, such information should be included;
9.2.3 The fact that additional information is available, and the name and address of the contact point in the country of export to which a request for further information should be addressed.
9.3 If an export of a banned or severely restricted pesticide occurs, the country of export should ensure that necessary steps are taken to provide the designated national authority of the country of import with relevant information.
9.4 The purpose of information regarding exports is to remind the country of import of the original notification regarding control action and to alert it to the fact that an export is expected or is about to occur. The minimum information to be provided for this purpose should be:
9.4.1 A copy of, or reference to, the information provided at the time of the notification of control action;
9.4.2 Indication that an export of the chemical concerned is expected or is about to occur.
9.5 Notification of control action should be provided as soon as practicable after the control action is taken. For pesticides banned or severely restricted before the implementation of the Code, an inventory of prior control action should be provided to the International Register of Potentially Toxic Chemicals (IRPTC), unless such information has already been provided.
9.6 Provision of information regarding exports should take place at the time of the first export following the control action, and should recur in the case of any significant development of new information or condition surrounding the control action. It is the intention that the information should be provided prior to export.
9.7 The provision of such information by the exporting country must take into account protection of the confidentiality of data in the importing country.
9.8 Governments of importing countries should:
9.8.1 establish internal procedures for the receipt and handling of such information from the exporting country; and
9.8.2 ensure that such information received is not used in any manner which would be inconsistent with the provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
ARTICLE 10 - LABELLING, PACKAGING, STORAGE AND DISPOSAL
10.1 All pesticide containers should be clearly labelled in accordance with applicable international guidelines, such as the FAO Guidelines on Good Labelling Practice (9).
10.2 Industry should use labels that:
10.2.1 include recommendations consistant with those of the recognized research and advisory agencies in the country of sale;
10.2.2 include appropriate symbols and pictogrammes whenever possible, in addition to written instructions, warnings and precautions;
10.2.3 in international trade, clearly show appropriate WHO Hazard Classification of the contents (7) or, if this is inappropriate or inconsistent with national regulations, use the relevant classification;
10.2.4 include, in the appropriate language or languages, a warning against the reuse of containers and instructions for the safe disposal or decontamination of empty containers;
10.2.5 identify each lot or batch of product in numbers or letters that can be read, transcribed and communicated by anyone without the need for codes or other means of deciphering;
10.2.6 are marked with the date (month and year) of formulation of the lot or batch and with relevant information on the storage stability of the product;
10.3 Industry should ensure that:
10.3.1 packaging, storage, and disposal of pesticides conform in principle to the FAO Guidelines for the Packaging and Storage of Pesticides (8), FAO Guidelines on the Disposal of Surplus Pesticides and Pesticide Containers (11), and WHO Specifications for Pesticides Used in Public Health (12);
10.3.2 in cooperation with governments, packaging or repackaging is carried out only on licensed premises where the responsible authority is convinced that staff are adequately protected against toxic hazards, that the resulting product will be properly packaged and labelled, and that the contents will conform to the relevant quality standards.
10.4 Governments should take the necessary regulatory measures to prohibit the re-packing, decanting or dispensing of any pesticide into food or beverage containers in trade channels and rigidly enforce punitive measures that effectively deter such practices.
ARTICLE 11 - ADVERTISING
11.1 Industry should ensure that:
11.1.1 all statements used in advertising are capable of technical substantiation;
11.1.2 advertisements do not contain any statement or visual presentation which directly or by implication, omission, ambiguity or exaggerated claim is likely to mislead the buyer, in particular with regard to the safety of the product, its nature, composition, suitability for use, or official recognition or approval;
11.1.3 pesticides which are legally restricted to use by trained or registered operators are not publicly advertized through journals other than those catering for such operations, unless the restricted availability is clearly and prominently shown;
11.1.4 no firm or individual in any one country simultaneously markets different pesticide active ingredients or combinations of ingredients under a single distinguishing name;
11.1.5 advertising does not encourage uses other than those specified on the approved label;
11.1.6 promotional material does not include use recommendations at variance with those of the recognized research and advisory agencies;
11.1.7 advertisements do not misuse research results or quotations from technical and scientific literature; and scientific jargon and irrelevancies are not used to make claims appear to have a scientific basis they do not possess;
11.1.8 claims as to safety, including statements such as safe", "non-poisonous", "harmless", "non-toxic", are not made, with or without a qualifying phrase such as "when used as directed";
11.1.9 statements comparing the safety of different products are not made;
11.1.10 misleading statements are not made concerning the effectiveness of the product;
11.1.11 any guarantee or implied guarantee, e.g. "more profits with guarantees high yields", are not given unless definite evidence to substantiate such claims is available;
11.1.12 advertisements do not contain any visual representation of potentially dangerous practices, such as mixing or application, without sufficient protective clothing; use near food; use by or near children;
11.1.13 advertising or promotional material draws attention to the appropriate warning phrases and symbols as laid down in the labelling guidelines (9);
11.1.14 technical literature provides adequate information on correct practices including the observance of recommended rates, frequency of and pre-harvest intervals;
11.1.15 false or misleading comparisons with other pesticides are not made;
11.1.16 all staff involved in sales promotion are adequately trained and possess sufficient technical knowledge to present complete, accurate and valid information on the products sold;
11.1.17 advertisements encourage purchasers and users to read the label carefully, or have the label read to them if they cannot read.
11.2 International organizations and public sector groups should call attention to departures from this Article.
11.3 Governments are encouraged to work with manufacturers to take advantage of their marketing skills and infrastructure, in order to provide public-service advertising regarding the safe and effective use of pesticides. This advertising could focus on such factors as proper maintenance and use of equipment, special precautions for children and pregnant women, the danger of re-using containers and the importance of following label directions.
ARTICLE 12 - MONITORING THE OBSERVANCE OF THE CODE
12.1 The Code should be published and should be observed through collaborative action among governments, individually or in regional groupings, appropriate organizations and bodies of the United Nations System, international governmental organizations, nongovernmental organizations and the pesticide industry.
12.2 The Code should be brought to the attention of all concerned in the manufacture, marketing and use of pesticides and in the control of such activities, so that governments, individually or in regional groupings, industry and international institutions understand their shared responsibilities in working together to ensure that the objectives of the Code are achieved.
12.3 All parties addressed by this Code should observe this Code and should promote the principles and ethics expressed by the Code, irrespective of other party's ability to observe the Code. The pesticide industry should cooperate fully in the observance of the Code and promote the principles and ethics expressed by the Code, irrespective of a government's ability to observe the Code.
12.4 Independently of any measures taken with respect to the observance of this Code, all relevant legal rules, whether legislative, administrative, judicial or customary, dealing with liability, consumer protection, conservation, pollution control, and other related subjects, should be strictly applied.
12.5 FAO and other competent international organizations should give full support to the observance of the Code, as adopted.
12.6 Governments should monitor the observance of the Code and report on progress made to the Director-General of FAO.
12.7 FAO Governing Bodies should periodically review the relevance and effectiveness of the Code. The Code should be considered as a dynamic text which must be brought up-to-date as required, taking into account technical, economic and social progress.
REFERENCES
1. Report of Second Government Consultation on International Harmonization of Pesticide Registration Requirements, FAO, Rome, 11-15 October 1982.
2. Good Laboratory Practice, C (81) 30, Annex II. Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris, 1981.
3. Good Analytical Practice (GAP), Report of the 15th Session of the Codex Committee on Pesticide Residues, The Hague, 3-10 October 1983 (Appendix V, Annex 11).
4. FAO Guidelines on Crop Residue Data, FAO, Rome, 1985.
5. FAO Guidelines for the Registration and Control of Pesticides (including a model scheme for the establishment of national organizations), FAO, Rome, 1985.
6. The Use of FAO Specifications for Plant Protection Products, FAO Plant Production and Protection Paper 13, Rome, 1979.
7. The WHO Recommended Classifications of Pesticides by Hazard, Guidelines to Classification 1984-1985, Ref. VBC/84.2, World Health Organization, Geneva, 1984.
8. FAO Guidelines for the Packaging, and Storage of Pesticides, FAO, Rome, 1985.
9. FAO Guidelines on Good Labelling Practice for Pesticides, FAO, Rome, 1985.
10. Good Agricultural Practices (GAP), Report of the 15th Session of the Codex Committee on Pesticide Residues, The Hague, 3-10 October 1983 (Appendix V, Annex I).
11. FAO Guidelines for the Disposal of Waste Pesticides and Pesticide Containers on the Farm, FAO, Rome, 1985.
12. WHO Specifications for Pesticides Used in Public Health, Sixth Edition, World Health Organization, Geneva, 1985.
13. FAO Guidelines on Efficacy Data for the Registration of Pesticides for Plant Protection, FAO, Rome, 1985.
14. FAO Guidelines on Environmental Criteria for the Registration of Pesticides, FAO, Rome, 1985.
15. Codex Recommended National Regulatory Practices to Facilitate Acceptance and Use of Codex Maximum Limits for Pesticide Residues in Foods. ALINORM (Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme - Codex Alimentarius Commission) 85/24 A - Add.2, FAO, Rome, 1985.
16. Provisional Notification Scheme for Banned or Severely Restricted Chemicals
(adopted by the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, UNEP, in decision 12/14 of 28 May 1984), UNEP, Nairobi, 1984.
<section>b</section>
F. United Nations/FAO World Food Programme
WFP pledging target
305. The Conference recalled that the WFP pledging target for the biennium 1987-88 of US$1400 million, comprising 3.25 million tons of food at current prices and US$405 million in cash, had been recommended by the Programme's governing body, the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes, and subsequently unanimously supported by the Eighty-eighth Session of the FAO Council. It welcomed the Executive Director's statement that the achievement of the target would enable the Programme to maintain the very considerable momentum it had built up over the past five years, and in terms of deliveries would mean placing in the hands of beneficiaries about 1.5 million tons each year for development projects alone.
306. The Conference noted the Executive Director's statement that global food aid for the year 1984-85 had reached a level of 12 million tons, 20 percent more than the previous highest recorded figure, since the World Food Conference. While donors had given more food through WFP than ever before, much of the increase in this period was due to the generous response of the donors countries to the crisis in Africa, and most of their additional assistance had been channelled bilaterally. It also noted the Executive Director's assurance that WFP had the proven capacity to use food for development, and his appeal that donors provide to WFP, for development purposes, some of that additional aid they had shown they were so willing to give for emergency uses.
307. The Conference commended the efficient and effective management, and the dedication of the staff of the World Food Programme. The unanimous acceptance of the target was a clear demonstration of the confidence of the donor as well as of the recipient countries in the capability, cost-effectiveness and efficiency of the Programme.
308. The Conference endorsed the decision of WFP to give priority to Africa, and at the same time supported the need to meet the developmental and emergency needs in other regions. It congratulated WFP on its timely and effective response to the African food crisis. It also appreciated WFP's quick response to the Mexican earthquake and to the volcanic eruption in Colombia, which clearly demonstrated the ability of the programme to move with great despatch in responding to disasters.
309. The Conference emphasized the benefit of triangular transactions in terms of timely delivery, incentives for agricultural production and rural development, and at the same time promoting ECDC. It encouraged WFP to continue such purchases and commodity swops in developing countries and appealed to the donor community to make the necessary funds or commodities available to the Programme for such transactions. It noted that, this year, some African countries had surpluses and invited the Programme to make every effort to address, as far as possible, the needs of African countries with food from Africa. It was recalled that the success of the Programme had been based on its ability to use donated commodities effectively for developmental and humanitarian purposes.
310. The Conference welcomed the growing spirit of cooperation between WFP and FAO. It looked forward to the final report on the implementation of the recommendations of the UN/FAO Task Force, which was to be submitted to the Twenty-first Session of the CFA. It further welcomed with appreciation WFP's close relationship with UNICEF (United Nations Children's Fund) and IFAD.
311. Concern was expressed regarding WFP's headquarters office accommodation, presently scattered in different locations, and it was hoped that the accommodation problem would be resolved expeditiously. Some members stated that the costing exercise underway regarding services, including accommodation, provided by FAO, required expeditious resolution.
312. The Conference supported the splitting of the proposed pledging target into commodities and cash, noted the difficulties of some countries in pledging both in cash and in commodities, and further noted the possibility of still pledging in monetary terms only. While most members would have liked to support a higher target level, they would accept the proposed level as representing the appropriate balance. It was noted that the target represented significant real growth compared to the level which was likely to be achieved in the current biennium. The Conference generally agreed that more cash contributions were needed to effectively administer the food aid management of the Programme and to purchase food in developing countries.
313. The Conference unanimously endorsed the pledging target. It appealed to the traditional as well as new donors to pledge generously at the forthcoming Donors' Conference to be held in New York, in March 1986, to achieve and, if possible, surpass the level, both in cash and in commodities, so as to enable the Programme to meet the growing demand for its assistance. It also appealed to all the donors for generous contributions to the IEFR, taking into account the need for more supplementary food for vulnerable groups than hitherto and more cash to meet internal transportation costs and to purchase more food in developing countries.
314. The Conference unanimously adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 11/85
TARGET FOR WFP PLEDGES FOR THE PERIOD 1987-88
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling the provisions of resolution 4/65 that the World Food Programme is to be reviewed before each pledging conference,
Recalling the provisions of operative paragraph 4 of its resolution 10/77 of 30 November 1977 that, subject to the review mentioned above, the next pledging conference should be convened at the latest early in 1986, at which time governments and appropriate donor organizations should be invited to pledge contributions for 1987 and 1988, with a view to reaching such a target as may be then recommended by the General Assembly and the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Noting that the review of the Programme was undertaken by the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes of the World Food Programme at its Twentieth Session and by the FAO Council at Its Eighty-eighth Session,
Having considered resolution 1/88 of the FAO Council as well as the recommendations of the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes,
Recognizing the value of multilateral food aid as implemented by WFP since its inception and the necessity for continuing its action both as a form of capital investment and for meeting emergency food needs,
1. Establishes for the two years, 1987 and 1988, a target for voluntary contributions of US$1400 million, comprised of 3.25 million tons of food at current prices and US$405 million in cash, and expresses the hope that such resources will be augmented by substantial additional contributions from other sources in recognition of the prospective volume of sound project requests and the capacity of the Programme to operate at a higher level;
2. Urges Member States of the United Nations and Members and Associate Members of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and appropriate donor organizations to make every effort to ensure the full attainment of the target;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Director-General of FAO, to convene a pledging conference for this purpose at United Nations Headquarters early in 1986;
4. Decides that, subject to the review provided for in resolution 4/65, the following pledging conference at which governments and appropriate donor organizations should be invited to pledge contributions for 1989 and 1990 with a view to reaching such a target as may be then recommended by the General Assembly and the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization, should be convened at the latest early in 1988.
(Adopted 28 November 1985)
G. Relations and Consultations with International Organizations
Recent developments in the United Nations system of interest to FAO
Relations with intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations
Recent developments in the United Nations system of interest to FAO
315. The Conference considered that the documents reflected the multiplicity and diversity of FAO's involvement in the activities and programmes of the United Nations system which was compatible with the Organization's wide mandate and the links between the food and agriculture sector and other sectors. In this context, the Conference was informed that FAO participated in 42 of a total of 60 inter-secretariat coordinating mechanisms.
316. The Conference noted with satisfaction that FAO's interagency cooperation had progressively increased. In particular, FAO's active participation in the work of the UN Economic and Social Council was noted with appreciation. However, some members expressed concern and noted that further Improvements could be made with regard to FAO's cooperation in the context of the UN's overall coordination mechanisms.
317. The Conference noted the lead role played by FAO in the ACC (Administrative Committee on Coordination) Task Force on Rural Development. It commended the preparation of 'Guiding Principles for the Design and Use of Monitoring and Evaluation in Rural Development Projects and Programmes' by the Task Force under the guidance of a panel convened by IFAD.
318. The Conference commended the active role played by FAO in the work of the ACC Sub-Committee on Nutrition (SCN) as described in the documents.
319. The Conference strongly commended the series of important initiatives taken by FAO with respect to the critical situation in Africa, including the constant flow of timely situation reports through its Global Information and Early Warning System for Food and Agriculture and its crops assessment and other missions, and the mobilization of assistance through the Agricultural Rehabilitation Programme for Africa. It learned with satisfaction that an in-depth study on the food and agricultural situation of Africa was in preparation and would be submitted to the next Regional Conference for Africa in September 1986. It emphasized the need for focusing attention on rehabilitation and long-term development programmes. It also welcomed and further encouraged the role of FAO in support of the United Nations Office for Emergency Operations in Africa (OEOA).
320. With respect to the mid-term Review and Appraisal of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade (IDS), the Conference expressed concern that the IDS targets had not been achieved and that the per capita output in the developing countries, or aggregate, was 5 percent less in 1985 than in 1980.
321. It was also noted with concern that, due to interest payments and other factors, there was a net transfer of financial resources from developing countries in general to developed countries in 1984, with projections indicating a similar situation in 1985. The Conference emphasized the need for increasing external financial flows to developing countries.
322. The Conference reiterated its appeal to bring the negotiations for the second replenishment of IFAD to an early satisfactory conclusion.
323. The Conference welcomed the reaffirmation of commitments by developed countries, in the document containing the agreed conclusions of the United Nations Committee on Review and Appraisal, of the target of 0.7 percent of GNP (Gross National Product) as official development assistance (ODA), and the achievement of that goal as soon as possible and, in any case, before the end of the Decade.
324. The Conference commended the activities of the FAO Investment Centre in assisting developing countries to obtain external capital finance for the development of their agriculture. The Conference expressed concern at the decline in multilateral commitments to agriculture, particularly in lending on concessional terms.
325. Referring to the mid-term review of the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries (SNPA), conducted by the high-level meeting of the Intergovernmental Group of LDCs of UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development) (Geneva, 30 September - 11 October 1985), the Conference expressed concern at the shortfall in the achievement of the SNPA targets. It supported the conclusion of the above-mentioned meeting as adopted. The need for LDCs to allocate an appropriate share of domestic resources to rural development and for the donors to support the efforts of the LDCs in this priority area was highlighted.
326. The Conference also welcomed the reiteration of the SNPA target of 0.15 percent of GNP as donor official development assistance to LDCs, together with the meeting's recommendation to the bilateral donors to provide ODA to LDCs essentially in the form of grants, and the request to the multilateral financial institutions to provide credits to the LDCs on highly concessional terms. The Conference was of the view that FAO should be fully involved in the UNDP round-table processes for LDCs, in the context of arrangements approved by the UNDP Governing Council.
327. The Conference noted FAO's work in support of Economic Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, and recalled the high priority given to it in the Programme of Work and Budget in 1986-87, which would enable the Organization to step up its activities in this sphere.
328. The Conference expressed appreciation for decision 85/26, adopted by the UNDP Governing Council, allocating to the Administrator US$1.5 million, from UNDP Special Programme Resources, for the promotion of action-oriented TCDC activities. The Conference was informed that the FAO Representatives (FAORs) had been requested to apprise the respective Governments of the availability of these funds, and if the Governments should decide to make use of these resources, the FAORs should advise them in preparing proposals.
329. The Conference commended the close collaboration between FAO and UNEP, including FAO's active participation in the preparation of the System-Wide Medium-Term Environment Programme (SWMTEP). It considered that close cooperation should be maintained in the implementation of the decisions adopted by the May 1985 session of the UNEP Governing Council in areas of concern to FAO, such as marine pollution, soils, desertification, energy, water, toxic chemicals, etc.
330. The Conference noted that a UNEP African Environmental Conference was to be held in December 1985 in Cairo. It hoped that the proposed institutional arrangements, if adopted, would take fully into account the competence and ongoing activities of FAO, and that the necessary consultations would take place to that effect.
331. The Conference was informed of the ongoing collaboration between FAO and UNIDO in areas of mutual interest. The Conference hoped that, with UNIDO becoming a specialized agency, such collaboration would further increase in the future.
332. A suggestion was made that in future documents on this item, mention should be made of the decisions taken by the Governing Council of UNDP in so far as they were relevant to FAO's activities.
333. In emphasizing the important role of women in the food and agriculture sector, the Conference expressed appreciation for FAO's substantial contribution to the documents submitted at, and its active participation in, the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women, held in Nairobi in July 1985. It commended FAO's programmes and projects undertaken for the benefit of rural women and urged the strengthening of these activities.
334. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 12/85
RURAL WOMEN
THE CONFERENCE,
Recognizing the fundamental role of women in agriculture, nutrition, family welfare and rural development, as well as the adverse conditions directly affecting them as workers, mothers and managers of the households,
Considering that women have not been provided with the educational opportunities to enable them to participate more effectively in agricultural development and the improvement of living conditions within their communities,
Conscious that training rural women could help boost production and assist the Organization in achieving its economic and social objectives,
Acknowledging that the programmes of the Organization express FAO's concern for the conditions of women in the Third World is it relates to agriculture, nutrition and rural development,
Taking into account the conclusions of WCARRD in 1979, resolution 35/136 of the UN General Assembly, resolutions 1982/50, 1983/78, 1985/46 of ECOSOC, and decision 1984/101 of ECOSOC as adopted,
Endorsing paragraph 16(c) of the conclusions and recommendations of the Eleventh Ministerial Session of WFC (World Food Council); paragraph 50 of FAO Council document CL 88/REP; the Government Consultation on the "Role of Women in Food Production and Food Security" held in Harare, Zimbabwe (10-13 July 1984).
Taking into account Agenda Item No. 8 of the "World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace", held in Nairobi, Kenya (15-26 July 1985), entitled "Forward-Looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women up to the Year 2000",
1. Requests the Director-General to continue to pay particular attention in the Organization's activities to the study of women's problems, especially in those programmes concerned with training and access to inputs and technology;
2. Urges that in the design and implementation of all FAO programmes and projects special attention be paid to the participation of peasant women who work in agriculture, fisheries and forestry and they be given suitable opportunities for training;
3. Calls upon the Director-General to keep Member Nations informed through the appropriate, competent bodies of the Organization of the follow-up to this resolution.
(Adopted 28 November 1985)
Relations with intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations
335. The Conference took note with satisfaction of the developments that had taken place since its Twenty-second Session in relations between FAO and intergovernmental organizations and international non-governmental organizations, including international trade unions.
336. It expressed appreciation of FAO's cooperation with intergovernmental organizations and gave its support to the strengthening of such cooperation. In particular, it endorsed FAO's successful cooperation with the Organization of African Unity and with other regional and sub-regional organizations in fighting the consequences of the catastrophic drought in Africa, and in preparing and implementing the programme of rehabilitation and reconstruction of African agriculture. FAO would be associated with the consultations for implementation of the EEC's African rural rehabilitation programme.
337. The Conference also noted with interest the report of the Informal Meeting of Representatives of International Non-Governmental Organizations (INGOs) attending the Twenty-third Session of the Conference. The meeting had as its central theme "Collaboration of INGOs in achieving the objectives of the FAO Programme of Work and Budget 1986-87" and considered ways and means which would allow these organizations to participate more actively in FAO's work in the field of rural development.
338. The Conference expressed support for FAO's determination to strengthen further its collaboration with NGOs, through appropriate arrangements, for example by increased cooperation in FAO's Global Information and Early Warning System.
339. The activities of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign - Action for Development (FFH/AD) had been particularly appreciated and support was expressed for their further development. It was suggested that a report on FFH/AD activities should be prepared for the next session of the Conference.
340. The Conference expressed particular appreciation for the involvement of NGOs in organizing celebrations of the Fortieth Anniversary of FAO, as well as of World Food Day, especially at national-and local levels.
<section>c</section>
VII. Constitutional and administrative matters
A. Statutory Report on Status of Conventions and Agreements, and Amendments thereto
B. Amendments to the Spanish Text of Rule XII.9(a) and Rule XII.17 of the General Rules of the Organization
C. Amendment to Rule XXV.6 of the General Rules of the Organization
D. Review of the Rules Governing Voting Procedures of Conference and Council
E. Relations with the Host Government
F. Emoluments of the Director-General
G. Audited Accounts
H. Scale of Contributions 1986-87
I. Status of Contributions
J. Problems with Late Payments and Arrears in Contributions
A. Statutory Report on Status of Conventions and Agreements, and Amendments thereto
341. Pursuant to Rule XXI of the General Rules of the Organization (GRO), and in accordance with established practice, the Director-General submitted to the Conference the biennial Statutory Report reflecting the present status of conventions and agreements concluded within the framework of FAO, of other multilateral treaties concluded outside its framework in respect of which the Director-General acts as depositary; and of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies is applied to FAO.
342. The Conference took note of the Statutory Report, contained in documents C 85/10 and C 85/10-Sup.1.
343. With reference to the International Plant Protection Convention, the Conference recalled that, when approving the amendments to the Convention at its Twentieth Session (1979) by Resolution 14/79, it had urged the parties to the Convention to accept the revised text it the earliest possible time. The Conference noted, however, that twenty acceptances were still required in order to reach the two-thirds majority of contracting parties, which was necessary for the entry into force of the revised text. In view of the importance of the Convention in strengthening international action against the spread of pests of plants and plant products in the context of international trade, the Conference reiterated its appeal to contracting parties that had not yet accepted the revised text of the Convention to deposit an instrument of acceptance as soon as possible.
B. Amendments to the Spanish Text of Rule XII.9(a) and Rule XII.17 of the General Rules of the Organization
344. The Conference noted that at its Forty-fifth Session (October 1984) when reviewing certain rules governing voting procedures of the Council and the Conference, the Committee on Constitutional anti Legal Matters (CCLM) had found that the Spanish text of Rule XII.9(a) GRO made use of the term "por aclamación", which did not entirely correspond with the terms used in the English text ("by clear general consent") and in the French text ("par consentement général manifeste"). The CCLM had therefore recommended that the Spanish text of Rule XII.9(a) GRO be amended by deleting the words "por aclamación" and replacing then by the words "por evidente consenso general". On the same occasion the CCLM had recommended that a similar amendment be made to paragraph 17 of Rule XII GRO, in which the words "por aclamación" should be replaced by the words "por consenso general", so as to be consistent with the terms "by general consent" and "par consentement général" used in the English
and French texts respectively.
345. The Conference further noted that the Council, it its Eighty-sixth Session (November 1984) had endorsed the CCLM's recommendations that the Spanish text of the General Rules of the Organization be amended in the manner indicated above.
346. The Conference agreed with the views expressed by the CCLN and the Council concerning the need to amend the Spanish text of Rule XII.9(a) and Rule XII.17 GRO, and adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 13/85
AMENDMENT OF THE SPANISH TEXT OF RULES XII.9(a) AND XII.17 OF THE GENERAL RULES OF ORGANIZATION
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that the Spanish text of Rule XII.9(a) GRO contains the expression "por aclamación", which does not correspond to the expressions used in the English and French texts ("by clear general consent" and "par consentement général manifeste", respectively),
Noting further that the Spanish text of Rule XII.17 GRO also contains the expression "por aclamación", which does not correspond to the expression used in the English and French texts ("by general consent" and "par consentement général", respectively),
Considering the recommendation of the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters endorsed by the Council at its Eighty-sixth Session,
Considering further that it would be appropriate to amend the Spanish texts of Rule XII.9(a) and Rule XII.17 GRO in order to harmonize them with the other language versions,
Decides that the Spanish texts of Rule XII.9(a) arid Rule XII.17 GRO be amended as follows:
Rule XII.9(a)
"El nombramiento de Presidente del Consejo y de Director General, la admisión de nuevos Estados Miembros y de Miembros Asociados y la elección de los Miembros del Consejo se decidirán por votación secreta. Las demás elecciones se decidirán igualmente por votación secreta, con la salvedad de que cuando no baya más candidatos que vacantes el l'residente podrá proponer a la Conferencia o al Consejo que el nombramiento se lleve a cabo por [aclamación] evidente consenso general."
Rule XII.17
"Si en asunto ajeno a elecciones fuera preciso tomar un acuerdo para el que ni la Constitución ni este RegIamento exijain una mayoría de dos tercios, el Presidento podrá proponer a la Conferencia o al Consejo que el asunto se decida por [aclamación] por consenso general sin recurrir a un voto formal."
(Adopted 27 November 1985)
C. Amendment to Rule XXV.6 of the General Rules of the Organization
347. The Conference noted that at the Eighty-seventh Session of the Council questions had been raised as to the practice of the Organization concerning the reimbursement of travel expenses of Council Members. At that Session, the Council had been informed that, tinder Rule XXV.6 GRO only the travel expenses incurred by the representative of each Member of the Council was borne by the Organization. In this connection the Council had noted with concern that Rule XXV.6 GRO apparently precluded the reimbursement of the travel expenses of any member of a delegation attending the Council when a Permanent Representative to the Organization residing in Rome was designated as the representative to the Council. Thus, with a view to considering the possibility of permitting the reimbursement of the travel expenses of any one member of a delegation, the Council had referred the interpretation or possible amendment of Rule XXV.6 GRO to the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters.
348. The Conference further noted that the CCLM had examined this matter at its Forty-seventh Session (October 1985) and had concluded that it was not legally possible to interpret Rule XXV.6 GRO as permitting the reimbursement of the travel expenses of any one member of a delegation to the Council. The CCLM had therefore prepared a draft amendment to Rule XXV.6 GRO, which would permit such reimbursement. The CCLM had also pointed out that, If an amendment to Rule XXV.6 GRO were adopted by the Conference, a consequential amendment should be adopted by the Council to Rule VII-2 of its own Rules of Procedure. At its Eighty-eighth Session (November 1985) the Council had agreed with the conclusion reached by the CCLM and had endorsed the CCLM's suggestions concerning the appropriate amendments to the Basic Texts. The Council had therefore recommended to the Conference the adoption of a draft Resolution prepared by the CCLM.
349. In the course of the debate one delegation declared that its Government was not in favour, as a matter of principle, to payment of travel expenses of representatives of Member States travelling to meetings of Organizations of the UN system, and was concerned about the precedent this Rule chance might set for the UN system. In view of the broad support for this proposal, however, it would not oppose a consensus on this matter. Other delegations raised various concerns and were informed of the expenditure which would be incurred by the Organization as a consequence of the adoption of the resolution. These delegations recognized, however, that such expenditure would be covered by the relevant budgetary appropriation. Most delegations, however, expressed their full support for the draft resolution, which in their view would be beneficial to the work of the Council and, in particular, would assist developing countries.
350. In conclusion the Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 14/85
AMENDMENT TO RULE XXV.6 OF THE GENERAL RULES OF THE ORGANIZATION
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that the Council, at its Eighty-seventh Session (June 1985) considered that the General Rules of the Organization should permit the reimbursement of the travelling expenses of any one member of a delegation representing a Member of the Council at Council Sessions,
Noting further that, in order to achieve this purpose, the Council, at its Eighty-eighth Session (November 1985), endorsed a draft amendment to Rule XXV.6 GRO prepared by the CCLM;
1. Decides to amend Rule XXV.6 GRO to read as follows:
"The travelling expenses of [the representative] not more than one member of the delegation of each [Member of] Member Nation on the Council properly incurred in travelling, by the most direct route, from the [representative] member's capital city or duty station, whichever is less, to the site of the Council's session and return to his or tier capital city or duty station, shall be borne by the Organization";
2. Invites the Council to amend Rule VII.2 of its Rules of Procedure in the manner recommended by the CCLM in order to bring that provision in line with the above amendment to Rule XXV.6 GRO.
(Adopted 27 November 1985)
D. Review of the Rules Governing Voting Procedures of Conference and Council
351. The Conference recalled that at its Twenty-second Session (1983), some members had expressed concern at the fact that Rule XII.9(a) GRO provided for a vote by secret ballot when there was the sane number of candidates as places to be filled. They had suggested that the election procedures be reviewed, in order to study the possibility of not proceedings to a secret ballot in such cases: for instance for the election of the Independent Chairman of the Council. The Conference had agreed that the Council should review the present rules governing the voting procedures, where there were the same number of candidates as places to be filled in the Conference or Council, with a view to accelerating procedures and thus saving valuable time.
352. The Conference further recalled that the Council, at its Eighty-fifth Session, had decided that the question be submitted for examination to the CCLM, which had in fact examined it at its Forty-fifth Session (October 1984).
353. The Conference noted that the CCLM had pointed out that under Rule XII.9(a) GRO it was mandatory to have a secret ballot with respect to (a) the appointment of the Independent Chairman of the Council, (b) the appointment of the Director-General, (c) the admission of additional Member Nations or Associate Members, (d) the election of Council members. The CCLM had expressed the view that the said four cases related to some highly sensitive matters, for which the secrecy of voting was intended to afford Member Nations the possibility of expressing their choice without any constraint or embarrassment, and had concluded that no amendment to Rule XII.9(a) GRO was called for.
354. The Conference noted that the Council at its Eighty-sixth Session (November 1984) concurred with the CCLM's conclusion that the present provision was appropriate since it protected the interests of Member Nations, and that therefore no amendment to Rule XII.9(a) GRO was necessary.
355. The Conference agreed with the conclusions reached on this matter by the CCLM and the Council, and decided to take no action concerning the possible amendment of Rule XII.9(a) GRO.
E. Relations with the Host Government
Immunities of the organization
Headquarters Agreement
Headquarters accommodation
Immunities of the organization
356. The Conference recalled that the question of FAO's immunity from legal process in Italy had been considered by the Council and at the Twenty-second Session of the Conference in connection with a judgement rendered by the Corte di Cassazione in 1982. Further, the Conference recalled that in this judgement the Corte di Cassazione had given a restrictive interpretation of the Organization's "immunity from every form of legal process" provided for in Section 16 of the Headquarters Agreement, in which a distinction had been made between acts accomplished "jure imperii" and "jure gestionis". On the basis of this distinction, the Court had not recognized immunity in an action brought against the Organization in the Italian courts by the landlords of Building F in which they claimed arrears of rent.
357. With a view to reaching a solution of the problem, the Council, at its Eighty-sixth Session (November 1984), had strongly urgent the Host Government "to accelerate the adoption of legislative measures that would guarantee, in the future, the Organization's immunity from legal process including measures of execution." At the same session, the Council had taken up a suggestion that had first been made at the Twenty-second Session of the Conference to the effect that the Organization might seek an Advisory Opinion from the International Court of Justice on the interpretation of the relevant provisions of the Headquarters Agreement. The Council had requested the Committee on Constitutional and Legal Matters to formulate the questions that might be submitted to the Court if, in the meantime, no appropriate legislative action had been taken by the Host Government and the Conference were to decide to follow this course of action. The CCLM had carried out this task at its
Forty-sixth Session I/ and the Council, in turn, at its Eighty-seventh Session (June 1985), had forwarded the questions to the Conference for consideration.
358. The Conference had before it a Note by the Director-General as well as an extract from the Report of the Eighty-seventh Session of the Council containing the questions that might be submitted to the International Court of Justice which read as follows:
"(i) Does Section 16 of the Headquarters Agreement concluded between FAO and the Italian Republic mean that in Italy FAO is immune from every form of legal process in all cases in which it has not expressly waived its immunity?
(ii) If the answer to (i) is negative, what are the specific exceptions to FAO's immunity from every form of legal process under Section 16?"
359. The Conference noted that an out of court settlement had been reached in the course of 1985 with the landlords of Building F and with plaintiffs in other lawsuits brought against FAO in the Italian courts since 1982; no further lawsuits were pending. The Conference also noted the legal and practical considerations put forward by the Italian delegation and the efforts made by the Italian authorities to overcome FAO's practical problems. It nevertheless recognized the importance of finding a solution that was mutually agreeable to FAO and the Italian Government, with a view to guaranteeing the Organization's immunity from legal process as soon as possible. For this purpose, the determination of the appropriate interpretation of Section 16 of the Headquarters Agreement would be the best approach.
360. The Representative of the Host Government underlined the readiness of the Italian authorities to pursue actively their efforts to reach a viable legal solution to this matter. The suggestion was made that it should be left to the Council to decide whether or not FAO should seek an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice. Nevertheless, the Conference agreed that it would not be desirable at this stage to submit the questions forwarded to it by the Council to the International Court of Justice and that it would be preferable to reconsider the matter, as necessary in the light of a report by the Director-General on developments, at its next session. It therefore invited the Director-General and the Italian authorities to explore all possible means of arriving rapidly at a definitive solution which would ensure that FAO would enjoy immunity from all forms of legal process in Italy. The Conference also requested the Council to follow this matter closely and to
report to it at its next session.
Headquarters Agreement
361. The Conference noted the reports of the Eighty-sixth and Eighty-seventh Sessions of the Council and was informed that the Director-General had received a letter dated 5 October 1985 from the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Italy. The Conference was also informed that negotiations had not been completed, agreement not yet having been reached inter alia on two major issues, namely (a) duty-free privileges to staff of Italian nationality and (b) the number of staff in the first category enjoying full diplomatic privileges and immunities.
362. The Conference endorsed the position taken by the Council at its previous sessions and urged both parties to arrive at an early conclusion of the negotiations in line with Council Resolution 4/86 (November 1984).
Headquarters accommodation
363. The Conference noted the reports of the Eighty-sixth and Eighty-seventh Sessions of the Council as well as the latest developments since the latter session of the Council.
364. Regarding the construction of 70 rooms on the eighth floor of building D, contracts for electrical works, plumbing, heating and air conditioning were awarded in September 1985 while masonry works were progressing satisfactorily. The 70 rooms were expected to be ready for occupancy by the end of September 1986.
365. As regards the new structures to be constructed within the Caracalla Complex, the Conference was informed that, on 16 October 1985, the fortieth anniversary of the foundation of the Organization, the President of the Italian Republic had laid a foundation stone to commemorate the commencement of the construction project. Provision for the funding of the project to the extent of 25 000 million Italian lire had been included in the Host Government's budget for 1986 and the relevant law was currently being debated in Parliament. As soon as the financing law was passed, the Government expected to proceed with the preparation of executive drawings and construction work. The Conference expressed its satisfaction at this decision taken by the Host Country and expressed Its gratitude to the Italian Government.
F. Emoluments of the Director-General
366. The Conference endorsed the Council's recommendation that the representation allowance for the Director-General be increased, and adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 15/85
EMOLUMENTS OF THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL
THE CONFERENCE,
Considering that in FAO the representation allowance of the Director-General had not been changed since 1 January 1981 when it was established at US$ 24 000 per annum, and that inflation during this period has been in excess of 75 percent,
Decides that:
The representation allowance of the Director-General be increased to US$ 32 000 per annum effective I January 1985.
(Adopted 19 November 1985)
G. Audited Accounts
367. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 16/85
AUDITED ACCOUNTS
THE CONFERENCE,
Having considered the report of the Eighty-sixth Session of the Council,
Having examined the following audited accounts and the External Auditor's Reports thereon:
Regular Programme 1982-83 C 85/5
United Nations Development Programme 1982-83 C 85/6
World Food Programme 1982-83 C85/7
Noting the issues raised in the Representation of Financial Statements of the World Food Programme by the Director, Financial Services Division, and the External Auditor's comments, and the reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) and of the Eighteenth Session of the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes thereon,
Noting further that the External Auditor had drawn attention to matters affecting the World Food Programme Accounts,
Adopts the above audited accounts.
(Adopted 27 November 1985)
H. Scale of Contributions 1986-87
368. The Conference took note of and endorsed the recommendation of the Eighty-seventh Session of the Council that the FAO Scale of Contributions for 1986-87 should continue to be derived directly from the UN Scale of Assessments in force during the calendar year of the FAO Conference Session. The practice of deriving the FAO Scale from the UN Scale of Assessments had been adhered to by the Organization, without exception, following the decision of the Eighth Session of the Conference in 1955 and confirmation after a very thorough and detailed review of the matter, by the Eighteenth Session of the Conference in 1975.
369. The Conference was informed that the recommended FAO Scale for 1986-87 had been derived directly from the UN Scale of Assessments in force for the three-year period 1983/85, as adopted by UN General Assembly Resolution 37/125 of 17 December 1982, and had been adjusted to take account of the two new Member Nations admitted at this Session of the FAO Conference. The FAO Scale for 1984-85, adopted by the Conference in 1983, had also been derived directly from the same UN Scale of Assessments. Therefore the differences between the 1984-85 FAO Scale and the 1986-87 FAO Scale arose only as a result of the admission of the two new Member Nations at this Session of the Conference. The application of the UN Scale to FAO thus reflected also FAO's own membership.
370. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 17/85
SCALE OF CONTRIBUTIONS 1986-87
THE CONFERENCE,
Having noted the recommendations of the Eighty-seventh Session of the Council,
Confirming that as in the past FAO should follow the United Nations Scale of Assessments subject to adaptation for the different membership of FAO,
1. Decides that the FAO Scale of Contributions for 1986-87 should be derived directly from the United Nations Scale of Assessments in force in 1985;
2. Adopts for use in 1986 and 1987 the Scale as given in Appendix F to this report.
(Adopted 27 November 1985)
I. Status of Contributions
371. The Conference noted the status on 22 November 1985 of contributions from Member Nations to the Budget of the Organization (Appendix G). It observed that the rate of receipt of 1985 assessments had generally been more favourable than in recent years. Application as of 1 January 1985 of approximately US$41 million of the cash surplus of the 1982-83 biennium, representing 20.72 percent of assessed contributions for 1985, had, however, been an important factor in the improved rate of receipts in 1985.
372. The Conference observed that 72 Member Nations had not yet fulfilled their obligation to the Organization with regard to payment of 1985 assessments, notwithstanding that Financial Regulation 5.5 required all Member Nations to pay contributions in full within 30 days of receipt of the Director-General's notification of the amount due, or as of the first day of the calendar year to which they relate, was the later. The Conference also noted that many Member Nations which were fully paid had not, however, remitted their 1935 contributions in a timely manner. In addition, 40 Member Nations currently had arrears of contributions outstanding, relating to assessments for 1984 and prior years.
373. The Conference appealed to all Member Nations to take the necessary actions to ensure timely payment of their assessed contributions for 1986 and urged the 72 Member Nations with outstanding contributions to remit, as soon as possible, amounts due or overdue.
374. The Conference noted that the Finance Committee had given consideration to various measures to deal with the continuing long-term problem of delayed payment of assessed contributions and arrears. The Conference observed that the problem was a particularly difficult one, with no simple solution which could be considered equitable and effective on a continuing basis.
J. Problems with Late Payments and Arrears in Contributions
375. The Conference noted that the Government of Chad had advised that the failure to pay contributions to the Organization was due to conditions beyond its control and had requested that it be permitted to pay its arrears of assessments, plus current contributions in the year of assessments, over a ten year period beginning in 1985.
376. The Conference adopted the following Resolution, which would ensure its voting rights to Chad:
Resolution 18/85
PAYMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS - CHAD
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that the Government of the Republic of Chad had made a proposal that it liquidate its arrears of contributions over a period of ten years commencing in 1985, in addition to paying each current contribution in the calendar year of assessment,
Decides that:
1. Notwithstanding Financial Regulation 5.5, the arrears of contributions of the Republic of Chad totalling $102 485.34 shall be settled through the payment of ten equal annual instalments of $10 248.54;
2. The first instalment together with the assessed contribution for 1985 shall be payable In 1985;
3. The annual payment of the instalments referred to above, together with the payment of each current contribution in the calendar year of assessment and any advances to the Working Capital Fund, shall be considered as fulfilment of the Republic of Chad's financial obligations to the Organization.
(Adopted 9 November 1985)
377. The Conference noted that the Government of Paraguay had advised that the failure to pay contributions to the Organization was due to conditions beyond its control and had requested that it be permitted to pay its arrears of assessments, plus current contributions in the year of assessment, over a ten year period beginning in 1986.
378. The Conference adopted the following Resolution, which would ensure its voting rights to Paraguay:
Resolution 19/85
PAYMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS - PARAGUAY
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that the Government of the Republic of Paraguay had made a proposal that it liquidate its arrears of contributions over a period of ten years commencing in 1986, in addition to paying each current contribution in the calendar year of assessment,
Decides that:
1. Notwithstanding Financial Regulation 5.5, the arrears of contributions of the Republic of Paraguay totalling $71 225.00 shall be settled through the payment of ten equal annual instalments of $7 122.50;
2. The assessed contribution for 1985 shall be payable in 1985. The first instalment shall be payable in 1986;
3. The annual payment of the instalments referred to above, together with the payment of cacti current contribution in the calendar year of assessment and any advances to the Working Capital Fund, shall be considered as fulfilment of the Republic of Paraguay's financial obligations to the organization.
(Adopted 9 November 1935)
<section>d</section>
VIII. Appointments and elections
A. Applications for Membership in the Organization
B. Appointment of the Independent Chairman of the Council
C. Appointment of Member Governments' Representatives to Staff Pension Committee
D. Election of Council Members
A. Applications for Membership in the Organization
Admission of Cook Islands
Admission of Solomon Islands
379. The Conference had before it applications for membership from Cook Islands and Solomon Islands. These applications had been submitted within the time limit prescribed by Rule XIX GRO. They contained, or were supplemented by, the formal instrument required under Article II of the Constitution, and were thus found in order.
380. The Conference proceeded to a secret ballot on the two applications at its third meeting on Monday 11 November 1985, in accordance with Article 11-2 of the Constitution and Rule XII-9 GRO.
Admission of Cook Islands
1. Number of ballot papers issued137
2. Defective ballots 2
3. Abstentions 2
4. Votes for 132
5. Votes against 1
6. Number of votes cast 133
7. Majority required 89
Admission of Solomon Islands
1. Number of ballot papers issued 137
2. Defective ballots 2
3. Abstentions 2
4. Votes for 131
5. Votes against 1
6. Number of votes cast 132
7. Majority required 89
381. The Conference accordingly admitted Cook Islands and Solomon Islands to membership of the Organization.
382. The Conference decided that, according to the established principles and customs, the minimum contribution due for the last quarter of 1985 by Cook Islands and Solomon Islands amounted to $4 950 for each country. The advance to be made by each of the two countries to the Working Capital Fund was $1325.
B. Appointment of the Independent Chairman of the Council
383. Having proceeded to a secret ballot in conformity with Rule XII-9(a) GRO, the Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 20/85
APPOINTMENT OF THE INDEPENDENT CHAIRMAN OF THE COUNCIL
THE CONFERENCE,
Having proceeded to a secret ballot, in accordance with the provisions of Rule XII of the General Rules of the Organization,
1. Declares that Mr Lassaad Ben Osman is appointed Independent Chairman of the Council for a period of two years, that is until the end of the regular session of the Conference to be held in 1987;
2. Decides that the conditions of appointment including the allowances attached to the office of the Independent Chairman of the Council, shall be as follows:
(a) An annual allowance of the equivalent of US$10 000 to cover representation expenses and secretarial assistance in the Chairman's home station, on the understanding that the Director-General will provide secretarial assistance when the Chairman attends sessions of the Council or Conference; one-half of the allowance shall be payable in US dollars, the balance being payable, in whole or in part, in the currency of the home country of the Chairman, or in Italian Lire, according to his desires;
(b) A per them allowance at a rate equivalent to that for the Deputy Director-General, while the Chairman is absent from his home station on Council business, the allowance being reduced to US$20 per them while the Chairman is in travel status;
(c) Travel expenses, including the above per them allowance, shall be defrayed by the Organization, in conformity with its regulations and existing practice when the Chairman attends sessions of the Council, of the Programme and Finance Committees, of the Conference, or when he is invited by the Council or by the Director-General to travel for other purposes.
(Adopted 27 November 1985)
C. Appointment of Member Governments' Representatives to Staff Pension Committee
384. In accordance with Article 6(c) of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, the Conference appointed three members and three alternates to the Staff Pension Committee for the period I January 1986 to 31 December 1987 as follows:
(i) Members
John Glistrup
Counsellor
Permanent Representative of Denmark to FAO
A. Daniel Weygandt
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative of the United States of America to FAO
Ibrahima Kaba
Counsellor
Deputy Permanent Representative of Guinea to FAO
(ii) Alternate Members
Hamid Reza Nikkar Isfahani
Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Iran to FAO
Vanrob Isarankura
Agricultural Counsellor
Permanent Representative of Thailand to FAO
Jose Manuel Watson
Ambassador of Panama to FAO
D. Election of Council Members
385. The Conference noted that Sierra Leone (elected to the Council for the term of office November 1983 - 31 December 1986) and Liberia (elected to the Council for the term of office 1 January 1985 - November 1987) had been deemed to have resigned from the Council on 1 January 1985 in accordance with Rule XXII-7 of the General Rules of the Organizations. As specified in paragraphs 6 and 9 of Rule XXII GRO, the Conference elected to the Council for the remainder of the above terms of office the following Member Nations:
(a) Gambia for the period November 1985 - 31 December 1986, and,
(b) Liberia for the period November 1985 - November 1987.
386. The Conference also elected the following Member Nations as members of the Council:
REGION (SEATS)
MEMBERS
Period: November 1985 - 31 December 1988
Africa (3) Cameroon
Niger
Zambia
Asia (6) Bangladesh
China
Indonesia
Japan
Malaysia
Thailand
Europe (3) Germany, Federal Republic of
Turkey
Yugoslavia
Latin America and the Caribbean (3) Argentina
Nicaragua
Venezuela
Near East (1) Iraq
North America None
Southwest Pacific None
Period: 1 January 1987 - November 1989
Africa (5) Algeria
Gabon
Gambia
Madagascar
Zaire
Asia None
Europe (3) Hungary
Spain
Switzerland
Latin America and the Caribbean (5) Brazil
Colombia
Cuba
Mexico
Trinidad and Tobago
Near East (2) Lebanon
Libya
North America (2) Canada
United States of America
Southwest Pacific None
<section>e</section>
IX. Other matters
Conduct of debates in plenary and the commissions
387. The Conference recognized with deep appreciation the objective, efficient and orderly fashion in which debates in the Plenary and the three Commissions had been conducted.
Date and place of the twenty-fourth session of the conference
388. The Conference decided that its Twenty-fourth Session should be held in Rome from 7 to 26 November 1987.
<section>f</section>
X. APPENDIX A - Agenda
INTRODUCTION - PROCEDURE OF THE SESSION
1. Election of Chairman and Vice-Chairmen
2. Appointment of General Committee and Credentials Committee
3. Adoption of Agenda
4. Arrangements for the Session and Allocation of Agenda Items
5. Admission of Observers
6. Fortieth Anniversary of FAO
PART I - MAJOR TRENDS AND POLICIES IN FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
7. World Food and Agriculture Situation:
7.1 State of Food and Agriculture
7.2 Critical Situation in Africa
7.3 Study of Agricultural Price Policies
7.4 Forestry - The Manifesto of Mexico (Ninth World Forestry Congress,July 1985)
8. Progress Report on International Agricultural Adjustment including Agricultural Protectionism
9. Report on the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development (June-July 1984)
10. Adoption of the World Food Security Compact
11. Programme for the 1990 Census of Agriculture
PART II - ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMMES OF THE ORGANIZATION
12. Programme of Work and Budget 1986-87 and Medium-Term Objectives
13. Review of the Regular Programme
14. Review of Field Programmes
15. Follow-up of Conference Resolutions 8/83 and 9/83 -- Plant Genetic Resources
16. Code of Conduct on Distribution and Use of Pesticides
17. United Nations/FAO World Food Programme
17.1 WFP Pledging Target
17.2 Other Matters
18. Relations and Consultations with International Organizations, including:
18.1 Recent Developments in the United Nations System of Interest to FAO
18.2 Relations with Intergovernmental and International Non-governmental Organizations
PART III - CONSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
A. Constitutional and Legal Matters
19. Statutory Report on Status of Conventions and Agreements, and Amendments thereto
20. Other Constitutional and Legal Matters, including:
20.1 Amendments to the Spanish text of Rule XII-9(a) and Rule XII-17 of the General Rules of the Organization
20.2 Review of the Rules governing Voting Procedures of Conference and Council
20.3 Relations with the Host Government
- Immunities of the Organization
- Headquarters Agreement
20.4 Amendment to Rule XXV-6 of the General Rules of the Organization
B. Administrative and Financial Matters
21. Audited Accounts
22. Scale of Contributions 1986-87
23. Other Administrative and Financial Matters, including:
23.1 Relations with the Host Government
- Headquarters' Accommodation
- Other Matters
23.2 Current Status of Contributions
- Problems with Late Payments and Arrears in Contributions
23.3 Emoluments of the Director-General
PART IV - APPOINTMENTS AND ELECTIONS
24. Applications for Membership in the Organization
- Cook Islands
- Solomon Islands
25. Election of Council members
26. Appointments
26.1 Appointment of Independent Chairman of the Council
26.2 Appointment of Member Governments' Representatives to the Staff Pension Committee
PART V - OTHER MATTERS
27. Date and Place of the Twenty-fourth Conference Session
28. Any Other Matters
<section>g</section>
XI. APPENDIX B - List of delegates and observers
Vice-Chairmen : Lindsey Percival Duthie (Australia)
Vice-Présidents : Richard L. Cheltenham (Barbados)
Vicepresidente : Buta Singh (India)
Abuzeid Omar Dawarda (Libya)
MEMBER NATIONS
AFGHANISTAN
Delegate
Abdul Ghaffar LAKANWAL
Minister of Agriculture
Kabul
Alternate
Ghulam Mohammed DAHRAM
President of the Institute of
Agricultural Research
Kabul
Alternate
Mohammad Jamal NOOR
Second Secretary
Embassy of Afghanistan
Rome
ALBANIA
Délégué
Mme Themie THOMAI
Ministre de l'Agriculture
Tirana
Suppléant
Bashkim DINO
Ambassadeur en Italie
Représentant permanent de l'Albanie auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint
Nikolla NOSI
Premier Secrétaire
Ambassade d'Albanie
Rome
Adjoint
Andrea SHUNDI
Adjoint
Sali METANI
Ministère de l'Agriculture
Tirana
ALGERIA
Délégué
Kasdi MERBAH
Ministre de l'Agriculture et des Pêches
Alger
Suppléant
M. Mourad BENCHEIKH
Représentant permanent de l'Algérie auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint
Chantouf Sid AHMED
Directeur de la programmation
Ministère de l'Agriculture et des Pêches
Alger
Adjoint
Alt Si Salmi HAMIDA
Spécialiste des Etudes et des Recherches
Ministère de l'Agriculture et des Pêches
Alger
Adjoint
Youssef NAHAL
Directeur de la Planification agricole
Ministère de la Planification
Alger
Adjoint
Mouradi BENZAGHOU
Directeur Général
Office national de l'Equipement agricole
Alger
Adjoint
Rabah KEDJOUR
Directeur adjoint de la Division de la Programmation
Ministère de l'Agriculture et des Pêches
Alger
Adjoint
Halim BENATTALLAH
Conseiller des Affaires étrangères
Ambassade d'Algérie
Rome
Conseiller
Mohammed Seghir MELLOUHI
Directeur de l'Agriculture et des
Pêches dans la Wilaya de Sétif
Conseiller
Arezki CHERFAOUI
Directeur de l'Agriculture et des
Pêches dans la Wilaya de Aïn Temouchent
Conseiller
Arraf SOULIMANE
Directeur de l'Agriculture et des
Pêches dans la Wilaya de Sidi-Bel-Abbès
Conseiller
Ahmed-Chaouch Mohamed AL-KAMEL
Directeur de l'Agriculture et des
Pêches dans la Wilaya d'Attarf
Conseiller
Mohammed Salah Eddine AHRIZ
Directeur de l'Agriculture et des Pêches dans la Wilaya de Constantine
Conseiller
Mlle Faouzia BOUMAIZA
Secrétaire des Affaires étrangères
Ambassade d'Algérie
Rome
Conseiller
Mohand Hocine ZIDANI
Attaché
Ministère des Affaires étrangères
Alger
ANGOLA
Délégué
Evaristo DOMINGOS KIMBA
Ministre de l'Agriculture
Luanda
Suppléant
Gaspar DOS SANTOS CARDOSO
Ambassadeur d'Angola en Italie
Rome
Adjoint
Pedro Agostinho KANGA
Cabinet du Plan
Ministère de l'Agriculture
Luanda
Adjoint
Mme Josefa COELHO DA CRUZ
Premier Secrétaire
Ambassade d'Angola en Italie
Rome
Adjoint
Rolando Felicidades DE JESUS NETO
Technicien supérieur
Secrétariat d'Etat à la Coopération
Luanda
Adjoint
Mme Cesaltina DE ABREU VAN-DUNEM
Technicienne supérieure du
Ministère de l'Agriculture
Luanda
Adjoint
Pedro SEBASTIAO
Directeur du Cabinet juridique
Ministère des Pêches
Luanda
Adjoint
José Manuel ZENHA RELLA
Conseiller économique
Ministère de l'Agriculture
Luanda
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
Delegate
Robin YEARWOOD
Minister of Agriculture, Lands and Fisheries
St. John's
Alternate
Ernest BENJAMIN
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Lands and Fisheries
St. John's
ARGENTINA
Delegado
Lucio G. RECA
Secretario de Agricultura, Ganadería y
Pesca
Buenos Aires
Suplente
Emilio PARDO
Director, Departamento de Relaciones
Económicas Multilaterales del
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y
Culto
Buenos Aires
Suplente
Guillermo E. GONZALEZ
Ministro Plenipotenciario
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Sra. Doña Susana RUIZ CERRUTTI
Ministro Plenipotenciario
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y
Culto
Buenos Aires
Suplente
Dante MARSICO
Ministro Consejero Agrícola
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Carlos R. SERSALE DI CERISANO
Secretario de Primera
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Asesor
Alberto Joaquín TORRES
Secretaría de Agricultura, Ganadería y Pesca
Buenos Aires
Asesor
Sra. Doña Susana E. DI FONZO
Representación Permanente ante la FAO
Roma
AUSTRALIA
Delegate
L. P. DUTHIE
Permanent Secretary
Department of Primary Industry
Canberra
Alternate
D. G. NUTTER
Ambassador of Australia in Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
S. SAVILLE
Secretary of the Northern Territory
Department of Primary Industry
Darwin
Alternate
David R. GREGORY
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative of
Australia to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Michael A. COMMINS
Counsellor (Development Assistance)
Alternate Permanent Representative of
Australia to FAO
Rome
Alternate
John SAULT
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Australian High Commission
London
Alternate
Michael RYAN
Principal Executive Officer
Department of Primary Industry
Canberra
Adviser
Mrs Janet GIRARDI
Australian Embassy
Rome
AUSTRIA
Delegate
C. HAIDEN
Federal Minister of Agriculture and Forestry
Vienna
Alternate
R. STEINER
Director General
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Vienna
Alternate
H. REDL
Director
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Vienna
Associate
H. LAUBE
Ambassador Permanent Representative of Austria to FAO Rome
Associate
P. HOYOS
Counsellor
Rome
Associate
D. KINZEL
Deputy
Permanent Representative of Austria to FAO Rome
BAHAMAS
BAHRAIN
Delegate
Habib A. KASSIM
Minister of Commerce and Agriculture
Manama
Alternate
Jaffar Habib AHMED
Director of Agricultural Projects
Ministry of Agriculture
Manama
Associate
Hassan Sultan JASIM
Agricultural Engineer
Ministry of Agriculture
Manama
Associate
Khalil Ibrahim DURAZI
Agricultural Engineer
Ministry of Agriculture
Manama
Adviser
Hamed Ali AL-SHEHABI
Secretary to Minister
Ministry of Agriculture
Manama
BANGLADESH
Delegate
M. A. MUNIM
Minister of Agriculture
Dhaka
Alternate
A. K. M. KAMALUDDIN CHOUDHURY
Secretary
Ministry of Food, Relief and Rehabilitation
Dhaka
Alternate
REAZ RAHMAN
Ambassador of Bangladesh in Italy
Rome
Alternate
K. M. EJAZUL HUQ
joint Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture Dhaka
Alternate
MANIRUZZAMAN CHOWDHURY
joint Secretary Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock Dhaka
Alternate
S. M. MATIUR RAHMAN
Economic and Commercial Counsellor
Embassy of Bangladesh
Rome
Alternate
MOHSIN ALI KHAN
Political Counsellor
Embassy of Bangladesh
Rome
Associate
QUAZI ALTAF BARI
Private Secretary to the
Minister for Agriculture
Dhaka
Associate
MANJOOR A. RAHIN
Second Secretary
Embassy of Bangladesh
Rome
BARBADOS
Delegate
Richard CHELTENHAM
Minister of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Affairs Bridgetown
Alternate
C. E. MAYNARD
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Affairs Bridgetown
Alternate
C. GOODING
Chief Economist
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Affairs Bridgetown
BELGIUM
Délégué
Roger MARTIN
Ambassadeur de Belgique auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Guy STUYCK
Ambassadeur
Directeur Général adjoint de la politique Ministère des Affaires étrangères
Bruxelles
Suppléant
H. VANDEPUTTE
Ingénieur en chef Directeur,
Direction des Relations internationales
Ministère de l'Agriculture
Bruxelles
Conseiller
Jacques THINSY
Conseiller
Direction générale des relations économiques extérieures
Ministère des Affaires étrangères
Bruxelles
Conseiller
E. MARTENS
Administration générale de la coopération au développement
Ministère des Affaires étrangères
Bruxelles
Conseiller
Mlle Brigitte MINART
Représentant permanent adjoint de la Belgique auprès de la FAO
Rome
BELIZE
Delegate
Dean R. LINDO
Minister of Natural Resources
Belmopan
Alternate
Miss Judith NELSON
Ministry of Natural Resources
Belmopan
BENIN
Délégué
Adolphe BIAOU
Ministre du Développement rural et de l'Action coopérative
Porto-Novo
Suppléant
Mamoudou FASSASSI
Directeur de l'agriculture
Ministère du développement rural et de l'Action coopérative
Porto-Novo
Suppléant
Jonas NAPPORN
Directeur Général
Office national des céréales
Porto-Novo
Conseiller
Pierre Dominique COCO
Directeur du Centre Panafricain de
Formation coopérative
Cotonou
BHUTAN
Delegate
Dasho Pema WANGCHUK
Director General of Agriculture
Thimphu
Alternate
Miss Lhaden PEMA
Assistant Director
Animal Husbandry Department
Thimphu
Alternate
Namgey NIDUP
Administration and Finance Officer
Ministry of Agriculture
Thimphu
BOLIVIA
Delegado
Federico ZUAZO CUENCA
Embajador
Representante Permanente de Bolivia ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Srta. Raquel LIEBERS BALDIVIESO
Representante Permanente Alterno de Bolivia ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Gustavo ALIAGA
Representante Permanente Alterno de Bolivia ante la FAO
Roma
Adjunto
Sra. Maria Benny ALBORTA
Secretaría
Embajada de Bolivia
Roma
BOTSWANA
Delegate
Geoffrey M. OTENG
Assistant Minister of Agriculture
Gaborone
Alternate
Thomas M. TAUKOBONG
Director of Agricultural Field
Services
Ministry of Agriculture
Gaborone
Alternate
Anthony A. MOKGARE
Planning Officer
Ministry of Agriculture
Gaborone
BRAZIL
Delegate
Octavio Rainho da SILVA NEVES
Ambassador of Brazil to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Pedro Paulo PINTO ASSUMPÇÃO
Minister
Coordinator of International Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture
Brasilia
Alternate
Ivan de Otero ASSUMPÇÃO
Coordinator of Economic Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture
Brasilia
Alternate
Almir Franco de SA BARBUDA
Alternate Permanent Representative of Brazil to FAO Rome
Alternate
Henrique da SILVEIRA SARDINHA PINTO
Alternate Permanent Representative of Brazil to FAO Rome
Associate
Mrs Maria de LOURDES CAMILLO CRUZ
Permanent Representation of Brazil to FAO
Rome
Associate
Mrs Celia Maria BARRETO GOES DEL BUBBA
Permanent Representation of Brazil to FAO
Rome
Associate
Mario MANNRICH
Permanent Representation of Brazil to FAO
Rome
BULGARIA
Délégué
Alexander PETKOV
Président du Conseil Central de l'Union nationale agro-industrielle
Président du Comité national bulgare pour la collaboration avec la FAO
Sofia
Délégué
Yovtcho ROUSSEV
Vice-Président du Conseil central de l'Union nationale agro-industrielle
Sofia
Suppléant
Jeko DIMITROV
Ministre plénipotentiaire auprès de la FAO
Rome
Adjoint
Yuli MINTCHEV
Premier Secrétaire
Chef de Section
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Sofia
Adjoint
Vladimir STOYANOV
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
BURKINA FASO
Délégué
Seydou TRAORE
Ministre de l'Agriculture et de l'élevage
Ouagadougou
Suppléant
Mme Laetitia OUEDRAOCO-GUIGMA
Chef du Service de la Nutrition et Technologie
Direction de l'Agriculture
Ouagadougou
Suppléant
Lazare GANSORE
Premier Secrétaire Représentant
Permanent Suppléant du Burkina Faso auprès de la FAO
Rome
BURMA
Delegate
U TIN TUN
Permanent Representative of Burma to the United Nations and other International Organizations
Geneva
Alternate
U TIN HLAING
General Manager
Agricultural Corporation
Rangoon
Alternate
U SEIN WIN
Director, Forestry Department
Rangoon
Alternate
U KYAW LWIN
Additional Director
Planning and Statistics Department
Ministry of Livestock, Breeding and Fisheries
Rangoon
Alternate
U NGWE WIN
Acting Permanent Representative of Burma to FAO
Rome
Alternate
U WIN MAUNG
Alternate Permanent Representative of Burma to FAO
Rome
BURUNDI
Délégué
Mathias NTIBARIKURE
Ministre de l'Agriculture et de l'Elevage
Bujumbura
Suppléant
Salvator SAHINGUVU
Directeur général de la Planification agricole
Bujumbura
Suppléant
Térence NSANZE
Ambassadeur du Burundi auprès de l'Office des Nations Unies et de la FAO
Genève
CAMEROON
Délégué
Jean-Baptiste YONKE
Ministre de l'Agriculture
Yaoundé
Suppléant
Adjoudji HAMADJODA
Ministre de l'élevage, des pêches et des industries animales
Yaoundé
Suppléant
Félix SABAL LECCO
Ambassadeur du Cameroun en Italie
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome
Adjoint
Martin NKAKE NDOLO
Inspecteur général au Ministère de l'Agriculture
Yaoundé
Adjoint
Maxiale MAHI
Directeur de l'Agriculture
Yaoundé
Adjoint
Mbome MOUKIA
Directeur des Pêches
Ministère de l'élevage. des pêches et des industries animales
Yaoundé
Conseiller
Daniel DANG MEKOULA
Secrétaire permanent du Comité national de la FAO
Yaoundé
Conseiller
Thomas YANGA
Deuxième Conseiller à l'Ambassade du Cameroun
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO
Rome
CANADA
Delegate
W. L. R. CLARK, M.P.
Chairman
Standing Committee for Agriculture
House of Commons
Ottawa
Alternate
Douglas LINDORES
Vice-President
Multilateral Programmes Division
Canadian International
Development Agency
Hull
Alternate
G.H. MUSGROVE
Minister Counsellor
Permanent Representative of
Canada to FAO
Rome
Associate
Marc-André FREDETTE
Multilateral Affairs Division
Agriculture Canada
Ottawa
Associate
James LYNCH
United Nations Affairs Division
Department of External Affairs
Ottawa
Associate
R. MACINTOSH
Multilateral Programmes Division
Canadian International
Development Agency
Hull
Associate
Robert PRINS
Multilateral Affairs Division
Agriculture Canada
Ottawa
Associate
James STONE
Economic Relations with Developing
Countries Division
Department of External Affairs
Ottawa
Associate
Robert SALLERY
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Adviser
Glenn FLATEN
Representative of the Canadian
Federation of Agriculture
Ottawa
CAPE VERDE
Délégué
Antonio RODRIGUES PIRES
Ambassadeur du Cap-Vert auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Carlos PINHEIRO SILVA
Ingénieur agronome
Directeur auprès du Ministère du
Développement rural
Praia
Suppléant
Mme Maria Aleluia BARBOZA ANDRADE
Economiste au Cabinet d'Etude et
Planification
Ministère du Développement rural
Praia
Suppléant
Mme Maria de LOURDES DUARTE
Attaché agricole Représentation permanente du Cap-Vert auprès de la FAO
Rome
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Délégué
Emmanuel ABDOUL
Ministre du Développement rural
Bangui
Suppléant
Raymond NGBONGUE
Directeur des Etudes et de la
Coordination
Bangui
CHAD
Délégué
Dono N'gardoum DJIDINGAR
Ministre d'Etat à l'Agriculture et au Développement rural
N'Djamena
Suppléant
Nadingar ALLADOUMGUE
Directeur Général de l'Agriculture
N'Djamena
Adjoint
Moctar Ali MAHAMAT
Directeur de la lutte contre les calamités naturelles
N'Djamena
CHILE
Delegado
Julio César JARA D.
Embajador de Chile ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Sra. Doña Magdalena BALDUZZI B.
Consejero Representante Permanente Alterno de Chile ante la FAO
Roma
CHINA
Delegate
HE KANG
Minister of Agriculture, Animal
Husbandry and Fisheries
Beijing
Alternate
ZHU PEIRONG
Director of Foreign Affairs Department
Ministry of Agriculture. Animal
Husbandry and Fisheries
Beijing
Alternate
KONG FANNONG
Counsellor
International Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Beijing
Alternate
LI ZHENHUAN
Counsellor Deputy
Permanent Representative of China to FAO
Rome
Alternate
WU TIANXI
Division Director
Department of Foreign Affairs
M.A.A.F.
Beijing
Alternate
ZHANG ZHENPING
Division Director
Department of Finance
Ministry of Finance
Beijing
Alternate
ZENG XIANRONG
First Secretary
Permanent Representation of the
People's Republic of China to FAO
Rome
Alternate
MA GENG'OU
Deputy Division Director
Department of Foreign Affairs
M.A.A.F.
Beijing
Adviser
GONG GUANQUN
Department of Foreign Affairs
M.A.A.F.
Beijing
Adviser
LI YANPENG
Permanent Representation of China to FAO
Rome
COLOMBIA
Delegado
Sra. Doña Cecilìa LOPEZ
Viceministro de Agricultura
Bogotá
Suplente
Gonzalo BULA HOYOS
Embajador de Colombia ante la FAO
Roma
Adjunto
Sra. Doña Olga Clemencia FERNANDEZ
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno de Colombia ante la FAO
Roma
Adjunto
Srta. Mery HURTADO
Tercer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno de Colombia ante la FAO
Roma
Adjunto
Srta. Da. Hilda LOPEZ DE MORAL
Consejero
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores
Bogotá
Adjunto
Srta. Patricia DI PRIMA
Representación Permanente de .
Colombia ante la FAO
Roma
Adjunto
Pedro ORLANDO NAVARRO
Representación Permanente de
Colombia ante la FAO
Roma
COMOROS
Délégué
MOHAMED ALI
Ministre de la Production. du Développement rural. de l'industrie et de l'Artisanat
Moroni
Suppléant
Ahmed DJABIR
Directeur Général de la Production agricole
Ministère de la Production
Moroni
CONGO
Délégué
François Xavier KATALI
Ministre de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Brazzaville
Suppléant
Joseph TCHICAYA
Ambassadeur du Congo auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Michel MOMBOULI
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint du Congo auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Mme A. NIOMBELA MAMBULA
Premier Secrétaire
Représentation permanente du Congo auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Jean-Claude ELOMBILA
Conseiller agricole
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Brazzaville
Suppléant
Alfred MAKOUNZI
Conseiller au développement rural
Brazzaville
Suppléant
Pierre KOYA
Directeur de l'élevage
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Brazzaville
Suppléant
Jean BANTSIMBA
Directeur de l'agriculture
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage
Brazzaville
Suppléant
Jean-Claude LOEMBE
Directeur du Projet PAM
Brazzaville
Conseiller
Mamadou Dekamo KAMARA
Directeur Général de la Société d'Etudes et de Promotion/Développement
Brazzaville
Conseiller
Mathias SAMBA
Attaché
Représentation permanente du Congo auprès de la FAO
Rome
COOK ISLANDS
Delegate
Norman GEORGE
Minister of Foreign Affairs
Rarotonga
Alternate
William HOSKING
Acting Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Rarotonga
Alternate
Frederick WEBB
International Affairs Specialist
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Rarotonga
COSTA RICA
Delegado
Carlos Emanuel ROJAS LOPEZ
Ministro de Agricultura y Ganadería
San José
Suplente
Carlos di MOTTOLA BALESTRA
Embajador de Costa Rica ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Sra. Doña Yolanda GAGO
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Adjunto
Carlos ROJAS KOBERG
Ministerio de Agricultura
San José
Adjunto
Srta. Gloria ROJAS KOBERG
Ministerio de Agricultura
San José
CUBA
Delegado
Adolfo DIAZ SUAREZ
Ministro de Agricultura
La Habana
Suplente
Leopoldo ARIZA HIDALGO
Embajador de Cuba ante la FAO
Roma
Adjunto
Sra. Dra. Grafila SOTO CARRERO
Especialista del Comité Estatal de Cooperación Económica (CECE)
La Habana
Adjunto
Marcos NIETO LARA
Sub-Director de Relaciones Internacionales
Ministerio de Agricultura
La Habana
Adjunto
Sra. Lic. Miriam INZAULGARAT GARCIA
Segundo Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno de Cuba ante la FAO
Roma
Asesor
Pedro REYNALDOS DUEÑAS
Tercer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno de Cuba ante la FAO
Roma
Asesor
Sra. Doña Maria Josefina FERNANDEZ
Agregado Diplomático
Representación Permanente de Cuba ante la FAO
Roma
Asesor
Sra. Doña Silvia CARBALLO VIVES
Agregado Diplomático
Representación Permanente de Cuba ante la FAO
Roma
CYPRUS
Delegate
Andreas PAPASOLOMONTOS
Minister of Agriculture and Natural
Resources
Nicosia
Alternate
Avraam LOUCA
Director-General
Ministry of Agriculture and
Natural Resources
Nicosia
Alternate
Fotis G. POULIDES
Ambassador of Cyprus to FAO
Rome
Associate
George F. POULIDES
Alternate Permanent Representative of
Cyprus to FAO
Rome
Adviser
Haris ZANNETIS
Agricultural Attaché
Permanent Representation of Cyprus to FAO
Rome
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Delegate
Miroslav TOMAN
Minister of Agriculture and Food of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic
Prague
Alternate
Róbert SEVCOVIC
Deputy
Minister of Agriculture and Food of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic
Prague
Associate
Gabriel MACKO
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Associate
Václav KOUBA
Head of Department
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Prague
Associate
Václav DOBES
International Economic Department
Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Prague
Adviser
Svatopluk STAMPACH
Adviser to the Federal Minister of
Agriculture and Food
Prague
Adviser
Miss Hanna SNAJDROVA
Attaché
Embassy of Czechoslovakia
Rome
DEMOCRATIC KAMPUCHEA
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REP. OF KOREA
Delegate
LI HAK CHOL
Vice-Chairman of Agricultural
Commission
Pyongyang
Alternate
LI JONG HYOK
Ambassador to FAO
Rome
Alternate
LI HYOK CHOL
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent
Representative to FAO
Rome
Adviser
HAN DAE SONG
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Pyongyang
Adviser
CHONG UN HYONG
Third Secretary
Permanent Representation of the
D.P.R. of Korea to FAO
Rome
DENMARK
Delegate
Hans Jørgen KRISTENSEN
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Copenhagen
Alternate
John GLISTRUP
Permanent Representative of
Denmark to FAO
Rome
Associate
Jørgen Skovgaard NIELSEN
Head of Division
Ministry of Agriculture
Copenhagen
Associate
Michael HJORTSØ
Head of Section
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Copenhagen
Associate
Carl THOMSEN
Professor
The Royal Veterinary and
Agricultural University
Copenhagen
Associate
Georg NIELSEN
Director
Danish Agricultural Information Office
Copenhagen
Associate
A. VESTEN PEDERSEN
Head of Division
The Agricultural Council
Copenhagen
Associate
Ms Sys THODEN
Head of Division
Federation of Danish Smallholders Union
Copenhagen
Adviser
Victor HJORT
Alternate Permanent Representative of Denmark to FAO Rome
Adviser
Viggo ANDERSEN
Agricultural Consultant
Ministry of Agriculture
Copenhagen
Adviser
Ms Anne-Lise PETERSEN
Head of Section
Ministry of Agriculture
Copenhagen
Adviser
Lars FAABORG-ANDERSEN
Head of Section
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Copenhagen
Adviser
Ms Lene JENSEN
Royal Danish Embassy
Rome
DJIBOUTI
Délégué
Ahmed Hassan LIBAN
Ministre de l'agriculture et du développement rural
Djibouti
Suppléant
Mohamed Moussa CHEHEM
Chef de Service de l'élevage et des pêches
Djibouti
Suppléant
Djama Mahmoud DOUALE
Ingénieur agronome
Djibouti
DOMINICA
Delegate
Charles A. MAYNARD
Minister of Agriculture
Roseau
Alternate
Ms Hannelore BENJAMIN
Rome
Associate
Ms loan MAYNARD
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Delegado
José E. Lois MALKUN
Subsecretario de Estado de
Planificación Sectorial Agropecuaria
Secretaría de Estado de Agricultura
Santo Domingo
Suplente
Marcio E. VELOZ MAGGIOLO
Embajador
Representante Permanente de la
República Dominicana ante la FAO
Roma
Adjunto
Srta. Dolores Margarita CEDEÑO PEREZ
Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto
Srta. Nancy M. LOPEZ GARCIA
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Adjunto
Sra. Doña Mercedes BERNARD PICHARDO
Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
ECUADOR
Delegado
José Ignacio JIJON-FREILE
Ministro
Representante Permanente
Encargado del Ecuador ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Hugo MORA
Ministro Comercial
Embajada del Ecuador
Roma
Suplente
Lautaro POZO-MALO
Segundo Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno del Ecuador ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Roque SEVILLA
Director Nacional Forestal
Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería
Quito
EGYPT
Delegate
Yehia RIFAAT
Ambassador of Egypt in Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Mohamed Mahmoud DESSOUKY
Under-Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
Cairo
Alternate
Abdel Azim Mahmoud AL-GAZZAR
Agricultural Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative of
Egypt to FAO
Rome
Associate
Adel Hilmi El, SARKY
Director General
International Organizations and
Conference Department
Ministry of Agriculture
Cairo
Associate
Miss Nermin Ali MORAD
Counsellor
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Cairo
Adviser
Yousef Ali Mohamed HAMDI
Agricultural Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative of
Egypt to FAO
Rome
EL SALVADOR
Delegado
Ivo P. ALVARENGA
Embajador de El Salvador en Italia
Representante Permanente ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Sra. Doña María Eulalia JIMENEZ
Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno de El Salvador ante la FAO
Roma
Adjunto
Ramón Federico MARTINEZ
Cónsul General y Primer Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno de El Salvador ante la FAO Roma
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Delegado
Luis OBIANG MENGUE
Embajador Extraordinario y Plenipotenciario de Guinea Ecuatorial en España
Madrid
Suplente
Moisés ESONO MBA ABUY
Secretario General del Ministerio de
Agricultura, Ganadería y Desarrollo Rural
Malabo
ETHIOPIA
Delegate
TEKOLA DEGENE
Minister of Agriculture
Addis Ababa
Alternate
TESFAYE ABDI
Ambassador of Ethiopia in Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Associate
ASSEFA YILALA
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Adviser
GETACHEW TEKLE MEDHIN
Head of Agricultural Department
ONCCP (Office of the National
Committee for Central Planning)
Addis Ababa
Adviser
ESHETU DEBABU
Senior Expert
Foreign Economic Relations
Ministry of Agriculture
Addis Ababa
Adviser
KASSAYE DERESEH
Senior Expert
Relief and Rehabilitation Commission
Addis Ababa
FIJI
FINLAND
Delegate
Toivo YLÄJÄRVI
Minister of Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki
Alternate
Antti NIKKOLA
Chairman of the National FAO Committee
Helsinki
Alternate
Carl Arne HARTMAN
Permanent Representative of Finland to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Reino URONEN
Secretary General
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki
Alternate
Ms Ann-Christin KÄRNÄ
First Secretary (Development
Co-operation)
Ministry for Foreign Affairs
Helsinki
Adviser
Pekka ALHOJÄRVI
Special Adviser
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Helsinki
Adviser
Aarne NYYSSÖNEN
Director
The Finnish Forestry Research Institute
Helsinki
Adviser
Niilo HINTIKKA
Chief of Bureau
National Board of Agriculture
Helsinki
Adviser
Esko LINDSTEDT
Executive Manager
Central Union of Agricultural Producers
Helsinki
Adviser
Ms Tuuli ROUHUNKOSKI
Executive Manager
Centre for Country Women and
Homemakers
Helsinki
FRANCE
Délégué
Henri NALLET
Ministre de l'Agriculture
Paris
Suppléant
Jacques POSIER
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent de la
France auprès de l'OAA
Rome
Suppléant
Paul-Marc HENRY
Ambassadeur de France
Président du Comité interministériel pour l'Alimentation et l'Agriculture
Paris
Suppléant
Alain PIERRET
Directeur des Nations Unies et des Organisations internationales
Ministère des Relations extérieures
Paris
Suppléant
Dominique PERREAU
Chargé de Mission auprès du
Ministre de l'Agriculture
Paris
Suppléant
Jean NESTOR
Chef du Service des Relations Internationales
Ministère de l'Agriculture
Paris
Suppléant
Guy PERRIN de BRICHAMBAUT
Conseiller technique
Service des Relations internationales
Ministère de l'Agriculture
Paris
Suppléant
Philippe PIOTET
Secrétaire Général du Comité interministériel pour l'Alimentation et l'Agriculture
Paris
Suppléant
Jacques MORDANT
Sous-Directeur de la Coopération et des Affaires bilatérales
Services des Relations Internationales
Ministère de l'Agriculture
Paris
Suppléant
Jean-Marie TRAVERS
Conseiller des Affaires étrangères
Direction des Nations Unies et des Organisations internationales
Ministère des Relations extérieures
Paris
Suppléant
Mlle Louise AVON
Chef du Département des Politiques multilatérales
Direction des Politiques du Développement
Ministère des Relations extérieures
Paris
Suppléant
Pierre COSSEVIN
Chef du Bureau des Organismes internationaux
Ministère de l'Economie des
Finances et du Budget
Paris
Suppléant
Guy FRADIN
Chef du Bureau de la coopération internationale
Service des Relations internationales
Ministère de l'Agriculture
Paris
Suppléant
Mlle Edith RAVAUX
Représentant permanent adjoint de la France auprès de l'OAA
Rome
Suppléant Jean-Pot NEME
Attaché scientifique
Représentation permanente de la France auprès de l'OAA
Rome
GABON
Suppléant
Michel ANCHOUEY
Ministre de l'agriculture, de l'élevage et de l'économie rurale
Libreville
Suppléant
Jean Fidèle NGUEMA-NZE
Ambassadeur du Gabon auprès de la FAO
Rome
Adjoint
Paul MOMBEY
Directeur de Cabinet du
Ministre de l'Agriculture, de l'Elevage et de l'Economie rurale
Libreville
Conseiller
Barthelemy BOUASSA-MOUSSADJI
Directeur adjoint de l'Elevage et des Industries animales
Libreville
Conseiller
Charles MBOUROU
Secrétaire Général de la
Commission nationale de la FAO
Libreville
GAMBIA
Delegate
Saihou SABALLY
Minister of Agriculture
Banjul
Alternate
Ousman N. R. OTHMAN
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Water Resources
Banjul
Alternate
A. M. K. BOJANG
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the
Gambia to FAO
Brussels
Alternate
Sankung JANNEH
Director of Agriculture
Banjul
Alternate
Mrs Therese RILEY
Senior Assistant Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Banjul
GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF
Delegate
Ignaz KIECHLE
Minister for Food, Agriculture and Forestry
Bonn
Alternate
Lothar LAHN
Ambassador of the Federal Republic of
Germany in Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Rudolf GENSKE
Director-General
International Agricultural and
Fishery Policies
Federal Ministry of Food Agriculture and
Forestry
Bonn
Alternate
Wolfgang A. F. GRABISCH
Director, Foreign Economic Policies
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Forestry
Bonn
Alternate
Joachim WINKEL
Head of Division
International Agricultural Organizations
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Forestry
Bonn
Alternate
Josef SCHERER
Head of Minister's Office
Federal Ministry of Food. Agriculture and
Forestry
Bonn
Alternate
Gerhard LIEBER
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent
Representative of the Federal Republic of
Germany to FAO
Rome
Associate
Horst WETZEL
Deputy Head of Division
World Food Problems
Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation
Bonn
Associate Jean P. ROLLIN
First Secretary Federal Foreign Office
Bonn
Associate
Wolfgang HERMKES
Assistant Head of Division
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Forestry
Bonn
Associate
Rainer PRESTIEN
Assistant Head of Division
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Forestry
Bonn
Associate
Mrs Hannelore GERBENER
Assistant Head of Division
Federal Ministry of Food Agriculture and
Forestry
Bonn
Adviser
Mrs Margret HARTMANN
Office of the Federal Minister
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Forestry
Bonn
Adviser
Ms Karola FABER
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Forestry
Bonn
Associate
Till CRAMER
First Secretary (Agriculture)
Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany
Rome
Associate
Wolfgang BÖHNKE
Attaché,
Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany
Rome
GHANA
Delegate
I. K. ADJEI-MAAFO
Secretary for Agriculture
Accra
Alternate
E. BORTEI-DOKU
Ambassador of Ghana in Italy
Rome
Alternate
C. K. KONU
Principal Agricultural Officer
Ministry of Agriculture
Accra
Alternate
Horatio MENDS
Permanent Representative of Ghana to FAO
Rome
Alternate
H. K. QUARTEY-PAPAFIO
Director for Crops
Ministry of Agriculture
Accra
GREECE
Délégué
Yiannis POTTAKIS
Ministre de l'Agriculture
Athènes
Suppléant
Panayiotis SKALIERIS
Ambassadeur de Grèce auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Vassilios VASSALOS
Division des Organisations économiques internationales
Ministère des Affaires étrangères
Athènes
Conseiller
Sotirios HOTZEAS
Conseiller spécial du Ministre de l'Agriculture
Athènes
Conseiller
Theodoros DIMOPOULOS
Conseiller spécial du Ministre de l'Agriculture
Athènes
Conseiller
Mme Tassia ATHANASSIOU
Attaché d'Ambassade
Ministère des Affaires étrangères
Athènes
Conseiller
Mme Zabetta IERONIMAKI
Attaché
Représentation permanente de la
Grèce auprès de la FAO
Rome
Conseiller
Mme C. C. MAVRIS-ZOUMIS
Représentation permanente de la
Grèce auprès de la FAO
Rome
Continue
<section>h</section>
List of delegates and observers (continued)
GRENADA
Delegate
Hon. Pauline C. ANDREW
Parliamentary Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Lands
Forestry, Fisheries and Tourism
St. George's
Alternate
Oswald GIBBS
Grenada High Commissioner
London
Adviser
Miss H. Maria BLAIZE
Chargé d'Affaires a.i.
Embassy of Grenada
Brussels
GUATEMALA
Delegado
Srta. Zoila ALBRIGO
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno de Guatemala ante la FAO
Roma
GUINEA
Délégué
Alhousseny FOFANA
Ministre du Développement agricole
Conakry
Suppléant
El Hadj Mamy KOUYATE
Ambassadeur
Représentant Permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Naby Moussa TOURE
Conseiller principal du Ministre du Développement agricole
Conakry
Suppléant
Ibrahima KABA
Premier Conseiller d'Ambassade
Représentant Permanent Adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Cellou DIALLO
Secrétaire Général
Ministère du Développement agricole
Conakry
Suppléant
Bernard KOUNDIANO
Directeur Général de l'agriculture
Conakry
Suppléant
Fode Bangaly KEITA
Direction Générale de la
Coopération Internationale
Conakry
Suppléant
Gusmane BALDE
Directeur Général Soguipêche
Conakry
Suppléant
Nouhou Tata DIALLO
Conseiller
Secrétariat d'Etat aux Eaux et Forêts
Conakry
GUINEA-BISSAU
Délégué
Carlos CORREIA
Ministre d'Etat du Développement rural et Pêches
Bissau
Suppléant
Jorge A. Santos OLIVEIRA
Directeur Zone 1
Ministère du Développement rural et Pêches
Bissau
GUYANA
HAITI
Délégué
Frantz FLAMBERT
Ministre de l'agriculture, des ressources naturelles et du développement rural
Port-au-Prince
Suppléant
André JEAN-LOUIS
Coordinateur de la Coopération externe
Ministère de l'agriculture, des ressources naturelles et du développement rural
Port-au-Prince
Conseiller
Alex Louis TANIS
Conseiller au Bureau de la Coopération externe
Ministère de l'agriculture
Port-au-Prince
HONDURAS
Delegado
Alejandro BANEGAS
Ministro Consejero
Encargado de Negocios a.i.
Roma
Suplente
Sra. Doña Rosibel ZUÑIGA
Agregada Comercial
Representante Permanente Alterno de Honduras ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Srta. Lorna Abelina CALDERÓN
Agregada de la Embajada de Honduras
Roma
HUNGARY
Delegate
Jenö VANCSA
Minister of Agriculture and Food
Budapest
Alternate István DOBOCZKY
Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Food
Budapest
Alternate
Lajos ZELKÓ
Counsellor
Permanent Representative of
Hungary to FAO
Rome
Associate
Géza ZALA
Head of international Relations Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Budapest
Associate
Iván MUNKA
Secretary General of the
Hungarian National Committee for Food and Agriculture Organizations of the United Nations
Budapest
Associate
Ms Mária GÁLVÖLGYI
International Relations Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Budapest
Associate
Ferenc SZOKOL
First Secretary
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Budapest
Associate
Tibor SZANYI
International Relations Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Budapest
Adviser
Zoltán KALMAN
Assistant to the Permanent
Representative of Hungary to FAO
Rome
ICELAND
Delegate
Jón HELGASON
Minister of Agriculture
Reykjavik
Alternate
Sveinbjörn DAGFINNSSON
Secretary-General
Ministry of Agriculture
Reykjavik
Alternate
Kornelius SIGMUNDSSON
Minister Counsellor
Ministry for Foreign Affairs
Reykjavik
INDIA
Delegate
Buta SINGH
Minister of Agriculture and
Rural Development
New Delhi
Alternate
M. SUBRAMANIAN
Secretary
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development
New Delhi
Alternate
K. N. ARDHANAREESWARAN
Additional Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development
New Delhi
Alternate
R. C. GUPTA
Minister (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative of
India to FAO
Rome
Alternate
J. K. ARORA
Joint Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development
New Delhi
Alternate
G. R. SAINI
Economic and Statistical Adviser
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development
New Delhi
INDONESIA
Delegate
ACHMAD AFFANDI
Minister of Agriculture
Jakarta
Alternate
WARDOYO
Minister for Food Crops Production
Ministry of Agriculture
Jakarta
Alternate
JACOB PIAY
Ambassador or Indonesia in Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
GATOT SOEHERMAN
Governor
Province of West Nusa Tenggara
Alternate
SALMON PADMANAGARA
Director General for Agricultural
Education, Training and Extension
Jakarta
Alternate
GUSTI BAGUS TEKEN
Adviser to the Minister of Agriculture
Jakarta
Alternate
IBRAHIM HASAN
National Logistic Agency
Jakarta
Alternate
A. KOBIR SASRADIPOERA
Director, Bureau for International Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
Jakarta
Alternate
SUHARYO HUSEN
Agricultural Attaché
Embassy of Indonesia
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
I. NYOWAN ARDHA
International Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
Jakarta
Alternate
JOHAN SYAHPERI SALEH
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Jakarta
Alternate
HARTAWAN ADANG
Chief, Economics Division
Embassy of Indonesia
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
HIDAYAT GANDA ATMADJA
Assistant Agricultural Attaché
Embassy of Indonesia
Rome
Alternate
SAEFUDIN ACHMAD
Bureau for International Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
Jakarta
Adviser
TOYIB HADIWIJAYA
Former Minister of Agriculture
Jakarta
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
Delegate
Abbas Ali ZALI
Minister of Agriculture
Teheran
Alternate
Latif SAFARI
Deputy from the Islamic
Consultative Assembly (MAJLIS)
Teheran
Alternate
Gholamali HEYDARI KHAJEPOUR
Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of
Iran in Italy
Rome
Alternate
Hamid Reza NIKKAR ISFAHANI
Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Iran to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Sirous NASSERI
Director
International Organizations Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Teheran
Alternate
Abbas ADELI RANKOUHI
Director General
International Affairs Department
Ministry of Agriculture
Teheran
Adviser
Saeed MOHAJERI
Senior Agricultural Expert
Planning Department
Ministry of Agriculture
Teheran
Adviser
Mohammad Jafar ERFANIAN
Senior Agricultural Expert
Planning Department
Ministry of Agriculture
Teheran
Adviser
Mohammad Djavad MIR HADI
Member of the Scientific Board of the Agricultural Research Organization
Ministry of Agriculture
Teheran
IRAQ
Delegate
Badr Jasim ALLAWI
Senior Undersecretary, Ministry of
Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Baghdad
Alternate
Hisham F. N. TABAQCHALI
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Iraq to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Abdul Wahab Naji Ismail AL-SAMURRAI
Director-General
State Board of Agricultural Training and
Extension
Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Baghdad
Alternate
Kadhim Tayeh SALMAN
Director-General
Planning and Follow-up
Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Baghdad
Alternate
Mufeed Abdul Latif AL-JANABI
Second Secretary
Multilateral Economic Relations Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Baghdad
Adviser
Louis Shakuri DANU
Expert In the Ministry of
Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Baghdad
Adviser
Osam Faraj ABDUL AZIZ
Research Economist
Foreign Economic Relations Committee
Baghdad
IRELAND
Delegate
Austin DEASY
Minister for Agriculture
Dublin
Alternate
Eamon KENNEDY
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of
Ireland to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Patrick J. O'DONOGHUE
Principal
Department of Agriculture
Dublin
Alternate
P. O. RYAN
First Secretary (Agriculture) Deputy
Permanent Representative of Ireland to FAO
Rome
ISRAEL
Delegate
Arie NEHAMKIM
Minister of Agriculture
Jerusalem
Alternate
Eytan RONN
Ambassador of Israel in Italy
Rome
Alternate
Eliahou DOUEK
Permanent Representative of
Israel to FAO
Rome
Associate
Avraham SHINAR
Director, Foreign Relations and
Technical Assistance Division
Ministry of Agriculture
Jerusalem
Associate
Itzhak ABT
Director, Centre for International
Agricultural Development Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
Jerusalem
Associate
Haim BAR-SHAI
Assistant Director
Food Division
Ministry of Industry and Trade
Jerusalem
Associate
Uri SAVIR
Assistant Director, International
Economic Organizations Division
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Jerusalem
Adviser
Avraham GRANOT
Second Secretary
Embassy of Israel
Rome
Adviser
Malka WEISS
Director - Minister Office
Ministry of Agriculture
Jerusalem
Adviser
Yaniv NAFTALI
Ministry of Agriculture
Jerusalem
Adviser
David HARIS
Ministry of Agriculture
Jerusalem
ITALY
Délégué
Filippo Maria PANDOLFI
Ministre de l'agriculture et des forêts
Rome
Suppléant
Elio PASCARELLI
Ambassadeur auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Sergio BALANZINO
Ministre plénipotentiaire
Coordinateur de la Coopération multilatérale
Département de la coopération au développement
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Rome
Suppléant
Mme Anna Teresa FRITTELLI ANNIBALDI
Représentant permanent adjoint d'Italie auprès de la FAO
Rome
Conseiller
Antonio BACCHI
Bureau de la coopération économique multilatérale
Direction générale des affaires économiques
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Rome
Conseiller
Dorello FERRARI
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint d'Italie auprès de la FAO
Rome
Conseiller
Massimo CURCIO
Ministre plénipotentiaire
Directeur de l'Aide d'urgence
Département de la Coopération au
Développement
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Rome
Conseiller
Giuseppe MORONI
Chef de Section
Direction générale du Trésor
Ministère du Trésor
Rome
Conseiller
Ugo SESSI
Directeur de Section
Direction générale du Trésor
Ministère du Trésor
Rome
Conseiller
Mme Elena MAMMOME
Chef de Service
Bureau des relations internationales
Ministère de J'agriculture et des forêts
Rome
Conseiller
Silvano SALVATICI
Direction générale pour
l'économie des produits agricoles
Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts
Rome
Conseiller
Mme Brunella LO TURCO
Direction générale pour l'économie des produits agricoles
Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts
Rome
Conseiller
Nicola ROSSI
Directeur de Section
Direction générale pour l'économie des produits agricoles
Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts Rome
Conseiller
Bernardo PALESTRINI
Inspecteur en Chef
Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts
Rome
Conseiller
Pasquale MAINOLFI
Inspecteur en Chef
Service Phytosanitaire
Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts
Rome
Conseiller
Giuseppe MAGGIO APRILE
Direction générale de la pêche maritime
Ministère de la marine marchande
Rome
Conseiller
Domenico SORRENTI
Agronome
Institut agronomique de Florence
Ministère des Affaires étrangères
Florence
Conseiller
Bruno SCAPINI
Conseiller
Ministère des Affaires étrangères
Rome
Conseiller
Francesco MONASTRA
Directeur de Section
Institut expérimental de la production fruitière
Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts
Rome
Conseiller
Giampaolo CEPRINI
Bureau de recherches, études et programmation
Direction générale des affaires économiques
Ministère des affaires étrangères
Rome
IVORY COAST
Délégué
Souleymane SAKO
Ambassadeur de Côte-d'Ivoire en Italie
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Daniel Konan YOMAN
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint de Côte-d'Ivoire auprès de la FAO
Rome
JAMAICA
Delegate
K.G.A. HILL
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to the
Office of the United Nations and to FAO
Geneva
Alternate
Salvatore T. ALFANO
Consul General of Jamaica
Rome
JAPAN
Delegate
Seiya NISHIDA
Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary of Japan in Italy
Rome
Kenichi KAKUDO
Vice-Minister
Ministry of Agriculture. Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo
Alternate
Hirosuke OSHIMA
Minister
Embassy of Japan
Rome
Alternate
Kosei SHIOZAWA
Minister
Permanent Representative of Japan to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Masatake YOSHII
Director, International Cooperation
Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture. Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo
Alternate
Masaki SAITO
Director, Economic Affairs Division
United Nations Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Tokyo
Alternate
Shigeki YAMAMOTO
Assistant Director
International Cooperation Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo
Alternate
Seiichi OKUBO
Assistant Director, Planning Division
International Affairs Department
Economic Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Tokyo
Alternate
Hiroshi NAKAGAWA
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Embassy of Japan
Rome
Associate
Tatsuya KAJIYA
Official
Economic Affairs Division
United Nations Bureau
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Tokyo
Associate
Tomofumi KUME
First Secretary
Embassy of Japan
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Associate
Takashi SAITO
First Secretary
Embassy of Japan
Rome
JORDAN
Delegate
SALEM ALLOZI
Under-Secretary of Ministry of
Agriculture
Amman
Alternate
Tarek MADI
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Jordan to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Samir J. MASARWEH
Alternate Permanent Representative of
Jordan to FAO
Rome
Alternate
SAUD AL-ZUHEER
Director of Economic Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture
Amman
Alternate
Walid ABDRABU
Head of International Relations Division
Ministry of Agriculture
Amman
KENYA
Delegate
William Odongo OMAMO
Minister for Agriculture and
Livestock Development
Nairobi
Alternate
Joshua K. MUTHAMA
Ambassador of Kenya to FAO
Rome
Adviser
Moses MUKOLWE
Deputy Director of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock Development
Nairobi
Adviser
Peter M. AMUKOA
First Secretary (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative of Kenya to FAO
Rome
Adviser
Martin Nyagah WAMBORA
Senior Assistant Secretary
Ministry of Finance
Nairobi
Adviser
James Aggrey AREMO
Projects Officer
Freedom from Hunger Campaign
Ministry of Agriculture
Nairobi
Adviser
J.K. ARAP ROB
Second Secretary
Permanent Representation of
Kenya to FAO
Rome
Adviser
Sammy P. LESHORE
Third Secretary
Permanent Representation of
Kenya to FAO
Rome
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
Delegate
IN-SUNG HWANG
Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries
Seoul
Alternate
NAM KI LEE
Ambassador of the Republic of
Korea in Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Associate
HAN GON KIM
Director General
Agricultural Policy Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Seoul
Associate
KOO HUM SHIN
Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent
Representative to FAO
Rome
Associate
SUNG YUP KIM
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Associate
KWANG SHIK WON
Secretary to the Minister of
Agriculture and Fisheries
Seoul
Associate
IL HO JO
Director
International Cooperation Division
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Seoul
Associate
BYUNG JAE CHO
Assistant Director
International Organizations Division
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Seoul
Associate
JOUNG HO KIM
Assistant Agricultural Attaché
Embassy of the Republic of Korea
Rome
Associate
SEONG-BAE SUH
Deputy Director
International Cooperation Division
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Seoul
Adviser
KYO EUN KIM
Professor
Agricultural Cooperative junior College
National Agricultural Cooperatives
Federation
Seoul
Adviser
KI-SUNG KIM
Research Associate
Korea Rural Economics Institute
Seoul
KUWAIT
Delegate
Sheikh Ibrahim Dou'eij All Ibrahim AL-SABAH
Director General
Agricultural Affairs and Fisheries Resources
Authority
Kuwait
Alternate
Abdel Aziz Issa AL-KHEDR
Ambassador of Kuwait In Italy
Rome
Alternate
Abdullatif A. ALZAIDAN
Controller of Fisheries
Kuwait
Alternate
Miss Fatma Hassan JAWHAR HAYAT
Head of Foreign and Technical Relations
Kuwait
Alternate
Abdul Rida Magid BAHMAN
Head of Production
Kuwait
Alternate
QAIS A. ALATEEQI
Director General
Agricultural Projects Company
Kuwait
Alternate
Ms Fozia A. AL-SDIRAWI
Agro-Production Department
Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research
Kuwait
LAOS
LEBANON
Délégué
Khalil MAKKAWI
Ambassadeur du Liban en Italie
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Amin ABDEL-MALEK
Inspecteur général de l'agriculture
Inspection centrale
Beyrouth
Suppléant
Selim SARRAF
Chef de Service à l'Institut de
Recherches agronomiques
Beyrouth
Conseiller
Mounir KHORAYCH
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint du Liban auprès de la FAO
Rome
Conseiller lad AL-HASSAN
Premier Secrétaire
Ambassade du Liban
Rome
LESOTHO
Delegate
D.P.G. MAKOAE
Minister of Agriculture and Marketing
Maseru
Alternate
P. G. KHOJANE
Ambassador of Lesotho in Italy
Rome
Alternate
M. G. KHADIKANE
Principal Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Maseru
Associate
T. E. KITLELI
Counsellor
Deputy Permanent
Representative to FAO
Rome
Associate
P. D. E. MOSEBO
Senior Planning Officer
Ministry of Agriculture
Maseru
LIBERIA
Delegate
Scott TOWEH
Minister of Agriculture
Monrovia
Alternate
D. Jas A. SIRLEAF
Deputy Minister of Agriculture
Monrovia
Alternate
J. Hilary MASON
Assistant Minister of Agriculture
Monrovia
Associate
E. K. PORTE
Project Manager
Liberian Rubber Development Unit
Monrovia
Associate
Jeremiah TULAY
Project Manager, LCADP
Monrovia
Associate
Patience M. GEORGE
Staff Assistant for Administration and FAO Liaison Officer
Monrovia
Adviser
Dominic BALLAYAN
Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent
Representative of Liberia to FAO
Rome
Adviser
Ms Emary B. DENNIS
Senior Economist
Ministry of Planning and
Economic Affairs
Monrovia
Adviser
S. Prince PORTE
Chargé d'Affaires
Embassy of Liberia
Rome
LIBYA
Delegate
Abuzeid Omar DAWARDA
Secretary of the People's
General Committee for Agricultural
Development and Land Reclamation
Tripoli
Alternate
Mansur Mabruk AL SAGHIR
Secretary of the Agricultural
Committee for the Western Region
Alternate
Bashir El Mabrouk SAID
Permanent Representative of the
Jamahiriya to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Muhammad Ramadan AGIAG
Director of the Office for
Plant Production
Tripoli
Associate
All ZWAIK
General Coordinator of FAO
Projects in the Jamahiriya
Tripoli
Associate
Hemeida AL-ZALTINI
People's Office for External Relations
Tripoli
Associate
Ali MAKTUF
Adviser
Ministry of Agriculture
Tripoli
LUXEMBOURG
Délégué
René STEICHEN
Secrétaire d'Etat à l'Agriculture
Luxembourg
Adjoint
François GREMLING
Premier Conseiller au Ministère de l'Agriculture
Luxembourg
Adjoint
Ghislain BOMBLED
Attaché
Ambassade du Luxembourg
Rome
MADAGASCAR
Délégué
José ANDRIANOELISON
Ministre de la production agricole et de la réforme agraire
Antananarivo
Suppléant
Apolinaire ANDRIATSIAFAJATO
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent de
Madagascar auprès de la FAO
Rome
Conseiller
Clément Therre RAJAONA
Conseiller du Ministre de la production agricole et de la réforme agraire
Antananarivo
Conseiller
Raphaël RABE
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint de Madagascar auprès de la FAO
Rome
MALAWI
Delegate
R. M. BANDA
Minister of Forestry and Natural Resources
Lilongwe
Alternate
O.V. MSISKA
Senior Fisheries Research Officer
Ministry of Forestry and Natural Resources
Lilongwe
Alternate
E. I. CHIWEWE
Deputy Secretary
Ministry of Forestry and Natural Resources
Lilongwe
Alternate
B.H. SANDE
Administrative Officer
Ministry of External Affairs
Lilongwe
Alternate
S. S. KAMVAZINA
Controller of Agricultural Services
Lilongwe
MALAYSIA
Delegate
ANWAR IBRAHIM
Minister of Agriculture
Kuala Lumpur
Alternate
DATO ALWI JANTAN
Secretary General
Ministry of Agriculture
Kuala Lumpur
Alternate
RAJA MANSUR bin RAJA RAZMAN
Ambassador of Malaysia in Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
DATO'ABU BAKAR MAHMUD
Director General
Department of Agriculture
Kuala Lumpur
Alternate
MAZLAN JUSOH
Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative of
Malaysia to FAO
Rome
Alternate
AHMAD SHAROM MOHAMED
First Secretary
Embassy of Malaysia
Rome
Alternate
MOHD YASSIN MOHD SALLEH
Assistant Agricultural Attaché
Embassy of Malaysia
Rome
Alternate
HAJI KHALID bin MOHD NASIR
Chairman
Committee on Agriculture
Perak
Alternate
HAJI KHALID bin MOHD YUNUS
Chairman
Committee on Agriculture
Negeri Sembilan
Alternate
HAJI. SHARIF bin HI. OMAR
Chairman
Committee on Agriculture
Penang
Alternate
IBRAHIM SAAD
Secretary to the Minister of Agriculture
Kuala Lumpur
MALDIVES
Delegate
M.U. MANIKU
Deputy Minister of Agriculture
Malé
Alternate
Abdul Azeez Abdul HAKEEM
Senior Under-Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Malé
MALI
Délégué
Issa ONGOIBA
Ministre de l'Agriculture
Bamako
Suppléant
Kéoulé BOUNDY
Conseiller culturel
Ambassade du Mali
Paris
Suppléant
Mabayo SANGHATA
Directeur Général de l'Agriculture
Bamako
Conseiller
Samba SIDIBE
Directeur général de l'élevage
Ministère chargé du développement rural
Bamako
Conseiller
Nampa SANOGHO
Directeur des Eaux et Forêts
Bamako
MALTA
Delegate
J. DEBONO GRECH
Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries
Valletta
Alternate
Istvan MOSKOVITS
Permanent Representative of Malta to FAO
Rome
Alternate
S. SANT'ANGELO
Principal Assistant Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Valletta
Associate
George CARBONE
Assistant Secretary (Technical)
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Valletta
Associate
Adrian GAUCI
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent
Representative of Malta to FAO
Rome
Associate
Mario CUTAJAR
Public Relations Officer
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Valletta
MAURITANIA
Délégué
MESSAOUD OULD BOULKHEIR
Ministre du Développement rural
Nouakchott
Suppléant
Mohamed Sidya OULD BAH
Commissaire à la Sécurité Alimentaire
Nouakchott
Suppléant
Amadou Bassirou BARRO
Responsable de la cellule de planification
Ministère du Développement rural
Nouakchott
Suppléant
AHMED SALEM OULD MOLOUD
Contrôleur administratif
Ministère du Développement rural
Nouakchott
Suppléant
AHMED OULD TEGUEDI
Chef de la Division Europe et Amérique
Ministère des Affaires étrangères et de la Coopération
Nouakchott
MAURITIUS
Delegate
Mrs Krishnawtee BEEGUN
Principal Assistant Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Natural Resources
Port Louis
Alternate
Sateeaved SEEBALUCK
Administrative Officer
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Natural Resources
Port Louis
MEXICO
Delegado
José Ramón LOPEZ PORTILLO ROMANO
Ministro Plenipotenciario de México ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Sra. Doña Mercedes RUIZ ZAPATA
Segundo Secretario
Representación Permanente de Mexico ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Luis LINARES ZAPATA
Consejero Regional Agropecuario y
Forestal para Europa Occidental
Paris
Suplente
Sra. Doña Margarita LIZARRAGA SAUCEDO
Consejero de Pesca
Representación Permanente de
Mexico ante la FAO
Roma
Consejero
Victor Manuel del ANGEL GONZALES
Director de Cooperación Internacional
Secretaría de Agricultura y
Recursos Hidráulicos
Mexico
Consejero
Elias REYES BRAVO
Jefe del Departamento de Organismos
Especializados en Agricultura y Alimentación
Secretaría de Agricultura y
Recursos Hidráulicos
Mexico
MONGOLIA
Delegate
S. SODNOMDORJ
Minister of Agriculture
Ulan Bator
Alternate
A. SHIILEGDAMBA
External Relations Officer
Ministry of Agriculture
Ulan Bator
Alternate
Shirchinjavyn YUMJAV
First Secretary
Permanent Mission of Mongolia to the Office of the United Nations
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Geneva
MOROCCO
Délégué
Othman DEMNATI
Ministre de l'agriculture et de la Réforme agraire
Rabat
Suppléant
Yahia BENSLIMANE
Ambassadeur du Maroc en Italie
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Mohamed BENNIS
Ministre plénipotentiaire
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Abdelhakim SAISSI
Directeur de la Planification et des Affaires économiques
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme agraire Rabat
Suppléant
Rami Yahiaoui ABDELLATIF
Directeur de la Production végétale
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme agraire
Rabat
Suppléant
Abdelaziz ARIFI
Directeur de la protection des végétaux
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme agraire
Rabat
Suppléant
Mokhtar NAANANI
Chef de la Division de la planification
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la
Réforme agraire
Rabat
Suppléant
Albert SASSON
Chef de la Division des Affaires économiques
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme agraire
Rabat
Suppléant
Mohamed CHELOUATI
Chef du Service de la Coopération agricole
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Réforme agraire
Rabat
MOZAMBIQUE
Delegate
João DOS SANTOS FERREIRA
Minister of Agriculture
Maputo
Alternate
Adriano Afonso MALEIANE
National Director of the Agrarian Economy
Ministry of Agriculture
Maputo
Alternate
Ms Fernanda PINTO e COSTA
Officer
Ministry of Agriculture
Maputo
NAMIBIA
Delegate
Ricardo MARTINEZ-MUÑOZ
Minister Counsellor
Permanent Representation of
Colombia to FAO
Rome
Adviser
Taye-Brook ZERIHOUN
Political Affairs Officer
UN-PATD
New York
Adviser
Ms Jennifer Lee DE LAURENTIS
Personal Assistant to the ASG
UN-PATD
New York
NEPAL
Delegate
Hem Bahadur MALLA
Minister of Agriculture
Kathmandu
Alternate
Akrur N. RANA
Senior Agricultural Adviser
Ministry of Agriculture
Kathmandu
Alternate
Kamala Bhakta RAJBHANDARI
Joint Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reform
Kathmandu
Alternate
Hari Mohan SHRESTHA
Joint Secretary
Ministry of Commerce and Supplies
Kathmandu
NETHERLANDS
Delegate
G.J.M. BRAKS
Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries
The Hague
Alternate
Aart DE ZEEUW
Director General of Agriculture
The Hague
Alternate
H.J. TANKINK
Deputy Director-General for Rural Areas and Quality Management
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
The Hague
Alternate
L. HERTOG
Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands to FAO and WFP
Rome
Associate
W. A. MEIJER
Director
Agricultural Development
Cooperation Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
The Hague
Associate
N. SLOT
Policy Adviser to the
Director-General for Agriculture and Food
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
The Hague
Associate
J. DOORENBOS
Deputy Director
Department of Development Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
The Hague
Associate
C.B. HOUTMAN
Agricultural Development Cooperation
Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
The Hague
Associate
M. LENSTRA
International Organizations Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
The Hague
Associate
A.J.M. OOMEN
Agricultural Development
Cooperation Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
The Hague
Associate
P.A.L. de RIJK
Division for International
Economic Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
The Hague
Associate
K. de VEY MESTDAGH
Deputy
Permanent Representative to FAO and WFP
Rome
Adviser
G.A.M. van der GRIND
Public Board of Agriculture
The Hague
Adviser
J.J. GROENEVELD
Director, Processing and Marketing
Agricultural Products Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
The Hague
Adviser
G.M.G. KWAAK
Information and External
Relations Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
The Hague
NEW ZEALAND
Delegate
Colin J. MOYLE
Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries
Minister in charge of the Rural
Banking and Finance Corporation
Wellington
Alternate
R.E.W. ELLIOTT
Assistant Director-General
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Wellington
Alternate
R.W.M. JOHNSON
Deputy Director
Economics Division
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Wellington
Alternate
J.D.L. RICHARDS
Counsellor
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
P.N. BAIGENT
Counsellor (Agriculture)
New Zealand High Commission
London
Alternate
Ms A.J. COSTELLO
Second Secretary (Commercial)
Alternate Permanent
Representative to FAO
Rome
Associate
P.G. McCABE
Private Secretary to the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries Wellington
Associate
Miss Anne MORAN
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Wellington
NICARAGUA
Delegado
Jaime WHEELOCK ROMAN
Ministro de Desarrollo Agropecuario y
Reforma Agraria
Managua
Suplente
Pedro Antonio BLANDÓN LANZAS
Viceministro Primero de
Cooperación Externa
Managua
Suplente
Humberto CARRION MCDONOUGH
Embajador de Nicaragua ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Reynaldo TREMINIO
Director de Granos Básicos
MIDINRA
Managua
Suplente
Aldo FABRI
Director de Colaboración
Económica Externa
MIDINRA
Managua
Suplente
Francisco LACAYO
Director General de la Región I
MIDINRA
Managua
Suplente
Srta. Rita Delia CASCO
Directora General de Organismos y
Conferencias Internacionales, MINEX
Managua
Suplente
Sra. Virginia ESPINOSA RAMIREZ
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Asesor
Enoc FLORES
MIDINRA
Managua
Asesor
Ramiro PERALTA DIAZ
Asesor Técnico
MIDINRA
Managua
NIGER
Délégué
ALLELE ELHADJ HABIBOU
Ministre de l'agriculture
Niamey
Suppléant
IBRAHIM OUMAROU
Directeur de l'agriculture
Niamey
Suppléant
MAINA SANDA
Directeur des Etudes et de la
Programmation
Ministère de l'agriculture
Niamey
Suppléant
IBRAHIM MAZOU
Directeur de l'élevage
Ministère des ressources animales
Niamey
Suppléant
BAWA SAHADOU
Représentant permanent du Niger auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint
Mme TALATA BAGHEBABA
Chef de Service du Budget
Ministère des Finances
Niamey
Adjoint
MAMANE MARICHATOU AMADOU
Ingénieur des techniques forestières
Ministère de l'Hydraulique et de l'Environnement
Niamey
NIGERIA
Delegate
A. I. AKINRINADE
Minister of Agriculture, Water
Resources and Rural Development
Lagos
Alternate
K.B. DAVID-WEST
Director
Federal Livestock Department
Lagos
Alternate
O. AWOYEMI
Director
Federal Department of Agriculture,
Water Resources and Rural Development
Lagos
Alternate
S.S.O. AKPATA
Director
Central Planning Department
Federal Department of Agriculture
Water Resources and Rural Development
Lagos
Alternate
O. AYO
Director
Federal Ministry of National Planning
Lagos
Alternate
Alhaji D.D. APANPA
Director
Federal Department of Fisheries
Lagos
Alternate
Jaafaru LADAN
Minister (Agriculture)
Permanent Representative of
Nigeria to FAO
Rome
Adviser
Mrs K. TYCUS-LAWSON
Legal Adviser
Ministry of Agriculture
Lagos
NORWAY
Delegate
Svein SUNDSBØ
Minister of Agriculture
Oslo
Alternate
Torbjorn K. CHRISTIANSEN
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of
Norway to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Per Harald GRUE
Director General of Agriculture
Oslo
Alternate
Harald HØSTMARK
FAO Coordinator
Ministry of Development Cooperation
Oslo
Associate
Mrs Mette RAVN
Alternate Permanent Representative of Norway to FAO Rome
Associate
Ms Anny FELDE
Personal Secretary to the
Minister of Agriculture
Oslo
Associate
Olav LINDSTAD
Head of Division
Ministry of Development Cooperation
Oslo
Associate
Nils Ragnar KAMSVAAG
Secretary
The Royal Norwegian Embassy
Rome
Associate
Ms Hanne-Marie KAARSTAD
Counsellor
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Oslo
Associate
Ms Anne NYSTRØM
Adviser
The Royal Norwegian Embassy
Rome
Associate
Almar SAGELUMO
Acting Director General of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture
Oslo
Associate
Knut BØRVE
Executive Officer
Ministry of Agriculture
Oslo
Associate
Jostein LEIRO
Counsellor
Ministry of Development Cooperation
Oslo
OMAN
Delegate
Salim Ismail SUWAID
Ambassador of the Sultanate of
Oman in Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Ahnaf bin Omar AL ZUBAIDI
Director of Agricultural Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries
Muscat
PAKISTAN
Delegate
Kazi Abdul MAJID ABID
Minister for Food and Agriculture and Cooperatives Islamabad
Alternate
Sartaj AZIZ
Special Assistant to the Prime Minister on Agriculture Islamabad
Alternate
Muzaffar AHMAD
Additional Secretary
Ministry of Food. Agriculture and Cooperatives Islamabad
Alternate
M. Afzal QADIR
Ambassador of Pakistan in Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Associate
Javed MUSHARRAF
Agricultural Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Associate
Ajmal Mahmood QURESHI
Deputy Secretary for International Cooperation
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Cooperatives Islamabad
PANAMA
Delegado
Bruno V. GARISTO M.
Ministro de Desarrollo Agropecuario
Panamá
Suplente
José Manuel WATSON
Embajador
Representante Permanente de Panamá ante la FAO Roma
Suplente
Alfredo ACUÑA HUMPHRIES
Representante Permanente Alterno de Panamá ante la FAO Roma
Suplente
Srta. Delia de VILLAMONTE
Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno de Panamá ante la FAO Roma
Suplente
Horacio MALTEZ
Representante Permanente Alterno de Panamá ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto
Sra. Yolanda AROSEMENA de ACUÑÁ
Agregada de la Representación
Permanente de Panamá ante la FAO
Roma
Adjunto
Srta. Navidad MORON ZANET
Agregada de la Representación
Permanente de Panamá ante la FAO
Roma
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
PARAGUAY
Delegado
Roque J. YODICE
Representante Permanente de¡
Paraguay ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Luis Maria AVEIRO MONELLO
Representante Permanente Alterno del Paraguay ante la FAO
Roma
PERU
Delegado
Mario BARTUREN DUENAS
Ministro de Agricultura
Lima
Suplente
Luis SOLARI TUDELA
Director de Organismos y
Conferencias Internacionales
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores
Lima
Suplente
Manuel VILLAVICENCIO RIVERA
Director General de la Oficina
Sectorial de Planificación
Ministerio de Agricultura
Lima
Suplente
Javier GAZZO F.D.
Embajador del Peru ante la FAO
Roma
Adjunto
Jose Luis GARAYCOCHEA BUSTAMANTE
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO
Roma
Adjunto
Daniel F. ROCA ALCAZAR
Representante Permanente Suplente del Peru ante la FAO
Roma
Continue
<section>i</section>
List of delegates and observers (continued)
PHILIPPINES
Delegate
Jesus T. TANCHANCO
Minister
National Food Authority
Manila
Alternate
Jacobo C. CLAVE
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Victor G. GARCIA III
First Secretary and Alternate
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Horacio M. CARANDANG
Agricultural Attaché and Alternate
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Hermes J. DORADO
Second Secretary and Alternate
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Associate
Renato ASTUDILLO
Special Assistant
National Food Authority
Manila
Adviser
J.A. RONQUILLO
Chief. Division of Research
Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic
Resources
Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Manila
Adviser
Ms María Luisa GAVINO
Agricultural Analyst
Embassy of the Philippines
Rome
Adviser
Ms Raquel M. ACOSTA
Executive Assistant
Embassy of the Philippines
Rome
Adviser
Ms Imelda M. CLAVE
Embassy of the Philippines
Rome
Adviser
Flora M. CLAVE
Embassy of the Philippines
Rome
POLAND
Delegate
Kazimierz GRZESIAK
Deputy
Minister of Agriculture and Food Economy
Warsaw
Alternate
Józef WIEJACZ
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of
Poland to FAO
Rome
Associate
Jan GORECKI
Vice-President of the Warsaw
Agricultural University
Associate
Jan ORZESZKO
Alternate Permanent
Representative of Poland to FAO
Rome
Associate
Marian BRZOSKA
Adviser to the Minister of
Agriculture and Rural Economy
Warsaw
Associate
Mrs Malgorzata PIOTROWSKA
Secretary of the Polish National
FAO Committee
Warsaw
Associate
Dariusz MANCZYK
Senior Expert
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Warsaw
PORTUGAL
Delegate
Jose Eduardo MENDES FERRAO
President of the Portuguese
National FAO Committee
Lisbon
Alternate
Oscar SALES PETINGA
Department of Planning of the
Ministry of Agriculture
Lisbon
Associate
Antonio ALMEIDA RIBEIRO
Alternate Permanent
Representative of Portugal to FAO
Rome
Associate
Antonio MAGALHAES COELHO
Expert of the Portuguese
National FAO Committee
Lisbon
QATAR
Delegate
AHMAD A.R. AL-MANA
Under-Secretary for Industry and
Agriculture
Doha
Alternate
Braid A. AL-HUMAIDI
Head of Northern Agricultural
Services Centre
Ministry of Industry and Agriculture
Doha
Alternate
Mohammad Ibrahim AL-MANNAI
Head of Agricultural Meteorology
Ministry of Industry and Agriculture
Doha
ROMANIA
Délégué
Aurel ANTONIU
Vice-Ministre de l'agriculture et de l'industrie alimentaire Bucarest
Adjoint
Gheorghe COSTAN
Conseiller au Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'industrie alimentaire Bucarest
Adjoint
Victor EFTIMIU
Conseiller au Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'industrie alimentaire Bucarest
RWANDA
Délégué
Anastase NTEZIRLYAYO
Ministre de l'agriculture. de l'élevage et des forêts Kigali
Suppléant
Anastase MUREKESZI
Directeur Général de la Production agricole
Ministère de l'agriculture, de l'élevage et des forêts Kigali
SAINT CHRISTOPHER AND NEVIS
SAINT LUCIA
Delegate
Ira d'AUVERGNE
Minister of Agriculture. Lands,
Fisheries and Cooperatives
Castries
Alternate
Ms Andria XAVIER
Ministry of Agriculture, Lands,
Fisheries and Cooperatives
Castries
SAINT VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
Delegate
Marcus P.W. DE FREITAS
Minister of Trade, Industry and Agriculture
Kingstown
Alternate
Henry A. GAYNES
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Agriculture
Kingstown
Alternate
Mrs Gloria DAVY-PENNINGSFELD
Consul General
Geneva
SAMOA
SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE
Délégué
Tomé Dias DA COSTA
Ministre de l'Agriculture et de l'élevage
Sao Tomé
Suppléant
Fradique Bandeira de MENEZES
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Bruxelles
Suppléant
Carlos Edmundo MADEIRA LITO
Directeur des Ressources humaines
Ministère de l'Agriculture
Sao Tomé
SAUDI ARABIA.(KINGDOM OF)
Delegate
Abdul RAHMAN bin Abdul Aziz AL-SHEIKH
Minister of Agriculture and Water
Riyadh
Alternate
Abdullah AL-SAEED AL-MOSAED
Deputy Minister for Water Affairs
Riyadh
Alternate
Atif Y. BUKHARI
Ambassador of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Mustafa Ibrahim MAHDI
Permanent Representation of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to FAO
Rome
Associate
Hameed ABUJABALL
Director of Foreign Relations
Ministry of Agriculture and Water
Riyadh
Adjoint
Abdallah M. AL-GULAIGAH
Governor of SWCCD
Riyadh
SENEGAL
Délégué
Amadou Bator DIOP
Ministre du développement rural
Dakar
Suppléant
Henry Arfang SENGHOR
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent du Sénégal auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant
Amadou Moustapha KAMARA
Directeur de l'agriculture
Dakar
Suppléant
Mame Balla SY
Premier Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint du Sénégal auprès de la FAO Rome
Conseiller
Abdou Karim SIDIBE
Conseiller technique du Ministre du Développement rural Dakar
Conseiller
Médoune DIENE
Commissaire à la Sécurité alimentaire
Ministère du Développement rural
Dakar
Conseiller
Etienne SARR
Conseiller technique du
Ministre du Développement rural
Dakar
Conseiller
Papa Yoro DIALLO
Conseiller culturel
Ambassade du Sénégal
Rome
SEYCHELLES
Delegate
Jacques Marie HODOUL
Minister of Planning and Development
Mahé
SIERRA LEONE
Delegate
Eya E. MBAYO
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources
Freetown
Alternate
T.E.C. PALMER
Principal Agricultural Officer
Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources
Freetown
SOLOMON ISLANDS
Delegate
Sethuel KELLY
Minister of Agriculture and Lands
Honiara
Alternate
Edmund ANDRESEN
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Lands
Honiara
Associate
J. ASIPARA
Ministry of Agriculture and Lands
Honiara
Adviser
B.G.C. SMITH
Under-Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Lands
Honiara
SOMALIA
Delegate
Bile Rafle GULED
Minister of Agriculture
Mogadishu
Alternate
Mohamed ABUCAR SHEIKH
Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Agriculture Mogadishu
Alternate
Abbas Musse FARAH
Ambassador of the Somali Democratic
Republic to FAO
Rome
Adviser
Abdilatif Hagi ABDULLAHI
General Manager
Bulo Marerto Project
Mogadishu
Adviser
Hassan Moallim IBRAHIM
Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Mogadishu
Adviser
Abukar Sheikh HUSSEIN
Official
Ministry of Livestock
Mogadishu
Adviser
Husseien Ali AHMED
Ministry of Fisheries
Mogadishu
SPAIN
Delegado
Julián AREVALO ARIAS
Presidente del F.O.R.P.P.A.
Madrid
Suplente
Ismael DIAZ YUBERO
Representante Permanente de
España ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Juan-Maria LOPEZ-AGUILAR
Subdirector General de Organismos Internacionates Técnicos y para el Desarrollo
Mìnìsterìo de Asuntos Exteriores
Madrid
Suplente
Sra. Doña Pilar GARCIA DONORO
Subdirectora General de
Relaciones Pesqueras Internacionales
Ministerio de Agricultura,
Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid
Suplente
Sra. Doña Rosa FERNANDEZ LEON
Subdirectora General del
Mercado Alimentario
Ministerio de Agricultura,
Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid
Asesor
Leandro Nagore SAN MARTIN
Director de Asuntos Generales de la
Dirección General de Organizaciones y Conferencias Internacionales
Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores
Madrid
Asesor
Francisco FERNANDEZ DE ANA MAGAN
Representante Permanente Adjunto de España ante la FAO
Roma
Asesor
Manuel GARIJO HIERRO
Jefe del Servicio de Cooperación
Económica Sectorial
Vicesecretaría General Técnica
Ministerio de Agricultura,
Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid
Asesor
José-Miguel BOLIVAR SALCEDO
Coordinador Adjunto de Recursos
Fitogeneticos del INIA
Ministerio de Agricultura,
Pesca y Alimentación
Madrid
Asesor
Antonio BROTONS DIEZ
Dirección General Presupuestos
Ministerio de Economía y Hacienda
Madrid
Asesor
José-Joaquín GARCIA DEL CASTILLO
Jefe de la
Sección de Organismos y Conferencias Internacionales de la
Secretaría General Técnica
Ministerio de Agricultura, Pesca v Alimentación
Madrid
Asesor
Fernando PANIZO ARCOS
Jefe del Gabinete Técnico del F.O.R.P.P.A.
Ministerio de Agricultura, Pesca y
Alimentación
Madrid
SRI LANKA
Delegate
Gamini JAYASURIYA
Minister of Agricultural
Development and Research and
Minister of Food and Cooperatives
Colombo
Alternate
M. A. PIYASEKERA
Ambassador of Sri Lanka in Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
N.V.K.K. WEREGODA
Secretary
Ministry of Agricultural
Development and Research
Colombo
Alternate
D.H.J. ABEYAGOONASEKERA
Director
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Colombo
Associate
Miss C. AMARATUNGA
Second Secretary
Embassy of Sri Lanka
Alternate Permanent
Representative to FAO
Rome
SUDAN
Delegate
Siddiq ABDEEN MOHAMED
Minister of Agriculture and Natural Resources
Khartoum
Alternate
Yousif Ahmed DASH
Undersecretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Khartoum
Alternate
Abdalla Mekki OSMAN
Undersecretary for Animal Resources
Khartoum
Alternate
Abdel Moneim Mohamed EL-SHEIKH
Director General
Agriculture Planning Administration
Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources
Khartoum
Alternate
Gamal Mohamed AHMED
Counsellor (Agricultural Affairs)
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
SURINAME
Delegate
Radjkoemar RANDJET SINGH
Minister of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries
Paramaribo
Alternate
George D. SOERJOESING
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries
Paramaribo
Alternate
Harold E. LIONARONS
Coordinator of Planning
Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries
Paramaribo
Adviser
Ramsewak SHANKAR
Adviser to the Minister of Agriculture
Paramaribo
Adviser
Hugo W. LECKIE
Head of Administrative Section
Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries
Paramaribo
SWAZILAND
Delegate
H.S. MAMBA
Minister for Agriculture and Co-operatives
Mbabane
Alternate
Nicholas Thulasizwe GUMEDZE
Director of Veterinary Services
Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives
Mbabane
Adviser
Ms Nonathemba Magdalene DLAMINI
Director of Research and Planning
Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives
Mbabane
Adviser
Patrick King LUKHELE
Chief Project Co-ordinator
Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives
Mbabane
SWEDEN
Delegate
Svante LUNDKVIST
Minister of Agriculture
Stockholm
Alternate
Ulf LONQVIST
Under-Secretary of State
Ministry of Agriculture
Stockholm
Alternate
Stefan de MARE
Assistant Under-Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Stockholm
Alternate
Mrs Astrid BERGQUIST
Head of Section
Secretary General of the Swedish
National FAO Committee
Ministry of Agriculture
Stockholm
Alternate
Ingvar WIDEN
Director General
National Board of Agriculture
Chairman of the Swedish National
FAO Committee
Stockholm
Alternate
Gösta ERICSSON
Minister
Permanent Representative of Sweden to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Göran ANCKARBERG
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative of Sweden to FAO
Rome
Adviser
Lars Erik BIRGEGÀRD
Research Director
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Uppsala
Adviser
Lennart BRUNANDER
Member of Parliament
Stockholm
Adviser
Arne JOHANSSON
Chairman
Swedish Union of Forest Workers
Stockholm
Adviser
Ms Agneta KARLSSON
Assistant
Ministry of Agriculture
Stockholm
Adviser
Hans RAMEL
Member of the Board
Federation of Swedish Farmers
Stockholm
SWITZERLAND
Délégué
Jean-Claude PIOT
Directeur de l'Office fédéral de l'agriculture
Président du Comité national suisse de la FAO
Berne
Suppléant
Hans POPP
Sous-Directeur de l'Office fédéral de l'Agriculture
Berne
Suppléant
Gaspard BODMER
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent de la
Suisse auprès de la FAO
Rome
Suppléant
Peter WIESMANN
Ministre
Représentant permanent adjoint de la Suisse auprès de la FAO
Rome
Adjoint
Grégoire de KALBERMATTEN
Collaborateur diplomatique à la
Section des Nations Unies et
Organisations internationales
Berne
Adjoint
Igor MARINCEK
Secrétaire du Comité national suisse de la FAO
Office fédéral de l'Agriculture
Berne
SYRIA
Delegate
Mahmoud Ahmad EL-KURDY
Minister of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Damascus
Alternate
Bourhan KAYAL
Ambassador of the Syrian Arab Republic in Italy
Rome
Alternate
Hussein AL-AHMAD
Director of Research Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Damascus
Alternate
Mohammed Rachid KANBAR
Soils Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Damascus
Alternate
Mahmoud SALAMEH
External Relations Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Damascus
Adviser
Mohamed Said HALABI
Agriculture and Irrigation Department
State Planning Commission
Damascus
TANZANIA
Delegate
P.A. BOMANI
Minister for Agriculture and
Livestock Development
Dar es-Salaam
Alternate
Ernest A. MULOKOZI
Ambassador
Principal Secretary Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development
Dar es-Salaam
Alternate
A.K. SYKES
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Tanzania to FAO
Rome
Alternate
O.A. JUMA
Principal Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development
Zanzibar
Alternate
J.K. KYAMBWA
Commissioner of Livestock
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development Dar es-Salaam
Alternate
E.G. MOYO
Assistant Commissioner for Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development
Dar es-Salaam
Alternate
B.H. KATANI
Senior Economist Planning and Marketing
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development
Dar es-Salaam
Alternate
J.S. MTENGA
Minister Plenipotentiary
Alternate Permanent Representative of Tanzania to FAO
Rome
Alternate
ESROM MARYOGO
Minister Plenipotentiary
Embassy of Tanzania
Rome
THAILAND
Delegate
Borom TANTHIEN
Deputy
Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok
Alternate
Chaisop SOPSARN
Deputy Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok
Alternate
Vanich VARIKUL
Director General
Department of Fisheries
Bangkok
Alternate
Vasana BOONPHUPHANTUNTE
Assistant Secretary to the
Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok
Alternate
Nguen SRISURAK
Deputy Secretary General
Office of Agricultural Economics
Bangkok
Alternate
Tanongchit WONGSIRI
Deputy Director-General
Department of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok
Alternate
Mrs Marasee SURAKUL
Assistant Secretary-General
Office of the National FAO Committee
Bangkok
Alternate
Vanrob ISARANKURA
Agricultural Counsellor
Permanent Representative of Thailand to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Chaiwat INTRACHATORN
Commercial Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative of Thailand to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Pichai PONGPAET
First Secretary
Alternate Permanent Representative of Thailand to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Pinit KORSIEPORN
Alternate Permanent Representative of Thailand to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Chanchai CHARANVATTANAKIT
Third Secretary
Department of Economic Affairs
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Bangkok
Adviser
Thavi TANTHIEN
Private Secretary to the Deputy
Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok
TOGO
Délégué
Koffi SAMA
Docteur vétérinaire
Ministère du développement rural
Lomé
TONGA
Delegate
Tomasi T. SIMIKI
Director of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forests
Nuku'alofa
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
Delegate
Lyle Everette WILLIAMS
Ambassador
Permanent Representative to the
United Nations and to FAO
Geneva
Alternate
Vincent MOE
Director Veterinary Services
Ministry of Agriculture, Lands and Food Production
Port-of-Spain
Alternate
Mrs Jean GEORGE
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative of Trinidad and Tobago to the United Nations and FAO
Geneva
TUNISIA
Délégué
Lassaad BEN OSMAN
Ministre de l'agriculture
Tunis
Suppléant
Mohamed ABDELHADI
Ministre plénipotentiaire
Représentant permanent de la
Tunisie auprès de la FAO
Rome
Conseiller
Mohsen BOUJBEL
Directeur de la Planification des Statistiques et des Analyses économiques
Tunis
Conseiller
Sadok DJELLOULI
Directeur des Projets du PAM
Tunis
Conseiller
Badr BEN AMMAR
Sous-Directeur à la
Direction de la Planification des Statistiques et Analyses économiques
Tunis
Conseiller
Lassaad BOUKCHINA
Attaché de Cabinet
Ministère de l'Agriculture
Tunis
Conseiller
M.L. MOUAFFAK
Directeur Général adjoint
Office des Céréales
Tunis
TURKEY
Delegate
Hüsnü DOGAN
Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Affairs
Ankara
Alternate
Nazmi DEMIR
Deputy Under-secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Affairs
Ankara
Alternate
Temel ISKIT
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of
Turkey to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Mithat BALKAN
Director of International Economic
Organizations Division
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ankara
Associate
Mrs Gaye GÜRPINAR
Director for External Affairs
Board of Research, Planning and Coordination
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Affairs
Ankara
Associate
Sabri KESKIN
Director of Internally Financed Projects
Division Directorate General for Projects and Implementations
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Affairs
Ankara
Associate
Hasim ÖGÜT
Agricultural Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative of Turkey to FAO
Rome
UGANDA
Delegate
Cyprian AJIKU
Minister of Works and
Minister of Agriculture and Forestry
Entebbe
Alternate
A.K. OSUBAN
Commissioner for Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Entebbe
Alternate
M. SIMBWA-BUNNYA
Permanent Representative (Designate) of Uganda to FAO
Entebbe
Associate
S. ONYAIT
Deputy Commissioner of Veterinary Services
Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries
Kampala
Associate
Christopher DHATEMWA
Assistant Commissioner for Fisheries
Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries
Entebbe
Associate
E. OLET
Assistant Chief Forest Officer
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Entebbe
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Delegate
Hamad Abdulla SALMAN
Deputy
Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries
Dubai
Alternate
Nasser Salman AL ABOODI
Ambassador of the United Arab
Emirates In Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Ahmed Abduila BUHUMAID
Director of the Office of the
Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries
Dubai
Adviser
Mohammed ABDULAZIZ
Agricultural Adviser
Dubai
Adviser
Abdulla KHALFAN MOHAMED AL-SHARIQI
Director of Northern Agriculture Zone
Dubai
Adviser
Ali Rashid Ali BADAWI
Director of Eastern Agriculture Zone
Dubai
Adviser
Rashed Mohammed AL KAIBI
Head of the Personnel Section
Dubai
UNITED KINGDOM
Delegate
Timothy RAISON
Minister for Overseas Development
London
Alternate
R. A. BROWNING
Deputy Secretary
Overseas Development Administration
London
Alternate
R.F.R. DEARE
Minister
Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom to FAO
Rome
Alternate
G.A. WILLIAMS
Assistant Head
United Nations and Commonwealth
Department
Overseas Development Administration
London
Alternate
J.R. GOLDSACK
Natural Resources Adviser
Overseas Development Administration
London
Alternate
J.D. AITKEN
Principal
Overseas Development Administration
London
Alternate
Miss P. WEST
Principal,
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
London
Alternate
E.V. WADE-BROWN
Higher Executive Officer
Overseas Development Administration
London
Adviser
M.J. DINHAM
Private Secretary to the Minister for Overseas Development
London
Adviser
Mrs E.A. BRIERTON
Assistant to the Permanent
Representative to FAO
Rome
Adviser
Miss K. BRAMLEY
Assistant to the Permanent
Representative to FAO
Rome
Adviser
Mrs P. SHUTE
British Embassy
Rome
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Delegate
John R. BLOCK
Secretary of Agriculture Washington, D.C.
Alternate
Millicent FENWICK
United States Ambassador to the
United Nations Agencies for
Food and Agriculture
Rome
Alternate
Daniel G. AMSTUTZ
Under-Secretary for International Affairs and Commodity Programs
Department of Agriculture Washington, D.C.
Alternate
Antonio GAYOSO
Director,
Office of International Development Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Department of State Washington, D.C.
Alternate
James E. ROSS
United States Mission to the United Nations Agencies for Food and Agriculture
Rome
Congressional Adviser
Hon. Gene CHAPPIE House of Representatives Washington, D.C.
Adviser
Edmund M. PARSONS
Deputy
United States Representative to the United Nations Agencies for Food and Agriculture
Rome
Adviser
A. Daniel WEYGANDT
United States Mission to the United Nations Agencies for Food and Agriculture
Rome
Adviser
Max L. WITCHER
Director,
International Organization Affairs Office of International Cooperation and Development
Department of Agriculture Washington, D.C.
Adviser
Hartford T. JENNINGS
Agricultural Development Division Office of International Development
Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Department of State Washington, D.C.
Adviser
Wayne DENNEY
International Organization Affairs Office of International Cooperation and Development
Department of Agriculture Washington. D.C.
Adviser
Mark WARD
United Nations Division Agency for International Development Washington, D.C.
Adviser
Michael H. GOLDMAN
Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs
Department of State Washington, D.C.
Adviser
E.B. SAMUEL
Economic Officer
Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs
Department of State Washington, D.C.
Adviser
Allan R. FURMAN
United States Mission to the United Nations Agencies for Food and Agriculture
Rome
Private Sector Adviser
William T. SCHAUPAUGH
Executive Vice-President
American Seed Trade Association Washington, D.C.
Adviser
H. Peters STRONG
Alternative Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
URUGUAY
Delegado
Roberto VAZQUEZ PLATERO
Ministro de Agricultura y Pesca
Montevideo
Suplente
Alberto André BONINO
Jefe de División de Apoyo
Plan Agropecuario
Montevideo
Adjunto
Federico Xiviller VILA
Representante Permanente Alterno del Uruguay ante la FAO
Roma
VANUATU
Delegate
J.T. HOPA
Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Port Vila
Alternate
William MAHIT
Second Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Port Vila
Adviser
M.H. FOWLER
Agricultural Economist
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
Port Vila
VENEZUELA
Delegado
Sra. Doña Mercedes FERMIN GOMEZ
Embajador de Venezuela ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Sra. Doña Maria Isabel CASELLAS
Consejero
Representación Permanente de Venezuela ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Alberto MURILLO MORANTES
Primer Secretario
Representación Permanente de
Venezuela ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Enrique BADILLO SPOSITO
Segundo Secretario
Representación Permanente de
Venezuela ante la FAO
Roma
Suplente
Sra. Doña Marina BRICEÑO ZEHL
Agregado II
Representación Permanente de
Venezuela ante la FAO
Roma
VIET NAM
Délégué
NGUYEN DANG
Ministre adjoint de l'agriculture
Hanoï
Suppléant
Mme PHAN THI MINH
Ambassadeur du Viet Nam en Italie
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO
Rome
Adjoint
TRAN DUC
Professeur en Economie
Hanoï
Adjoint
Mme HOANG THI CU
Représentant permanent adjoint du Viet Nam auprès de la FAO
Rome
Adjoint
NGUYEN CHI THANH
Représentant permanent adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
YEMEN ARAB REPUBLIC
Delegate
Ahmed All AL-HAMDANI
Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries
Sanaa
Alternate
Taha Abdo THABET
Assistant Director
Irrigation Department
Sanaa
Alternate
Ali Abdullah AL AGHBARY
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Ahmed Ali AL-AKWAA
Director of Foreign Relations Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Sanaa
YEMEN, PEOPLE'S DEM. REPUBLIC OF
Delegate
Mohamed Sulaiman NASSER
Minister of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Aden
Alternate
Anwar KHALED
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the People's
Democratic Republic of Yemen to FAO
Rome
Adviser
Isam LUQMAN
General Manager
Ministry of Agriculture
Aden
Adviser
Saleh Salem GAASOOS
Ministry of Agriculture
Adviser
Abdul Rahaman TARMOOM
Assistant to the Director of Agriculture
Ministry of Planning
Aden
Adviser
Mohammed Ahmed MANSOOR
Assistant Deputy Minister for Fisheries
Aden
YUGOSLAVIA
Delegate
Milorad STANOJEVIC
Minister of Agriculture
Belgrade
Alternate
Hristo HRISTOMANOV
Chairman of the Yugoslav National FAO Committee
President of the Committee for Agriculture of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia
Skopje
Alternate
Milutin TAPAVICKI
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia to FAO
Rome
Alternate
Milan KNEZEVIC
President,
Committee for Agriculture of the Socialist Republic of Slovenia
Ljubljana
Alternate
Milan TRKULJA
Professor
Faculty of Economics
University of Novi Sad
Alternate
Milan KARIC
Counsellor for FAO
Federal Committee for Agriculture
Belgrade
Adviser
Ms Mirijana SRDANOV
Assistant to the President of the Federal Committee for Agriculture
Belgrade
ZAIRE
Délégué
NZUNGU LUNTADI
Secrétaire d'Etat au Département de l'Agriculture et du Développement rural
Kinshasa
Suppléant
SAMBA MOONI te AVELELA
Directeur-Chef de Service au
Département de l'Agriculture et du Développement rural
Kinshasa
Suppléant
Mme SANGO ya TAMBWE
Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint du Zaïre auprès de la FAO
Rome
ZAMBIA
Delegate
G.K. CHINKULI
Minister of Agriculture and Water Development
Lusaka
Alternate
N.P. MAGANDE
Permanent Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture and Water Development
Lusaka
Alternate
H.M. NZUNGA
Ambassador of Zambia in Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO
Rome
Alternate
E. MUYANGA
Director of Fisheries
Ministry of Lands and Agriculture
Lusaka
Alternate
N. MUMBA
Director of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture and Water Development
Lusaka
Adviser
T.F.F. MALUZA
Alternate Permanent Representative of Zambia to FAO
Rome
ZIMBABWE
Delegate
M.E. MAHACHI
Minister of Lands, Agriculture and
Rural Resettlement
Harare
Alternate
E. CHENGU
Deputy Secretary
Ministry of Lands, Agriculture and
Rural Resettlement
Harare
Alternate
T. TAKAVARASHA
Assistant Secretary
Ministry of Lands, Agriculture and Rural Resettlement Harare
OBSERVERS FROM UNITED NATIONS MEMBER STATES
U.S.S.R.
Jurij A. ZNAMENSKI
Assistant Director
Central Institute for Scientific Research on Fisheries
Moscow
Guenrih K. VOITOLOVSKI
Chief of Section
Institute for International Economic Relations Academy of Sciences
Moscow
HOLY SEE
The Most Rev. Agostino FERRARI-TONIOLO
Permanent Observer of the Holy See to FAO
Vatican City
Rev. Msgr Biagio NOTARANGELO
Vatican City
Rev. F. Aloysius FONSECA
Vatican City
Giovanni Battista PIRAS
Vatican City
Pietro CAIAZZA
Vatican City
Luigi GUARRERA
Vatican City
Vincenzo BUONOMO
Vatican City
SOVEREIGN ORDER OF MALTA
Don Francesco COLONNA
Représentant auprès de la FAO
Rome
Clemente BRIGANTE COLONNA
Représentant adjoint auprès de la FAO
Rome
LIBERATION MOVEMENTS
AFRICAN NATIONAL CONGRESS
T.T.NKOBI
Treasurer General
Lusaka
Shadrack PEKANE
Projects Department
Lusaka
PAN AFRICANIST CONGRESS OF AZANIA
Mfanasekaya GQOBOSE
Secretary for Economic Affairs
Dar es-Salaam
SOUTHWEST AFRICAN PEOPLE'S ORGANIZATION
A.H. SHIHEPO
Deputy Secretary for Foreign Affairs
REPRESENTATIVES OF UNITED NATIONS AND SPECIALIZED AGENCIES
UNITED NATIONS
Miss Margaret J. ANSTEE New York
Assistant Secretary General
Department of Technical
Cooperation for Development
Patrizio CIVILI New York
Chief of the Office of
Under- Secretary General for International
Economic and Social Affairs
T.ZOUPANOS Geneva
Chief of External Relations and Inter-Agency Affairs
OFFICE OF THE UN HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES
Manfred PAEFFGEN Rome
Representative for Italy
Ms Laura CARUGNO Rome
Programme Assistant
Branch Office for Italy
UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
Aldo AJELLO Geneva
Assistant Administrator
Director, European Office
R. HELMKE Geneva
Deputy Director
European Office
Evlogui BONEV Geneva
Principal Officer
European Office
UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION
Martyn N. EGGOUCH Vienna
Head, Interagency Programme
Coordination Section Division of Policy Coordination
UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME
Joseph C. WHEELER Nairobi
Deputy Executive Director
Reuben James OLEMBO Nairobi
Director, Environmental Management Service
WORLD FOOD COUNCIL
Maurice T. WILLIAMS Rome
Executive Director
Brian ROSS Rome
Chief, Policy Co-ordination and External Relations
Alain VIDAL NAQUET Rome
Chef de Cabinet
Peter E. Rome
Chief, Policy Development and Economic Analysis
Uwe KRACHT Rome
Senior Economic Affairs Officer
Pavel S. FEDORUK Rome
Senior Economic Affairs Officer
WEI ZHOU Rome
Senior Economic Affairs Officer
Thomas STEPHENS Rome
Policy Analysis and
Information Officer
Rajinder KAUSHIK Rome
Economist
WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME
James C. INGRAM Rome
Executive Director
Salahuddin AHMED Rome
Deputy Executive Director
M. EL MIDANI Rome
Director. WPX
R.M. CASHIN Rome
Director, WPM
E.E. LUHE Rome
Director. WPR
F. HOLDER Rome
Director. WPDE
C.D. PAOLILLO Rome
Senior Policy Adviser, WPD
D.E. SINTOBIN Rome
Deputy Director, WPR
F. PRONK Rome
Deputy Director. WPM
H. BEN SLIMANE Rome
Deputy Director, WPM
P. KELLOWAY Rome
Deputy Director. WPX
D.J. SHAW Rome
Senior Economist, WPD
Q.H. HAQUE Rome
Chief, WPXR
P. MITCHELL Rome
Chief, WPXP
T. NEGASH Rome
External Relations Officer, WPXR
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION
Francesco D'ATTILIA Rome
Director, Branch Office
Italo CORDISCHI Rome
Assistant Director, Branch Office
UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION (UNESCO)
Nhu-hoi PHAM Paris
Deputy Assistant Director-General
Department of Sciences
Inocencio A. RONQUILLO Paris
Chairman, Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission
WORLD BANK
Marius VERAART Washington D.C.
FAO and IFAD Coordinator
Agriculture and Rural Development Department
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
President
Moise MENSAH Rome
Assistant President
Project Management Department
Benjamin MacDONALD Rome
Director, Asia Division
Domingos DONIDA Rome
Latin America Division
Bahman MANSURI Rome
Director, Africa Division
Salah TAYYIB Rome
External Relations Division
Seiji SHINDO Rome
Director, Policy Review Division
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
Bjoern SIGURBJOERNSSON Vienna
Director, joint FAO/IAEA Division of Isotope and Radiation
Applications of Atomic Energy for
Food and Agricultural Development
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
Gilles DESESQUELLES Bruxelles
Administrateur à la Direction générale de l'agriculture
Commission des Communautés européennes
Uwe HESSE Bruxelles
Chef de Division
Secrétariat du Conseil
Salvatore CORNADO Rome
Attaché au développement
Bureau d'Information
Gianfranco GIRO Rome
Chef du Bureau de l'Information
Secrétariat du Conseil
Nicolo DI GIOIA Rome
Attaché agricole
Bureau d'Information
E.J.W. VAN RIJ Bruxelles
Direction de la politique agricole
Secrétariat du Conseil
OBSERVERS FROM INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
I.B.C. JOHN Abidjan
Director of the Department of
Agriculture
CHOUKRALLAH LARBI Abidjan
Chief of the Agriculture Division
Cheikh T. SARR Abidjan
Chief of the Agriculture Division
ANDEAN DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Francisco ROJO FERNANDEZ Caracas
ARAB CENTRE FOR THE STUDY OF ARID ZONES AND DRY LANDS
Mahamad EL KHASH Damascus
Director-General
ARAB ORGANIZATION FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
Hassan Fahmi JUMAH Khartoum
Director General
Mohamed Osman SALIH Khartoum
Deputy Director-General
Mohamed Hamdi SALEM Khartoum
Director, Economics Division
Soliman Sid AHMED Khartoum
Head of Production Economics Section
Economic Division
CENTRAL AFRICAN CUSTOMS AND ECONOMIC UNION
Louis Bertrand NETY Bangui
Chef du Département de l'agriculture, des eaux, chasses et Forêts
Benoit TAKAM Bangui
Expert
CENTRE ON INTEGRATED RURAL DEVELOPMENT FOR AFRICA
A. Mamdouh EL-BAZ Arusha
Director
CENTRE ON INTEGRATED RURAL DEVELOPMENT FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
A.T.M. SHAMSUL HAQUE Dhaka
Director
COMMONWEALTH AGRICULTURAL BUREAUX
E.K. WOODFORD Slough (U.K.)
Director, Scientific Services
COMMONWEALTH SECRETARIAT
M. Mokammel HAQUE London
Director
Food Production and Rural Development Division
G.L. BAILUR London
Assistant Director
Food Production and Rural Development Division
Michael WALES London
Assistant Director
Food Production and Rural Development Division
COOPERATION COUNCIL OF THE ARAB STATES OF THE GULF
Abdullatif Ibrahim AL-MUGRIN Riyadh
Director Agriculture and Water Department
Secretariat General
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Kjell M. TORBJÖRN Strasbourg
Secretary
Committee on Agriculture
DESERT LOCUST CONTROL ORGANIZATION FOR EASTERN AFRICA
A.K. AHMED Addis Ababa
Director of Operations
ECONOMIC COMMUNITY OF THE GREAT LAKES COUNTRIES
Tashibamba BAJIKA Gitega
Directeur général (Burundi)
Institut de recherche agronomique et zootechnique de la CEPGL
INTER-AMERICAN INSTITUTE FOR COOPERATION ON AGRICULTURE
Francisco MORILLO San José
Director General
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
Hector E. LUIS London
Representative in the United Kingdom
INTER-AFRICAN COFFEE ORGANIZATION
MPUNGI BUYUNGU Abidjan
Deputy Secretary
INTERNATIONAL SERICULTURAL COMMISSION
Henri BOUVIER La Mulatière
Secrétaire général (France)
Gérard CHAVANCY La Mulatière
Secrétaire général adjoint (France)
INTERNATIONAL UNION FOR THE PROTECTION OF NEW VARIETIES OF PLANTS (UPOV)
Heribert MAST Geneva
Vice Secretary General
LAKE CHAD BASIN COMMISSION
Mustafa SAM Maroua
Executive Secretary (Cameroon)
LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES
Abdul Hassan ZALZALA Tunis
Deputy Secretary General for Economic Affairs
ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
Ph. GUERIN Paris
Head of the Agricultural Trade and Markets Division
Giuseppe VASTA Rome
Consultant
Directorate for Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY
Ide OUMAROU Addis Ababa
Secretary General
P.O. ETIANG Addis Ababa
Assistant Secretary General in charge of EDECO Department
Usele MAWISA Addis Ababa
Assistant Executive Secretary
Ide MAMOUDOU Addis Ababa
Attaché de Cabinet
ORGANISATION OF THE ISLAMIC CONFERENCE
S.S. PIRZADA Jeddah
Secretary-General
Inam UL-HAQUE Jeddah
Ambassador
Adviser to the Secretary-General
PERMANENT INTERSTATE COMMITTEE FOR DROUGHT CONTROL IN THE SAHEL
BRAH MAHAMANE Ouagadougou
Secrétaire exécutif
WEST AFRICAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
Konan KANGA Ouagadougou
Chef de la Division Pêche, Eaux et Forêts
OBSERVERS FROM NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
ASSOCIATED COUNTRY WOMEN OF THE WORLD
Ms Barbara PURVIS Rome
Representative to FAO
Mrs Ayesha SAMAD Rome
Representative to FAO
Mrs Giovanna BOTTARELLI Rome
CARITAS INTERNATIONALIS
Ms Patricia WOHLRAB Rome
ENVIRONMENT LIAISON CENTRE
David BULL Nairobi
Executive Officer
Ms Pilar de SEVILLA Quito
Fundacion NATURA
Ms Marianna WENNING Bonn
EUROPEAN ASSOCIATION FOR ANIMAL PRODUCTION
K. KALLAY Rome
Secretary-General
INSTITUTE OF CULTURAL AFFAIRS INTERNATIONAL
John Stringham Frankfurt
Regional Director
Mrs Ann AVERY Paris
Regional Director
INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE OF WOMEN
Sarojini PILLAY Rome
Permanent Representative to FAO
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF AGRICULTURAL ECONOMISTS
Mme Margaret LOSEBY Rome
Professor
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF AGRICULTURAL STUDENTS
Ms Ester BONITATIBUS Udine
Executive Secretary
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FISH MEAL MANUFACTURERS
F.CHAPARRO Lima
Presidente. Pesca Peru
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF PLANT BREEDERS FOR THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES
Cornelius MASTENBROEK Dronten
President (Netherlands)
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR WATER LAW
Dante CAPONERA Rome
Chairman of the Executive Council
Ms Anne I. de SADELEER Brussels
Legal Consultant
INTERNATIONAL CATHOLIC RURAL ASSOCIATION
Sister Millicent FRANCIS Vatican City
Executive Secretary
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Roberto GIORDANI Rome
Directeur du Centre d'études CESTAAT
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE
Pier Luigi ROMITA Rome
Vice-President of the Commission
President of the Italian National Committee
Paolo BURI Rome
Italian National Committee
INTERNATIONAL CONFEDERATION OF FREE TRADE UNIONS
Lois STEWART Brussels
Economist
Mrs Maria Teresa GUICCIARDI Rome
Permanent Representative to FAO
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATIVE ALLIANCE
Lino VISANI Rome
Permanent Representative to FAO
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN
Mrs Lena PASSERINI Rome
Permanent Representative to FAO
Mrs Lydia ROSSINI VAN HISSENHOVEN Rome
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCERS
J.H. FEINGOLD Paris
Secretary-General
F. SHEFRIN Ottawa
North American Representative
Mrs Giuseppina PELA Rome
Permanent Representative to FAO
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION FOR HOME ECONOMICS
Mrs W. Jean FEWSTER Rome
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF PLANTATION, AGRICULTURAL AND ALLIED WORKERS
R. G. GREEN London
Head of Legal/Health and Safety Department
Rees LLOYD Los Angeles
Attorney
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF WOMEN IN LEGAL CAREERS
Ms Teresa ASSENSIO BRUGIATELLI Rome
President
Mrs Antonietta CESCUT Rome
Secretary General
INTERNATIONAL GROUP OF NATIONAL ASSOCIATIONS OF MANUFACTURERS OF AGROCHEMICAL PRODUCTS
Hans AEBI Basle
Deputy Director Agricultural Division
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR APPLIED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS
J.P. AYRAULT Laxenburg
Secretary (Austria)
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF CONSUMERS' UNION
Cary FOWLER Pittsboro
Agricultural Consultant (North Carolina)
Patrick MOONEY Brandon
International Consultant (Canada)
Andrea GAIFAMI Milan
Education Officer Coordinator for Italy
Hendrikus F. HOBBELINK
Amsterdam
Campaign Coordinator
INTERNATIONAL RAIFFEISEN UNION
Fulvio D'ADAMO Rome
Directeur de l'Institut de Crédit des Caisses rurales
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANIZATIONS
André DUFFAURE Rome
Permanent Representative to FAO
NITROGEN STUDY CENTRE
E.U. KOPKE Zürich
FAO/FIAC Liaison Office
PANAFRICAN INSTITUTE FOR DEVELOPMENT
Jacques MOYNAT Geneva
Representative of the Secretary General
SOCIETY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Ponna WIGNARAJA Rome
Secretary General
WOMEN'S INTERNATIONAL LEAGUE FOR PEACE AND FREEDOM
Mrs Bruna MAGNANI LOMAZZI Rome
Permanent Representative to FAO
WORLD ASSOCIATION FOR ANIMAL PRODUCTION
K. KALLAY Rome
Secretary General
WORLD ASSOCIATION OF GIRL GUIDES AND GIRL SCOUTS
Donna Orietta DORIA Rome
Permanent Representative to FAO
WORLD CONFEDERATION OF LABOUR
Mrs A. BARONE Rome
Permanent Representative to FAO
Claudio GENTILI Rome
WORLD FEDERATION OF TRADE UNIONS
Giuseppe CASADEI Rome
Permanent Representative to FAO
Mrs Zdenka INDRUCHOVA Prague
Department for relations with the United Nations
WORLD FEDERATION OF UNITED NATIONS ASSOCIATIONS
Ms Marina CERNE Rome
Member of the Italian Society for International Organization
WORLD UNION OF CATHOLIC WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS
Mrs G. GARZERO Rome
Permanent Representative to FAO
Mrs Barbara COLEMAN SANTORO Rome
<section>j</section>
XII. Appendix C - List of documents
C 85/1 Agenda
C 85/2 The State of Food and Agriculture 1985
C 85/2-Sup.1 Supplement to C 85/2
C 85/3 Programme of Work and Budget 1986-87
C 85/3-Corr.1 Corrigendum to C 85/3
C 85/3-Sup.1 Programme of Work and Budget 1986-87: List of Publications
C 85/3-Sup.2 Programme of Work and Budget 1986-87: List of Sessions
C 85/4 Review of Field Programmes 1984-85
C 85/5 Financial Report and Statements Volume 1: Regular Programme 1982-83
C 85/6 Financial Report and Statements Volume II: UNDP 1982-83
C 85/7 Financial Report and Statements Volume III: WFP 1982-83
C 85/8 Review of the Regular Programme 1984-85
C 85/9 Recent Developments in the UN System of Interest to FAO
C 85/9-Sup.1 Supplement to C 85/9
C 85/10 Statutory Report on Status of Conventions and Agreements, and on Amendments thereof
C 85/10-Sup.1 Supplement to C 85/10
C 85/11 Election of Council Members
C 85/12 Arrangements for the Twenty-third Session of the Conference
C 85/13 Admission to the Session Of Representatives and Observers of International Organizations
C 85/13-Sup.1 Supplement to C 85/13
C 85/14 Applications for Membership in the Organization
C 85/15 Appointment of Independent Chairman of the Council
C 85/16 Appointment of Member Governments' Representatives to the Staff Pension Committee
C 85/17 Relations with Intergovernmental and International Non-Governmental Organizations
C 85/18 Programme for the 1990 Census of Agriculture
C 85/18- Corrigendum to C 85/18 Corr.1 (A/E/S only)
C 85/19 Agricultural Price Policies
C 85/20 Critical Situation in Africa
C 85/21 International Agricultural Adjustment: Fifth Progress Report
C 85/22 FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development (June-July 1984)
C 85/23 World Food Security Compact
C 85/23-Corr.1 Corrigendum to C 85/23
C 85/24 Follow-up of Conference Resolutions 8/83 and 9/83 on Plant Genetic Resources
C 85/25-Rev.1 Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides
C 85/26 Amendment of the Spanish Text of Rule XII-9(a) and Rule XII-17 of the General Rules of the Organization
C 85/INF/Series
C 85/INF/1 Information for Delegates and Observers
C 85/INF/1-Sup.1 Special On-Line Data Accession Centre
C 85/INF/2 Guide on Conduct of Plenary Meetings
C 85/INF/3-Rev.2 Provisional List of Delegates and Observers
C 85/INF/4 Provisional List of Documents
C 85/INF/5 FAO Member Nations, Council Members, Members of Council Committees and of the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes of the UN/FAO World Food Programme
C 85/INF/6 Presentation of B.R. Sen Awards (1984 and 1985)
C 85/INF/7 Presentation of A.H. Boerma Award 1984-85
C 85/INF/8 Notification of Membership in the Open Committees of the Council (1986-87)
C 85/INF/9 Fourteenth Biennial Frank L. McDougall Lecture
C 85/INF/10 Implementation of 1984 Regional Conference Recommendations
C 85/INF/11 Provisional Checklist of Documents for Commission I
C 85/INF/12 Provisional Checklist of Documents for Commission II
C 85/INF/13 Provisional Checklist of Documents for Commission III
C 85/INF/14 Statement by the Director-General to the Twenty-third FAO Conference Session - November 1985
C 85/INF/15 The Manifesto of Mexico
C 85/INF/16 Draft International Code of Practice for Ante-Mortem and Post-Mortem Judgement of Slaughter Animals and Meat
C 85/INF/17 Report of the Informal Meeting of International Non-Governmental Organizations
C 85/INF/17-Corr.1 Corrigendum to C 85/INF/17
C 85/INF/18 Agenda and Timetable Approved on 9 November 1985
C 85/INF/19 Homily of His Holiness Pope John Paul II
C 85/INF/20 Statement by the Director-General on the Critical Situation in Africa
C 85/INF/21 Statement by the Ministers of Agriculture and Heads of Delegations of the Group of 77 on the Occasion of the Fortieth Anniversary of FAO
C 85/INF/22 Summary of the Proceedings of the Ministerial Conference on Fisheries Convened by the Government of Spain (La Toja, 15-18 September 1985)
C 85/LIM/Series
C 85/LIM/1 Report of the Nominations Committee
C 85/LIM/2 Preparations for the Twenty-third Conference Session (Extract from CL 88/REP)
C 85/LIM/3 Scale of Contributions 1986-87 (Extract from CL 87/REP)
C 85/LIM/4 Audited Accounts (Extract from CL 86/REP)
C 85/LIM/5 World Food Programme (WFP): Proposed Pledging Target for 1987-88 (Extract from CL 88/REP) Pledges for the Period 1987-88 (Extract from CL 88/REP)
C 85/LIM/6 First Report of the General Committee
C 85/LIM/7 First Report of the Credentials Committee
C 85/LIM/8 Review of the Rules Governing Voting Procedures of Council and Conference (Extract from CL 86/REP)
C 85/LIM/9 PWB 1986-87 and Medium-Term Objectives (Extract from CL 88/REP)
C 85/LIM/10 Relations with the Host Government: Immunities of the organization
C 85/LIM/11 Second Report of the Credentials Committee
C 85/LIM/12 Financial Status of Contributions (including Delayed Payment of Assessed Contributions) (Extract from CL 88/REP)
C 85/LIM/13 First Report of the Resolutions Committee (Commission III)
C 85/LIM/14 Council Elections
C 85/LIM/15 Immunities of the Organization (Extract from CL 87/REP)
C 85/LIM/16 Second Report of the Resolutions Committee (Commission II)
C 85/LIM/17 Review of the Regular Programme (including Evaluation of the TCP) (Extract from CL 88/REP)
C 85/LIM/18 Follow-up of Conference Resolutions 8/83 and 9/83 on Plant Genetic Resources (Extract from CL 88/REP)
C 85/LIM/19 Second Report of the General Committee
C 85/LIM/20 Action Arising Out of the Ninth World Forestry Congress (Mexico, July 1985) (Extract from CL 88/REP)
C 85/LIM/21 Emoluments of Director-General (Extract from CL 88/REP)
C 85/LIM/22 Reimbursement of Travel Expenses of Council Members (Rule XXV-6 GRO) (Extract from CL 88/REP)
C 85/LIM/23 Review of Field Programmes 1984-85 (Extract from CL 88/REP)
C 85/LIM/24 Third Report of the Resolutions Committee (Commission I)
C 85/LIM/25 Headquarters Accommodation
C 85/LIM/26 Fourth Report of the Resolutions Committee (Commission II)
C 85/LIM/27 Fifth Report of the Resolutions Committee (Commission I)
C 85/LIM/28 Sixth Report of the Resolutions Committee (Commission III)
C 85/LIM/29 Headquarters Agreement
C 85/LIM/30 Third Report of the General Committee (Election of Council Members)
C 85/LIM/31 Fourth Report of the General Committee
C 85/LIM/32 Financial Position of the Organization
C 85/LIM/33 Seventh Report of the Resolutions Committee (Commission II)
C 85/LIM/34 Eighth Report of the Resolutions Committee (Commission I)
C 85/LIM/35 Fifth Report of the General Committee
C 85/LIM/36 Third Report of the Credentials Committee
C 85/LIM/37 Ninth Report of the Resolutions Committee (Commission II)
C 85/REP/Series
C 85/REP/1 to Draft Reports of Plenary
C 85/REP/10
C 85/I/REP/1 to Draft Reports of Commission I
C 85/l/REP/6
C 85/II/REP/1 to Draft Reports of Commission II
C 85/II/REP/6
C 85/III/PEP/1 ) Draft Report of Commission III
C 85/PV/Series
C 85/PV/1 to 24 ) First to Twenty-fourth Verbatim Records of Plenary
C 85/I/PV/1 to 18) First to Eighteenth Verbatim Records of Commission I
C 85/II/PV/1 to 17) First to Seventeenth Verbatim Records of Commission II
C 85/III/PV/1 to 5) First to Fifth Verbatim Records of Commission III
C 85/DJ/Series
C 85/DJ/1 to
C 85/DJ/7
C 85/DJ/8-Rev.1
C 85/DJ/9 to Journals of the Conference
C 85/DJ/13
C 85/DJ/14-Rev.1 to
C 85/DJ/15
<section>k</section>
XIII. Appendix D - Statement by the Director-General
Mr Chairman, Delegates and Observers, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Twenty-third Session of our Conference marks the completion of four decades of work by FAO. The Organization itself is but the tip of the iceberg. Vaster but less visible, a thousand forms of international cooperation have developed during these forty years. Together we strive to rid the world of its millennial scourge of hunger and malnutrition.
Our thoughts will be much devoted to the past: to an assessment of what has so far been achieved, by FAO and others; and to mapping out the tasks which still lie ahead. This will be our special theme next Thursday, when the Conference will formally celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the Organization.
Today I would like, rather, to look at the situation of today, and its implications for our work of tomorrow.
Movements in the world economy may appear remote from the work of FAO, but they nonetheless determine the elbow-room of our member countries for coping with problems in food and agriculture. In one way or another, they have a major impact on world food security.
The state of the world economy can give us small comfort. The recovery from the deep depression of the early eighties appears to be losing its impetus. The developing nations have benefited little from the recent buoyancy in the industrialized areas. Their external debt is moving toward the awesome figure of one thousand billion dollars. As yet there is no consensus on how short-term debt management can evolve into long-term expansion of the national economy. These nations must attempt to remove the stranglehold of debt at a time when they face a deteriorating economic climate, and when trading conditions - to which I shall return in a moment - are alarmingly weak.
The debt problem remains central to the economies of many developing countries, especially in Latin America and also in Africa. Until it has been solved, their economic and even social stability must be considered in jeopardy. This includes their food security. A foreign exchange crisis can prevent imports of the fertilizers and other inputs needed to grow food. It can bring the most extreme difficulties to a food-deficit country which is obliged to import basic foodstuffs.
In the interest of rich and poor countries alike, it is imperative that the industrialized nations reach agreement on a set of concerted macro-economic policies. These policies should aim at steering the world away from the danger of another slump, at bringing about a renewed flow of capital to the developing countries, and at creating an environment in which the nations of the Third World can resume the growth rates of the seventies. Only in a context of overall growth can the poorer nations cope with the investment and policy requirements on which their future food security will. depend. Either their economies will grow, or their problems. And if the human race Is to survive at all, it is surely time to put an end to the competitive dissipation of resources for armaments. The fault is by no means only with the richer nations. How much of the external debt of the developing countries is owed for weapons? Mankind is impoverishing itself to build its own funeral pyre.
In food and agriculture, the scene before us is in many respects favourable indeed. Although the final harvest results for 1985 are not yet in, we can already see that in most regions it has been a satisfactory year. Global food production is likely to have grown a little faster than population. Increases have been well distributed among the developing countries. It is likely that in many areas the nutritional levels of the poor have further improved. Africa - to whose problems I shall return in a minute - has shown a good recovery from its recent run of disastrous crops, although by no means all countries are out of difficulty.
Cereal stocks are forecast to reach a level equivalent to 21 percent of annual consumption at the end of the current season: more than enough to act as a cushion for world food security.
However, all is not well. The problems have deep roots, but are reflected chiefly in trade. They were reviewed just last month by FAO's Committee on Commodity Problems.
World prices have been trending downwards, across almost the entire spectrum of agricultural commodities. This would not be so serious, if we could look forward to markets picking up again in the near future. However, there is little to justify hopes of an early upturn. On the contrary, the prospect of a general economic slowdown suggests rather that prices may continue to be weak.
Over the medium term, too, we foresee scant possibility of renewed dynamism in agricultural trade. Our most recent round of commodity projections, just completed, suggests that in most cases import demand will grow more slowly in this decade than it did in the seventies. Both developing and developed exporters will be adversely affected.
For many tropical products, such as coffee, cocoa and tea, the market is projected to expand by little more than one percent per annum up to 1990. For some commodities, it may even contract.
In the cases of cereals and livestock products, import demand grew in the seventies by more than seven percent annually; in the eighties, growth is projected at between one and two percent only.
This unpromising trade environment is being further weakened and distorted by the side effects of national agricultural policies, especially those of developed countries.
The difficulties being faced by many developed nations as they attempt to reshape their agricultural policy framework are highly complex. New policies must achieve objectives that conflict at many points. Farmers must be able to enjoy acceptable income levels. Food prices to the consumer must be reasonable. The farm community must be able to carry out its function of conserving the countryside, a function to which growing importance is attached by society as a whole. Exporters must be able to compete on international markets, and importers must be assured of a regular flow of supplies. Subsidies to agriculture from the rest of the economy must be kept within reasonable bounds.
The problem is not to achieve one or more of these objectives: it is to achieve all of them at the same time.
These unresolved dilemmas lead to national policies which can have a damaging impact on other countries through the mechanism of trade. In effect, farmers are being subsidized to produce surplus commodities, which importers are then subsidized to buy. The total cost to the world economy is enormous. And increasing competition for limited markets is leading to tensions between trading groups that are certainly not in the interest of the world community as a whole.
There are mounting pressures for protectionism, even while discussions on trade liberalization are under way.
It is essential to find viable solutions to these complex issues as soon as possible. The focus of attention is on trade, but in the last resort what happens in trade depends on what happens in production.
National production policies should be deliberately conceived in such a way as to minimize any possible negative effect on other countries through trade. The highest importance attaches to the decisions on farm policy which are under consideration by the United States and the European Economic Community. Together, the US and the EEC account for about 45 percent of the world's agricultural exports and the world's agricultural imports. Their policies are clearly going to have a very wide impact Indeed. I trust that the decisions will be statesmanlike, and will take full account of all implications for international trade, in particular for the interests of developing countries.
So far as trade issues are concerned, we have been counting heavily on the work of the GATT Committee on Trade in Agriculture, established just three years ago. I deeply hope that this Committee will be able to speed up completion of its work programme. I also hope that the conditions will be met for the early launching of a new round of multilateral trade negotiations in GATT. So far as agriculture is concerned, this could help to bring about again more rational and efficient arrangements for world production and trade.
In the meantime, the possible impact of trading difficulties for the developing countries is a matter for the greatest concern. How can agricultural exporters cope with their debt burden, and finance economic growth, without a strongly rising level of earnings from foreign trade?
The plight of exporters is made more desperate by the virtual collapse of most of the international commodity agreements. The chances of establishing the UNCTAD Common Fund for Commodities now appear remote.
Projections are not forecasts of what is going to happen. They are extrapolations from trends. They provide a warning. In order to mitigate the dangers I have analysed, a three-pronged approach to the problems of developing-country exporters can be suggested.
In the first place, the industrialized nations should deliberately sustain the efforts of the poorer countries to earn their livelihood through trade. Several distinct types of action are needed. New protectionist measures which would further restrict the trade outlets of the developing countries should not be enacted, and existing trade barriers should be lowered or if possible eliminated. There should be a halt to subsidized exports from richer nations which enter into direct competition with the products of the Third World.
Secondly, the development of South-South trade should be more systematically fostered. Intra-trade among the developing countries has been growing with great rapidity - it increased by more than five hundred percent between 1970 and 1980. Indeed, it now accounts for about a quarter of all the agricultural exports of the developing nations. Nevertheless, there is still much scope for liberalization in South-South trade. Negotiations among developing countries on a Global System of Trade Preferences are still at an early stage: they should be pressed forward vigorously. Among commodities, we see particular opportunities for expanding intra-trade in tea, fats and oils and oilmeals.
Thirdly, exporters of tropical products would do well to coordinate their production and investment plans, if necessary through informal groups such as those sponsored by FAO. If this is not done, a stagnant market can all too easily be pushed into collapse by the untimely expansion of production. And genuine efforts should be made to revive existing commodity agreements, to negotiate new ones, and to bring the UNCTAD Common Fund for Commodities into operation.
Difficulties of another kind face the world's fishermen. In substance, they must meet a constantly rising demand for fish while adapting to the new regime of the oceans, at a time when there are only limited possibilities of expanding the total catch. The year 1984 was a good one in this respect: the catch rose strongly and reached about 82 million tons, well above the previous record.
The spotlight is now on improved management. Just last year our World Fisheries Conference endorsed a Strategy for Fisheries Management and Development. At national level, the Strategy is already being widely utilized as point of reference by individual countries as they plan to strengthen their fisheries sector. Internationally, FAO has been giving particular attention to the Strategy provisions regarding trade in fish and fishery products. We shall be starting a series of intergovernmental consultations on this subject next year, taking up both its technical and its economic aspects.
Besides a Strategy, the Fisheries Conference also approved five Programmes of Action, for implementation mainly but not exclusively by FAO. I am glad to say that the annual target for contributions to finance these Programmes has been comfortably exceeded in 1985, and we are continuing to negotiate for further pledges. Most recently, the United States has agreed to support an FAO executed regional project in West Africa. I have also been in touch with the Minister of Fisheries of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, which I visited on the invitation of the Government. Last September, I was invited by the Government of Spain to participate in a Ministerial Conference on Fisheries which was organized as a follow-up to the FAO World Conference.
I may add that "Fishermen and Fishing Communities" have been adopted as a main theme for World Food Day 1986. I have spoken so far of the world's farmers and fishermen, but it is the foresters who have a special claim on FAO's attention in 1985, for this has been declared by the FAO Council as the International Year of the Forest.
The decision of the Council was part of FAO's response to the mounting wave of concern over the future of man's forest heritage. Atmospheric pollution, pest and fire in the temperate zones, indiscriminate cutting in the tropics: everywhere the forest is under siege.
Another response was the recent launching of a major FAO initiative which appears to be rapidly gathering strength. Last June, our Committee on Forest Development in the Tropics adopted an overall framework for action to tackle the problems which we believe to have the highest priority in tropical forestry. This overall plan covers a wide range of programmes: land-use planning, fuelwood, industry, forest conservation, and institution-building. These are not conceived as specific FAO programmes, but rather as priority areas for action by the international community as a whole.
I am glad to say that a series of follow-up meetings is being organized by individual governments. In this way, the diffused and generalized concern felt by the public about the fate of tropical forests can be channeled into concrete programmes and projects. Within the very flexible structure envisaged for the Programmes of Action, our Committee on Forest Development in the Tropics will function as the overall mechanism for monitoring progress and problems.
The other main event in this International Year of the Forest has been the Ninth World Forestry Congress held in Mexico last July. The conclusions of the Congress are embodied In a Manifesto which Is before this Conference. The Congress placed considerable emphasis on the integration of forestry in broader approaches for rural development. This is, of course, completely in line with the thinking of FAO. Furthermore, it expressed strong support for the Plan of Action for Tropical Forests which I have just described. I would also draw attention to the proposal supported by the Congress for the creation of a world fund for the development and environmental protection of forests, aimed especially at providing aid for developing countries.
This proposal - if it is acceptable to the donor community - would come at a very opportune moment. Official commitments of aid to agriculture in its broad definition (which includes forestry) declined in 1983 for the first time in the present decade. Within the total figure, an even sharper drop occurred in aid on concessional terms: in other words, loans for agriculture are tending to be given on harder terms. Multilateral assistance is going through a particularly difficult time: multilateral commitments to agriculture have dropped by 23 percent in current dollars since 1980. This reflects, of course, the difficulties being encountered by IDA, IFAD and other organizations. The long-drawn-out negotiations for the second replenishment of IFAD are especially worrying. I appeal to all parties concerned to bring them to a successful conclusion before the end of the year.
The progress of the Substantial New Programme of Action for Least Developed Countries, adopted by a United Nations Conference in 1981, has been less than satisfactory. Only some donors have reached the 1985 target for aid to the least developed countries. As for the LDCs themselves, their socio-economic situation In the last four years has tended to deteriorate rather than Improve. Food aid is the one bright spot. For the first time, the target of 10 million tons of cereals set at the World Food Conference in 1974 has been attained and surpassed. The International Emergency Food Reserve, too, has handsomely exceeded its target of 500 000 tons in each of the recent years. However, the increased flow is accounted for by emergency assistance to Africa, and not by a higher level of development aid. I deeply hope that contributors will make a special effort to attain the new target for the World Food Programme in 1987-88, amounting to 1.4 billion dollars in both commodities and
cash.
It is, of course, in Africa that aid has made its most dramatic response to the most dramatic of problems. I would like, Mr Chairman, to summarize the evolution of the crisis in Africa south of the Sahara.
Two years ago, African food problems already occupied the forefront of the international stage. In November 1983, the last session of the FAO Conference adopted its resolution on "The Critical Situation of Food and Agriculture in Africa". During 1984 the crisis peaked, with widespread famine in Ethiopia, the Sudan and Chad, and intense local food shortages in a number of other countries.
The relief operation has mobilized an immense fund of goodwill and generosity, not only on the part of governments but also among private organizations and citizens. I would like to pay a special tribute to all who participated in fund-raising drives, both as organizers and as givers. Thanks to the efforts of governments, organizations and individuals, the food aid needs of the stricken countries, estimated at 7 million tons for 1984/85, have been almost entirely covered.
If the situation of food aid pledges is satisfactory, I cannot say the same for the logistics. Innumerable delays have occurred at almost every stage of the long transportation process which takes relief grain from its country of origin to the point of distribution. At the beginning of this month, over a million tons of pledged relief supplies had still not reached the afflicted countries. Further substantial. quantities were awaiting either discharge or transportation to the deficit areas.
In the meantime, the situation south of the Sahara has been transformed by timely and abundant rains. For 16 of the 21 affected countries, the emergency can be considered over, although most of them will continue to need food aid to cover their structural food deficits. In several cases, including Kenya, Malawi and Zimbabwe, the harvest has been so good that substantial quantities of maize and sorghum are available for export - although markets are extremely difficult to find. On the basis of present information, we expect only five countries to require further emergency relief in 1986.
Action must now be taken to organize the best use of the exportable surpluses in the region and the late-arriving relief supplies. If the necessary arrangements can be made, including triangular transactions and the rescheduling of destinations, it should be possible to meet emergency requirements for 1986, to contribute toward structural food deficits, and to rebuild national reserves in a speedy and rational manner. If this is not done, there is a danger that relief goods arriving late may depress prices and discourage planting for next year's harvest.
I have already drawn the attention of donors to some of these problems, and would urge all concerned - including both donors and affected countries - to plan the necessary measures as soon as possible. FAO will, of course, be ready to continue its support of these efforts.
The Agricultural Rehabilitation Programme for Africa (ARPA) launched by FAO at the beginning of the year is contributing toward the turnaround in food production. In order to get the Programme moving as fast as possible, the Council approved a refocusing of Regular Programme activities in the amount of 5 million dollars for the purpose of rehabilitation in Africa. This was increased by a further 2.5 million dollars from savings under the Regular Programme. As a third step, the Finance Committee approved my proposal to transfer to the Programme an amount of 15 million dollars from savings, to be used according to the procedures of TCP projects.
So far, projects costing about 200 million dollars are covered by tentative or definite pledges from various sources of finance. I am especially pleased that the list of participants includes some developing countries in other regions. However, many deserving projects still need a donor. I would ask potential contributing countries to look again through our list of projects for which there is at present no financing in sight.
Over and above rehabilitation and recovery, there remain many questions for the medium and longer term. How, in particular, can the different agroecological zones of Africa best achieve a massive increase in their rates of growth of food production? And how can they best be helped by the international community? We are formulating possible responses. Our suggestions will be put forward for discussion at the Regional Conference for Africa next September in Brazzaville. Before that time, they will be reviewed by an Expert Consultation of individual specialists from Africa.
Meanwhile, I would like to draw attention to a recommendation put forward by the Conference of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa last July, and modified by the recent Summit of the Organization of African Unity. This recommendation, in its final form, calls for agriculture to receive 20-25 percent of public expenditure. The fragmentary data which are available suggest that for most African countries this would involve a major shift in priorities toward agriculture.
In the last resort, the problems of African agriculture can only be tackled within the framework of the total economy. In turn, the problems of a national economy cannot be examined in isolation from the external forces - debt, trading conditions, migration, aid flows - which have such a major impact on it. That is why, in addressing the Second Committee of the General Assembly at the end of last month, I reiterated my suggestion that a Special Session of the Assembly be devoted to the long-term development of Africa. A proposal to this effect was adopted by the OAU Summit last July.
Mr Chairman, I have dwelt at length on the two issues - or groups of issues which I see as the most disturbing at this time: the trading problems of developing countries; and the difficulties of Africa.
Among the more specific questions on the agenda of this Conference, I would like to draw special attention to the proposed World Food Security Compact.
On the occasion of this fortieth anniversary, the Compact gives an opportunity for the solemn reaffirmation of the principles which are guiding our endeavours. It contains no new commitments of a legal or financial character. What it does offer is a statement to the world of what we are trying to do, and of the indispensable contributions that can be made by governments, organizations and individuals.
I deeply hope that the Compact can be adopted without controversy, and by consensus, as an integral part of the celebration of our anniversary.
Similarly, I would urge the Conference to adopt by consensus the International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides. The document before the Conference is the culmination of several years of preparatory work, in the course of which there have been extended consultations with the many interests involved. This final text incorporates certain suggestions put forward in the recent discussion in the FAO Council, which we hope will facilitate its acceptance by the Conference.
As developing countries intensify their agricultural production, plant protection becomes increasingly important. Pesticides are not the only instrument within plant protection strategies, but they are often of crucial importance. The Code of Conduct can be of special benefit to developing nations which do not already have their own pesticide control procedures and regulatory processes. It can help to avoid hazards to health and the environment, and thus promote a key aspect of agricultural development.
I would also like to draw attention to the items on the Conference agenda relating to the 1990 Census of Agriculture and our Study of Price Policies.
Without going into the substance of these two questions, I wish to flag them as prime examples of FAO's role in organizing the collection of data, and in analysing the information which becomes available in terms of policy options.
The function of a world data centre, with a high capacity for analysis, is likely to become of ever-increasing importance in future. This is the result of both the mounting complexity of the world in which we live, and the rapid advances in the technology for handling information. FAO must remain at the forefront in coming years, as it has in the past.
These concerns, Mr Chairman, are reflected in my Proposed Programme of Work and Budget, which is before the Conference.
I cannot emphasize too strongly that my proposals are based on strategies which have been unanimously approved by the entire membership of the Organization. The general thrust of FAO's programme has the full backing of the countries of the world.
It is only when we come to financial matters that we find unanimity more difficult to attain.
My approach has been aimed at three objectives: to improve the service which FAO provides to its members, and especially to developing countries with serious food problems; to show austerity, economy and efficiency in the use of the funds made available to us; and to seek a consensus among all groups of countries on the level of the budget.
With a view to achieving the last of these objectives, I have made certain adjustments since my Summary Programme of Work and Budget was discussed by the
Programme and Finance Committees and Council. This is the first time I have taken such a step, and I hope that members will appreciate the spirit of goodwill in which it was done.
In substance, I have maintained my proposals for a modest increase in our technical programmes, but have made a number of reductions in administrative and support costs.
There remains a small net programme increase, but I foresee that this will be fully covered by an increase in Miscellaneous Income and by changes in the effective dollar/lire exchange rate.
The actual cost of the budget to member countries will, in the last resort, depend on the exchange-rate factor, but I believe that most countries will find an actual reduction in their contributions to FAO in the next biennium.
I appeal to all member countries to support the Programme of Work and Budget which I have submitted to the Conference.
Mr Chairman, the fortieth birthday of FAO was celebrated on 16 October last with a very fine ceremony, at which we were honoured by the presence of His Excellency President Cossiga of Italy. While he was here, President Cossiga unveiled a plaque marking the start of work on the additional buildings which the Italian Government is generously constructing for FAO. These will enable all the Rome staff to work at the Terme di Caracalla, rather than being spread over several different locations in the city.
In a broader sense this was a gesture of support, not just for FAO, but for all that FAO stands for: raising the living standards of the poor and the malnourished; promoting a rational world order in food and agriculture; and ultimately contributing toward peace and prosperity for all.
It will be up to FAO, as it moves into its fifth decade, to justify this confidence. We have gone far, but not far enough, toward the aims established forty years ago. The reflections inspired by our anniversary should lead us to a new dedication of purpose, a new vigour in our action, and above all a renewed enthusiasm.
With purpose, vigour and enthusiasm we shall fight to bring all people their birthright of food security and happiness.
<section>l</section>
XIV. Appendix E - Statement of the computation of contributions for 1986 and 1987
MEMBER NATIONS
ASSESSMENTS PER ANNUM
LESS:
CREDITS FROM TAX EQUALIZATION FUND PER ANNUM
CONTRIBUTIONS PAYABLE
PER ANNUM
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burma
Burundi
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Cook Islands
Costa Rica
Cuba
Cyprus
Czechoslovakia
Democratic Kampuchea
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Germany, Federal Republic of
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic. Republic of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Korea. Republic of
Kuwait
Lao
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
66B 650
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Rwanda
Saint Christopher and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Solomon Islands
Somalia
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States of America
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Viet Nam
Yemen Arab Republic
Yemen, People's Democratic Republic of
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe
229 100 000 a/
30 525 000 b/
198 575 000 c/
a/ Financing of Budgetary Appropriations 1986-87 in accordance with Conference Resolution 8/85
(see para. 257 in the Conference Report):
Total-Appropriations (Gross)
Less: Miscellaneous Income
(see para. 2 of Conference Resolution 8/85)
Assessments for 1986-87 biennium
Apportioned to Member Nations in accordance with the Scale of Contributions 1986-87 adopted by Conference Resolution 17/85 and divided into two equal annual instalments, resulting in assessments per annum of
b/ See para. 3 of Conference Resolution 8/85
c/ 397 150 000 for 1986-87 biennium
<section>m</section>
XV. Appendix F
SCALE OF CONTRIBUTIONS 1986-87
(1984-85 Scale shown for comparative purposes)
Member Nations
Scale
1986-87 a/
Scale
1984-85 a/
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burma
Burundi
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Cook Islands b/ d/
Costa Rica
Cuba
Cyprus
Czechoslovakia
Democratic Kampuchea
Democratic People's Republic of Korea c/
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Germany, Federal Republic of
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Korea, Republic of c/
Kuwait
Lao
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia d/
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Rwanda
Saint Christopher and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Solomon Islands b/
Somalia
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland c/
Syria
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga c/
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States of America
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Viet Nam
Yemen Arab Republic
Yemen, People's Democratic Republic of
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe
a/ Derived directly from the UN Scale of Assessments for 1983/85 as adopted by General Assembly Resolution 37/125 of 17 December 1982, plus new members.
b/ New member admitted at the Twenty-third Session of the Conference, November 1985.
c/ The contribution rates of these four members of FAO, which are not members of the United Nations, are derived from the percentage rates at which they are called upon by the UN to contribute to certain UN activities.
d/ The Secretariat of the UN Committee on Contributions advised that the "theoretical probable" rates of these two Members of FAO, which are not Members of the UN, would be the minimum rate, i.e. 0.01 percent.
<section>n</section>
XVI. Appendix G
ASSESSED CONTRIBUTIONS OF MEMBER NATIONS
Receipts 1/
Outstanding Contributions at 22 November 1985 2/
Receipts 3/
Member Nations
to date
Relating to 1985 assessments
Arrears 4/1984 and prior assessments
Total outstanding contributions
Total
outstanding
as % of 1985
assessments
During 1984
Afghanistan 4 619.00 15 110.00 15 110.00 77 F6
Albania 19 729.00 - - 0 F8
Algeria 315 664.00 0 4,F5
Angola 19 729.00 - - - 0 1,F3
Antigua and Barbuda 6/ - 19 729.00 25 454.00 45 183.00 229 
Argentina 539 988.21 1 595 541.79 1 257 858.00 2 853 399.79 168 
Australia 4 072 043.55 - 1,8
Austria 1 795 339.00 - 0 2,F3
Bahamas 19 729.00 - 0 F2
Bahrain 19 729.00 - 0 F5
Bangladesh 157 832.00 
Barbados 19 729.00 - 0 F5
Belgium 3 315 990.00 - 0 3,10
Belize 25 454.00 19 729.00 19 729.00 100 
Benin 4 619.00 19 729.00 14 368.22 34 097.22 173 F6
Bhutan 57 077.00 
Bolivia 17 298.00 19 729.00 19 729.00 39 458.00 200 
Botswana 19 729.00 - - 0 F5
Brazil 5 033 410.00 3 314 472.00 2 730 944.00 6 045 416.00 182 
Bulgaria 534 038.00 - 0 4,11
Burkina Faso 7 870.72 19 729.00 11 858.28 31 587.28 160 
Burma 19 729.00 - 0 F9
Burundi 24 438.46 19 729.00 34 773.17 54 502.17 276 
Cameroon 19 729.00 - 0 1,3,F7
Canada 7 339 188.00 - - 0 F4
Cape Verde 4 619.00 15 110.00 - 15 110.00 77 F10
Central African Republic 7/ 51 919.54 13 388.59 - 13 388.59 68 
Chad 7/ 31 031.80 3 564.74 3 564.74 18 
Chile 157 832.00 - 0 1.54
China 2 091 274.00 0 4,83
Colombia 256 477.00 - - 0 1,F12
Comoros 4/ 7/ 14 606.85 19 729.00 588.69 20 317.69 103 4
Congo 19 729.00 - - - 0 F1
Costa Rica 57 520.53 - - 0 5,7,10
Cuba 156 650.66 217 019.00 61 009.93 278 028.93 128 
Cyprus 19 729.00 0 F2
Czechoslovakia 1 815 068.00 0 6,F9
Democratic Kampuchea 4/5/7/ 4 619.00 19 729.00 75 732.08 95 461.08 484 
Democratic Peoples Rep. of Korea 118 374.00 - - 0 8,F11
Denmark 1 795 339.00 0 F1
Djibouti 39 458.00 - - - 0
Dominica 4 619.00 15 110.00 - 15 110.00 77 5,F8
Dominican Republic 97 394.00 60 438.00 - 60 438.00 77 
Ecuador 115 829.17 4 868.02 - 4 868.02 12 6,8,11
Egypt 157 832.00 - - 0 F1
EL Salvador 4 619.00 19 729.00 32 408.00 52 137.00 264 
Equatorial Guinea 4 619.00 15 110.00 - 15 110.00 77 F5
Ethiopia 19 729.00 - - 0 F7
Fiji 19 729.00 - - 0 F 2
Finland 1 144 282.00 - - 0 F1
France 15 506 994.00 - - 0 F4
Gabon 39 535.90 33 538.42 - 33 538.42 85 5
Gambia 56 905.55 17 469.45 - 17 469.45 89 
Germany, Federal Republic of 20 340 599.00 - - - 0 6,F11
Ghana 18 478.00 39 458.00 41 579.49 81 037.49 205 
Greece 1 073 631.00 220 931.99 - 220 931.99 23 6
Grenada 16 471.26 6 990.01 - 6 990.01 35 11,12
Guatemala 9 239.00 39 458.00 30 219.00 69 677.00 177 
Guinea 4 619.00 19 729.00 16 614.81 36 343.81 184 
Guinea-Bissau 35 169.14 19 729.00 13 347.99 33 076.99 168 
Guyana 13 872.75 19 729.00 37 347.00 57 076.00 289 
Haiti 39 458.00 
Honduras 23 088.44 - 0 7
Hungary 552 412.00 - 0 5,9,F12
Iceland 78 916.00 - 0 F2
India 337 211.00 511 136.00 511 136.00 60 f10
Indonesia 315 664.00 - 0 F3
Iran, Islamic Republic of 3 823 289.77 1 381 030.00 1 547 441 .14 2 928 471.14 212 
Iraq 571 000.00 295 935.00 - 295 935.00 100 
Ireland 434 038.00 - 0 F9
Israel 465 599.00 215 761.67 215 761.67 39 2,4,6,7,9,10,
Italy 8 917 508.00 - 0 3,F7
Ivory Coast 114 729.61 11 305.26 13 474.62 24 779.88 31 12
Jamaica 39 458.00 - - - 0 F2
Japan 24 582 334.00 0 3,F6
Jordan 21 839.00 - 0 6
Kenya 21 534.71 17 923.29 17 923.29 91 
Korea, Republic of 434 038.00 - 0 F10
Kuwait 591 870.00 0 F3
Laos 24 348.00 15 110.00 15 110.00 77 
Lebanon 21 478.00 17 980.00 17 980.00 46 1,F10
Lesotho 19 729.00 - - 0 F6
Liberia 42 615.40 19 729.00 16 660.60 36 389.60 184 
Libya 129 341.00 611 599.00 363 991.00 975 590.00 160 F8
Luxembourg 138 103.00 - 0 F5
Madagascar 31 894.96 19 729.00 5 132.04 24 861.04 126 
Malawi 14 931.25 4 797.75 4 797.75 24 4,F9
Malaysia 217 019.00 - - 0 F3
Maldives 19 729.00 - 0 F5
Mali 4 619.00 19 729.00 34 927.02 54 656.02 277 
Malta 19 729.00 - 0 F1
Mauritania 43 798.83 17 995.32 17 995.32 91 
Mauritius 19 729.00 - 0 4,F7
Mexico 2 316 212.64 59 406.53 59 406.53 3 5
Mongolia 19 729.00 - 0 F5
Morocco 239 922.09 102 539.92 102 539.92 87 
Mozambique 4 619.00 15 110.00 15 110.00 77 F10
Namibia 19 ?29.00 - - - 0 F1
Nepal 19 729.00 - - - 0 2,F7
Netherlands 4 241 735.00 - - - 0 F2
New Zealand 611 599.00 - - - 0 F4
Nicaragua 7/ 46 578.20 321.00 - 321.00 2 
Niger 57 031.73 19 729.00 - 19 729.00 100 
Nigeria 535 895.40 371 638.60 - 371 638.60 82
Norway 1 223 198.00 - - - 0 6,F8
Oman 19 729.00 - - - 0 F6
Pakistan 138 103.00 - - - 0 F2
Panama 39 458.00 - - - 0 1,F6
Papua New Guinea 19 729.00 - - 0 F3
Paraguay 7/ 59 618.67 19 729.00 - 19 729.00 100 
Peru 94 001.50 157 832.00 249 830.00 407 662.00 258 
Philippines 213 604.97 105 048.43 - 105 048.43 48 10
Poland 2 678 088.00 1 716 423.00 1 716 423.00 3 432 846.00 200 
Portugal 434 038.00 - 0 F7
Qatar 18 478.00 60 438.00 60 438.00 77 7,F11
Romania 485 982.97 453 767.00 911 860.99 1 365 627.99 301 
Rwanda 19 729.00 - 0 F6
Saint Christopher and Nevis - 19 729.00 9 864.00 29 593.00 150 6
Saint Lucia 39 083.83 19 729.00 20 955.99 40 684.99 206
Saint Vincent and Grenadines 29 593.50 - 0 3
Samoa 19 729.00 - 0 F11
Sao Tome and Principe 28 474.49 15 042.23 15 042.23 76 
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of 2 051 816.00 - 0 F6
Senegal 4 619.00 19 729.00 18 643.78 38 372.78 194 
Seychelles 24 348.00 12 679.00 12 679.00 64 F2
Sierra Leone 74 375.00 
Somalia 4 619.00 19 729.00 35 826.91 55 555.91 282 
Spain 4 596 857.00 - 0 F9
Sri Lanka 19 729.00 0 1,F3
Sudan 52 144.00 - 0 11
Suriname 4 619.00 15 110.00 15 110.00 77 F9
Swaziland 4 619.00 19 729.00 19 713.48 39 442.48 200 
Sweden 3 136 911.00 - 0 F1
Switzerland 2 623 957.00 0 6,F9
Syria 119 613.24 - 108 694.76 108 694.76 138 
Tanzania 4 619.00 19 729.00 32 408.00 52 137.00 264 
Thailand 197 290.00 - 0 F16
Togo 34 984.83 19 729.00 23 047.46 42 776.46 217 
Tonga 19 729.00 - 0 F2
Trinidad and Tobago 78 916.00 0 F5
Tunisia 78 916.00 - 0 1,F6
Turkey 170 915.00 735 687.82 - 735 687.82 96 1,4,11
Uganda 4 619.00 19 729.00 428.96 20 157.96 102 10
United Arab Emirates 430 283.00 319 419.00 - 319 419.00 85 
United Kingdom 11 127 156.00 - 0 2,5,F7
United States of America 48 654 106.28 1 318 393.72 - 1 318 393.72 3 10,F12
Uruguay 23 097.00 98 645.00 163 336.00 261 981.00 266 
Vanuatu 19 729.00 - - - 0 F4
Venezuela 2 604 228.00 - - 0 
Viet Nam 78 916.00 - - 0 
Yemen Arab Republic 24 350.58 - - 0 5
Yemen, Peoples Dem. Republic of 19 729.00 - - 0 F3
Yugoslavia 1 180 038.92 412 857.86 412 857.86 37 5
Zaire 40 115.00 - 0 
Zambia 19 729.00 0 F1
Zimbabwe 78 916.00 - - 0 
Cook Islands 8/ 6 275.00 6 275.00 
Solomon Islands 8/ 6 275.00 6 275.00 
Conference authorized arrears instalments due in future years:
Chad 92 236.80 92 236.80 
Central African Republic 34 022.06 34 022.06 
Comoros 49 054.60 49 054.60 
Democratic Kampuchea 19 278.76 19 278.76 
Nicaragua 11 643.30 11 643.30 
Paraguay 71 225.00 71 225.00 
1/ $182 763 374.59 applied to 1985 assessments, $19 172 302.12 to arrears and $178 518.18 to the working Capital Fund; includes $46 193 205.00 arising from the distribution of the cash surplus of the 1982-83 biennium.
2/ Of which 25 174 262.34 relates to the budget (72) and $3 975.00 represents amounts due as advances to the Working Capital Fund, indicated by footnote 6/ (1)8/(2).
3/ Month in which a cash payment against the current assessment was received during 1984; F = full or final payment.
4/ Arrears include Conference authorized arrears instalments due in 1985 from 2 Member Nations
totalling $7 014.96,(as well as $1 325.00 due to the Working Capital Fund from 1 Member Nations, footnote 6/).
5/ Member Nation (1) with no vote at the Conference in accordance with Article III. 4 of the Constitution.
6/ Member Nation (1) with amount in arrears as advance to the Working Capital Fund.
7/ Member Nation (6) with payment(s) due or overdue under Conference authorized arrears instalment arrangement. Arrears instalments due in future years are set out at the end of this Listing.
8/ Member Nation (2) admitted during the Twenty-third Session of the Conference with amounts due to 1985 Assessed Contribution to the Budget (US$ 4 950) and to the Working Capital fund (US$ 1 325) each.
PROGRAMME COMMITTEE
(November 1985-November 1987)
Chairman:
France (M.L. Mazoyer)
Members :
Argentina (C.O. Keller Sarmiento)
Austria (R. Steiner)
Barbados (C.E. Maynard)
Congo (J. Tchicaya)
India (R.C. Gupta)
Lebanon (A. Abdel-Malek)
Libya (B. El-Mabrouk Said)
Nigeria (J. Ladan)
Pakistan (J. Musharraf)
United States of America (Mrs M.H. Fenwick)
FINANCE COMMITTEE
(November 1985-November 1987)
Chairman:
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of (A.Y. Bukhari)
Members :
Angola (P.A. Kanga)
Australia (B. Martyn)
Costa Rica (C. di Mottola Balestra)
Germany, Federal Republic of (G. Graf. von Westphalen)
Italy (E. Pascarelli)
Madagascar (R. Rabe)
Malaysia (A.W. Jalil)
Peru (J. Gazzo)
COMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL MATTERS
(November 1985-November 1987)
El Salvador
Italy
Philippines
Poland
Senegal
Sudan
United States of America
COMMITTEE ON FOOD AID POLICIES AND PROGRAMMES
(January 1986-December 1988)
Term of office expiring
Elected by FAO Council
Elected by ECOSOC
31 December 1986 Australia Egypt
Bangladesh Hungary
Canada India
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of Italy
United States of America Norway
31 December 1987 Brazil Belgium
Congo Denmark
Kenya Japan
Netherlands Lesotho
Thailand Pakistan
31 December 1988 Ethiopia Argentina
France Cape Verde
Germany, Federal Republic of Colombia
Sao Tome and Principe Finland
Venezuela United Kingdom
