<title>Report of the Conference of FAO Twenty-first Session Rome, 7-25 November 1981</title>
<section>1</section>
I. COUNCIL (until 31 December 1982)
Independent Chairman: M.S. Swaminathan
Afghanistan^2
Germany, Fed. Rep. of^1
Pakistan^3
Angola^2
India^3
Panama^1
Argentina^1
Indonesia^1
Philippines^3
Bangladesh^1
Ireland^2
Poland^2
Barbados^2
Italy^3
Portugal^1
Brazil^2
Ivory Coast^1
Romania^2
Canada^2
Japan^1
Saudi Arabia^3
Cape Verde^3
Kenya^2
Sudan^3
China^1
Lebanon^2
Syrian Arab Republic^1
Colombia^2
Lesotho^3
Thailand^1
Congo^2
Malaysia^1
United Kingdom^3
Cuba^2
Mexico^2
United Republic of Cameroon^1
Ecuador^3
Morocco^2
United States of America^2
Egypt^3
New Zealand^3
Upper Volta^3
Ethiopia^3
Nigeria^2
Venezuela^1
France^3
Norway^3
Yugoslavia^1
Zambia^1
^1 Term of office until 31 December 1982
^2 Term of office until conclusion of Twenty-second Session of the Conference, November 1983
^3 Term of office until 31 December 1984
<section>2</section>
II. COUNCIL (as from 1 January 1983)
Seats falling vacant at the conclusion of the Twenty-second Session of the Conference, November 1983
Seats falling vacant on 31 December 1984
Seats falling vacant at the conclusion of the Twenty-third Session of the Conference, November 1985
Afghanistan
Cape Verde
Argentina
Angola
Ecuador
Bangladesh
Barbados
Egypt
Benin
Brazil
Ethiopia
China
Canada
France
Cyprus
Colombia
India
Germany Federal Republic of
Congo
Italy
Indonesia
Cuba
Lesotho
Iraq
Ireland
New Zealand
Japan
Kenya
Norway
Malawi
Lebanon
Pakistan
Malaysia
Mexico
Philippines
Panama
Morocco
Saudi Arabia
Rwanda
Nigeria
Sudan
Spain
Poland
United Kingdom
Thailand
Romania
Upper Volta
Venezuela
United States of America
<section>3</section>
III. Introduction
A. Twelfth McDougall Memorial Lecture
B. Presentation of the B.R. Sen Awards for 1980 and 1981
C. Presentation of the A.H. Boerma Award for 1980-1981
D. Tribute to Dr. Bukar Shaib as Independent chairman of The Council
E. Retirement of dr. Ralph W. Phillips
F. In memoriam
A. Twelfth McDougall Memorial Lecture
1. The Twelfth in the series of lectures at regular Conference sessions in memory of Frank Lidgett McDougall, a founding father of the Organization, was delivered by Her Excellency Shrimati Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of India.
B. Presentation of the B.R. Sen Awards for 1980 and 1981
2. The B.R. Sen Award for 1980 was presented to Mr. M. Muñoz Alaba (Chile) for the introduction of far-reaching technical innovations in Honduran forestry which included preparation and implementation of rational forest management plans for the first time. Mr. Muñoz Alaba was recruited in 1975 by FAO to become the project manager in Honduras of the FAO/UNDP Project for the Management, Production and Development of Forests and Forest Industries. As a result of initiatives through the project a strong awareness has been developed to diminish the uncontrolled cutting and burning of forests in Honduras, and to increase efficiency through the introduction of improved machinery and its handling. Results achieved by COHDEFOR (Corporación Hondureña de Desarrollo Forestal) with which Mr. Muñoz Alaba has been associated include a big industrial complex being installed in Olancho; a modern large-scale saw mill established at Siguatepeque, with other mechanical forestry industries at
the planning stage, among them a pulp mill and factory to produce wooden boxes with region-wide scope for Central America; over thirty small saw mills that have become more productive through the replacement of equipment; forest management plans being carried through in Las Lajas; Comayagua and other new areas being surveyed and management plans being prepared. Mr. Muñoz Alaba has been responsible, as project manager for technical innovations, institutional improvements, research and training, silviculture and forest management, organizing and supervising seminars on forestry, and assistance in improving saw-milling and wood industry design. Thus, a multifaceted programme to develop both the forests and the forest industries in Honduras has been launched.
3. The B.R. Sen Award for 1981 was presented to Mr. H. Brammer (United Kingdom) for his work in promoting the optimum use of land, specifically for training and advising on soil survey and land use planning in Bangladesh. Mr. Brammer joined FAO in 1961 as Deputy Project Commissioner in Bangladesh bringing with him the experience gained as a member of the Soil and Land Use Survey Organization in Ghana, which organization had gained international recognition as a pioneer in tropical soil surveys and land-use recommendations. Except for two years of service with FAO in Zambia, he continuously dedicated himself to the service of agriculture in Bangladesh. Mr. Brammer's achievements include the establishment of the Bangladesh National Soil Survey; completing reconnaissance soil survey of Bangladesh at a very high standard thus establishing the potential for improved land use including the growing of high-yielding wheat and increasing acreage and production of this crop. He has
prepared innumerable documents on diverse aspects of land resources and agricultural development in Bangladesh, many of them specifically aimed at development at the grass roots level, and translated into Bengali. His dedication to work and his technical competence received recognition when the Government of Bangladesh awarded him in 1978 the Presidency's Gold Medal for services to Bangladesh agriculture.
C. Presentation of the A.H. Boerma Award for 1980-1981
4. The A.H. Boerma Award was presented at this Conference for the second time. The Award-winner for the 1980-1981 biennium was Mr. Lester R. Brown, President of the World-watch Institute, Washington, D.C. A citizen of the United States of America, Mr. Brown's work has been reproduced in many languages, and has received wide publicity throughout both the developed and developing worlds. He writes for a large number of well-known periodicals and lectures widely. His latest book, "Building a Sustainable Society" draws particular attention to the prospect of growing food insecurity.
Tribute to Dr. Bukar Shaib as Independent Chairman of the Council
5. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 1/81
D. Tribute to Dr. Bukar Shaib as Independent chairman of The Council
THE CONFERENCE,
Considering that the term of office of Dr. Bukar Shaib, Independent Chairman of the FAO Council since 1977, will expire at the close of the Twenty-first Session of the Conference,
Conscious of his close and active association with the Organization since 1962, especially during his four years as Independent Chairman,
1. Pays tribute to the wisdom and efficacy with which he has guided the debates of the Council, at all times, in a spirit conducive to friendly cooperation and consensus;
2. Expresses to Dr. Bukar Shaib its sincere thanks and warmest good wishes.
(Adopted 12 November 1981)
Retirement of Dr. Ralph W. Phillips
6. In tribute to the Deputy Director-General whose retirement would take place at the end of the current year, the Conference adopted the following resolution by acclamation:
Resolution 2/81
E. Retirement of dr. Ralph W. Phillips
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that Dr. Ralph W. Phillips will retire from the Organization at the end of December 1981, after four years of service as Deputy Director-General,
Mindful of his earlier services to the Organization, in particular as Deputy Director of the then Agriculture Division, and subsequently as Member and Chairman of the Programme Committee,
Recognizing his long and exceptionally outstanding services and unfailing dedication to the aims of the Organization,
Expresses to Dr. Ralph W. Phillips its thanks and deep appreciation of the distinguished contribution he has made to the work of FAO, and conveys to him its warm wishes for a continued active life, good health and happiness.
(Adopted 23 November 1981)
F. In memoriam
7. The Conference paid tribute to the staff members who had died in the service of the Organization since its Twentieth Session.
<section>4</section>
IV. Procedure of the session
A. Election of the chairman and vice-chairmen of the conference
B. Appointment of the general committee and the credentials committee
C. Adoption of the agenda
D. Arrangements for the session and allocation of agenda items
E. Admission of observers
A. Election of the chairman and vice-chairmen of the conference
8. The Council had nominated, and the Conference elected Jorge Rubén Aguado (Argentina) as Chairman of the Twenty-first Session of the Conference.
9. The Nominations Committee recommended, and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Vice-Chairmen of the Conference
Claude Batault (France)
Edward L. Senanayake (Sri Lanka)
Amer Mahdi Saleh Khashaly (Iraq)
B. Appointment of the general committee and the credentials committee
10. The Nominations Committee recommended, and the Conference approved the following appointments:
Members of the General Committee
China
Romania
Colombia
Tunisia
Kuwait
United States of America
Nigeria
Members of the Credentials Committee
Angola
Malaysia
Bangladesh
Switzerland
Czechoslovakia
Syria
Dominican Republic
United States of America
Ghana
C. Adoption of the agenda
11. The Conference adopted its Agenda as amended by the General Committee, and as given in Appendix A to this report.
D. Arrangements for the session and allocation of agenda items
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen
Attendance during general discussion
Resolutions committee of the conference
Right of reply
Verbatim records
Verification of credentials
Voting rights
Informal meeting of international non-governmental organizations
12. The Conference adopted the arrangements and timetable proposed by the Seventy-ninth Session of the Council, as amended by the General Committee.
Establishment of Commissions and Appointment of their Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen
13. The Conference concurred with the Council's recommendations to establish three Commissions to consider and report upon Parts I, II and III of the Agenda,
14. In accordance with Rule VII-1 and XXIV-5(b) of the General Rules of the ORGANIZATION (GRO), the Eightieth Session of the Council had nominated the following Chairmen of the Commissions:
Commission I: Joseph Tchicaya (Congo)
Commission II: Robert Steiner (Austria)
Commission III: Saeed Ahmed Qureshi (Pakistan)
15. the Conference appointed the foregoing officers and, taking into consideration the proposals of the General Committee, in accordance with Rule XIII-2 (GRO), also appointed:
Vice-Chairmen of Commission I: G. Stuyck (Belgium)
D. Noel (Grenada)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission II: A.A. Khalil (Sudan)
N. Mapela (Zaire)
Vice-Chairmen of Commission III: T.J. Kelly (Australia)
C. Muszalski (Poland)
Attendance during general discussion
16. The Conference also approved the recommendation of the Seventy-eighth Session of the Council that the office of the Rapporteur from Plenary to Commission I be discontinued. The Conference furthermore asked that Heads of Delegations ensure they have at least one member of their respective delegation present in Plenary throughout the General Discussion.
Resolutions committee of the conference
17. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the Seventy-ninth Council Session to establish a Resolutions Committee composed of seven members, one from each FAO, region, and appointed the following:
Africa Benin
Asia India
Europe Norway
Latin America Mexico
Near East Libya
North America Canada
Southwest Pacific New Zealand
18. The Conference agreed to the recommendation of the General Committee that the Resolutions Committee be chaired by the current Chairman of the Programme Committee, in order to have the full benefit of his experience.
19. The Conference approved the functions of the Resolutions Committee and the criteria for the formulation of resolutions, as set out in document C 81/12, Appendix D.
Right of reply
20. The Conference confirmed the decision taken at its previous seven sessions to the effect that, when a delegate wishes to reply to criticism of his Government's policy, he should preferably do so on the afternoon of the day on which such criticism had been voiced, after all those wishing to participate in the discussion had had an opportunity to do so.
Verbatim records
21. According to Rule XVIII GRO, verbatim records were kept of all Conference Plenary and Commission meetings. The Conference endorsed the recommendation of the General Committee that statements might be inserted in the verbatim records when time did not permit them to be delivered, taking however into consideration the conditions laid down by the General Committee.
Verification of credentials
22. The credentials of delegations of 145 Member Nations were found valid. Seven Member Nation. did not send a delegation to the Conference.
23. The credentials of the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to FAO and those of the Palestine Liberation Organization were found valid.
24. The names of the representatives of the international organizations attending the Conference, including the United Nations and Specialized Agencies were duly deposited as prescribed by Rule III-2 GRO.
Voting rights
25. The Conference noted that, in accordance with Article III.4 of the Constitution, five Member Nations, at the beginning of the Session, had no right to vote in the Conference as the amount of their arrears of contributions to the (ORGANIZATION exceeded the amount of the contributions due from them for the two preceding calendar years. Subsequently two of these Member Nations regularized their positions.
Informal meeting of international non-governmental organizations
26. The Eightieth Council Session had nominated Michel Cépède, President of the French National Committee for the FFHC, to chair the informal meeting of representatives of international non-governmental organizations admitted as observers to the Twenty-first Session of the Conference. The meeting was convened on Tuesday 10 November. The report on its deliberations was communicated to the Conference.
E. Admission of observers
Applicants for membership
27. As was customary, the Director-General had provisionally invited the applicants for membership (Bhutan, Equatorial Guinea, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tonga and Zimbabwe) to be represented by observers until their admission to the Organization had been decided upon. The Conference approved the Director-General's action.
Liberation movements
28. The Conference approved the invitations issued by the Director-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and those African Liberation Movements recognized by OAU to attend the session in an observer capacity.
Intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations
29. The Conference approved the list of international organizations to which the Director-General had extended a provisional invitation to the Conference session, and invited the representatives of these organizations to participate in the activities of the Conference in an observer capacity.
30. The Conference concurred with the recommendation of the General Committee that, in accordance with Rule XVII-3 GRO, the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and the International Federation of Agricultural Producers (IFAP) address Plenary.
<section>5</section>
V. Major trends and policies in food and agriculture
A. Statements by heads of delegations in the general discussion
B. World food and agriculture situation
C. World food and agricultural development strategy
D. Energy in agriculture and rural development
A. Statements by heads of delegations in the general discussion
31. The Plenary General Discussion as opened by the Director-General. The text of his statement is given in Appendix D. Following this, 137 speakers participated in the discussion: the Independent Chairman of the Council, 126 -Heads of delegations - of which 100 were Ministers and Vice-Ministers - the Permanent Observer of the Holy See to FAO, representatives of two bodies and one organization in the United Nations system, the European Economic Community and observers from one intergovernmental organization, three liberation movements and one international non-governmental organization having consultative status with FAO. The statements of one Member Nation and one international non-governmental organization having consultative status with FAO were inserted in the records.
B. World food and agriculture situation
State of Food and Agriculture
Progress in Implementation of the plan of action to Strengthen world food security
State of Food and Agriculture
32. The Conference reviewed the current food and agricultural situation as well as the long-term trends on the basis of the Director-General's report, the State of Food and Agriculture 1981, and its Supplement, and generally endorsed his assessment of the situation.
33. While the immediate threat of another world food crisis had been averted with a larger cereals harvest in 1981, the Conference considered the basic features of the food and agricultural situation as continuing to be generally unsatisfactory. It emphasized that the improvements in world food supply in 1981, welcome as they were, should not lull the inter-national community into a sense of complacency.
34. The Conference noted that food and agricultural production in the world was likely to increase by 2.5 percent and 2.7 percent respectively in 1981, after two years of increases of less than 1 percent. However, although the growth rates in 1981 were above the average for the 1970s, the output in 1981 was still below the longer-term trend level. The Conference drew attention to the gloomy economic situation, in the world, marked by economic recession, a slowdown in the growth of trade, a continuation of protectionist pressures and practices and widespread inflation and unemployment, which, along with the lack of a fully effective system of world food security, made the present period one of the most economically difficult since World War II. These problems plagued both developed and developing countries. The low-income, food-deficit countries in particular had limited capacities to face up to these problems and were thus more vulnerable.
35. The welcome improvements in food and agricultural production in 1981 were not shared equally by all countries in both the developed and the developing world. The Conference drew attention, in particular, to the setbacks suffered by some countries in Africa and the Near East, while noting that some countries in these regions had registered large increases in production or had had good crops. Significantly increased food and agricultural production also had been recorded in most developed regions in 1981 although, in one of them, the recovery failed to offset the declines of the previous two years, thus leading to a sizeable increase in cereal imports.
36. The expected increase of 2 to 3 percent in world production of cereals would permit some rebuilding of stocks during the 1981/82 season, which would be a welcome reversal of the trend in the previous two seasons when stocks had been drawn down. However, the Conference expressed concern that the carryover level forecast for the end of the 1981/82 season would still represent only about 16 percent of annual consumption requirement and would thus be lower than the minimum safe level for world food security as estimated by the FAO Secretariat. The increase in stocks would be mostly in the from of coarse grains and not as wheat which was of more direct use for human consumption in many countries and the stocks would be held mostly by major exporting and developed countries. The Conference voiced concern that despite efforts to increase cereal stock infrastructure in developing countries, the levels of stocks held by them remained inadequate. Attention was drawn to the large
amount of food lost after harvest and reiterated the need for continued improvements in storage facilities to minimize this waste.
37. The Conference welcomed the importance that the Cancún Summit had attached to the problems of world agricultural development as well as to measures for improving food security.
38. The continuing absence of a consensus which would prompt the resumption of negotiations or. a new Wheat Trade Convention was generally regretted.
39. It was emphasized that any lasting improvement in world food security could only be achieved with sustained, accelerated expansion of food production by developing countries them selves and the enhancement of their self-reliance in food. The Conference drew attention in this connection to the need for greater efforts by the developing countries, in particular the least developed and other low-income countries, especially in Africa, and at the same time emphasized the need for adequate international support to their efforts. In some countries this may call for review of strategies, plans and programmes for food production as well as economic and population policies; in others, the critical constraints may be in the design and implementation of agricultural policy, while in still others the requirements were for access to land and reforms in institutions and services.
40. Among policy measures the Conference attached particular importance to policies for maintaining adequate producer price incentives in developing countries for increasing food production by the farmers. In this connection the rising levels of agricultural production costs which were affecting the net incomes of farmers in both developing and developed countries were noted with concern.
41. The Conference drew attention to the need for intensified research to promote more efficient and economical use of inputs and energy in food and agricultural production. In particular, research should be undertaken to find alternative methods of feeding livestock.
42. The Conference noted that fertilizer prices had risen in 1980 and that the rate of growth in fertilizer consumption had declined significantly as a consequence. Higher prices were making it difficult for many developing countries, particularly low-income countries, to finance their fertilizer needs and hence to increase their food production. More recently, however, the export prices of the main traded types of fertilizers had tended to level off or even decline in terms of US dollars, particularly phosphatic fertilizers, although the simultaneous strengthening of the dollar against most other currencies meant that prices had continued to rise in terms of domestic currencies of most importing countries.
43. The Conference noted that the substantial bilateral aid provided to developing countries for fertilizers in 1978/79 had declined in 1979/80, as noted with concern by the Fertilizer Commission at its session in September 1981. It appreciated the recent new contributions made to the International Fertilizer Supply Scheme (IFS) by several countries, but drew attention to the continued declining trend, despite these pledges, of the annual contributions to the scheme to only a small fraction of the level of 1974/75. The Conference underlined the need to continue, on the one hand, to help developing countries to manufacture fertilizers economically, and on the other hand, when it was necessary, to provide developing countries, in particular the low-income countries, with fertilizer supplies and technical assistance. It urged donors to support fertilizer requirements in developing countries either bilaterally or in the IFS.
44. Emphasis was generally placed on the WCARRD mandate in alleviating poverty. improving the distribution of rural income while increasing agricultural production, in particular the need to address poor and disadvantaged rural groups through community action and increased services. The need for national monitoring and evaluation of progress was also brought out
45. Land distribution, proper use of land and agrarian reform were seen as major vehicles for increasing agricultural production in some developing countries. Particular emphasis was also placed on the need for improvements in rural infrastructure, including extension and agricultural education, cooperatives and credit. A number of members emphasized the need for designing policies arid providing services to reach small farmers and other disadvantaged groups including the establishment of a special fund for small farmers. By biasing institutions and input distribution systems towards, and promoting group activities among, small-scale farmers, much could be done to alleviate rural poverty.
46. The Conference appreciated the analysis of population trends in the documents Attention was drawn to the dynamic aspects of population such as its rate of growth and rates of migration within a country which might pose more serious problems than the size of the population itself. A number of members drew attention to the problems posed in balancing rapid population growth and rising incomes with the food supply; it was necessary to consider not only population growth but also the size, distribution, structure and movement of the population and its implications. Particular attention was drawn to the problems of rural-urban migration and employment in developing population activities. The need to integrate more population considerations into the agricultural development activities of the Organization was also suggested.
47. World Food Day was acknowledged by the Conference as a useful means of focussing attention to world food problems.
48. Although by and large world food supplies were statistically adequate to maintain a reasonable level of nutrition for everyone, the Conference noted with concern that there was unequal distribution of available food supplies both between and within countries. Governments would have to pay increased attention nationally and internationally to the distribution aspects of food and to policies to increase the purchasing power of the poor and to reduce poverty.
49. The Conference noted that food balance sheets were currently the only available comprehensive source of information on food supplies. While their limitations were fully recognized, they did permit regular assessments to be made on progress at the country level in meeting estimated average nutritional requirements from food supplies, although they did not cover the distribution of food intake among individuals and households.
50. In view of this, the Conference noted the necessity to improve the quality to and coverage of information at the country level on the nutritional status of different groups of the population. It urged governments to make particular efforts to collect and analyse data on food consumption through household surveys and to make them available to TAO.
51. The reference to child nutrition in the documents was welcomed, given the susceptibility of this vulnerable group of the population to nutritional deficiencies. The need to consider the dynamic aspects of this issue was underlined: namely, the effects of changing patterns of land use and hence food availabilities, the time available to mothers for child care, availability of safe drinking water and other changes wrought by agricultural development on the welfare of the child.
52. Members repeatedly referred to the roles of improved yet appropriate technologies both to increase food and agriculture production and to introduce more efficient methods of preservation and processing of foods to improve nutrition.
53. The Conference expressed concern at the recent trends in the flow of official external assistance especially to agriculture which, although higher in nominal terms, had declined in real terms in 1980 for the second consecutive year It urged donor countries and international financial institutions to increase the flow of financial recources to developing countries in support of their measures to increase substantially investment in agriculture, as recommended in the international Development Strategy for the Third UN Development Decade, and invited developing countries to devote to agriculture an appropriate amount of non-project aid and externally borrowed funds.
54. The Conference welcomed the increase in the flow of external assistance to agriculture in the Least Developed Countries. It also welcomed the commitment of donors in their agricultural development assistance programmes to give priority to this group of countries, as had been recommended by the UN Conference on the Least Developed Countries held in September 1981.
55. The Conference noted that while food aid was not a substitute for increased food production and was essentially a means to development and not an end in itself, nevertheless it performed a vital need in meeting emergency food needs, covering food supply gaps in low-income countries and supporting specific food production programmes. In view of continuing large food aid requirements, it expressed concern that food aid shipments had stagnated and even declined in 1980. It noted that food aid was covering a declining proportion of the cereal import needs of low-income countries, reflecting temporary and specific problems affecting some countries. It urged all current and potential donors to increase their efforts to meet the minimum annual target of 10 million tons of food aid agreed at the World Food Conference, in the same spirit that had been recently shown by donors, including the EEC and the OPEC Special Fund, to ensure this year's fulfilment of the IEFR target.
56. The Conference noted with particular concern the adverse effects of the slowing down of the world economy on agricultural trade. Although the value of this trade in 1980 had increased by 11 percent, this was well below the average annual rate of increase for the 1970s and, in real terms, registered practically no growth. Attention was drawn to the declining terms of trade of agricultural products of export interest to developing countries. This was making it particularly difficult for them to finance their development efforts at a time when aid flows were sluggish and rates of interest on commercial loans were high. While productivity gains could offset the effects of price declines on farm net incomes, these would not improve the purchasing power of agricultural export earnings of developing countries.
57. Much of the expansion in agricultural trade recorded in 1980 had been due to increased shipments of cereals, including feed grains. Concern was expressed over the growing food import burden of low-income, food-deficit developing countries. Indeed, among all the developing marketing economy regions, only Asia had achieved a small gain in agricultural export earnings in real terms in 1980.
58. The reason for this slowing down of agricultural trade which had affected some developed countries as well, was primarily depressed demand because of continuing economic recession, particularly for agricultural raw materials and tropical beverages. Concern was expressed that the increasing prevalence of protectionist policies and/or measures, with livestock products and sugar receiving particular attention, had seriously impeded on a number of occasions and might similarly impede in the future, the expansion of trade in these commodities. The Conference noted the measures taken by several developed countries to improve and facilitate the access to their markets of agricultural commodities from developing countries. One member stated that among developing countries themselves, some had reached the stage which allowed them to make progress along the same lines as developed countries. The mutual interests of developed and developing countries in promoting free trade were
recognized as were the opportunities for expanding trade between developing countries themselves. In this connection some members suggested the establishment of a generalized system of trade preferences among developing countries for their benefit alone.
59. Recognizing the importance of stabilizing prices of commodities traded by developing countries, the Conference underlined the potential value of the Common Fund for commodities The Conference urged members who had not yet signed or ratified the agreement establishing the Fund to do so. Attention was called to the potential for expanding technical and economic cooperation amongst developing countries, particularly in sharing experiences in disseminating technical information and in promoting trade and investment.
60. With regard to fishery resources, the Conference expressed concern about the stagnation in the world catch in 1980. Mention was made of the need for full utilization of the resources in newly acquired Exclusive Economic Zones and of the important role FAO should play in this and in the development of fishery management capabilities in developing countries. The importance of cooperation among coastal countries sharing common stocks of fish was stressed and reference was made to the need for expanding the use of seafood to help overcome problems of protein malnutrition.
61. The Conference emphasized the need for greater effort by countries, with needed FAO support, for forestry development to ensure increases in future supplies of fuel wood and charcoal and of industrial wood products and at the same time to avoid degradation of the environment, protect watersheds and thus reduce the risk of natural disasters of flood and soil erosion. The importance of reversing the current trend to uncontrolled deforestation with its consequence of destabilizing the ecological balance and causing soil erosion or desertification was stressed. The important contribution of forestry to rural development was identified, not only in relation to the supply of fuel and general support to agriculture, but also in the supply of food and foliage, enriching the nutritional quality of food supply and extending supplies of animal fodder.
62. The Conference pointed out the vital need to preserve and protect the ecological base on which future production rested through, for example, improved soil and forest management. Thus, it emphasized the complementarily of forestry and agriculture and the importance of combining activities in both areas.
63. The Conference endorsed the concern of the UN Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, that a vastly increased afforestation programme must he achieved in developing countries.
64. The Conference underlined that special attention be given by all countries to implement policies aiming to create an environment of peace, political security and freedom from international tensions. Such an environment was essential for increasing food and agricultural production, particularly in developing countries.
65. It was noted that the value of the analysis of the state of food and agriculture would be enhanced if distinction between different groups of countries were further pursued.
Progress in Implementation of the plan of action to Strengthen world food security
66. The Conference reviewed the progress made in implementing the Plan of Action on World Food Security since its Twentieth Session, when it had adopted Resolution 3/79 urging all governments to take immediate steps to put the Plan into operation .
67. The Conference reiterated its support for the Plan of Action on World Food Security and welcomed the progress made in its implementation. An increasing number of countries had adopted national stock policies or practices in line with the criteria laid down in the Plan of Action, although not all countries had yet been able to put these policies into operation. Moreover, various regional and sub-regional groupings in the developing world were considering ways of strengthening food security through schemes of collective self-reliance.
68. The Conference expressed particular satisfaction at the decision by the International Monetary Fund to extend balance of payments support through its compensatory financing facility to member countries experiencing temporary increases in the costs of their cereal imports. This was fully in line with the Plan of Action. However, some members pointed out that the facility could only provide marginal support to countries that were already using compensatory financing for other purposes. The Conference welcomed the new Food Aid Convention of 1980 and its extension for a two-year period to 1983, which provided for an annual food aid commitment of 7.6 million tons of grains. It hoped that new contributors would join it so that the minimum target of 10 million tons of food aid in cereals could be realized. It noted with satisfaction that the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes intended to review food aid targets and requirements.
69. The fact that in 1981, for the first time since its inception, the International Emergency Food Reserve (IEFR) had reached its target of 500 000 tone of cereals, due to contributions by traditional donors and, most recently, additional contributions by the EEC, Australia and the OPEC Special Fund, was also a substantial step forward, which was appreciated by the Conference. It also welcomed Finland's intention to increase its contribution substantially in 1982. Another positive development was the procedure for consultations which might be called by the Director-General within the framework for the Agenda for Consultations and Possible Action to Deal with Acute and Large-Scale Food Shortages drawn up by the Committee on World Food Security at its Sixth Session.
70. Recognizing the long-term need for a more rapid growth of production of all basic foods, including fish, animal products, vegetable oils, etc. particularly in low-income, food-deficit countries, the Conference welcomed the fact that several countries in South Asia had succeeded in increasing their food production sufficiently to reduce greatly their dependence on food imports and food aid. Others had been unable to accelerate the growth in their domestic food production, partly due to a lack of resources. As noted above, this situation called for more intensive efforts by the developing countries themselves as well as additional support from the international community. The need for an equitable distribution of available food supplies was also stressed.
71. The Conference reiterated the importance of food reserves as an element in food security, and particularly as protection against food shortages occurring in the wake of natural or man-made disasters. It noted with concern that many developing countries, and in particular low-income, food-deficit countries, had not yet been able to establish such national reserves due to insufficient food production, lack of storage facilities, and other financial and technical constraints. It stressed the importance of establishing early warning systems and preparedness programmes. It also called for improved information on stock levels. The Conference agreed that FAO, should continue to assist interested governments in the formulation and implementation of their food security programmes through the Food Security Assistance Scheme (FSAS), whose services had already proved useful to many governments. The FSAS activities should continue to be carried out in close collaboration with the
World Food Programme.
72. In view of the increasing requests for assistance in this field, the Conference welcomed the pledges of new trust fund contributions to the FSAS announced by Australia, Italy and Japan and the renewed commitments of the Netherlands and Norway and urged all governments in a position to do so and the concerned international organizations to increase their support for the national food security programmes of developing countries, either directly or through the FAO Food Security Assistance Scheme. It requested the Committee on World Food Security, as part of its review under the Plan of Action, to examine how to improve its ability to assess and evaluate food security assistance and the needs of developing countries, and invited all donors, including multilateral and regional financing agencies to contribute relevant information.
73. Many members stressed the need for further strengthening the level of the resources of the International Emergency Food Reserve (IEFR). The Conference also stressed that need for better predictability and continuity of the IEFR resources, and expressed its satisfaction that the CFA at its Twelfth Session had reached a consensus that, if Member Nations were able to make the necessary internal arrangements, a joint pledging conference could be convened for voluntary biennial pledges for the WFP regular resources and the IEFR. It also expressed the hope that the first such joint conference should be held next year.
74. The Conference stressed the importance of cooperative arrangements by developing countries to strengthen their collective self-reliance in food security through food reserves, mutual assistance during food emergencies, exchange of technical expertise, and joint efforts to increase food production. It expressed satisfaction at the increasing number of initiatives taken and envisaged at regional and sub-regional levels by developing countries, including the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), Permanent Inter-State Committee for Drought Control in the Sahelian Zone (CILSS) and the Southern African countries, the Arab Organization for Agricultural Development, the Caribbean Economic Community, the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and the Economic System for Latin America. It also welcomed the Lagos Plan. Of Action, the decision of the Third Islamic Summit Conference to establish an Islamic Food Supplies Security Fund as well
as the decision of the Sixth Conference of the Heads of State/Government of Non-aligned countries that they should set up a food security system of their own. In this connection, the Conference recalled its earlier decision contained in Resolution 3/79, as adopted, concerning the creation of special regional accounts for the purchase of food to be stored for food security which could be particularly helpful for small producing and consuming countries. The Conference noted the suggestion that special measures should be considered to improve the food security of small, poor island economies.
75. The Conference stressed the need to fully implement the Plan of Action on World Food Security. Many members recognized that in the absence of a new Wheat Trade Convention the Plan of Action was the only internationally agreed framework for pursuing global policies on world food security and they therefore urged that it should be strengthened where possible. They considered that there was a need to heighten the consultative role of the Committee on World Food Security, particularly as regards the harmonization of national stock policies. A few members disagreed with this last view, considering that the International Wheat Council was the most appropriate forum for the examination of wheat reserve policies. Many members called for renewed efforts to conclude a new Wheat Trade Convention with provisions for market stability, world food security and the special interests of the developing countries. A few others questioned the desirability of such a new Convention.
76. The Conference underlined the importance of maintaining a balanced expansion of agricultural trade as an integral part of world food security. It stressed that the need for governments to resist pressures for increased protection and to promote efforts to liberalise world agricultural trade, especially in order to improve the export earnings of developing countries.
C. World food and agricultural development strategy
International agricultural adjustment
International Development Strategy (IDS), including Regional and National Development
77. The Conference discussed the progress of international agricultural adjustment and subsequently considered the new International Development Strategy, including national and regional development strategies.
International agricultural adjustment
78. The Conference based its discussion on C 81/24 "International Agricultural Adjustment: Third Progress Report" and C 81/LIM/20 "International Agricultural Adjustment" (Extract from A: Report of the Fifty-third Session of the Committee on Commodity Problems, Rome, September 1981 and B: Report of the Eightieth Session of Council, Rome, November 1981).
79. The Conference generally agreed with the assessments made by Council and the Committee on Commodity Problems that while there had been some progress, it was limited or patchy and overall it was inadequate. In the six years since the guidelines were adopted by Conference, basic food and agricultural problems in many of the developing countries had not been fully resolved. The Conference also recognized the considerable efforts and progress made by a number of developing countries. Recognition of the mutuality of interest between developing and developed countries in eliminating hunger had not been sufficiently followed by action.
80. The 4 percent target for annual growth of output, adopted originally by the World Food Conference in 1974, still eluded developing countries as a group. The crux of the world food problem, however, lay in the slow growth of food production in low-income, food-deficit countries together with uneven distribution of available food supplies. When production was related to population growth, the alarming extent of the shortfall in production performance in these countries was revealed. It was noted that inadequate investment and pricing policies which did not give sufficient incentives to producers appeared to be two major influences which constrained production growth.
81. While the main responsibility for accelerating food production was that of developing countries themselves, many members pointed to the need for improved trading conditions, particularly in access to markets. Developing countries particularly needed remunerative prices for their exports to assist them to pay for increasing quantities of production inputs, such as fertilizers, essential for raising crop yields. Terms of trade of many agricultural commodities continued to be unfavourable, especially in recent years, for many developing countries. Efforts should be made by developing countries, assisted by developed countries, to expand the intra-developing country trade in both commodities and production requisites.
82. The Conference while recognizing with appreciation that the assistance to agriculture was rising in money terms, expressed concern that such assistance had declined in real terms and remained below the level estimated to be necessary for the desired expansion of production. It was agreed that a higher priority should be given to agriculture within overall flows of assistance. It was also pointed out that donors tended to respond to the priority which recipient countries themselves gave to agriculture. The target for food aid should be met or, if possible, exceeded.
83. The importance of improved distribution of food in developing countries as a complement to better production was emphasized. The Conference recognized with regret that there was no indication yet of any diminution in the numbers of people who were seriously undernourished. Improved distribution must also encompass small farmers, landless labourers and women if nutritional improvements were to be broadly based and if effective demand wee to be sustained at a higher level. Nutritional education was another aspect that needed attention, including the scope for using more locally grown foods rather than becoming increasingly dependent on imports, particularly of foods which could not be grown economically within the country.
84. The Conference reaffirmed its understanding of the guidelines of international agricultural adjustment as providing an appropriate frame of reference in a world where countries were becoming ever more inter-dependent. Countries should take them into account when formulating their national policies.
85. The Conference agreed that the periodic appraisal of progress was useful and the Director-General should prepare another monitoring report for submission to the next session of Conference, in conformity with the usual procedure.
86. The Conference considered that while future monitoring reports should remain succinct, an attempt should be made to include the following improvements:
- giving more attention to low-income, food-deficit countries, and to basic food crops in addition to grains;
- assessing agricultural trade in the context of overall trade rather than in isolation;
- making the statistical data more specific and more disaggregated;
- orienting the report more to analysing reasons for progress or its lack than limiting it predominantly to reporting what had taken place;
- extending the time span of the monitoring beyond the most recent two to three years;
- extending the analysis to include trends in agriculture in developed centrally planned economies and their impact on trade and related international agricultural adjustments.
<section>6</section>
International Development Strategy (IDS), including Regional and National Development.
87. The Conference discussed this part of the item on the basis of the full text of Resolution 35/56 as adopted by the United Nations General Assembly setting out the International Development Strategy for the Third UN Development Decade, and of the Secretariat document "Regional and National Development Strategies, Some Selected Issues for the 1980s". The Conference appreciated the role of the Organization in promoting the greater emphasis given to the sector in the new IDS as compared with the Strategy for the previous decade.
88. The Conference noted that these two papers were complementary: the IDS set out the agreed global frame of goals and approaches, while the FAO document examined prominent issues in food and agriculture which would have to be tackled at national and regional levels for the global objectives to be met.
89. The Conference reaffirmed the crucial importance of the success of the IDS and expressed its strong support for its objectives and goals. Some members pointed out that too often in the past, desirable targets had been agreed to by the international community, but the hopes thus raised had then been dashed by the harsh actualities of experience. Members recalled in particular the World Food Conference goal of abolishing hunger within a decade. More recently a number of international conferences hat explored the requirements for improvement in economic and social conditions.
90. The Conference agreed with the stress laid by the new IDS on the key role of food and agriculture in improving the quality of life and raising the economic growth of developing countries.
91. The Conference stressed that action was now essential. Indeed, the new decade had got off to a slow start with gross domestic product in most developing countries rising at rates well below the overall target of a 7 percent annual increase for the decade as a whole. This lag would need to be made up. Attainment of the overall growth target and the target of 4 percent annual growth in agricultural production would require not only a major effort on the part of developing countries to mobilize internal resources and put them to use efficiently but also a strong commitment on the part of the international community, particularly developed countries to create an international environment in full support of those efforts. The developing countries accepted that the main responsibility for achieving a faster economic growth and self-reliance fell on them, but for success they needed the cooperation of all countries in meeting this responsibility.
92. The Conference affirmed its support for the core of action at the international level as defined in the food and agricultural component of the IDS. Amongst the key components, special emphasis was generally put in the improvement in access to external markets for the agricultural exports of developing countries, including processed products, attainment of the targets for financial, technical and food assistance, with a larger share being allocated to agriculture; and the strengthening of international arrangements, at present very limited, for food security. Some members also pointed to the potential addition to resources available for agricultural development which could come from a limitation on expenditure on armaments.
93. The Conference welcomed the Summary by the Co-Chairmen of the International Meeting on Cooperation and Development held at Cancún, Mexico, concerning global negotiations and the contribution it could make to translate the IDS into concrete action at the international level. In view of its contributions to the formulation and elaboration of international, regional and national development strategies for food and agricultural development, the Conference considered that the global negotiations as and when they are launched should make appropriate use of FAO's wide range of expertise and experience.
94. The Conference noted that its next session would have the opportunity to consider how FAO might best contribute to the UN Review and Appraisal of DD3 scheduled for 1984. Members noted that since the IDS was a guide for action, it would be appropriate for the Organization to give its views to the UN in accordance with paragraph 175 of the IDS on the reasons for successes and failures in reaching the objectives of the Strategy.
95. Action at the international level could provide a framework for more effective action to be taken at national and regional levels. The Conference believed that the issues and proposals in the Secretariat document 1/ were generally in line with the priorities of the IDS and that their implementation would contribute to the realization of the goals and objectives of the Strategy. By their very nature, most problems related to agricultural and rural development and increased food production would have to be tackled at the country level. National approaches to such problems must take full cognizance of the stage of development of the country. The Conference stressed that it was essential that national policies took an integrated approach to agricultural and rural development Any improvement achieved under a piecemeal approach was only too likely to be at the cost of worsening other problems.
96. The Conference noted the special problems which were faced by small developing islands and by land-locked countries in their efforts to accelerate rural and agricultural development. The UN International Development Strategy for the Third Development Decade recognised the need for special efforts to offset major handicaps faced by these countries due to special geographical and economic constraints as well as frequency of natural disasters. The Conference urged upon the international community and donor countries to adopt special measures that would enable these countries to overcome obstacles which they faced in their efforts to accelerate their rural and agricultural development.
97. The Conference agreed that the issues selected for examination in document C 81/22 included some of the most critical of those faced by developing countries in carrying out their food and agricultural development strategies. It stressed, however, that technical issues must always be examined within their socio-economic context and that national strategies must be related to the stage of development of the country concerned. The sharing of information on experience by countries at similar stages of development could help them to formulate more effective strategies. Is was also felt that learning from the early experience of countries which were more developed could also provide useful information.
98. The dominant theme in the discussion by the Conference was the need to focus on increasing food production, especially in low-income food deficit countries. Production-oriented strategies remained of the highest priority and should be conceived within the framework of overall development planning which included goals of social equity. Countries should review all policies affecting agriculture and give due importance to the strengthening of national planning capabilities.
99. The Conference noted that many countries enjoyed considerable potential for increasing food production. Choices, however, must be made between commodities for domestic consumption as against those for exports as well as between production of agricultural raw materials, including biomass for commercial energy, and food commodities. In most developing countries priority must be given to expanding production of the basic food crops, and in particular of cereals, but the specific situation of the country must always be taken into account. While a high degree of self-sufficiency in food grains constituted the basic objective of most national food strategies in developing countries, the potential of the livestock sector in solving food problems, particularly in Africa, was also stressed. In this connection, the control of animal diseases, such as trypanosomiasis and tick-borne diseases in Africa, was considered to be of central importance for the livestock strategy.
100. The Conference emphasized the importance of concentrating much of the development efforts on small farmers, both because of their significant share in total output in many countries and because they constitute the majority of the rural poor. The Conference stressed the important role of farmers associations and cooperatives and reiterated its support for the WCARRD Programme of Action and the need for its speedy implementation. There must be full participation of rural people, including women, in the institutions whose activities could so largely contribute to development.
101. The importance of providing farmers with packages of appropriate technology and the credit to purchase such inputs as fertilizers was noted as well as the related reed of strengthening national agricultural research and extension. Progress was critically dependent on the wider dissemination of known technologies. Such technologies must be spread to more farmers in a greater number of countries and over a wider range of crops and livestock production. These efforts should be backed up by vigorous location-specific research by national institutions supported by international organizations and research networks. Conference recognized the increasing difficulties developing countries were experiencing because of the constant rise in current expenditure associated with the necessary expansion of public services infrastructure.
102. The importance of low-cost technology for the development of crop and dairy farming, the up-grading of equipment or tools for cultivation, improved management of soil and water, including prevention of waterlogging and salinity, ant evolution of appropriate cropping patterns, including exploitation of untapped cropping potential, were all emphasized by the Conference. Irrigation development must encompass rehabilitation of existing schemes as well as the expansion of new small-scale works. Long-term development strategies would also need to include, where appropriate, large-scale irrigation projects despite the heavy capital investment which was involved.
103. The preparation of cost-effective projects in food and agriculture with a greater degree of people's participation, as well as commitment of external resources for financing not only investment costs but also recurrent and local costs in low income developing countries, was critical for the implementation of the national development strategy. FAO's role in extending assistance to Member Nations in all these important areas, as well as in preparing cost effective projects for external financing, was highlighted.
104. The Conference was informed that FAO, studies had shown that given the imperative need for faster growth in output there was no alternative to the modernization of production technology for sufficiently higher yields to be obtained and one of the key inputs involved was fertilizer. Furthermore, in a period of energy shortages or high costs, it was essential for agricultural uses of commercial energy to be assured. The Conference emphasized that at the same time increased attention should be given to the development of alternative or supplementary ways of improving and maintaining soil fertility, often relying on the use of various organic materials, as well as to measures for economy and improved efficiency in the use of inorganic fertilizers and other chemical inputs to production. Even with a high rate of increase of fertilizer application, rates in developing countries would still remain significantly below those in developed countries,
105. The Conference noted the central role of price policies in any strategy for increasing food production In many cases food price policies had favoured urban populations and had contributed to the undesirable acceleration of rural/urban migration. The Conference recognized, however, that developing countries faced a dilemma in regard to the pricing of food since their poor consumers could not pay high prices. Nevertheless, price relationships must be such as to stimulate production and where necessary they should be accompanied by special measures to protect the nutritional standards of the rural and urban poor. More efficient marketing and confidence as to the level and stability of future prices were also potent means of improving incentives to producers, particularly in view of the risks they faced in changing production techniques.
106. The Conference stressed the importance of training as an integral part of national and international strategies and some members thought that this issue was not given sufficient emphasis in the IDS or in the document on regional and national strategies. The improved production technologies which were the basis of higher yields demanded that farmers be able to make effective use of modern inputs.
107. The Conference underlined the need for a better production performance to be linked to improved distribution. Nowhere in the whole development process wee the importance of linkages greater than in the production - distribution - consumption, sequence. A development strategy, either national or international, which concentrated unduly on production could not lead to sustained growth and could not solve undernutrition. The dynamics of consumption must take account of changes such as urbanization and the influence of imported food which create new patterns of demand and thus have repercussions on domestic supply.
108. Realising that concepts of economic and technical cooperation among developing countries had been further evolved during the 1970s, the Conference stressed that these concepts needed to be translated into increasingly practical measures through viable programmes and projects. In addition to the expansion of trade amongst developing countries, in which agricultural commodities and production requisites could feature prominently, there were a number of other promising forms of economic and technical cooperation. These included the establishment of regional and inter-regional research networks for agricultural products, the promotion of joint ventures for the production and distribution of fertilizers, and the creation of regional food security schemes. Care must be taken that these activities were not inconsistent with national development strategies. Efforts to promote regional approaches should be extended also to small island economies.
109. The Conference believed that its discussion of regional and national development strategies of agricultural development had further emphasized the key role of external assistance for their implementation. While such resources were not large in comparison with those mobilized within the country, members referred to many instances in which they were the indispensable catalysts for increased production or improved nutrition. Finally, the Conference appealed to all contributors to IFAD to ensure that its funds were immediately replenished.
110. The Conference accordingly adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 3/81
REPLENISHMENT OF RESOURCES OF THE INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT IFAD
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting with concern that IFAD funds have not yet been replenished,
Noting also the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 35/36 on the International Development Strategy for the Third UN Development Decade which inter alia urged the replenishment of IFAD resources by the end of 1980,
Stressing that IFAD is the only financing institution within the United Nations system entirely oriented towards assisting agricultural and rural development projects,
Appreciating the impact of the projects financed by IFAD on food production and rural development in developing countries,
Recognizing with appreciation the increasing collaboration between FAO and IFAD and the effective support given by FAO's Investment Centre for the preparation of projects for financing by IFAD
Urges the Member States of IFAD to take urgent steps to finalize the agreement on the replenishment of IFAD resources before the end of 1981 and thus assure the continuity of its operations.
(Adopted 24 November 1981)
D. Energy in agriculture and rural development
111. The Conference recognized that, although the use of commercial energy in agriculture was at present relatively small, it was of crucial importance. Moroever, to achieve the desirable rates of growth in crop and livestock production, large increases in the use of commercial energy and energy intensive inputs would be required in developing countries. The Conference recommended that the energy needs for agriculture in developing countries be assured.
112. Noting the rising costs of fossil fuels and of related agricultural inputs, the Conference stressed that efforts should be made to ensure Fret efficiency in the use of fertilizers, pesticides, mechanical equipment. and water lifting devices.
113. The Conference emphasized the need to make more effective use of locally available and renewable resources, such as the recycling of organic matter, biological nitrogen fixation, small-scale hydropower, draught animals, biogas and the application of solar and wind energy in agriculture, fisheries and forestry.
114. The Conference expressed general support of the Nairobi Programme of Action on new and renewable sources of energy and particularly welcomed the priority given to rural energy, and requested FAO to assist member countries in the implementation of the Programme of Action.
115. The Conference noted that in some countries there was an increasing interest in energy cropping, based upon sugar cane, maize and cassava. The Conference recognized that energy cropping in agriculture needed to be approached with caution so as not to endanger food supplies, or lead to an increase in prices, as this could have a detrimental effect on world food security. In this connexion, it was stressed that, to the maximum extent possible, energy cropping should aim at utilizing non-food crops and/or agricultural waste. It was recognized, however, that decisions in this respect should be based on the resources available in the countries concerned. It was considered useful that FAO monitor the developments in this field.
116. The Conference emphasized the unique importance of wood as a source of energy for rural people and for most of the urban poor in developing countries. Considering the increasing number of people living under fuel wood shortages, the Conference recognized the priority attention required by the fuel wood crisis and the vital links between fuel wood land use, the maintenance of environmental stability for continued food and crop production, and rural development.
117. The Conference stressed that action is urgently needed to restore or increase fuelwood supplies, particularly through accelerated tree planting, preferably based on multipurpose and fast-growing species. The objectives of the Nairobi Programme of Action in this respect were fully endorsed. In addition, emphasis was placed on the need to tackle the fuel wood problem within the context of an integrated approach to forestry which encompasses all the contributions of forests and trees to rural development and to environmental stability; the active participation of rural people in benefits as welt as in efforts, was viewed as essential.
118. The Conference emphasized the need to relate the contribution of wood energy to long-term world wood balances and to multi-purpose forestry for rural development; this could be reviewed within the Committee of Forestry. Some important aspects were also stressed, such as the role of women, the improvement of conversion technologies and the use of forestry and agricultural residues. Attention was also drawn to the need for rationalization of the exploitation of forestry resources and the marketing of fuelwood The Conference recommended that priority he attached to FAO programmes in these areas which already largely incorporate the recommendation: of the Nairobi. Programme of Action.
119. The Conference noted that. some countries were already providing special support to FAO programmes. related to fuelwood and forestry through trust funds and urged other potential donors to do the same.
120. The Conference took note of the experience gained in different countries in the development of new and renewable sources of energy. It was recommended that FAO should promote the exchange of information and experience and that, with regard to developing countries, a TCDC approach should be encouraged.
121. The Conference expressed its support for the cooperative network on rural energy which had been set up ill the European region. It was felt that the benefits of this programme could also be extended to developing countries through the transfer of appropriate technologies.
122. The Conference emphasized the need to develop overall national. energy policies.. taking into account varying conditions in different countries. It stressed that each country would need to adopt a selective approach so as to develop the most appropriate new and renewable sources of energy in the light of its situation and its requirements for rural development.
123. The Conference stressed that aspects of environmental conservation and of economic feasibility should be taken into account in the planning and development of new and renewable sources of energy so that short-term gains would not out-weigh long-term needs.
124. The Conference endorsed the priority on energy which the Director-General had proposed in his 1982-83 Programme of Work The Conference noted that within FAO, activities related to energy. will be coordinated through the lnter-departmental Working Group on Natural Resources and the Human Environment. The Conference recommended that, within the framework of the Nairobi Programme of Action, FAO take a lead in identifying needs and problems and in promoting appropriate action related to rural energy.
125. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 4/81
KEY ROLE OF FORESTRY IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND ITS LONG-TERM ASPECTS
THE CONFERENCE,
Recognizing the several functions the forests fulfill., such as the supply of wood for fuel and building materials, shelter, land stabilization, water quality enhancement and forest ecological, reserves,
Noting that the consumption of wood in the world is rapidly increasing,
Recognizing that the ongoing deforestation, in particular in tropical areas, threatens to destroy the productive capacity of soils and the ecological balance in general,
Nothing with concern that the available forest resources in the world are rapidly decreasing,
Stressing the fact that timely planning for long-term objectives is essential for forestry to meet future needs,
Noting that many communities already suffer from the lack of the most basic products and other benefits from the forests,
Noting that much gain can be obtained by the development of community forest areas and village forestry programmes,
Considering the socio-economic importance of the involvement of the local population in solving the problems of wood supply and particularly fuel wood,
Noting that the guidelines established by the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development emphasize the key role of forestry in rural development,
Noting that "there will be food as long as there are forests",
Recognizing the leading role of FAO within the United Nations system in forestry, primary forestry industries and rural development,
1. Calls upon Governments to take into account the key role of forestry in rural development and to devise and pursue policies to preserve the environmental and ecological heritage, so that resources of nature are used wisely by the present generation and handed down to posterity;
2. Supports the Director-General's Forestry Strategy for Development which is designed to assist Member Nations in giving full weight to the key role of forestry in rural development, with special reference to the conservation and regeneration of species important to all people.
(Adopted 24 November 1981)
<section>7</section>
VI. Activities and programmes of the organization
A. Programme of work and budget 1982-83 and medium-term objectives
B. World food day
C. National Agricultural Research in Developing Countries
D. World soil charter
E. Resources for Food Production and Agricultural Development
F. Review of the Regular Programme 1980-81
G. Review of Field Programmes 1980-81
H. Follow-up to WCARRD
I. United nations/FAO world food programme (WFP)
J. Relations and consultations with International organizations
A. Programme of work and budget 1982-83 and medium-term objectives
Background
Methodology
General
Level of the budget
General policy and direction
Major programme - agriculture
Programme 2.1.1 - natural resources
Energy
Programme 2.1.2 - crops
Programme 2.1.3 - Livestock
Programme 2.1.4 - research support
Programme 2.1.5 - rural development
Programme 2.1.6 - nutrition
Programme 2.1.7 - food and agricultural information and analysis
Programme 2.1.8 - food and agricultural policy
Major programme - fisheries
Major programme - forestry
Investment
Field programme planning and liaison
Decentralization
Freedom from hunger campaign/action for development
Technical cooperation programme
Support and common services
Background
126. The Conference noted that the Director General's proposed Programme of Work and Budget 198283 had been prepared against the background of the world food situation which despite developments remained disturbing, and under circumstances in which many countries were suffering from reduced levels of economic activity, high inflation, budgetary constraints, growing unemployment, balance of payments difficulties, debt burdens, and deteriorating terms of trade for some major agricultural commodities. Moreover, although world food supply had been growing by 3.3 percent per annum in recent years, this increase was well below the 4 percent objective foreseen in the International Development Strategy and was likely to remain so in the foreseeable future. For Africa, in particular, food production per head had been in decline throughout the decade. It was also noted that a permanent and global system of food security was yet to be achieved and food aid had consistently failed to
reach the target of 10 million tons per annum set by the World Food Conference.
127. It was agreed that these problems reinforced the need for intensifying the struggle against hunger, malnutrition and poverty.
Methodology
128. The Conference appreciated that in the preparation of the Programme of Work and Budget 1982-83 and Medium-Term Objectives, account had been taken of suggestions made at previous sessions of the Conference and the Programme and Finance Committees. In particular, the clear and succinct presentation of objectives and better definition of programmes. were welcomed.
129. Some members considered that clearer detail could be provided concerning changes in programmes. It was also suggested that there could be a closer integration between the Review of the Regular Programme and the Programme of Work and Budget and/or the Medium-Term Objectives. Other members considered, however, that particularly in view of the cost of documentation, the size of the Programme of Work and Budget document could be further reduced; also that the Programme and Finance Committees should be asked through the Council to consider whether the Medium-Term Objectives document should or should not be incorporated in the Programme of Work and Budget document for 1984-85.
General
130. The Conference recognized the Director-General's problem in attempting to draw up a Programme of Work and Budget which would enable FAO even in a limited way to meet the demands to expand its activities in the fight against hunger and rural poverty in a period of world financial stringency.
131. Many members referred to the precarious situation of many developing countries, especially the deteriorating terms of trade for agricultural products, the necessity to import both food and energy, all of which had implications, not only for their balance of payments, but also for the basic welfare of their people. Agriculture was of primal and basic improvements and food production particularly in food-deficit countries was felt to be the world's foremost concern. This had been recognized, at recent major summit meetings and only last month at Cancún.
132. The majority of members left that in the circumstances, the Director-General had if anything erred on the side of caution rather than the reverse in presenting his proposals for programme increases which they considered modest. They considered it indispensable that FAO's responsibilities in such areas as follow-up to WCARRD and international development strategy formulation, science and technology, energy, and commodity problems should continue and increase.
133. They noted however that the Director-General's proposals for the various programmes and for the level of budget were fully consistent with the Summary Programme of Work and Budget 1982-83 as discussed and recommended by the Seventy-ninth Session of the Council. These members noted with satisfaction that the proposed programme increase had been largely allocated to technical programmes and decentralization to the country level, which has much improved the speed and efficiency of FAO's delivery. FAO's capacity to quickly respond to countries' essential technical assistance needs had been strengthened within the various technical programmes, through the Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP), and the provision of services no promote technical and economic cooperation between the developing countries. All these actions were especially welcome. The emphasis in programme orientation on food production and reduction of post-harvest losses, particularly in Africa, energy,
follow-up to WCARRD, and the playing of a catalytic role in the promotion of national self-reliance through support to investment were singled out for special support. It was noted in this connection that in 1980 the FAO Regular Programme supported a total field programme of nearly $3 billion per annum. The importance of national agricultural research and the transfer of technology to the farmer, farming systems development, nutrition, the struggle against environment degradation, particularly desertification, work on livestock diseases, and the achievement of more equitable conditions for trade in agricultural products, were also emphasized.
134. The great majority of members therefore supported the priorities and objectives set out for the Organization by the Director-General in his Programme of Work and Budget 1982-83 and Medium-Term Objectives document.
135. Some members, while generally supporting the objectives and most of the priorities of FAO and emphasizing the Organization's special place in the UN system, were unable to support the real level of increase proposed in the programme. They were fully committed to the fight against hunger and malnutrition by means of multilateral and bilateral aid, and intended by this means to support the efforts of the developing countries to develop and implement appropriate food and agricultural strategies. They further referred to the difficult choices in priorities they were having to make in their domestic budgets. They pointed out that in recent years, FAO's budget had been growing more rapidly than had their national budgets and economies. They considered that in the circumstances, It was reasonable and desirable that the whole UN system, including FAO, should undergo a period of budgetary consolidation, i.e. a pause in real programme growth in the FAO as well as in the budgets
of other organizations in the UN system.
136. They believed that the Organization could, through more rigorous evaluation, identify elements of the programme to which fewer resources could be devoted without adverse effects on its operational impact; and that administrative costs could be further reduced. In this connection, some members referred particularly to Regional Offices, support services, consultancies, meetings and publications. Some of these also pointed out that some countries faced the choice between allocating funds to aid agencies, such as the UNDP, and to FAO. In this connection one member explained that his country therefore had to assess the claims of the FAO Regular Programme on criteria which other members did not necessarily apply, such as relative geographical allocation. Since resources, even where growing, were limited, acceptance of the Director General's proposals might in turn make it necessary to adjust their intended contributions to bilateral aid or to multilateral aid agencies.
137. A few other members, while reserving their position on the balyet level, shared most of these views.
138. The great majority, while recognizing and respecting the views of all Member Nations, strongly disagreed with the above arguments. They supported the need to select priorities carefully and to continue to effect administrative economic, whenever possible. They strongly rejected however the suggestion that increases in FAO's budget level as proposed by the Director-General should lead to reductions in bilateral or multilateral aid or in contributions to other international organizations. Some members expressed strong regret at what they considered the threatening attitude in this regard witch had been adopted by two delegations. The great majority believed that, in the light of the Cancún meeting and with the challenges now facing FAO, they could only regard the proposed programme and budget as the minimum needed to enable FAO to play it's rightful and essential part in the increased international cooperation to which the Melbourne and Cancún summits had referred. In
this connection, they cited the past record of the Organizations and expressed full confidence in the Director-General.
Level of the budget
139. The great majority expressed their full support for the proposed budget level; some members were unable to support the proposed budget level; and some other members having reserved their positions until a later stage, subsequently declared their positions at the time of voting.
140. The Conference approved the Programme of Work and Budget, and adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 5/81
BUDGETARY APPROPRIATION 1982-83
THE CONFERENCE,
Having considered the Director-General's Programme of Work and Budget and the conclusions of its Commissions,
Approves the Programme of Work proposed by the Director-General for 1982-83;
Resolves that for the financial period 1982-83:
1. Appropriations are voted for the following purposes:
Chapter I - General Policy and Directions 28632000
Chapter II - Technical and Economic Programmes 163551000
Chapter III - Development Support Programmers 80261000
Chapter IV - Technical Cooperation Programe 47387000
Chapter V - Support Service: 51724000
Chapter VI - Common Services 14485000
Chapter VII -Contingencies 600000
Total effective working budget 360640000
Chapter VIII - Transfer to fax Equalization Fund 48160000
Total. Appropriations (Gross) 416800000
2. The appropriations (gross) voted in paragraph 1, shall be financed by assessments on Member Nations, after deduction of Miscellaneous Income in the amount of $ 14 260 000 thus resulting in assessments against Member Nations of $ 400 540 000.
3. In establishing the actual amounts of contributions to be paid by individual Member Nations, the assessment of each Member Nation shall be reduced by any amount standing to its credit in the Tax Equalization Fund provided that the credit of a Member Nation that levies taxes on the salaries, emoluments and indemnities received from FAO, by staff members shall be reduced by the estimated amounts of such taxes to be reimbursed to the staff member by FAO.
4. The contributions due from Member Nations in 1982 and 1983 shall be paid in accordance with the scale adopted by the Conference at its Twenty-first Session, which contributions, after the deduction of amounts standing to the credit of Member Nations in the Tax Equalization Fund, result in net amounts payable totalling $ 355 380 000 as set out in Appendix E to this Report.
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
141. In discussion of the individual Chapters, the following were the main points made on various programme matters.
General policy and direction
142. A number of members noted the need to contain the costs of servicing FAO's Governing Bodies under Programme 1.1, particularly through continuing to keep documentation as brief as possible.
143. Some members stressed the need for continued attention to the selection of priorities, on the basis of improved evaluation techniques.
144. A number of members, while endorsing the need for coordination of activities within the United Nations system, expressed concern about their growing volume and cost. The policy, already approved by the Council, of applying the test of cost-effectiveness to increasing demands for participation in coordination activities was re-affirmed.
Major programme - agriculture
145. The Conference supported in general the medium-term objectives and priorities and the budget allocations for programme and sub-programmes within the Major Programme - Agriculture.
146. In reviewing this Major Programme, it was emphasized that much of the activity should contribute to countries' implementation of WCARRD follow-up policies. The importance of internal integration and coordination activities was recognized. In this connection, the Conference also laid particular stress on the need for:
- increasing food production per unit of land area and from more effective utilization of marginal lands;
- ensuring the rational and sustained productive use of land and water resources while protecting the environment;
- improving incentives to agricultural production and the incomes of small farm families, agricultural workers and other rural people.
Programme 2.1.1 - natural resources
147. The Conference particularly emphasized FAO's role in assisting members to safeguard land and water resources from erosion and desertification and in reclaiming degraded lands for production. It supported the work on assessing the potential of land through soil, vegetation and irrigation potential studies, in which remote sensing plays and important role.
148. Members stressed the need to increase the production capacity per unit area of land. FAO's growing role in promoting investment in irrigation and drainage and improving farm water management was welcomed and possibilities for using non-conventional energy sources for irrigation were noted. The Conference supported the high priority given to better soil conservation practices and improvement of shifting cultivation.
149. It approved work promoting increased and more effective use of fertilizers. It emphasized in particular the importance of action aimed at developing the use of fertilizers which were less demanding in fossil energy, such as organic materials, compost and biological nitrogen fixation. Emphasis on the further development of extension services for the Fertilizer Programme was endorsed and FAO's efforts to obtain additional extra-budgetary resources for the International Fertilizer Supply Scheme were strongly supported by the majority of members.
150. The primary role of the small farm unit in most developing countries' agriculture was recognized. FAO's assistance in developing integrated small farm management systems including both crops and livestock was found particularly welcome. The collection of comparative farm management data was considered particularly useful for this and for sector planning.
Energy
151. The Conference strongly supported the high priority being given to work on the efficient use of energy, its conservation and the development of alternative energy sources.
Programme 2.1.2 - crops
152. The Conference stressed FAO's role in promoting the use of improved seeds and planting material for improved food crop production. Seed production needed to be increased in the developing countries, and their national capacities for adaptive plant breeding strengthened. The proposal to bring together all seed-related activities under a new Seed Service was welcomed.
153. FAO's role, together with the International Board for Plant Genetic Resources, in conserving and ensuring the availability of genetic material was supported. The Conference discussed a proposal that the establishment of an international gene bank under FAO auspices should be explored and that FAO should prepare the elements of a draft International Convention for Plant Genetic Resources. On the initiative of the delegation of Mexico, the Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 6/81
PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES
THE CONFERENCE,
Recognizing that plans genetic resources are indispensable for the genetic improvement of cultivated plants, and that they are in danger of erosion and loss,
Recalling, that work on plant genetic resources was begun in FAO as the result of a recommendation made by the First Session of the Advisory Committee on Agriculture in 1946,
Recalling further that in 1974 with the support of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, the International Board for Plant Genetic Resources (IBPGR) was set up for which FAO provides the Secretariat,
Noting that a Joint FAO/IBPGR programme is promoting the international collaboration of national, regional and international plant genetic centres in which plant genetic resources are collected, maintained, evaluated, exchanged and distributed,
Considering that there is no international agreement for ensuring the conservation, maintenance and free exchange of the genetic resources of agricultural interest contained in existing germplasm banks,
Convinced of the need for such an agreement,
Recalling the proposal made by some members during the Seventy-ninth Session of the Council in June 1981 that consideration be given to the establishment of an international bank of plant genetic resources under the auspices of FAO to ensure the free exchange of plant genetic resources between countries,
1. Requests the Director-General to examine and prepare the elements of a draft international convention, including legal provisions designed to ensure that global plant genetic resources of agricultural interest will be conserved and used for the benefit of all human beings, of this and future generations, without restrictive practices that limit their availability of exchange, whatever the source of such practices.
2. Requests the Director-General to prepare a study on the establishment of an international bank of plant genetic resources of agricultural interest under the auspices of FAO, taking into account the provisions of the proposed international convention as well as on-going national, regional and international efforts in this field in particular those of the IBPGR.
3. Requests the Director-General to present proposals based on the studies mentioned to the Committee on Agriculture for consideration at its Seventh Session in 1983, which shall report thereon to the Council with a view to consideration by the Twenty-second Session of the FAO Conference.
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
154. The Conference welcomed FAO's expanding assistance to developing countries in order to increase productivity of cereals. It stressed the need to give special attention to improving roots and tubers in those countries where they were food staples and also where they were major food crops for small farmers and other farming enterprises and people in rural areas. Appropriate mechanization was considered an important element in efforts to increase productivity.
155. The Conference supported the action programme for plant protection, including the emergency operations related to locust and other migratory pests, and expressed appreciation for FAO's prompt and effective action in this area.
156. The Conference re-confirmed the importance of reducing post-harvest food losses with emphasis on improved farm and village storage. It stressed the need for locating additional extra-budgetary resources for the Special Action Programme on the Prevention of Food Losses. It was felt that there was also need of energy-efficient agricultural processing industries for the conservation of food and non-food products.
Programme 2.1.3 - Livestock
157. The Conference appreciated the contribution which FAO had made, and would be continuing to make within the Livestock Programme, to the control of livestock diseases, in particular African swine fever in Latin America and the Caribbean, and trypanosomiasis in Africa. The serious economic losses resulting from rinderpest and foot-and-mouth disease were noted.
158. The Conference reconfirmed its support for the Programme of the Control of African Animal Trypanosomiasis and Related Development, recognizing the crucial role of the activities thereunder in developing the agricultural resources of the region. Welcoming FAO's overall coordinating function for the Programme, the Conference urged Governments, financial institutions and relevant agencies to join in efforts to provide resources for implementation of field activities identified under the Programme.
159. Members agreed with the greater emphasis being given in cooperation with other expert bodies, to animal genetic resources and to the utilization of livestock feed resources, including better pasture management. Stress was laid on the role which small animals, particularly sheep, goats and poultry, could play in contributing to the agricultural economy, particularly as regards small farmers, and in raising protein intake amongst poverty groups, though there was a parallel need to ensure adequate protection to forest and fuelwood resources.
160. The Conference welcomed the greater emphasis on national training within the International Scheme for the Coordination of Dairy Development (ISLAND) and the International Meat Development Scheme (IMDS).
Programme 2.1.4 - research support
161. The Conference noted that Agricultural Research was supported under ail the economic and technical programmes. of FAO. It endorsed the programme of Research Support (see also under pares. 224-232 below).
162. The Conference particularly welcomed FAO's efforts to strengthen national research services and increase regional and international research collaboration, and commended FAO cooperation with multilateral donors such as the World Bank and the Regional Development Banks.
163. Particular stress was laid on the need to strengthen the linkages between research, extension and farmers, to ensure the full benefits of research investment. The Organization's role in supporting applied research and the adaptation of technologies to different environments was recognized as contributing valuably to technical cooperation between developing countries. FAO's assistance in the training of personnel, especially for agricultural research planning and management, was welcomed.
164. The Conference underlined the contribution of the FAO/IAEA Joint Division in the application of isotopes and radiation in plant breeding, disease control and pest management.
Programme 2.1.5 - rural development
165. The Conference affirmed the central role of the Programme in spearheading FAO's support to WCARRD follow-up. Strong support was expressed for this activity (which was discussed in more detail under agenda item 13, pares. 280-295). The Conference also stressed FAO's position as the lead agency for Rural Development within the United Nations system. The input provided under this Programme for World Food Day was also appreciated.
166. The Conference noted with satisfaction the existence of a special trust fund intended to ensure follow-up to the recommendations of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development and stressed the need and expressed the hope that other contributions would soon join the generous donors who had already granted their support to this important special action programme.
167. The Conference laid particular stress on FAO's support to development of the rural poor, including small farmers. Within this group, emphasis was given to the needs of women and children.
168. The importance of FAO's contribution to population education in rural areas was noted.
169. Members welcomed the prominent role being given to extensions, education and training support. Every effort should be made to ensure that two-way systems of communication were developed, so that small farmers, producers' organizations and other types of agricultural enterprises received the full benefits of technology developments and could also make their own needs known. The emphasis on training of trainers was correct and, in view of the high rates of illiteracy among many rural populations, assistance with development support communication was especially useful.
170. The Conference appreciated the attention given to problems of agrarian structures and agrarian reform. The important role that rural organizations, especially cooperatives, had to play in mobilizing and bringing basic agricultural supplies and services to the population was noted. FAO's work to improve agricultural administration and production support services was welcomed.
171. Members appreciated the input being made into rural marketing organization and stressed the need for adequate storage at all stages of the marketing chain. Specialist agricultural credit systems supported by and integrated with extension, agricultural service systems and carefully devised agricultural insurance had a crucial role to play.
Programme 2.1.6 - nutrition
172. The Conference agreed with the proposals for this programme and that increased emphasis should be given to the introduction of nutritional considerations into FAO's development assistance and into agricultural and rural development plans and projects, at the national level.
173. Emphasis was placed on the importance of FAO's assistance, particularly in food policy, in the implementation of the Lagos Plan of Action.
174. The Conference noted the importance of assisting Member Nations in the assessment of the nutritional situation in their countries. The role of the Fifth World Food Survey was appreciated in this context.
175. Members emphasized the promotion of community nutrition programmes, particularly supplementary feeding programmes, for the most vulnerable sectors of the population. It continued to be important to evaluate the nutritional adequacy of WFP feeding projects.
176. The Conference supported assistance in the development of national food control systems and improved food handling. It welcomed the priority given to developing countries by the Codex Alimentarius Commission.
Programme 2.1.7 - food and agricultural information and analysis
177. The Conference noted the considerable progress made in FAO's computerized system for food and agricultural statistics. It endorsed the programme for further expansion of the data series as well as steps taken to more speedily process an increasing number of statistics and socio-economic indicators for monitoring WCARRD follow-up; the food and nutrition situation; and for use as background material to the Fifth World Food Survey. Efforts to improve the accuracy of information were welcomed.
178. The Conference emphasized the importance of the Organization's work in monitoring progress in achievement of long-term objectives in developing countries, especially in Africa, and analysing the flow of domestic and external resources to agriculture.
179. The Conference supported the greater stress to be given in the State of Food and Agriculture to the analysis of development issues, and to improving outlook analysis with respect to agricultural production, stocks, trade and nutrition (as discussed in more detail under agenda item 6.1, pares. 32 - 65). The Conference agreed that work on agricultural prices should be expanded to meet the requirements arising from the growing emphasis placed by member countries on the formulation and assessment of price policies.
180. The Conference supported the further strengthening of the Global Information and Early Warning System which would allow a better assessment of the world outlook for food supplies, demand, and stocks. Members also welcomed efforts to assist countries in establishing and operating their own early warning systems.
Programme 2.1.8 - food and agricultural policy
181. The Conference supported the high priority being given, through training and direct policy and planning advice, to the strengthening of national capabilities for the formulation of adequate food and agricultural strategies and policies including production incentives, and programmes. and projects for food and agricultural development. The importance of developing systems to identify priorities at the village level was emphasized.
182. The Conference agreed that major priority should be given to activities designed to improve world food security. These activities should assist developing countries to devise and implement their own programmes, including food reserve projects, and those for provision of infrastructure. Assistance should also (as discussed under agenda item 6.2, paragraph 75) support implementation of the Plan of Action on World Food Security, including: increasing the self-reliance of the developing countries; the development of improved international cooperative action, and the strengthening of national preparedness to counter acute food shortages.
183. The Conference agreed that work on the analysis of major global agricultural policy issues should promote the implementation of the new International Development Strategy and the Substantial New Programme of Action as adopted by the UN Conference on Least Developed Countries and the results of other recent relevant international conferences. (See also Agenda item 7, paras. 87 - 110).
184. Members supported the Organization's activities in commodity policy and trade and agreed that inter-governmental consultations for promoting joint action by producers and consumers on commodity problems should continue, taking into account the need to avoid duplication of the work of other specialized bodies concerned with international commodity trade. In particular, the Conference appreciated FAO's technical support to UNCTAD. FAO should develop cooperative arrangements between intergovernmental commodity groups and the new Common Fund, and assist in preparing projects for financing by the Fund.
185. The Conference endorsed the early preparation of the Programme for the 1990 World Census of Agriculture and the continued collaboration with the United Nations National Household Survey Capability Programme.
Major programme - fisheries
186. The Conference fully supported the priorities and thrust of Major Programme 2.2, Fisheries. It expressed its satisfaction at the progress being achieved by the FAO's EEZ Programme which provided technical and other assistance to developing countries in their efforts to manage and develop the fishery resources of their exclusive economic zones. The Conference reaffirmed its support for the proposed FAO, World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development, backed by careful preparation and study so as to ensure comprehensive coverage of the problems faced by countries in the management and exploitation of fisheries within their Exclusive Economic Zones.
187. Members appreciated the increased attention being given to fisheries policy. The decentralized approach to the delivery of the programme was welcomed and the importance of sub-regional cooperative activity emphasized.
188. The Conference noted the close integration between the Organization's Regular and Field Programmes in fisheries, and found that the present combination of fisheries' programmes. facilitated a coherent approach.
189. The Conference placed particular emphasis upon the provision of advice on policies and planning for fisheries management and development, including the surveillance and control of fisheries, the need for resources assessment, and the promotion of appropriate technologies for the fisheries of developing countries, with particular regard to the special requirements of small-scale fishermen.
190. The Conference also noted the basic importance of statistics and information on al aspects of fisheries, including socio-economic data on small-scale fishermen. In this connection, particular reference was made to the need to maintain and expand the Fishery Country Profile series.
191. The need for continued priority attention to training at all levels was emphasized as a vital means of enhancing the capacities of developing countries to obtain the maximum benefits from their fish resources.
192. The Conference agreed that a proper balance was being maintained by the Organization in its work in both marine and infant fisheries and welcomed the special efforts in inland fisheries and agriculture, and the control of environmental degradation.
Major programme - forestry
193. The Conference agreed with the strategy being pursued through the Forestry programme of integrating the productive, protective and social objectives in order to maximize forestry's contribution to rural development, and endorsed the balanced package made up by the emphases within the Forestry programmes,
194. The Conference expressed concern at the continued depletion of the world's forest cover and its environmental consequences leading to soil loss and degradation, salutation, flash floods, prolonged droughts and desertification. It was emphasized that high priority should be given to the role forestry played in maintaining the soil and water base necessary for continued food and agricultural production, thus contributing to the conservation of the environment, and maintenance of ecological balance.
195. It was noted that only a small proportion of the forest resources available in the tropical developing countries were at present under intensive management. The emphasis given to improving the management of forest lands through strengthening of institutions, training at all levels, modern survey techniques, better production systems and land use practices, and efficient systems of forest harvesting and wood processing was also noted, as well as the importance of rationalizing shifting cultivation and the need for a coordinated approach to this task.
196. The Conference approved the increased emphasis of the Forestry programme on activities to benefit the rural poor, in particular the high priority being attached to fuel wood which was the principal source of energy for many rural households. It noted the need to develop such activities with full participation of the people. The Conference recognized the importance attached to integrating forestry and agriculture, including the continued development of agro-forestry systems, community forestry, the conservation and rational management of wildlife as a local source of protein, and forestry's role in providing off-farm employment and income through appropriate forestry and forest-based processing activities.
197. The Conference endorsed the position of FAO as the lead agency in the field of forestry and primary forest industries within the United Nations system, and expressed the hope that its effectiveness in this respect would not be adversely affected by initiatives elsewhere within the system.
Investment
198. The Conference, mindful of the large investment requirements of agricultural development, recognized the key role played in this connection by the Investment Centre.
199. It endorsed the emphasis which was being placed on cooperation with the World Bank and with a growing number of international financing institutions, including in particular IFAD and the regional banks.
200. It welcomed the increased attention devoted to training, in order to build up national capacities to prepare projects for financing.
Field programme planning and liaison
201. The Conference stressed the importance of the proper planning, programming and coordination of field activities. These functions had become even more essential in view of the need to face the consequences of the declining resource situation affecting UNDP, which remained FAO's main source of extra-budgetary financing.
202. Under the circumstances, the Conference agreed that all efforts should continue to be made to identify new voluntary funding sources under Trust Fund arrangements, in particular to finance FAO's special action programmes,
203. The Conference noted the key role of the programme in promoting the implementation of the "New Dimensions in International Technical Cooperation", including, in particular, Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries (TCDC).
204. It strongly supported the efforts which were being devoted to such priority actions as assistance to the Least Developed Countries and cooperation with African Member States to ensure appropriate follow-up to the Lagos Plan of Action.
<section>8</section>
Decentralization
205. The Conference strongly supported the Director-General's decentralization policy and underlined that the functions of the FAO Regional and Country Offices in this process should be complementary.
206. FAO Representatives (FAORs), in particular, had a fundamental role to play in ensuring the full participation of Member Nations in the Regular Programme activities of the Organization and in developing its field programmes, through active association with the identification of assistance requirements and the monitoring of project implementation,
207. The Conference appreciated the concrete steps which had been taken to delegate effective authority to the FAORs Most members strongly encouraged the Director-General to continue and expand his initiatives in this respect, within the limits set by the rules and regulations of the Organization and constraints on resources, particularly in the area of financial management.
208. The continuing close and constructive cooperation between FAORs and UNDP Resident Representatives was noted with satisfaction. This policy, which was encouraged, was fully reflected in the joint letter which the UNDP Administrator and the Director-General had addressed to their respective representatives on 30 July 1980 1/.
209. Some members expressed reserve about the rate of the proposed expansion in the number of FAORs and also felt that in view of the decentralization to the country level, a review of the continuing validity of the role of the Regional Offices would be desirable. A large majority felt however that the proposed expansion of the number of FAORs was essential and that the role of the Regional Offices was fully valid, particularly since FAO could hardly envisage decreasing its regional involvement at a time when regional institutions and activities, both within and outside the UN system, were assuming growing importance in the economic development of the Third World.
Freedom from hunger campaign/action for development
210. The important role of non-governmental organizations in agricultural development was emphasized. This was due to the innovative nature of many of the projects they undertook, to the flexibility of their procedures, and to the overwhelming importance in the light of the follow-up to WCARRD, of involving people from both developing and developed countries in the struggle against hunger and malnutrition. Activities under FFHC/AD were therefore fully supported and, it was felt, should be intensified.
Technical cooperation programme
211. Strong general support was expressed for this programme. A number of developing countries gave concrete examples of its practical usefulness. The Conference agreed that the TCP filled efficiently an important gap, by rapidly meeting unforeseen short-term, small-scale technical assistance needs including in particular emergencies, investment preparation and training.
212. One of the more significant benefits of the TCP was seen to be its catalytic effect. Besides the generation of investment, this often occurred as a result of projects which led to larger-scale follow-up under UNDP or Trust Funds, or provided critical bridging operations when necessary.
213. It was agreed that the rigour which had been applied in the selection of TCP projects, according to the criteria endorsed by the Sixty-ninth and Seventy-fourth Sessions of the Council, must continue to be applied, and that its existing role should continue unchanged.
214. The Conference noted with satisfaction the priority being given under TCP to Africa, as well as, more generally, to least developed member countries. At the same time, it also noted that the Director-General had to maintain an overall balance reflecting the needs of all regions.
215. The great majority of members endorsed the budget proposed for the TCP. Several pointed to the large gap between the need for TCP-type activities and resources available.
216. A few members, while generally acknowledging the value of the Programme and the efficiency of its operations, felt that the need for the proposed increase had not been fully established and should be reviewed in the light of general economic circumstances and budgetary restraint in their own countries.
217. Some members mentioned their wish for independent full evaluation of TCP activities. The great majority however considered that, taking into account the information in the evaluation Review of the Regular Programme, a new external evaluation was not necessary and would not be useful, in view of the positive evaluation which had already been carried out in 1978 and endorsed by the Seventy-fourth Session of the Council in Resolution 1/74 1/, and the evaluation of TCP activities contained in the Review of the Regular Programme .
Support and common services
218. The steps taken over the past few years to apply the utmost economy in the operations of these programmes, were acknowledged. The Organization was urged to continue these efforts.
219. The quality and timely appearance of documents was commended, but continuing vigilance to maintain brevity and keep their numbers and cost down was stressed.
220. The Conference approved Supplements 1 and 2 to the Programme of Work and Budget (list of sessions and list of publications, etc. for 1981-82).
B. World food day
221. The Conference congratulated the Director-General and his staff on the success of the first World Food Day which had exceeded the expectations of many. World Food Day had concentrated the attention of all groups of nations on the problems of food and hunger in a way which had never been achieved before.
222. The Conference urged Member Nations and Non-governmental Organizations to strive, with the support of FAO, to ensure that the annual celebration of World Food Day would further intensify public awareness.
223. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 7/81
WORLD FOOD DAY
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling Resolution 1/79 establishing World Food Day to be observed annually on 16 October, the anniversary of the founding of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Noting with satisfaction the outstanding response by Member States of the Organization, including leadership and participation by Heads of State and Ministers, in activities which have assured widespread public recognition of World Food Day and practical efforts in pursuance of its objectives as established in paragraph 1 of Resolution 1/79,
Commending highly the Director-General for this successful implementation of the Resolution,
Appreciating the flow of information, initiatives, and assistance from Headquarters, Regional Offices and FAO Representatives' staff to Member Nations and Non-governmental Organizations in organizing activities at the national, regional and international level,
Expressing appreciation to Governments and institutions which through their voluntary financial contributions have supported the observance of the first World Food Day,
Convinced that the world food situation more than ever justifies support for "the necessary long-term effort to overcome widespread malnutrition", for giving priority to food and agricultural development, and for the role therein of the Food and Agriculture Organization,
Believing that the maintenance and enhancement of World Food Day activities on an annual basis requires continuous initiative and effort, under the leadership of the Food and Agriculture Organization, at national, regional and international levels,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all Member Governments, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, all organizing authorities and Non-governmental Organizations involved at national, regional and international levels for the successful organization of activities celebrating the first World Food Day on 16 October 1981;
2. Strongly recommends the intensification of these efforts in future years, so as to increase public awareness of the problems of the world food situation and of the need to develop greater self-reliance, foster economic and technical cooperation, and strengthen cooperative action, including the efforts of FAO, at the international level, in the struggle against hunger, malnutrition and poverty;
3. Urges Member Governments and Non-governmental Organizations to take the necessary steps towards this end, particularly with a view to improving domestic food production, promoting participation by the rural masses in decisions and measures affecting their development, closing the gap between actual and potential yields, promoting greater self-reliance, and improving living standards for the rural poor;
4. Requests the Director-General to take all necessary measures within approved budgetary resources to assist Member Governments, Non-governmental Organizations and other bodies in these efforts, including, as appropriate, publications, information, and other relevant activities directed towards promoting exchanges of experience and new ideas, sustaining public interest, developing practical follow-up actions, promoting self-financing activities supported by voluntary extra-budgetary contributions for World Food Day activities and to report regularly on progress made to the Conference.
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
C. National Agricultural Research in Developing Countries
224. The Conference welcomed document C 81/26 as presenting a clear and concise statement of the progress made since 1975 in the development of national agricultural research systems in the developing countries and analysing the major constraints still impeding their more rapid progress in terms of available finance, skilled manpower, organization and management, and the need for regional and international cooperation.
225. The Conference laid particular stress on the importance of research being integrated with other essential services in the development process and on the forging of strong two way linkages, especially with the extension services, in order that the full benefits of research reached the "resource-poor" farmer, fisherman and forester. The importance of the human element in this process was underlined, particularly the attitude of research workers themselves vis-à-vis the farmers. In this connexion, the Conference reaffirmed its strong support for the role of the Organization in the training of research workers, planners and managers.
226. The Conference stressed the desirability of research at the national level being organized and conducted on an interdisciplinary basis and reiterated its approval of the integration of research activities in all the programmes. of the Organization.
227. It was considered that the Organization should play an increasingly important role in the support of the application of advanced scientific practices of great importance to agriculture including specifically genetic engineering, remote sensing, systems modelling aimed at better farming practices and land use for the small farmer, the application of radio-isotopes and radiation, the development of scale neutral technologies, and biological approaches to pest control in pre- and post-harvest situations.
228. The Organization's role as a catalyst in effective research collaboration was supported, particular emphasis being laid on the need for stronger linkages to be forged between regional and international research institutions and the national services which would benefit from internationally generated technologies. The Conference approved the proposal to give greater attention to the establishment of research networks, urging the wider utilization of specialized national and regional institutions in the developing countries, in this process.
229. The Conference supported the concept of a global system of agricultural research in which the role of the Organization would be to ensure continued collaboration and monitoring and to take the initiative in closing gaps, but cautioned against over-optimism about its rapid achievement.
230. The importance of prompt and adequate exchange of information was recognized by the Conference to be fundamental to the proper functioning of cooperative research systems, and it approved the continuing decentralized activities of the CARIS project.
231. The Conference emphasized that research activities should have a sound cost benefit ratio and urged its member countries to give urgent attention to the improvement of their national services in order to acquire and retain the necessary credibility on which planners could base financial allocations for research. In this connexion, the need for more rapid results was underlined and it was suggested that greater attention be given to the dissemination and wider adaptation of existing results especially those emanating from the international research system, for which the Organization's continued support was approved.
232. The Conference endorsed the research strategy proposed in the Medium-Term Objectives and also reiterated its approval of the Research Support Programme.
D. World soil charter
233. The Conference considered the World Soil Charter to be a very relevant, timely and well prepared document. It urged the international community to take better care of the non-renewable resource, soil, and highlighted the need for maintaining and improving its productivity which was basic for the survival of mankind.
234. The principles contained in the Charter and the related action were considered to be excellent guidelines for promoting the effective management, conservation, and reclamation of lands' and for combatting desertification.
235. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 8/81
WORLD SOIL CHARTER
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling Resolution VI of the World Food Conference (Rome, 1974), by which the Food and Agriculture Organization was urged to establish a World Soil Charter as a basis for an international cooperation towards the most rational use of the world's soil resources,
Realizing that land resources are limited and that of the total land area of the world only a small percentage is currently used to feed the world population which is likely to reach six billion by the end of the century,
Recalling further the Programme of Action as adopted by the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (Rome, 1979), which called for "an efficient use of land... with due regard for ecological balance and environmental protection", and the Plan of Action of the U.N. Conference on Desertification (Nairobi, 1977) to combat land degradation and desertification,
Concurring that the food requirements of mankind including the eradication of malnutrition can be met by:
- the intensification of food crop production including multiple cropping, wherever this can be safely accomplished,
- the bringing into cultivation of new lands, wherever conditions for sustained cropping prevail, with a view to meeting food production requirements,
- the establishment and better utilization of grasslands and forests,
Sharing the concern caused by the dangers of soil degradation resulting from misuse of land and inappropriate measures for intensifying production, particularly in areas which are exposed to water and wind erosion, or salinity and alkalinity,
Noting the research carried out by FAO in conjunction with Unesco, UNEP, WHO, and other competent international organizations, and in consultation with Governments concerned, with a view to assessing the lands that can still be brought into cultivation, taking proper account of permanent vegetation cover for the protection of catchment areas and of land required for forestry, grazing and other uses, with particular reference to hazards of irreversible soil degradation as well as the order of magnitude of costs and inputs required,
Recognizing that decisive progress towards intensified assistance in the improvement of productivity and conservation of soils can be achieved by the adoption and implementation of appropriate principles and guidelines for action at the national and international levels,
Having noted the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the Committee on Agriculture at its Sixth Session and by the Council at its Seventy-ninth Session,
1. Hereby adopts the World Soil Charter;
2. Recommends to the United Nations and international organizations concerned to give effect, within their respective spheres of competence, to the Principles and Guidelines set forth below.
PRINCIPLES
1. Among the major resources available to man is land, comprising soil, water and associated plants and animals: the use of these resources should not cause their degradation or destruction because man's existence depends on their continued productivity.
2. Recognizing the paramount importance of land resources for the survival and welfare of people and economic independence of countries, and also the rapidly increasing need for more food production, it is imperative to give high priority to promoting optimum land use, to maintaining and improving soil productivity and to conserving soil resources.
3. Soil degradation means partial or total loss of productivity from the soil, either quantitatively, qualitatively, or both, as a result of such processes as soil erosion by water or wind, salinization, waterlogging, depletion of plant nutrients, deterioration of soil structure, desertification and pollution. In addition, significant areas of soil are lost daily to non-agricultural uses. These developments are alarming in the light of the urgent need for increasing production of food, fibres and wood.
4. Soil degradation directly affects agriculture and forestry by diminishing yields and upsetting water regimes, but other sectors of the economy and the environment as a whole, including industry and commerce, are often seriously affected as well, through, for example, floods, or the silting-up of rivers, dams and ports.
5. It is a major responsibility of governments that lend use programmes, include measures towards the best possible use of the land, ensuring long-term maintenance and improvement of its productivity, and avoiding losses of productive soil. The land users themselves should be involved, thereby ensuring that all resources available are utilized in the most rational way.
6. The provision of proper incentives at farm level and a sound technical, institutional and legal framework are basic conditions to achieve good land use.
7. Assistance given to farmers and other land users should be of a practical service oriented nature and should encourage the adoption of measures of good land husbandry.
8. Certain land tenure structures may constitute an obstacle to the adoption of sound soil management and conservation measures on farms. Ways and means should be pursued to overcome such obstacles with respect to the rights, duties and responsibilities of land owners, tenants and land users alike, in accordance with the recommendations of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (Rome, 1979).
9. Land users and the broad public should be well informed of the need and the means of improving soil productivity and conservation. Particular emphasis should be placed on education and extension programmes. and training of agricultural staff at all levels.
10. In order to ensure optimum land use it is important that a country's land resources be assessed in terms of their suitability at different levels of inputs for different types of land use, including agriculture, grazing and forestry.
11. Land having the potential for a wide range of uses should be kept in flexible forms of use so that future options for other potential uses are not denied for a long period of time or forever. The use of land for non-agricultural purposes should be organized in such a way as to avoid, as much as possible, the occupation or permanent degradation of good quality soils.
12. Decisions about the use and management of land and its resources should favour the long-term advantage rather than the short-term expedience that may lead to exploitation, degradation and possible destruction of soil resources.
13. Land conservation measures should be included in land development at the planning stage and the costs included in development planning budgets.
GUIDELINES FOR ACTION
Acceptance of these Principles would require the following action:
BY Governments
i. Develop a policy for wise land use according to land suitability for different types of utilization and the needs of the country.
ii. Incorporate principles of rational land use and management and conservation of soil resources into appropriate resource legislation.
iii. Develop an institutional framework for monitoring and supervising soil management and soil conservation, and for coordination between organizations involved in the use of the countries' land resources in order to ensure the most rational choice among possible alternatives.
iv. Assess both new lands and the lands already being used for their suitability for different uses and the likely hazards of degradation. Provide decision makers with alternative land uses which both satisfy communities' aspirations and use the land according to its capabilities.
v. Implement education, training and extension programmes. at all levels in soil management and conservation.
vi. Disseminate as widely as possible, information and knowledge about soil erosion and methods of controlling it both at the farm level and at the scale of entire watersheds stressing the importance of soil resources for the benefit of people and development.
vii. Establish links between local government administration and land users for the implementation of the soils policy and emphasize the need to put proven soil conservation techniques into practice, and to integrate appropriate measures in forestry and agriculture for the protection of the environment.
viii. Strive to create socio-economic and institutional conditions favourable to rational land resource management and conservation. These conditions will include providing security of land tenure and adequate financial incentives (e.g. subsidies, taxation relief, credit) to the land user. Give encouragement particularly to groups willing to work in cooperation with each other and with their government to achieve appropriate land use, soil conservation and improvement.
ix. Conduct research programmes. which will provide sound scientific backing to practical soil improvements and soil conservation work in the field, and which give due consideration to prevailing socio-economic conditions.
By International Organizations
i. Continue and intensify efforts to create awareness and encourage cooperation among all sectors of the international community, by assisting where required to mount publicity campaigns, conduct seminars and conferences and to provide suitable technical publications.
ii. Assist governments, especially of developing countries, on request, to establish appropriate legislation, institutions and procedures to enable them to mount, implement and monitor appropriate land use and soil conservation programmes.
iii. Promote cooperation between governments in adopting sound land use practices, particularly in the large international watersheds.
iv. Pay particular attention to the needs of agricultural development projects which include the conservation and improvement of soil resources, the provision of inputs and incentives at the level of the farm and of the watershed, and the establishment of the necessary institutional structures as the mayor components.
v. Support research programmes. relevant to soil conservation, not only of a technical nature but also research into social and economic issues which are linked to the whole question of soil conservation and land resource management.
vi. Ensure the storage, compilation and dissemination of experience and information related to soil conservation programmes. and of the results obtained in different agro-ecological regions of the world.
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
E. Resources for Food Production and Agricultural Development
236. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 9/81
RESOURCES FOR FOOD PRODUCTION AND AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 35/56 on the International Development Strategy for the Third UN Development Decade which inter alia stressed the key importance of food and agriculture in the fight against hunger and poverty,
Recalling the Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition of the World Food Conference,
Aware that still hundreds of millions of people continue to suffer from hunger and malnutrition,
Noting further the priority assigned to food and agricultural development in the deliberations of Heads of State at the Lagos, Ottawa, Melbourne and Cancún meetings,
Noting also the serious concern expressed by the Executive Heads of organizations in the United Nations system to the current session of the General Assembly with the deteriorating situation facing all organizations of the United Nations system with regard to the declining level of concessional resources in real terms available for international technical cooperation and other development activities,
Recalling the repeated endorsement by the international community of the need to ensure an increased flow of resources on a sustained, continuous and more predictable basis, to support economic and social development programmes. of the developing countries, particularly in the fields of agriculture and rural development,
Recognizing the current economic difficulties facing both developed and developing countries and the need for economy in public expenditures, and considering that these difficulties reinforce the need to confront the acute necessities of the large hungry and malnourished proportion of the world's population,
Reaffirming its belief that the Foot ant Agriculture (ORGANIZATION of the United Nations (FAO) is an indispensable instrument of international cooperation in the efforts of the international community to overcome hunger and malnutrition,
Recognizing with appreciation in this connexion the nature and level of collaboration between FAO and multilateral funding organizations, including the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the International Fund for Agricultural Development IFAD the World Bank, and the Regional Development Banks.
Reiterating its general approval of the strategies and priorities for 1982-83 and over the medium term as proposed by the Director-General and the need to implement these by provision of funds through the assessed contributions to the Regular Programme and adequate extra-budgetary contributions to FAO's Special Action Programmes and other Trust Funds,
1. Calls Upon all Member Nations to give the highest priority to food and agricultural development in their national development plans, to make every effort towards greater self-reliance in their development, including follow-up of the recommendations of WCARRD, and to take all necessary steps to avoid reducing the production and availability of food supplies for the poorest sections of the world's population;
2. Invites all the developing countries to pursue the policy of collective self reliance in food and agriculture, to develop cooperation between themselves, including cooperation between those with untapped agricultural production potential ant those with available financial resources to develop mutually beneficial collaborative arrangements for food production;
3. Affirms that greater self-reliance calls for fuller international cooperation including not only economic and technical cooperation between developing countries but also increased external aid and assistance to investment and technical assistance in food and agricultural development by countries in a position to provide these;
4. Strongly Urges Member Nations to take all possible steps without delay to ensure the replenishment of the resources particularly concessional resources, for food and agricultural development of the multilateral financing institutions, in particular to replenish IFAD 1/ to assure the attainment of the agreed target for pledges to the UNDP for the Third Programming Cycle (1982-86), to provide adequate support to the Special Action Programmes and other extra-budgetary activities of FAO, as well as to fulfil the targets for WFP and the IEFR;
5. Reaffirms the special position and importance of the Food and Agriculture ORGANIZATION in the fight against hunger and malnutrition through its four main roles of information, policy, advice, and support for operational activities, including the Technical Cooperation Programme, and the need for providing adequate resources both to the Regular Programme and to extra-budgetary activities supported thereunder;
6. Requests the Director-General to continue with his efforts to streamline the programmes, staffing and administrative costs of the Organization and to make improvements in efficiency and economy and, in the exercise of his responsibility under Article XVIII.1 of the Constitution, to put forward his proposals for the next Programme of Work and Budget on the basis of his best judgment of the world food situation, taking into account the views of all Member Nations on their needs and constraints.
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
F. Review of the Regular Programme 1980-81
237. The Conference welcomed the format and content in the Review of the Regular Programme 1980-81. The Review reflected the suggestions made by the Governing Bodies two years ago and was a major improvement over the first issue. It was very informative and useful for assessing programmes, and issues for the future.
238. As regards Part I, the Conference welcomed in particular the deepening of the analysis, the use of tables and charts, the pooling of the results of common activities (i.e. training, meetings, publications, technical backstopping of field projects and direct assistance to member countries) as well as the chapter on the Special Action Programmes.
239. The Conference felt that Part II (the in-depth reviews) was especially useful in evaluating FAO's programmes, It welcomed the increase in the number of topics covered and their extended time coverage for assessment purposes, the increased coverage of effects and impact, as well as the fuller exploration of the relationship between the Regular Programme activities and their respective field components, which enhanced the comprehensiveness of the Review.
240. In discussing both parts of the Review, the Conference supported the thrust of the Major Programmes, programmes, and sub-programmes and felt that the sections on "Outlook and Issues" drew attention to useful points for consideration by the Governing Bodies and the Secretariat in regard to formulation of programmes. in future.
241. Some members regretted the lack of quantification and/or measurement of impact. One member felt that in this regard the Medium-Term Objectives and the Review could be linked by quantifying objectives and impact. The majority however recognized the difficulties of measuring the impact of FAO's Regular Programme activities, since the resources available to the Organization under the Regular Programme were modest; considerable time was required for impact to manifest itself at the country level, impact depended on the degree to which FAO's assistance was buttressed by larger resources from governments, donors and financing institutions, and there were methodological and cost problems in quantification and measurement of impact.
242. The Conference supported the Director-General's policy of improved internal evaluation through auto-evaluation, the biennal review, the Programme and Finance Committees and the JIU. The majority emphasized the need for continued strengthening of the internal evaluation system as the most appropriate, effective and economical way of ensuring useful evaluation and its use in future programme formulation. Some members particularly stressed the value of thematic evaluations with other UN agencies, particularly UNDP. Some members reaffirmed that they highly valued independent evaluations and that they should be seen as complementary to internal evaluations.
243. A number of suggestions were made for improvements in the Review. In this connexion, the Conference gave special importance to the further strengthening of the in-depth reviews, with special emphasis on the treatment of effects and impact and the further improvements of the sections on "Outlook and Issues". To accomplish this, without lengthening the document, the Conference supported the views of the Programme Committee that certain sections of the performance report, especially the sections on objectives and resources, could be eliminated or sharply curtailed.
244. Other points stressed by some members included a desire for expanded coverage of constraints and difficulties encountered by the Organization and by Member Governments during implementation; increased coverage of the activities of the Regional Offices and FAO, country offices; more information on TCP; better criteria for the selection of topics for in-depth reviews; indications of how feedback from the Review helps solve identified problems, and some evaluation at the component (i.e. programme element) level which, it was felt, could give more information on impact than could assessment at higher programme levels.
245. In discussing the substance of the Review, the Conference emphasized the continued importance of several programmes, and sub-programmes covered in the Review.
246. In discussion of the Soil Management and Fertilizers sub-programme, under Major Programme 2.1 (Agriculture), strong support wee given to the Judicious use of mineral fertilizers complemented with organic material less demanding in fossil energy and involving also biological nitrogen fixation. The integration of crop/livestock/soil management practices wee also stressed. To achieve these goals, it was essential to ensure closer links between the Soil Management ant Fertilizers sub-programme and other complementary activities, especially in those field projects which have greater access to small farmers.
247. The Conference recognized the value of the Special Action Programmes and voiced concern about the slow response of donors for the programmes, for food security assistance, prevention of food losses, fertilizers, control of African Animal Trypanosomiasis, seed improvement and development, and WCARRD follow-up.
248. Strong support was expressed for FAO assistance in support of national agricultural research, which implied also closer links with existing international research network. Many members stressed the need to enhance effectiveness through stronger inter-action at the country level between research, extension and farming practices. Another factor highlighted was the need for improving the low statue of research workers in the developing countries.
249. The role of credit, especially supervised loans for smallholders, was supported. The critical role of improved internal and external marketing as a stimulant to increased food and agriculture production was also emphasized.
250. Other areas which received special notice ant support were home economics, the integration of nutrition criteria in the planning of agricultural and food production, the global early warning system, the role of women in development, the role of and assistance to cooperatives, improved livestock management for small animals and farm structures and storage facilities.
251. It wee agreed that communication techniques were an important element of agricultural and rural development programmes, in the developing countries. There was an exchange of views on the value of using video in such programmes, The need was stressed for a built-in communication element in the design of every rural development project with emphasis on people's participation.
252. In fisheries, the importance of decentralized implementation through inter-country projects (especially in the context of the EEZ Programme) with a strong TCDC element built into them, wee fully recognized. The development of small-scale fisheries (both marine and inland) was strongly supported, including the need for better socio-economic data on rural fishing communities. The promotion of private sector investment in fisheries was also highlighted.
253. The thrust of the forestry programme wee endorsed with special emphasis on community level fuel wood supplies, wood for energy, agro-forestry, protection of the environment, mapping of zones threatened by desertification, the development of appropriate forest industries and trade in forestry products. The element of training wee considered to be an essential aspect of the rural development orientation of FAO's forestry programmes.
254. Many members stressed the critical role of FAO in the promotion of training activities, especially the training of trainers They felt that the latter approach had a considerable multiplier effect and should, therefore, be vigorously pursued in all relevant and appropriate FAO programmes.
255. Under Technical Cooperation and Development Support, the Conference gave full recognition to the catalytic and bridging role of TCP in tackling pressing short-term problems expeditiously; to the benefit to the developing countries of the Investment Centre's work in attracting outside investment for agriculture and rural development; to the role and functions of the FAO Representatives in assisting governments in their development efforts, including coordination with other donors; and to the significance of FFHC/AD in promoting small-scale rural development projects. It also stressed the increasing use where appropriate of national institutions and consultants in the implementation of FAO's Regular and field programme activities as well as the promotion of TCDC as an effective mechanism for the transfer of technology.
256. The Conference endorsed the Review of the Regular Programme and noted with satisfaction the intention of the Secretariat to take account of the various views expressed in the discussion.
<section>9</section>
G. Review of Field Programmes 1980-81
Development assistance for food production and rural development
Support costs
Development assistance for food production and rural development
257. The Conference commended the quality of the documentation prepared in connexion with this item. It considered that document C 81/4 - Review of Field Programmes - was clear and concise and contained useful charts and tables. It gave a comprehensive picture of FAO's field programmes, contained an objective analysis of the problems which their implementation encountered and, thus, constituted a sound basis for judgment. The very great majority considered that document C 81/28 - Development Assistance for Food Production and Rural Development - was equally well presented and provided a satisfactory response to Conference Resolution 6/79. Some members however indicated they would prefer a more detailed analysis of trends and requirements.
258. With particular reference to document C 81/28, the Conference, on the basis of provisional figures for 1980, noted with concern that the level of official development assistance (ODA) specifically to agriculture, in spite of a continuing increase in current terms, had in fact been stagnant, if not slightly decreasing in real terms in 1980. One delegation however pointed out that this understated the total provided, since account was not taken of non-project assistance, and that the prospects for 1981 seemed more hopeful. The Conference re-affirmed the importance of maintaining an upward trend in both ODA and other official flows to agriculture and stressed the need for full replenishment of international funding sources, such as the International Development Association (IDA), the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), and the regional banks and funds.
259. The Conference noted with concern the difficult resource situation facing UNDP which remained the main source of funding of the Organization's field activities. UNDP planning for the Third Programming Cycle (1982-86) had initially been based on the assumption of a regular increase of 14 percent per year in voluntary contributions. This assumption however had had to be sharply revised downwards twice. First, in June 1981, the Administrator had indicated that the annual increase might not exceed eight percent in current terms. Secondly, in recent communications, he issued new warnings that even this modest target might not be reached. This trend, combined with the continuing effects of inflation, would result in a substantial decrease in real terms of UNDP operations during the Third Cycle. The Conference therefore called on all present and potential contributors to strengthen their financial support to UNDP, in order that it could continue its significant contribution to
the development process, including, in particular, food and agricultural production.
260. The Conference also expressed its preoccupation over the declining share of agriculture in UNDP allocations and, within this sector, the somewhat reduced role of FAO as executing agency. It noted that the share of total UNDP allocations going to agriculture had dropped to some 30 percent only, as compared to significantly higher proportions in the case of several other major bilateral and international development agencies. Full support was therefore expressed for the action taken by the Director-General to help correct this situation, through consultations with the governments of recipient countries, which played a major role in shaping their country programmes. and with the Administrator of UNDP, who retained final authority for actual project approval. Some members noted however that the selection of executing agency should be the prerogative of the recipient country. A number of members expressed their concern that this decrease was even more pronounced in some
regions.
261. Though variations in actual delivery were relatively smoother, the Conference also noted with concern the marked cyclical fluctuations in the level of UNDP allocations to FAO shown in Chart 2 of Chapter One of the Review It considered that this phenomenon had serious negative effects on the efficiency and economy and economy of field project management and requested the Director-General to pursue his current discussions with the Administrator of UNDP, with a view to finding ways and means to correct this situation.
262. While recognising that the volume of field activities financed by Trust Funds was difficult to predict accurately, the Conference noted with satisfaction that, during recent years, the number and value of such projects had grown steadly. It expressed its deep appreciation to the countries which had made this expansion possible and called on these and other potential donors to increase further their support, particularly in connexion with FAO's special action programmes,
263. The Conference emphasized the vital role played by the Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP). It particularly praised the usefulness of this Programme in connexion with emergencies, and in meeting small-scale unforeseen needs, and to provide bridging assistance for investment preparation and training, and the catalytic effect which it had in many other areas. It noted however that TCP resources were small in comparison to those available under other programmes. since the TCP represented only five percent of FAO's overall field operations in 1980-81. The TCP could not therefore be considered as a substitute for UNDP or Trust Funds. On the contrary, it should continue to complement and multiply the benefits of these other field projects.
264. The Conference noted with great concern that, in spite of the positive trends in Trust Funds and the effectiveness of the TCP, the overall level of FAO's field activities had already started to decline in real terms. Furthermore, a much sharper drop was to be expected in 1982-83, as a result of the very serious situation concerning FAO/UNDP activities described in paragraphs 3 to 5 above. It was stressed that unless the present trends were rapidly reversed, it was likely that the total number of field experts employed by the Organization would drop sharply during the coming months, thus reflecting a situation similar to that encountered in the period from 1974 to 1976.
265. The Conference noted that the sectoral composition of FAO's field programmes, as well as their geographic distribution, did not depend entirely on the Organization. In most cases, this resulted from a tripartite process in which the views of the funding agency and the decisions of the recipient government were of fundamental importance. Bearing this in mind, the Conference supported the broad sectoral distribution of FAO's field programmes.
266. The Conference recognised the special importance of activities intended to strengthen food production and of all forms of training. The need to pursue and strengthen activities dealing with energy and with the nutritional aspects of development was also underlined. Special reference was made to cooperation with regional organizations and the particular usefulness of the TCP in this regard.
267. The importance of the impact on field activities of the conclusions of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD) was emphasized. While welcoming the fact that WCARRD approaches hat already begun to permeate most aspects of FAO's field programmes, the Conference stressed that this influence should in future be reflected even more in all field activities of the Organization.
268. The Conference particularly commended FAO's activities in the field of investment preparation and requested the Director-General to pursue 0a efforts towards strengthening the participation of the Organization in the implementation of technical assistance financed by international lending agencies. Some members emphasized the importance of ensuring follow-on financing or investment.
269. The thrust of FAO's field programmes towards Most Seriously Affected and Least Developed countries, particularly in Africa, was commended. At the same time, the Conference supported the initiatives which the Director-General was taking to provide continuing support to other countries and regions, within the means at his disposal.
270. The Conference found that the assessment of field projects provided in Chapter Two of the Review 1/ was frank and constructive. It identified clearly the main problems which had been encountered in project implementation and thus provided a useful management tool. The Conference emphasized that there was scope for further improvement in the efficiency and impact of field operations, particularly through better project design and the fuller involvement of recipient governments. The good performance of TCP projects was noted, as well as the fact that Trust Fund projects were often better designed, due to the close involvement of FAO in the early stages of project identification and formulation.
271. It was suggested by some members that external evaluation of field projects would provide a useful supplement to the type of assessment reported in the Review. Bearing in mind that the main responsibility in this respect rested with the Governments of recipient countries themselves, the great majority of the delegates felt, however, that the existing assessment and evaluation system was entirely adequate.
272. The Conference expressed its appreciation for Chapter Three of the Review covering field activities in support of foodcrop development and found the analysis presented both informative and useful. It welcomed the fact that some 46 percent of all field activities were concerned with the production of foodcrops. It was however suggested that their usefulness might be further enhanced by increased focus on specific problems such as post-harvest losses. The Conference noted the link between FAO's technical assistance and investment activities in support of food production and stressed the need to assist developing countries in their efforts towards the achievement of greater self-sufficiency in food production.
273. The very significant progress which had been achieved by FAO in applying "new dimensions" approaches to the implementation of field activities was fully endorsed by the Conference. Satisfaction was expressed with the detailed information provided on this matter in Chapter Four of the Review.
274. The growing use of national directors to manage field projects was supported as an effective means of increasing the involvement of host countries in the implementation of Technical Cooperation projects. The increased recourse to national institutions and firms from developing countries for the provision of services and supply of equipment was also commended. The Conference noted with satisfaction that experts from developing countries already constituted about 43 percent of FAO's total field staff; it underlined the need for sustained efforts to increase this share further. Recalling the UN target of 50 percent of developing country experts in agency submissions of candidatures to countries, the Conference noted that FAO was already very close to meeting this objective.
275. The Conference commended the Organization's efforts in support of Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries (TCDC) and called for these to be continued and strengthened. It stressed that TCDC represented a fundamental means through which the developing countries could build up and develop their own permanent capacity for planning and implementing agricultural and food development programmes. The Conference recorded the important role which FAO's regional and country offices were fulfilling in compiling lists of institutions from developing countries which could participate in TCDC activities and invited the governments concerned to supply the Organization with all relevant information in this regard.
276. The Conference reaffirmed that the Food and Agriculture Organization should continue to be recognized as the focal agency within the United Nations system for the execution of technical cooperation projects in the fields of agriculture and rural development. It would not be in the best interests of either the developing countries, or the UN system itself, if this Organization's accumulated technical knowledge and field experience were not brought to bear fully on the effectiveness of multilateral technical cooperation efforts, geared towards increasing food production and promoting rural development.
Support costs
277. The Conference was informed 1/ of the developments which had taken place in the biennium 1980-81 on the question of Support Costs, in particular Decision 80/44 taken by the Governing Council of the UNDP at its June 1980 Session, which was subsequently adopted by the General Assembly at its Thirty-fifth Session.
278. The Conference took note of the basic consequence of the Governing Council Decision which was to reduce the flat reimbursement rate from 14 to 13 percent of UNDP programme delivery with effect from 1 January 1982. It also noted that paragraph 4 of the Decision "urged" the Governing Bodies of Executing Agencies to apply the same support cost reimbursement to technical cooperation activities financed from all other extra-budgetary resources. It also noted the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 4 of the Governing Council Decision.
279. The Conference felt that it should agree with the parallel decision of the General Assembly and decided to adopt the flat rate of 13 percent reimbursement on delivery of UNDP Projects. It also decided to amend the provision in paragraph 4(a) of the Manual Section 250 by changing the figure of 14 percent to 13 percent as the "established'. rate for Trust Fund projects, and to retain the present provisions in paragraphs (b) to (g) for application of lower rates or waivers in certain circumstances.
H. Follow-up to WCARRD
280. The Conference noted that the document "Follow-up to WCARRD" had been prepared as requested in Resolution 7!79 of the Twentieth Session of the Conference .
281. Recognizing the multi-disciplinary nature of rural development and the need to coordinate and guide WCARRD follow-up activities within FAO in all departments and divisions, the Conference welcomed the establishment of the Inter-Departmental Committee for Rural Development and other similar organizational arrangements.
282. The Conference expressed satisfaction at the progress achieved so far in orientating FAO's policies and technical programmes towards the objectives of the WCARRD Programme of Action. It noted that, operational and technical guidelines had been prepared, for use by FAO as well as by Member Governments and aid agencies, for the formulation of projects and programmes in line with the WCARRD Programme of Action. It stressed the need for continuing efforts to achieve a full orientation of all FAO activities both under its regular and field programmes, in this direction.
283. While recognizing the primary responsibility of countries for the implementation of the Programme of Action, the Conference stressed the role of FAO in stimulating action at the country level, and particularly its role in providing support to Member Nations in the task of implementation. In this connexion, the Conference expressed satisfaction at the content and effectiveness of WCARRD follow-up activities and urged the continuation of FAO assistance to countries in this regard.
284. The Conference emphasized the impetus given by WCARRD to the formulation of appropriate national strategies for agrarian reform and rural development and the need for the integration of these with overall national development strategies. It called upon all countries which had not already done so to undertake this first major step in the implementation of the Programme of Action. The Conference expressed satisfaction at the types of assistance provided by FAO in this regard, through WCARRD policy review missions and catalytic projects to countries. It was informed of the steps taken and programmes initiated by various countries in conformity with the Programme of Action.
285. The Conference recalled that the WCARRD Programme of Action called upon governments to undertake action in favour of the rural poor in the following specific areas: access to land and water and other natural resources; people's participation; the integration of women in development; access to inputs, markets and services; the development of non-farm rural activities; education, extension and training. In pursuance of their commitments at WCARRD, the Conference called upon countries to undertake appropriate target-oriented action in these areas.
286. The Conference supported the priority given by FAO to assistance in the above fields, and the nature, content and direction of such assistance. It emphasized particularly, the need for agrarian reform, including land tenure changes, the promotion of people's participation, especially through cooperatives and self-help organizations, programmes for the disabled, and education, extension and training, as basic to rural development. These measures and programmes are needed both for providing motivation and incentives to the rural poor, as well as for ensuring their equitable access to resources and to the benefits of rural development.
287. Recognizing the vital role played by women in agricultural production and rural life, the Conference expressed appreciation of the impetus given under WCARRD follow-up both within FAO and at the country level, to the integration of women in development, in all its aspects. It commended the types of activities being undertaken to integrate women's concerns into all relevant FAO projects, programmes and technical assistance to countries. It noted with satisfaction that the conceptual, technical and operational aspects of this important subject would be considered in depth at the next session of the Committee on Agriculture.
288. The Conference emphasized the important role of NGOs in the implementation of the Programme of Action. While expressing satisfaction at the progress made so far, it urged member countries to further involve non-governmental organizations (NGO) participation, and called upon NGOs to cooperate effectively in implementation. Noting recent positive developments in this respect, the Conference called upon NGOs and donors to provide all possible financial support to make such NGO activities more effective.
289. The Conference urged the implementation of the WCARRD recommendations regarding the monitoring and evaluation of agrarian reform and rural development, the collection and analysis of data on socio-economic indicators relating to rural poverty, the establishment of benchmarks for the year 1980, and the submission of reports on progress made, to every alternate FAO Conference. In this connexion, the Conference welcomed the action taken by FAO, in consultation with other concerned UN agencies, to assist countries through the development of indicators, assistance in pilot studies, and proposed regional workshops to prepare agreed indicators and guidelines for such monitoring. In order to implement the provisions relating to monitoring and reporting under the Programme of Action, the Conference called upon member countries to take the necessary steps to introduce such monitoring early.
290. In order to synchronize the reporting by countries and its consideration by the FAO Conference, the Conference urged member countries to make their first reports to the Twenty-second Session of the Conference in 1983, thus initiating the four-year cycle of reporting provided for in the Programme of Action. Further, in order to provide a uniform and consistent basis for such country reports, the Conference requested the Secretariat to provide a common format to assist countries in such reporting, and to provide such other feasible assistance as might he required, to enable them to meet this commitment.
291. It further requested the Secretariat, on the basis of such country reports, to prepare a consolidated report, both factual and analytical, reviewing the policies and progress of countries in the implementation of the WCARRD Programme of Action, for consideration by the Conference at its 1983 Session. It was noted that such a consolidated report would also provide a valuable input into the proposed document "Review and Analysis of Agrarian Reform and Rural Development" which FAG was to prepare, in collaboration with other UN agencies, for the consideration of ECOSOC in 1984, and every four years thereafter.
292. In considering action for WCARRD follow-up at the regional level, the Conference emphasized the usefulness of regional inter-country consultations in identifying problems and priorities for action, as well as areas for inter-country cooperation. It urged that periodic consultations of this nature be continued in the future. Noting that the Regional Conferences in 1983 would consider an item on WCARRD follow-up, the Conference urged that they give special attention to country preparations for monitoring and for reporting to the FAO Conference in 1983.
293. The Conference welcomed the establishment with FAO assistance, of Regional Centres for Integrated Rural Development, in both the Asia and Pacific and Africa regions. Noting the progress made towards the establishment of similar Centres in Latin America and the Near East, it urged their early establishment. The Conference recognized the important role that these autonomous intergovernmental organizations could play in promoting TCDC in rural development, especially in the fields of research, training and dissemination of information. It urged member countries to Join and support these Centres where established. It invited NGOs and other UN agencies to assist and cooperate with these Centres, on request. It invited donors to contribute directly to these Centres, or to selected aspects of their programme of work.
294. The Conference stressed the need for inter-agency cooperation in the implementation of the multi-disciplinary Programme of Action, as envisaged by the World Conference. It expressed appreciation at FAO efforts, as the lead agency in the ACC Task Force, to bring about greater inter-agency cooperation in rural development at global, regional and country levels. It noted with satisfaction that the new programme of work of the ACC Task Force on Rural Development reflected more closely the priorities of the WCARRD Programme of Action, and invited other UN agencies to coordinate their efforts in WCARRD follow-up through this mechanism.
295. The Conference noted that whereas Resolution 7/79 of the Twentieth Session had called for voluntary contributions of US$ 20 million to finance WCARRD follow-up, only a sum of US$. 9.3 million had so far been pledged, while the cost of projects already identified exceeded a sum of US$ 19 million. While expressing satisfaction at the positive, flexible ant innovative approaches utilized to tap all available financial sources, such as the regular programme including TCP, UNDP, bilateral aid, international non-governmental organizations and large non-governmental foundations, the Conference expressed concern that the momentum so far achieved could not be maintained unless additional funds were provided. The Conference, therefore, urgently called upon all potential donors to commit additional resources to meet at least the target of US$ 20 million set by Resolution 7/79, so as to ensure the timely and adequate implementation of programmes for the follow-up to WCARRD. It
invited all relevant organizations and agencies of the UN System to allocate more resources for WCARRD follow-up activities and further invited all bilateral donors to consider further direct assistance to such activities.
I. United nations/FAO world food programme (WFP)
296. The Executive Director a.i. of WFP reported on the resources and activities of the Programme. He paid special tribute to the legacy of idealism and creativity which the late Executive Director, Mr. Garson N. Vogel, had given to WFP. He noted that the Programme had been established by the United Nations General Assembly and the FAO Conference 20 years ago and that since then both bodies had reviewed WFP's activities and determined the pledging targets for voluntary pledges to the Programme every two years. The Executive Director a.i. informed the Conference that a number of records had been reached by the Programme in the past two years. In 1980, beyond supplies channelled through WFP by bilateral donors, WFP had delivered close to 1.3 million tons of food, about 66 percent for development projects and about 34 percent for emergency operations. Of the total deliveries, some 300 000 tons had come from the International Emergency Food Reserve (IEFR) and approximately one
million tons from the Programme's own resources. The Programme had been able to increase progressively the level of its commitments for development projects, which had reached approximately $510 million in 1981 and was expected to be higher in 1982. WFP was concentrating a very high proportion of its development assistance on priority countries and projects. In 1981, of the new commitments for development projects, about 85 percent went to low-income, food-deficit countries and about 80 percent was directed to projects in support of agriculture and rural development. WFP purchases were being increasingly made in developing countries to stimulate development, further cooperation among developing countries and save on transport costs.
297. While not minimizing the importance of, and continuing need for, programme or bulk food aid, the Executive Director a.i. strongly advocated the advantages of project food aid as provided by the Programme over almost two decades, which entailed clearly defined beneficiaries and development objectives. Referring to the proposed pledging target for $1 200 million for WFP's regular resources for the biennium 1983-84, he stated that, in his view, the proposed target was essentially a balanced one and represented the best compromise between what was desirable and what was possible, considering the hard reality of the present economic situation. He stressed that the proposed target represented the absolute minimum needed if current levels of WFP deliveries and projects were to be maintained after 1983.
298. The Conference expressed satisfaction and appreciation of the work of the Programme. General support was given for WFP's objectives and priorities, particularly to the emphasis on assisting low-income, food-deficit countries and projects for agriculture and rural development. In this respect, it was strongly felt that food aid should be primarily used in support of food self-reliance and food security in developing countries. The Programme was complimented for innovative and imaginative approaches in the use of food aid as an effective resource for development, particularly in depressed rural areas and for the benefit of the poorest of the poor. Recognition was made of the special and potential benefits of the regional approach to the planning and programming of food aid as shown in the successful example of the use of Zimbabwean maize stocks in Africa. The Conference recommended an increase in triangular transactions in support of this approach. Some members suggested
that while maintaining its established priorities, WFP should direct its assistance in support of countries best able to increase food production, thereby helping the Programme to obtain more sources of food aid, and stimulating development. Several delegations indicated their view that food aid should not be used for political ends. The Conference noted that WFP's role in providing emergency food assistance had grown considerably in recent years as a result of the marked increase in emergency situations around the world. It noted with satisfaction the efforts that the Programme was making to improve its emergency operations and appealed to donor and recipient governments to cooperate in ensuring the relief assistance was delivered as quickly and efficiently as possible. A number of members stressed the importance of WFP's coordinating role in the delivery of international emergency food assistance in large-scale emergencies and emphasized that the Programme should be
adequately equipped and staffed to perform this essential function. The Conference commended the Programme on keeping its administrative overheads below six percent of the value of its food deliveries, despite the considerable increase in the size and complexity of its activities.
299. The Conference unanimously endorsed the pledging target for voluntary contributions to WFP's regular resources for the period 1983-84 of $1 200 million. A number of members expressed the view, however, that it should be regarded as a minimum target, taking into account the growing needs of developing countries for food aid. Some members felt, on the other hand, that the target was ambitious as the targets set for the two preceding biennia had not been met. Nevertheless, the Conference agreed that the pledging target represented the best compromise between what was desirable and what should be possible to achieve. The Conference urged traditional and potential donors to make a concerted effort, in a spirit of international solidarity, not only to reach the target, but to surpass it, taking into account the undeniable increase in the requirements for food aid, particularly in the low-income, food-deficit countries. The Conference also urged traditional and all potential
donors to make every effort to reach the pledging target of $1000 million established for the current biennium (1981-82). Some members expressed the hope that centrally planned developed countries as well as other countries in a position to do so, would contribute to the Programme. The Conference noted with particular appreciation the substantial new contribution made recently by the OPEC Fund for International Development and the increased contributions of a number of donor countries, including Argentina, Australia and Italy. It also noted with appreciation the large supplementary contribution by the EEC and the first contribution by Austria and Spain to the IEFR. which would result in contributions reaching the target set for the IEFR for the first time since its establishment. The Conference appealed to donors to comply with the provision of WFP's General Regulations which stipulates that the cash and services components of pledges should amount, in the aggregate, to at
least one third of potential contributions. in view of the crucial importance of cash resources for the Programme's activities. A number of members urged signatories to the Food Aid Convention to channel a larger proportion of their contributions through WFP. The Conference unanimously adopted the following resolution concerning the target for WFP pledges for the period 1983-84:
Resolution 10/81
TARGET FOR THE WFP PLEDGES FOR THE PERIOD 1983-84
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling the provisions of Resolution 4/65 that the World Food Programme is to be reviewed before each pledging conference,
Recalling the provisions of operative paragraph 4 of its Resolution 10/77 of 30 November 1977 that, subject to the review mentioned above, the next pledging conference should be convened at the latest early in 1982, at which time governments should be invited to pledge contributions for 1983 and 1984, with a view to reaching such a target as may be then recommended by the General Assembly and the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Recalling the recommendation contained in paragraph 90 of Resolution 35/36 of the General Assembly concerning the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade that the resources of the World Food Programme be augmented and that every effort be made to reach the target agreed upon, for each biennium during the Decade for the Programme's regular resources,
Noting that the review of the Programme was undertaken by the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes of the World Food Programme at its Eleventh Session and by the FAO Council at its Seventy-ninth Session,
Having considered resolution 1/80 of the FAO Council as well as the recommendations of the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes,
Recognizing the value of multilateral food aid as implemented by WFP since its inception and the necessity for continuing its action both as a form of capital investment in economic and social development projects and for meeting emergency food needs,
1. Establishes for the two years 1983 and 1984 a target for voluntary contributions of $1 200 million, of which not less than one third should be in cash and/or services in aggregate;
2. Urges State Members of the United Nations and Member Nations and Associate Members of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to make every effort to ensure the full attainment of the target;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Director-General of FAO, to convene a pledging conference for this purpose at the United Nations Headquarters early in 1982;
4. Decides that, subject to the review provided for in Resolution 4/65, the following pledging conference at which governments should be invited to pledge contributions for the biennium 1985-86 with a view to reaching such a target as may be then recommended by the General Assembly and the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization, should be convened at the latest early in 1984.
(Adopted 25 November 81)
<section>a</section>
J. Relations and consultations with International organizations
Recent developments in the United Nations system of interest to FAO
Relations with intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations
Recent developments in the United Nations system of interest to FAO
300. The Conference discussed this matter on the basis of the document (C 819-Sup.1) bringing up-to-date the information which had been provided to the Council at its Seventy-ninth Session, 22 June to 3 July 1981 (C 81/19).
301. It noted that there had been a number of major international meetings since June including two mayor United Nations Conferences: the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, held in Nairobi from 10 to 21 August 1981, and the Conference on the Least Developed Countries, held in Paris from 1 to 14 September 1981; and three major summit meetings at the level of Heads of State and Government, the first at Ottawa on 20 and 21 July 1981, the second at Cancún (Mexico) on 22 and 23 October 1981, and the third, the meeting of the Heads of Governments of Commonwealth nations, held at Melbourne from 30 September to 7 October 1981. These meetings had followed closely upon the adoption of the new International Development Strategy. It was to be hoped that they had created a climate such as to give new impetus to the Strategy. On all these occasions, the issues of food and agriculture were considered of primary importance and deserving very high priority.
302. The Conference expressed the view that FAO should continue to participate actively in major United Nations conferences and give its support to their preparation and follow-up as it had done in the past. The Conference expressed satisfaction at the fact that the Substantial New Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries had been adopted in Paris and, in relation to the problems of agricultural and rural development, reflected to a large extent the ideas expressed by the Director-General in his Minimum Global Programme for Food and Agriculture.
303. The Conference was pleased to note that rural energy had been included in the Programme of Action adopted at Nairobi as a priority area. In addition, specific measures had been recommended in sectors of direct interest to FAO such as firewood, charcoal, biomass, draught animal power, solar and wind power.
304. The Conference expressed its appreciation to the Italian Government for the initiative it had publicly announced at the Paris Conference to convene a meeting in Rome with its partners in the European communities and other donor countries at which proposals concerning food production and food security would be discussed. The meeting would be held in close liaison with FAO and other United Nations organizations and bodies in Rome. The Italian delegation announced that a preparatory meeting would be held in January or February and the meeting itself was expected for the spring of 1982.
305. The Conference expressed its concern at the unsatisfactory level of resources for development, despite the adoption by the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) in the summer of 1981 of a resolution reiterating the need to strengthen international economic cooperation for development within the multilateral framework of the United Nations system. The Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC) had discussed this matter at its recent autumn session (29 and 30 October 1981) in New York and had adopted a decision on the outlook for financing of multilateral cooperation for development. In that decision the Executive Heads of the United Nations system had expressed serious concern at the deteriorating situation facing all organizations of the United Nations system with regard to the declining level of resources in real terms available for international technical cooperation and other development activities. The Conference recognized that this issue was a matter of serious
concern for the international community as a whole.
306. As a result of the Ottawa and Cancún summit meetings, prospects for relaunching the global negotiations might be improving, although the basis and circumstances offering the prospect of meaningful progress still had to be worked out and agreed upon by the General Assembly. The Conference expressed satisfaction at the importance attached by these summits to agricultural development and food security and was therefore confident that these issues would receive a prominent place in the global negotiations as and when they were launched. The Conference noted that FAO could provide appropriate services needed for this purpose with its experience of intergovernmental consultations and negotiations. FAO was thus ideally placed to assist in those parts of the negotiations relating to food and agriculture, which could include food production, food aid, food security and other related matters. The Conference accordingly supported the Director-General's offer for FAO to assist and
play an active role in preliminary steps towards and in the preparation and servicing of the global negotiations. The Conference requested the Director-General to convey this offer to the Secretary-General so that it could be drawn to the attention of the General Assembly at the appropriate time.
307. Reference was made to the coordination of the activities of the system both at the central and country level. The Conference recognized that FAO was already making substantial efforts in that direction and commended the Director-General in that respect. It took note that the FAO Council had discussed the matter of coordination in detail in November 1981 on the basis of a comprehensive report (CL 78/13) presented by the Secretariat. The Conference concurred with the Council's conclusion that elaborate arrangements for coordination had already been built up over the years, and that the establishment of new mechanisms or additional procedures should be studied in the light of cost benefit analysis.
308. The importance of coordination in a large and complex system such as the United Nations was recognized in order to maximize the impact of the system in favour of recipient countries but coordination must remain the primary responsibility of governments themselves. It was also stressed that coordination must never be allowed to become an end in itself and that the cost must never outrun the benefits. Maximum efficiency and speedy action must be the primary concerns.
309. The Conference recalled that the Council had also had a thorough discussion of operational activities for development at its Seventy-ninth Session in June/July 1981 in the light of UN General Assembly Resolution 35/81 and agreed that the policies of the Director-General had been in line with that resolution, in particular by raising increased resources for development for the special action programmes of FAO and in taking various measures to achieve the greatest possible efficiency in the implementation of all field programmes
310. The Conference also noted with appreciation that, at the country level, the Organization in particular through its Representatives, had been cooperating actively with the new Resident Coordinators. It also noted the role of UN Resident Coordinators in the field. All those so far appointed had been UNDP Resident Representatives. It was considered that this had facilitated the continuance of constructive relationships, in accordance with the spirit of the joint letter which the Director-General and the Administrator of the UNDP had sent to their respective Representatives, in July 1980, to foster cooperation at the country level.
311. The Conference stressed the need for the FAO Representatives to have direct access to appropriate government authorities in their countries of assignment and to be able to maintain direct lines of communication with the Director-General. The General Assembly had explicitly recognized this need in operative paragraph 7 of General Assembly Resolution 34/213 dated 19 December 1979, which stated that the guidelines for the exercise of their functions by the Resident Coordinators did "not affect relations between Governments and individual organizations of the United Nations system or the direct lines of authority and communication between the representatives of those organizations at the country level and their own executive heads".
Relations with intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations
312. The Conference took note of a report on some of the more significant developments that had taken place since its Twentieth Session in relations between FAO and intergovernmental organizations (other than the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies) and international non-governmental organizations, including international trade unions.
313. It noted the importance of cooperation between FAO and WMO in the application of meteorology to agriculture and that of FAO/OIE cooperation for developing productive and healthy animal industries, especially in the developing countries.
314. The Conference also noted with interest the report of the informal meeting of representatives of International Non-governmental Organizations (NGOs) attending the Twenty-first Session of the Conference. During the past biennium new forms of FAO/NGO cooperation had been developed, especially at the Headquarters level. It was intended to explore further possibilities for cooperation particularly at the regional and national level. NGOs were particularly satisfied with the increasing efforts made by FAO to cooperate with people's organizations in rural development.
315. The Conference expressed its support for the progress achieved in cooperation between FAO and IGOs and NGOs. It considered this to be an important component of FAO programmes for rural development where the organizations of rural poor, women and other less privileged sectors of society should play an active role.
<section>b</section>
VII. Constitutional and administrative matters
A. Statutory Report on Status of Conventions and Agreements, and Amendments thereto
B. Audited accounts
C. Scale of contributions 1982-83
D. Other financial and administrative questions
A. Statutory Report on Status of Conventions and Agreements, and Amendments thereto
316. Pursuant to Rule XXI of the General Rules of the Organization, and in accordance with established practice, the Director-General submitted to the Conference the biennial Statutory Report reflecting the present status of conventions and agreements concluded within the framework of FAO of other multilateral treaties concluded outside its framework in respect of which the Director-General acts as Depositary, and of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies as applied to FAO.
317. The Conference noted that the Statutory Report followed the same pattern as earlier reports, except that, in line with established practice of the United Nations, declarations and reservations made by parties to some conventions and agreements had also been introduced in the aforesaid document.
318. The Conference took note of the Statutory Report, which is contained in documents C 81/10 and C 81/10-Sup.1, as updated orally during the Conference Session.
319. With reference to the International Plant Protection Convention mentioned in paragraphs 22-24 of the Statutory Report, the Conference recalled that, when approving the amendments to the Convention by Resolution 14/79 at its Twentieth Session, it had urged the parties to the Convention to accept the revised text at the earliest possible time. The Conference noted, however, that only 22 acceptances had been received to date while at least a further 33 acceptances were still required for the entry into force of the revised text. In view of the importance of the Convention in strengthening international action against the spread of pests of plants and plant products in the context of international trade, the Conference reiterated its appeal to States that have not yet accepted the revised text of the Convention to deposit an instrument of acceptance as soon as possible.
B. Audited accounts
320. The Conference expressed its appreciation for the quality of the External Auditor's Reports, which it considered well reasoned and pertinent.
321. The Conference noted the recommendations of the External Auditor and it endorsed the measures that the Director-General had already taken to deal with them.
322. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 11/81
AUDITED ACCOUNTS
THE CONFERENCE,
Having considered the reports of the Seventy-eighth and Eightieth Sessions of the Council, Having examined the following audited accounts and the External Auditor's Reports thereon:
Regular Programme 1978-79 C 81/5
United Nations Development Programme 1979 and 1980 C 81/6; C 81/6(a);
C 81/6(a)-Corr.1
World Food Programme 1979 and 1980 C 81/7; C 81/7(a)
Notes the recommendations of the External Auditor contained in his Report and endorses the measures taken so far by the Secretariat in response to these recommendations.
Adopts the above audited accounts.
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
C. Scale of contributions 1982-83
323. The Conference took note of the recommendation of the Seventy-ninth Session of the Council, which was in accordance with the decision of the Eighth Session of the Conference (1955) that the FAO Scale of Contributions for future biennia would be derived directly from the UN Scale of Assessments in force during the calendar year of each Conference Session.
324. The Conference was informed that both the proposed FAO Scale for 1982-83 and the 198081 Scale had been derived directly from the same UN Scale of Assessments, the UN Scale being in force for the three year period 1980-82. The proposed FAO Scale for 1982-83 was therefore the same as the current Scale, except for adjustments which arose from the admission by the Twenty-first Session of the Conference of five new Member Nations.
325. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolutions 12/81
SCALE OF CONTRIBUTIONS 1982-83
THE CONFERENCE,
Having noted the recommendation of the Seventy-ninth Session of the Council,
Confirming that as in the past FAO should follow the United Nations Scale of Assessments subject to adaptation for the different membership of FAO,
1. Decides that the FAO Scale of Contributions for 1982-83 should be derived directly from the United Nations Scale of Assessments in force in 1981,
2. Adopts for use in 1982 and 1983 the Scale as set out in Appendix F of this report.
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
326. The delegate of Brazil, in expressing opposition to the resolution, proposed that the adaptation from the UN Scale to the FAO Scale to account for the differences in membership between the two Organizations, should not be made solely on an arithmetical basis, but rather by taking also into consideration economic and financial factors.
D. Other financial and administrative questions
Amendments to the provisions of the special reserve account
Headquarters accommodation
Regional office for the near east (RNEA)
Abolition of audited interim accounts 11
Status of contributions
Payment of contributions - Central African Republic
Replenishment of the working capital fund
Increase in the level of the working capital fund
Emoluments of the Director-General
Amendments to the provisions of the special reserve account
327. The Conference noted that the Council, at its Seventy-ninth Session, had examined the current validity, application and effectiveness of the provisions of the Special Reserve Account as established by Conference Resolution 27/77.
328. The Conference noted further that the Council had considered that, in the light of continued high inflation and currency instability, the current provisions were too restrictive. The Council had therefore recommended the following amendments to the Special Reserve Account to render it more effective and responsive to the needs of the Organization:
(i) the level of the Special Reserve Account be increased to five percent of the effective working budget;
(ii) the limitation on the use of the account to cover unbudgeted extra costs (presently two percent) be removed; and
(iii) approval for withdrawals in respect to unbudgeted costs be entrusted to the Programme and Finance Committees.
329. A few Member Nations could not support the proposals, believing that the current provisions were reasonable and provided adequate safeguards. Some other Member Nations, recognizing that the current provisions were inadequate and too restrictive for the efficient implementation of the approved Programme of Work, supported more flexible arrangements, including an increase in the level of the Special Reserve Account, to five percent of the effective working budget. Host of those Member Nations, however, considered that a ceiling should be set for the use of the Account to cover unbudgeted costs, and that the present arrangements for approval of such withdrawals concerning unbudgeted costs should be retained, i.e. should remain with the Council. It was also noted that the proposed changes might result in additional assessments on Member Nations.
330. The great majority of Member Nations, however, fully supported the proposals, which they considered to provide flexible, prompt and practical means to protect the integrity of the approved programme against unbudgeted inflation and currency instability which were beyond the control of the Director-General.
331. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 13/81
SPECIAL RESERVE ACCOUNT
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling its Resolution 27/77, whereby a Special Reserve Account was established, as of 31 December 1977, to assist in protecting the Organization's Programme of Work against the effects of unbudgeted extra costs that may arise in the 1978-79 biennium or in any subsequent biennia,
Conscious of the need to ensure that adequate cash resources are available to the Organization to finance the Programmes of Work approved by the Conference for any given biennium,
Recognizing that implementation of the Organization's approved Programme of Work and Budget should not be placed in Jeopardy due to unbudgeted extra costs arising from adverse currency fluctuations and unbudgeted inflationary trends,
Taking into account the experience gained with respect to the magnitude of currency fluctuations and unbudgeted coats in comparison to the effective working budget total,
Noting that up to 30 September 1981 US$ 16 135 000 had been credited to the Special Reserve Account as savings on staff costs arising from currency fluctuations and that, provided the rate of exchange for the lira did not change substantially in the remainder of 1981, further amounts would be credited to the Account,
Considering that, provided Member Nations pay their contributions in good time, a cash surplus is expected,
Having examined the recommendations of the Council at its Seventy-ninth Session on measures to ensure the financing of such unbudgeted extra coats as may have to be met,
1. Authorizes the Director-General to use the funds in the Special Reserve Account:
(a) whenever the Working Capital Fund la insufficient to finance budgetary expenditure pending receipt of contributions from Member Nations to the budget; such advances to be reimbursed from subsequent receipts of contributions as soon as possible;
(b) to finance unbudgeted extra costs due to movements of currency exchange rates;
(c) subject to prior review and approval by the Programme and Finance Committees, to finance unbudgeted extra-costs of approved programmes due to unforeseen inflationary trends, to the extent that such costs cannot be met through budgetary savings without impairing the implementation of such programmes
2. Directs the Director-General to credit to the Special Reserve Account any savings on staff costs arising from favourable differences between the lira exchange rate used in calculating the budget and the effective United Nations rate, applying an appropriate statistical formula for the purpose.
3. Decides that any balance of funds remaining in the Special Reserve Account at the end of the 1980-81 biennium and of each biennium thereafter shall be carried forward into the Special Reserve Account for the respective subsequent biennium, up to an amount equivalent to five percent of the total effective working budget for the respective subsequent biennium.
4. Further decides that, notwithstanding the provisions of Financial Regulation 6.1(b), such portion of the Cash Surplus in the General Fund at the end of 1980-81 and of any subsequent biennium as is required to bring the level of the Special Reserve Account to five percent of the effective working budget for 1982-83 and for any subsequent biennium shall be withheld and credited to the Special Reserve Account.
5. Authorizes the Director-General, in the event that a cash surplus should not arise at the end of any biennium adequate to bring the Special Reserve Account to the level specified in paragraph 4, to apply to the Special Reserve Account, notwithstanding Financial Regulation 6.1(a), any sums received in the subsequent biennium in payment of arrears of contributions for previous biennia.
6. Requests the Director-General, in the event that the Special Reserve Account, replenished in accordance with the foregoing paragraphs, should not attain the aforesaid level of five percent of the total effective working budget for the subsequent biennium to submit proposals to the Conference, through the Finance Committee and Council, concerning the ways and means of bringing the Special Reserve Account up to the level of five percent of the total effective working budget for the subsequent biennium.
7. Further decides that any balance at the end of 1980-81 or any subsequent biennium in excess of the amount referred to in pare. 3 above shall not be used for any purpose other than provided for in this resolution and shall be returned to the General Fund and allocated in accordance with Financial Regulation 6.1(b).
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
Headquarters accommodation
332. The Conference endorsed the recommendations of the Council as outlined in the Council's report of its Eightieth Session. In particular, it noted with concern that the only developments so far were the possibility of the Host Government implementing one of the interim measures proposed by the Director-General namely the construction of some 60 rooms on the roof of building D. It welcomed on the other hand the statement made on World Food Day (16 October 1981) by the President of the Council of Ministers of Italy regarding the Host Government's good intentions concerning the construction of a new building complex.
333. The Conference agreed on the gravity of the problem and that concrete action would have to be initiated now in order to avoid a continuation of the present critical situation. It appreciated the unremitting efforts of the Director-General to obtain a positive response from the Host Government and in support of these, adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 14/81
HEADQUARTERS ACCOMMODATION
THE CONFERENCE,
Recognizing that the buildings made available by the Italian Government at Viale delle Terme di Caracalla have long proved insufficient for accommodating the Headquarters staff of the Organization and the World Food Programme, this having necessitated the construction of temporary office accommodation in 1965 and the renting of additional premises since 1969,
Recalling the solution to the problem of Headquarters accommodation identified by the Director-General and supported by the Council at its Seventy-ninth Session ,
1. Decides to establish, under Article VI.5 of the Constitution, a working party consisting of seven Member Nations, comprising a representative from each of the seven FAO regions,
2. Decides that the Working Party will comprise the following Member Nations:
Australia
Bangladesh
Colombia
Greece
Saudi Arabia
United States of America
Congo whose representatives should, in consultation with the Director-General, act as a delegation for the purpose of meeting the Italian Authorities at the highest level, with a view to requesting, as a matter of urgency, the implementation of both the interim and permanent solutions proposed by the Director-General and endorsed by the Council at its Seventy-ninth
Session,
3. Authorizes the Director-General to convene meetings of the Working Party at such times as he may consider necessary or appropriate,
4. Requests the Working Party to report to the Council at its Eighty-second and Eighty-third Sessions and to the Conference at its Twenty-second Session on the progress made and on further steps that may be envisaged in order to achieve with the least possible delay a permanent solution to the accommodation problem.
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
Regional office for the near east (RNEA)
334. The Conference expressed its full satisfaction on the manner in which the Director-General had implemented Resolution 20/79 regarding the Regional Office for the Near East. It commended the speed and efficiency with which the arrangements had been effected while maintaining fully the quality and usefulness of services to the countries of the Region. It also noted with appreciation that the provisions made by the Director-General in the Programme of Work and Budget for 1982-83 would permit the Regional Office to continue to serve the needs and interests of the countries in the Region. The hope was expressed that the Regional Office would be able to operate again within the Region when more favourable circumstances permit.
Abolition of audited interim accounts 11
335. The Conference recalled that although the financial period of the Organization was two calendar years, the current Financial Regulations provided for the submission of interim accounts to the External Auditor for audit. It agreed that in the context of a biennial programme of work and budget cycle, the usefulness of audited interim accounts was limited.
336. The Conference agreed that, in order to take full advantage of biennial budgeting possibilities and to reduce expenses, the requirement for audited interim accounts be abolished, subject to the possibility of audited interim accounts being prepared in exceptional cases or where the nature of the account so warranted.
337. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 15/81
AMENDMENT TO THE FINANCIAL REGULATIONS
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that, although the financial period of the Organization was two calendar years, the current Financial Regulations provided for the submission of audited interim accounts to the External Auditor at the end of the first year of each biennium,
Recognizing that in the context of a biennial programme of work and budget the usefulness of audited interim accounts was limited,
Noting the Report of the Seventy-ninth Council Session on this question,
Decides that the Financial Regulations be amended as follows by deleting the words in square brackets and adding the words underlined:
Regulation X
Internal Control
10.3 The Director-General may make such ex gratia payments as he deems to be necessary. A statement of such payments shall be submitted with the final land interim/ accounts.
10.4 The Director-General may, after full investigation, authorize the writing-off of losses of cash, supplies, equipment and other assets, other than arrears of contributions. A statement of all such losses written off during the financial period shall be submitted to the External Auditor with the final /and interim/ accounts.
Regulation XI
The Accounts
11.2 Besides the final accounts for the financial period, the Director-General shall prepare, where the nature of the accounts so warrants, or in exceptional cases as decided by the Finance Committee, interim accounts at the end of each of the intervening years.
11.4 The final and any interim accounts of the Organization shall be presented in United States dollars. The accounting records may, however, be kept in such currency or currencies as the Director-General may deem necessary.
11.5 The final and any interim accounts shall be submitted to the External Auditor not later than 31 March following the end of the period to which they relate.
Regulation XII
External Audit Reporting
12.10 The External Auditor's reports shall be transmitted through the Finance Committee, together with the audited financial statements, to the Council in accordance with any directions given by the Finance Committee. The Council shall examine the financial statements and the audit reports and shall forward them to the Conference with such comments as it deems advisable. The report on /the/ any interim accounts shall be submitted to the Finance Committee.
Annex I
ADDITIONAL TERMS OF REFERENCE GOVERNING EXTERNAL AUDIT
5. The External Auditor shall certify the financial statements in the following terms: "I have examined the financial statements of the Organization for the /year/ financial period ended 31 December I have obtained all the information and explanations that I have required, and I certify, as a result of the audit, that, in my opinion, the financial statements are correct", adding, should it be necessary, "subject to the observations in my report."
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
Status of contributions
338. The Conference was informed that the rate of receipt of contributions throughout much of 1981 had been lower than any on record, and often had been lower than the proportional share of budgeted appropriations. On 19 November 1981 only 83.37 percent of current assessments had been received, compared to 95.65 percent on the same date during the last Conference year, 1979, and 94.41 percent in 1977. Outstanding contributions of Member Nations on 19 November 1981 totalled $25873758 as listed in Appendix G.
339. The Conference noted that this deterioration in the pattern of payment of assessments by Member Nations had necessitated proposals for action to ensure that the Organization would have available cash resources for execution of the approved programme.
340. The Conference recognized that these financial problems would not exist if Member Nations honoured their obligations to the Organization as provided for in Financial Regulation 5.5. In accordance therewith, contributions were due and payable in full within 30 days of the receipt of the Director-General's communication requesting payment, or as of the first day of the calendar year to which they relate, whichever was later.
341. The Conference shared the deep concern expressed by the Council and appealed to all Member Nations to remit their contributions in accordance with the timing foreseen in the Financial Regulations. Timely receipt of payments from all Member Nations, especially the larger contributors, would provide sufficient funds for the cash flow requirements of the Organization and thus avoid interest costs which would arise if funds had to be borrowed to implement the programme.
Payment of contributions - Central African Republic
342. The Conference, noting, on the basis of information received from the Government of the Central African Republic that its failure to pay contributions had been due to conditions beyond its control, considered the proposal of the Government that it liquidate its arrears of contributions over a ten-year period commencing in 1981 in addition to paying each current contribution in the calendar year of assessment.
343. The Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 16/81
PAYMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS - CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that the Government of the Central African Republic had made a proposal that it liquidate its arrears of contributions over a period of ten years commencing in 1981 in addition to paying each current contribution in the calendar year of assessment,
Decides that:
1. Nowithstanding Financial Regulation 5.5, the Central African Republic's arrears of contributions totalling $68 044.16 shall be settled through the payment of ten equal annual instalments of $6 804.42;
2. The first instalment together with the contribution assessed for 1981 shall be payable in 1981;
3. The annual payment of the instalments referred to above, together with the payment of each current contribution in the calendar year of assessment and any advances to the Working Capital Fund, shall be considered as fulfillment of the Central African Republic's financial obligations to the Organization.
(Adopted 12 November 1981)
Replenishment of the working capital fund
344. The Conference noted that at its Seventy-ninth Session the Council had adopted Resolution 1/79 authorizing the Director-General to withdraw from the Working Capital Fund up to $5 925 million to cover unbudgeted extra costs. It was expected that approximately $5.4 million would be required.
345. The Conference recalled that in accordance with Financial Regulation 6.5(b) advances made from the Working Capital Fund to finance expenditures not provided for in the budget should be reimbursed by such method as the Conference determined.
346. The Conference noted that if Member Nations paid their contributions promptly there would be sufficient cash surplus at 31 December 1981 to reimburse the amount withdrawn from the Working Capital Fund.
347. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 17/81
REIMBURSEMENT OF WORKING CAPITAL FUND FROM CASH SURPLUS 1980-81
THE CONFERENCE,
Noting that the Director-General was authorized by Resolution 1/79 of the Seventy-ninth Session of the Council to withdraw an amount of up to $5 925 million from the Working Capital Fund to cover unbudgeted extra costs,
Noting that by 31 December 1981 it is expected that some $5.4 million will be required,
Further noting that if Member Nations pay their contributions promptly it is estimated that there will be a cash surplus in the 1980-81 biennium,
Recalling that, in accordance with Financial Regulation 6.5(b), advances made from the Working Capital Fund to finance emergency expenditures shall be reimbursed by such method as the Conference determines,
Decides that, notwithstanding the provisions of Financial Regulation 6.1(b), such portion of the surplus as is sufficient to cover the withdrawal shall be withheld and used to reimburse the Working Capital Fund.
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
Increase in the level of the working capital fund
348. The Conference noted that as a result of the highly unsatisfactory status of contributions, the Organization was experiencing financial problems. The Conference strongly stressed the obligation on Member Nations under the Financial Regulations to pay each year's assessment within 30 days of receipt of the Director-General's communication or on 1 January of the calendar year to which they relate, whichever was the later. Nonpayment or delays would penalize those who met their obligations promptly.
349. The Conference considered the proposal to raise the level of the Working Capital Fund, which would be used as the first resort to cover any deficit in the cash flow of the Organization resulting from delays in the receipt of contributions. Some Member Nations could not support the proposal which they believed might result in additional assessments on Member Nations and reserves which would not directly benefit the programme of the Organization. The majority of Member Nations, taking into account the pattern of payments contributions, including the intentions of the major contributor, supported the proposal which was considered a prudent and necessary measure to ensure full implementation of the approved programme.
350. The Conference noted that the new assessment to finance the increase in the Working Capital Fund to $13.25 million might be offset at least to some extent by the cash surplus which, according to current estimates, could still become available at the end of the current biennium.
351. The Conference adopted the following Resolution:
Resolution 18/81
LEVEL OF THE WORKING CAPITAL FUND
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling its Resolution 34/75, by which the level of the Working Capital Fund was fixed at $6 500000,
Also recalling its Resolution 33/75, by which the Director-General was authorized to withdraw up to $1 000.000 from the Working Capital Fund for financing initial emergency measures for the control of livestock diseases and desert locusts,
Regretting that in spite of the repeated appeals of the Council, the rate of receipts of contributions to the Budget has seriously deteriorated in comparison with previous biennia, and that to some extent this may reflect a continuing pattern,
Considering that the Working Capital Fund should be the first source of finance for budgetary expenditures pending receipt of contributions and that other methods should, as far as possible, be used only when serious cash flow problems occur despite withdrawals from the Working Capital Fund,
Noting that the present level of the Working Capital Fund constitutes only two percent of the present Budget level and that this percentage is much lower than in other comparable Organizations,
Having examined the recommendations made by the Council at its Eightieth Session,
Decides that as from 1 January 1982, the authorized level of the Working Capital Fund shall be $13 250 000 and that:
(a) Member Nations shall be reassessed in accordance with the provisions of Financial Regulation 6.2(b) (iv) and (v) as from 1 January 1982 on the basis of the Scale of Contributions for 1982-83;
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of Financial Regulation 6.1(b), the portion of each Member Nation's share in any 1980-81 cash surplus as may be needed to bring up its advance to the Working Capital Fund after reassessment to the required level, shall be withheld and applied towards such advance as of 1 January 1982.
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
Emoluments of the Director-General
352. The Conference endorsed the Council's recommendation that the emoluments of the Director-General be brought in line with those of Executive Heads of organizations within the United Nations system. It also agreed that provision should be made for the automatic adjustment in the future of the Director-General's salary and allowances in line with those approved for staff in the Professional and higher categories.
353. The Conference accordingly adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 19/81
EMOLUMENTS OF THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL
THE CONFERENCE,
Recalling that it had fixed the salary and allowances of the Director-General at its Nineteenth Session in accordance with operative paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of Resolution 28/77,
Noting that the General Assembly of the United Nations, at its Thirty-fifth Session, approved certain recommendations of the International Civil Service Commission affecting the salaries and allowances of staff in the Professional and higher categories.
Noting further that the Council, at its Seventieth Session, authorized the Director-General to amend the FAO Staff Regulations to give effect to the recommendations of the International Civil Service Commission, in the form in which they had been approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations and with the same effective date,
Considering that the changes in entitlements of staff in the Professional and higher categories which were introduced in FAO with effect from 1 January 1981 should be applied retroactively to the Director-General, and that provision should be made whereby such changes in entitlements as in the future be introduced for the Professional and higher categories would automatically apply to the Director-General,
Considering also that in FAO the representation allowance of the Director-General had not been changed since it was established on 1 January 1977 at US $ 20.000.
Decides that:
1. The annual salary of the Director-General be retroactively adjusted from 1 January 1981 to the following amounts: gross salary US $125.400; net salary US $ 66.817 at the dependency rate, or US $ 60.177 at the single rate; post adjustment for one index point US $ 550 at the dependency rate, or US $ 496 at the single rate.
2. The system of allowances and benefits applicable to the Director-General be amended from 1 January 1981 in the same way as that of staff in the Professional and higher categories;
3. In the future the salary and allowances of the Director-General shall be adjusted in line with any revision of salaries and allowances of staff in the Professional and higher categories;
4. The representation allowance of the Director-General be increased to US $ 24.000 effective 1 January 1981.
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
<section>c</section>
VIII. Appointments and elections
A. Applications for membership in the organization
B. Election of Council Members
C. Appointments
A. Applications for membership in the organization
354. The Conference had before it applications for membership from Bhutan, Equatorial Guinea, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tonga and Zimbabwe. These applications had been submitted within the time limit prescribed by Rule XIX GRO. They contained or were supplemented by the formal instrument required under Article II of the Constitution, and were thus found in order.
355. The Conference proceeded to a secret ballot on the five applications at its second meeting on Saturday 7 November 1981, in accordance with Article II-2 of the Constitution and Rule XII-9 GRO. The results of the voting were as follows:
Admission of Bhutan
1. Number of ballot papers issued 132
2. Defective ballots 4
3. Abstentions 0
4. Number of votes cast 128
5. Majority required 86
6. Votes for 128
7. Votes against 0
Admission of Equatorial Guinea
1. Number of ballot paper issued 132
2. Defective ballots 4
3. Abstentions 0
4. Number of votes cast 128
5. Majority required 86
6. Votes for 127
7. Votes against 1
Admission of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
1. Number of ballot papers issued 132
2. Defective ballots 3
3. Abstentions 6
4. Number of votes cast 123
5. Majority required 82
6. Votes for 123
7. Votes against 0
Admission of Tonga
1. Number of ballot papers issued 132
2. Defective ballots 2
3. Abstentions 6
4. Number of votes cast 124
5. Majority required 83
6. Votes for 124
7. Votes against 0
Admission of Zimbabwe
1. Number of ballot papers issued 132
2. Defective ballots 11
3. Abstentions 1
4. Number of votes cast 120
5. Majority required 80
6. Votes for 120
7. Votes against 0
356. The Conference accordingly admitted Bhutan, Equatorial Guinea, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tonga and Zimbabwe to membership in the Organization.
B. Election of Council Members
357. The Conference elected the following Member Nations to membership on the Council:
REGIONS AND SEATS
MEMBERS
Period: November 1981 - December 1984
Africa Cape Verde
Ethiopia
Lesotho
Upper Volta
Asia India
Pakistan
Philippines
Europe Italy
France
Norway
United Kingdom
Latin America Ecuador
Near East Egypt
Saudi Arabia
Sudan
North America None
Southwest Pacific New Zealand
Period: 1 January 1983 - November 1985
Africa Benin
Malawi
Rwanda
Asia Bangladesh
China
Indonesia
Japan
Malaysia
Thailand
Europe Germany,
Federal
Republic of Spain
Cyprus
Latin America Argentina
Venezuela
Panama
Near East Iraq
North America None
Southwest Pacific None
C. Appointments
Appointment of the Director-General
Appointment of the independent chairman of the council
Appointment of Member Governments' Representatives to the Staff Pension Committee
Appointment of the Director-General
358. The Conference had before it a single nomination for the office of Director-General.
359. The Conference, after a secret ballot, appointed Edouard Saouma to the office of Director-General for a period of six years, from 1 January 1982 to 31 December 1987.
360. Pursuant to Rule XXXVI-1(c) GRO, on the recommendation of the General Committee, the Conference adopted the following resolutions:
Resolution 20/81
APPOINTMENT OF THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL
THE CONFERENCE,
Acting in accordance with Article VII of the Constitution,
Having proceeded to a secret harlot as laid down in Rule XII of the General Rules of the Organization,
1. Declares that Edouard Saouma is appointed to the Office of Director-General, for a period of six years, from 1 January 1982, the term of office expiring on 31 December 1987;
2. Resolves that the salary and allowances of the Director-General shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Resolution 19/81;
3. Further resolves that the other terms and conditions of service of the Director-General shall be governed by the relevant provisions of the Staff Regulations subject, however, to the provisions of the contract to be signed by the Chairman of the Conference on behalf of the Organization and by the Director-General in accordance with Rule XXXVI.1(c) of the General Rules of the Organization.
(Adopted 12 November 1981)
Appointment of the independent chairman of the council
361. Having proceeded to a secret ballot in conformity with Rule XII-9(a) GRO, the Conference adopted the following resolution:
Resolution 21/81
APPOINTMENT OF THE INDEPENDENT CHAIRMAN OF THE COUNCIL
THE CONFERENCE,
Having proceeded to a secret ballot, in accordance with the provisions of Rule XII of the General Rules of the Organization,
1. Declares that Dr. M.S. Swaminathan is appointed Independent Chairman of the Council for a period of two years, that is until the end of the regular session of the Conference to be held in 1983;
2. Decides that the conditions of appointment, including the allowances attached to the office of the Independent Chairman of the Council, shall be as follows:
(a) An annual allowance of the equivalent of $10 000 to cover representation expenses and secretarial assistance in the Chairman's home station, on the understanding that the Director-General will provide secretarial assistance when the Chairman attends sessions of the Council or Conference; one half of the allowance shall be payable in US dollars, the balance being payable, in whole or in part, in the currency of the home country of the Chairman' or in Italian Lire, according to his desires;
(b) A per diem allowance at a rate equivalent to that for the Deputy Director-General, while the Chairman is absent from his home station on Council business, the allowance being reduced to $20.00 per diem while the Chairman is in travel status;
(c) Travel expenses, including the above per diem allowance, shall be defrayed by the Organization, in conformity with its regulations and existing practice when the Chairman attends sessions of the Council, of the Programme and Finance Committees, of the Conference, or when he is invited by the Council or by the Director-General to travel for other purposes.
(Adopted 25 November 1981)
Appointment of Member Governments' Representatives to the Staff Pension Committee
362. In accordance with Article 6(c) of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, the Conference appointed three members and three alternates to the Staff Pension Committee for the period 1 January 1982 to 31 December 1983 as follows:
(i)Members
Horatio Mends
Minister Counsellor (Agriculture)
Permanent Representative of Ghana to FAO
Embassy of the Republic of Ghana
Rome
Ramadhar
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Alternate Permanent Representative of India to FAO
Embassy of the Republic of India
Rome
Milan Zjalic
Minister Counsellor
Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia
Embassy of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Rome
(ii) Alternate Members
Rui de Meira Ferreira
Counsellor
Permanent Representative of Portugal to FAO
Embassy of the Portuguese Republic
Rome
Sayed Amir Abdalla Khalil
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of Sudan to FAO
Embassy of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan
Rome
C. Palmer
Agricultural Attaché
Alternate Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone to FAO
Embassy of the Republic of Sierra Leone
Rome
<section>d</section>
IX. Other matters
A. Date and place of the twenty-second conference session
363. The Conference decided that its Twenty-second Session should be held in Rome from 5 to 24 November 1983.
<section>e</section>
X. Appendix A
AGENDA
INTRODUCTION - PROCEDURE OF THE SESSION
1. Election of Chairman and Vice-Chairmen
2. Appointment of General Committee and Credentials Committee
3. Adoption of Agenda
4. Arrangements for the Session and Allocation of Agenda Items
5. Admission of Observers
PART I - MAJOR TRENDS AND POLICIES IN FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
6. World Food and Agriculture Situation, including:
6.1 State of Food and Agriculture
6.2 Progress in Implementation of the Plan of Action to Strengthen World Food Security
7. World Food and Agricultural Development Strategy, including:
7.1 UN International Development Strategy for the Third Development Decade
7.2 Regional and National Development Strategies
8. Energy in Agriculture and Rural Development
PART II - ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMMES OF THE ORGANIZATION
9. Programme of Work and Budget, 1982-83
10. Medium-Term Objectives
11. Review of the Regular Programme
12. Review of Field Programmes, including:
12.1 Agricultural Investment and Development Assistance for Food Production and Rural Development
12.2 Support Costs
13. Follow-up to WCARRD
14. United Nations/FAO World Food Programme
15. Relations and Consultations with International Organizations, including:
15.1 Recent Developments in the United Nations System of Interest to FAO
15.2 Relations with Intergovernmental and International Non-Governmental Organizations
PART III - CONSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
A. Constitutional and Legal Matters
16. Statutory Report on Status of Conventions and Agreements, and Amendments thereto
17. Other Constitutional and Legal Questions
B. Administrative and Financial Matters
18. Audited Accounts
19. Scale of Contributions, 1982-83
20. Other Financial and Administrative Questions, including:
20.1 Amendments to the Provisions of the Special Reserve Account
20.2 Headquarters' Accommodation
20.3 The Regional Office for the Near East
20.4 Abolition of Audited Interim Accounts
20.5 Status of Contributions
20.6 Replenishment of the Working Capital Fund
20.7 Increase in the Working Capital Fund
20.8 Remuneration of the Director-General
PART IV - APPOINTMENTS AND ELECTIONS
21. Applications for Membership in the Organization
- Bhutan
- Equatorial Guinea
- Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
- Tonga
- Zimbabwe
22. Election of Council Members
23. Appointments:
23.1 Appointment of the Director-General
23.2 Appointment of the Independent Chairman of the Council
23.3 Appointment of Member Governments' Representatives to the Staff Pension Committee
PART V - OTHER MATTERS
24. Date and Place of the Twenty-second Conference Session
25. Any Other Business
<section>f</section>
XI. Appendix B
LIST OF DELEGATES AND OBSERVERS
Chairman Jorge Rubén Aguado (Argentina)
Vice-Chairmen Claude Batault (France)
Edward L. Senanayake (Sri Lanka)
Amer Mahdi Saleh Khashaly (Iraq)
MEMBER NATIONS
AFGHANISTAN
Delegate Fazel Rahim MOHMAND
Minister of Agriculture and Land Reform. Kabul
Alternate Shafi ZAFAR
President of Research and Soils Department Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reform Kabul
Alternate Abdullah NAQSHBANDI
President of Planning Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reform Kabul
Alternate Moh Afzal AZAMI
Director-General of Foreign Relations Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reform Kabul
ALBANIA
Délégué Stavri RISTA
Ministre adjoint de l'agriculture Tirana
Suppléant Pirro BITA
Ambassadeur de la République socialiste populaire d'Albanie en Italie
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Xhevat SHIMAJ
Directeur de l'Institut de recherches agricoles Lushnja
Adjoint Andrea SHUNDI Maître de conférence à l'Institut supérieur d' agriculture Tirana
Adjoint Mehemet MUSALLARI
Deuxième secrétaire
Représentant permanent adjoint de l'Albanie auprès de la FAO Rome
ALGERIA
Délégué Mohamed ABDELAZIZ
Président de la Commission de l'agriculture de l'Assemblée populaire nationale
Secrétaire général de la Commission nationale de la révolution agraire Alger
Suppléant Amar DAHMOUCHE
Ministre Conseiller
Représentant permanent adjoint de l'Algérie auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Rabah MECHHOUD
Représentant permanent suppléant de l'Algérie auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Saâd NASRI
Ministre plénipotentiaire
Ministère des affaires étrangères Alger
Suppléant Abdelaziz MANAMANI
Conseiller technique Ministère de l'agriculture et de la révolution agraire Alger
Suppléant Mohamed-Salah BOULECANE
Conseiller technique Ministère de l'agriculture et de la révolution agraire Alger
Suppléant Belaid HADJEM
Conseiller
Ambassade de la République algérienne démocratique populaire Rome
Suppléant Abdelkader HEZIL
Sous-Directeur des relations internationales
Ministère de l'agriculture et de la révolution agraire Alger
Conseiller Kamel HADRI
Secrétaire des affaires étrangères Alger
Conseiller Mohand BENAMARA
Chargé de mission
Ministère de l'agriculture Alger
ANGOLA
Délégué Telmo F. ALMEIDA
Chargé d'Affaires
Ambassade de la République populaire d'Angola Rome
Suppléant Pedro KANGA
Conseiller technique
Ministère de l'agriculture Luanda
Conseiller Ms Irene WEBBA
Ambassade de la République populaire d'Angola Rome
ARGENTINA
Delegado Jorge RUBEN AGUADO
Ministro de Agricultura y Ganadería Buenos Aires
Suplente Victor Hugo SANTIRSO
Subsecretario de Agricultura Buenos Aires
Suplente Leopoldo BRAVO
Embajador de Argentina en Italia Roma
Suplente Carlos Oscar KELLER-SARMIENTO
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y Culto Buenos Aires
Suplente Fernando PETRELLA
Represente Permanente de Argentina ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Victor BEAUGE
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores y Culto Buenos Aires
Suplente Carlos D. SANCHEZ-AVALOS
Consejero Agrícola
Representante Permanente Alterno de Argentina ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Sra. María Esther BONDANZA de FILIPPO
Secretario de Embajada Representación Permanente de Argentina ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Sra. Ileana DI GIOVAN de SUAREZ
Secretario de Embajada
Represertación Permanente de Argentina ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Nestor STANCANELLI
Ministro
Representación Permanente de Argentina ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Raúl G. DEJEAN RODRIGUEZ
Secretario Comercial
Representación Permanente de Argentina ante la FAO Roma
AUSTRALIA
Delegate T.J. KELLY
First Assistant Secretary Development Division
Department of Primary Industry Canberra
Alternate K.R. DOUGLAS-SCOTT
Ambassador of Australia in Italy Rome
Alternate J.C. McCOLL
Director-General
South Australian Department of Agriculture Adelaide
Alternate J.C. SAINSBURY
Counsellor (Agriculture)
Australian Embassy
Acting Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate R.E. STENSHOLT
Counsellor (Development Assistance)
Australian Embassy
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate A.P. BIGGS
Trade Commissioner (Agriculture)
Australian Embassy Brussels
AUSTRIA
Delegate Günter MAIDEN
Federal Minister of Agriculture and Forestry Vienna
Alternate Robert STEINER
Director-General
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Vienna
Alternate Hermann REDL
Director in the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Vienna
Associate Werner DRUML
Secretary, Embassy of Austria Rome
Associate Helmut HAWSER
Oberrat
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Vienna
Associate Peter ROSENEGGER
Permanent Representative of Austria to FAO Rome
BAHAMAS
Delegate Colin DEAN
Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Local Government Nassau
Adviser Godfrey ENEAS
Director of Agriculture Nassau
BAHRAIN
Delegate Habib A. KASSIM
Minister of Agriculture and Commerce Manama
Alternate Siddiq S. AL-ALAWI
Director of Agriculture Ministry of Commerce and Agriculture Manama
Alternate Hasan Mohamed A. Karim ABDALLA
Head of Agricultural Extension Budaya
Adviser Hamad Ali Abdul-Rahim AL-SHEHABI
Secretary to the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce Manama
Adviser Ahmed Mubarak AL SAAD
Engineer Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce Manama
BANGLADESH
Delegate A.Z.M. OBAIDULLAH KHAN
Secretary Ministry of Agriculture and Forests Dacca
Alternate ABUL AHSAN
Ambassador of the People's Republic of Bangladesh in Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate HESAMUDDIN AHMED
Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Fisheries & Livestock Dacca
Alternate S. HASAN AHMAD
Additional Secretary Ministry of Agriculture and Forests Dacca
Adviser ATAUL HUQ
Joint Secretary Ministry of Food Dacca
Adviser Md. IRSHADUL HAQ
Executive Director, IRDP Ministry of L.G.R.D. Dacca
Adviser TASLIMUR RAHMAN
Deputy Secretary Ministry of Agriculture and Forests Dacca
Adviser Md. ABDUL AZIZ PASHA
First Secretary Embassy of the People's Republic of Bangladesh Rome
Adviser TAJUL ISLAM
Information Officer Ministry of Agriculture and Forests Dacca
BARBADOS
Delegate Richard CHELTENHAM
Minister of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Affairs Bridgetown
Alternate Fozlo BREWSTER
Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Affairs Bridgetown
Alternate Lionel SMITH
Chief Agricultural Officer
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Affairs Bridgetown
BELGIUM
Délégué Guy STUYCK
Ambassadeur de Belgique auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant L. CORNET d'ELZIUS
Ministre plénipotentiaire
Service des organisations internationales
Ministère des affaires étrangères Bruxelles
Suppléant M. VAN DE PUTTE
Ingénieur principal
Chef de service
Relations internationales agricoles
Ministère de l'agriculture Bruxelles
Conseiller P. FRIX
Chef de cabinet adjoins du
Ministre de la coopération au développement Bruxelles
Conseiller J.P. WARNIMONT
Attaché
Représentant permanent suppléant auprès de la FAO Rome
Conseiller J. THINSY
Conseiller adjoins
Direction générale des relations économiques extérieures Bruxelles
Conseiller E. MARTENS
Secrétaire d'administration à l'administration générale de la coopération au développement Bruxelles
Conseiller L. VROONEN
Secrétaire d'administration
Administration générale de la coopération au développement Bruxelles
BENIN
Délégué Codjo AZODOGBEHOU
Ministre du développement rural et de l'action coopérative Cotonou
Suppléant Emmanuel DANHOUNSI
Directeur général du Ministère des fermes d'état, de l'élevage et de la pêche Cotonou
Suppléant Francis d'ALMEIDA
Direction de l'agriculture Porto-Novo
BHUTAN
Delegate Pema WANGCHUR
Director Department of Agriculture Thimphu
Alternate C. DORJI
Director Department of Forests Thimphu
Alternate H.K. CHHETRI
Third Secretary Royal Bhutanese Embassy New Delhi
BOLIVIA
Delegado Walter RIOS GAMBOA
Embajador de Bolivia en Italia
Representante Permanente de Bolivia ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Miguel TORRICO RIVERO
Ministro Consejero Embajada de Bolivia Roma
BOTSWANA
Delegate W.R. MESWELE
Minister of Agriculture Gaborone
Alternate K.S. BINGANA
Deputy Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture Caborone
Alternate V.F. AMANN
Chief Agricultural Economist Ministry of Agriculture Gaborone
Alternate J. PILANE
Agricultural Planning Officer Ministry of Agriculture Gaborone
BRAZIL
Delegate Angelo AMAURY STABILE
Minister of Agriculture Brasilia
Alternate Arrhenius F.M. de FREITAS
Permanent Representative of Brazil to FAO Rome
Alternate Francisco THOMPSON FLORES
Minister Coordinator for the Office for International Agricultural Affairs (CINGRA)
Ministry of Agriculture Brasilia
Alternate Deniz FERREIRA RIBEIRO
Chief of the Office for Economic Affairs Ministry of Agriculture Brasilia
Alternate Antonio CARABALLO BARRERA
Chief of the Office for Social Communication Ministry of Agriculture Brasilia
Alternate Antonio Luiz MACHADO de MORAES
Assistant Office for International Agricultural Affairs (CINGRA)
Ministry of Agriculture Brasilia
Alternate Pedro Paulo MEDEIROS BECK
Assistant Office for International Agricultural Affairs (CINGRA)
Ministry of Agriculture Brasilia
Alternate Ms. Eliana de SAMPAIO FERRAZ
Alternate Permanent Representative of Brazil to FAO Rome
Associate Carmelito de MELO
Specialized International Agencies Division
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Brasilia
BULGARIA
Délégué Philip ISHPEKOV
Ministre adjoint de l'agriculture Sofia
Suppléant Lyuten DJILINOV
Ministre plénipotentiaire
Représentant permanent de la Bulgarie auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint Christo PASKALEV
Ministère des affaires étrangères Sofia
Adjoint Kiril TANOUCHEV
Ministère de l'agriculture Sofia
BURMA
Delegate U YE GOUNG
Minister of Agriculture and Forests Rangoon
Alternate U KHIN MAUNG LAY
Ambassador of the Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma in Italy Rome
Associate U KNIN MAUNG LATT
Director-General Planning and Statistics Department Ministry of Agriculture and Forests Rangoon
Associate U TIN HLAING
General Manager Extension Agricultural Corporation
Ministry of Agriculture and Forests Rangoon
Associate U PE SKIN
Deputy Director Settlements and Land Records Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Forests Rangoon
Associate U TIN HTUT
Second Secretary Embassy of the Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma Rome
Associate U HLA OO
Personal Assistant to the Minister of Agriculture and Forests Rangoon
BURUNDI
Délégué Etienne BARADANDIKANYA
Ministre de l'agriculture et de l'élevage Bujumbura
Suppléant Salvator SAHINGUVU
Directeur général de la planification agricole et de l'élevage Bujumbura
Suppléant Venant KAKUNZE
Directeur de la laiterie centrale de Bujumbura Bujumbura
Conseiller Protais NDAYEGAMIYE
Conseiller à la Mission permanente du Burundi auprès des Nationa Unies Genève
CAMEROON
Délégué Félix Tonye MBOG
Ministre de l'agriculture Yaoundé
Suppléant D.E. DANG MEKOULA
Secrétaire permanent du Comité national de la FAO Yaoundé
Suppléant M. MOUKIA
Directeur des pêches
Ministère de l'élevage et des industries animales Yaoundé
Suppléant A.G. NGONGI NAMANGA
Conasiller (Agriculture) Ambassade du Cameroun Chargé des relations avec la FAO Rome
CANADA
Delegate Eugene F. WHELAN Minister of Agriculture Ottawa
Alternate Dennis W. WARE
Senior Program Coordinator Marketing and Economics Branch Agriculture, Canada Ottawa
Alternate Miss Jennifer McQUEEN
Director General International Affairs Directorate Agriculture, Canada Ottawa
Alternate Robin HIGHAM
Permanent Representative of Canada to FAO
Canadian Embassy Rome
Associate Lorne HENDERSON
Minister of Agriculture and Food Province of Ontario Ottawa
Associate Claude LAMBERT UN
Political and Institutional Affairs Division
Department of External Affairs Ottawa
Associate Miss C. McASKIE UN
Programs Division Multilateral Programs Branch Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) Ottawa
Associate A.E. PROULX
Secretary/Manager Agricultural Stabilization Board Ottawa
Associate Hrs. J. RICKETTS-BARBARIE
International Affairs Directorate Agriculture, Canada Ottawa
Associate R. ROSE
International Affairs Directorate Agriculture, Canada Ottawa
Associate G.A. STENEKER
International Forestry Relations Officer, Canadian Forestry Service, Environment, Canada Ottawa
Associate Miss V. WIGHTMAN
Commodity Trade Policy Division Office of Trade Relations Department of Industry, Trade and Commerce Ottawa
Associate T.G. WILLIS
Senior Agricultural Specialist Natural Resource Division Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) Ottawa
Special Adviser G. MITGES
Member of Parliament Ottawa
Adviser G. FLATEN
President, Canadian Federation of Agriculture Ottawa
Adviser T. STRAIN
President National Farmers' Union Saskatoon
CAPE VERDE
Délégué João PEREIRA SILVA
Ministre du développement rural Praia
Suppléant Antonio RODRIGUES PIRES
Représentant permanent du Cap-Vert auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint Julio FORTES
Ingénieur agronome
Service d'extension rurale
Ministère du développement rural Praia
Adjoint Mme Joceline SAINT'AUBIN
Chef de Cabinet du Ministre du développement rural Praia
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Délégué Clément KOKPAVO
Chargé d'affaires
Représentant Permanent de la République centrafricaine auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Basile GBODO
Directeur du bureau de la planification et de la coordination Bangui
CHAD
Délégué Lossimian M'BAILAOU NAIMBAYE
Ministre d'Etat au développement rural N' Djamena
Suppléant Nokouri GOUKOUNI
Directeur Général du développement rural N' Djamena
Adjoint Badaoui KASSER
Conseiller
Ministère de l'agriculture N' Djamena
Adjoint Ouaïdou RAMADAN
Directeur adjoint
Ministère d'Etat au développement rural N' Djamena
CHILE
Delegado José Luis TORO HEVIA
Ministro de Agricultura Santiago
Suplente Sergio CADENASSO FERROGGIARO
Embajador de Chile ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Sra. Doña Magdalena BALDUZZI
Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno de Chile ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Juan Enrique WALKER
Consejero Embajada de Chile Roma
Asesor Osvaldo LUCO ECHEVERRIA
Asesor de la Oficina de Planificación Agrícola Ministerio de Agricultura Santiago
Asesor Alberto E. CARDEMIL HERRERA
Asesor del Ministro de Agricultura Santiago
CHINA
Delegate LIN HU JIA
Minister of Agriculture Beijing
Alternate KONG CAN DONG
Director, Foreign Affairs Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture Beijing
Alternate LIN GAN
Minister Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of China to FAO Rome
Alternate ZHANG SHI ZHAN
Alternate Permanent Representative of China to FAO Rome
Alternate DONG BI SHU
Division Director
Department of Foreign Finance Ministry of Finance Beijing
Alternate WANG SHOU RU
Deputy Division Director Bureau of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture Beijing
Alternate WU TIAN XI
Senior Agricultural Economist Bureau of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture Beijing
Alternate JIN IANG YUN
Second Secretary
Permanent Representative of China to FAO Rome
Adviser XUE ZI PING
Bureau of Foreign Affairs Ministry of Agriculture Beijing
Adviser DAI JUN MING
International Department
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Beijing
Adviser XU GUO CHANG
Bureau of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture Beijing
Adviser WANG PING CHUNG
Third Secretary
Permanent Representation of China to FAO Rome
Adviser ZHU ZHENG XUAN
Attaché Permanent
Representation of China to FAO Rome
COLOMBIA
Delegado Luís Fernando LONDOÑO CAPURRO
Ministro de Agricultura Bogotá
Suplente Gonzalo BULA HOYOS
Embajador de Colombia ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Doña Paulina de CASTRO MONSALVO
Embajadora Volante Roma
Adjunto Gustavo CASTRO GUERRERO
Gerente General "Banco Ganadero" Bogotá
Adjunto Jacobo MARQUEZ IGUARAN
Procurador Delegado para Asuntos Agrícolas Bogotá
Adjunto Sra. Dra. Dory SANCHEZ
Ministro Consejero
Representación Permanente de Colombia ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto Srta. Maritza CONCHA PRADA
Primer Secretario
Representación Permanente de Colombia ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto Jaime GODIN
Tercer Secretario
Representación Permanente de Colombia ante la FAO Roma
COMOROS
CONGO
Délégué Marius MOUAMPENGA
Ministre de l'agriculture et de l'élevage Brazzaville
Suppléant Joseph TCHICAYA
Ambassadeur de la République populaire du Congo auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint Gabriel SILOU
Directeur de la coopération multilatérale
Ministère de la Coopération Brazzaville
Conseiller Alphonse MOUANGA
Représentant permanent adjoint du Congo auprès de la FAO Rome
Conseiller Jacques NGOULOU
Attaché à la coopération
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage Brazzaville
Conseiller Albert KOUKA
Directeur de l'élevage
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage Brazzaville
Conseiller Daniel AMBOULOU
Directeur des études et de la planification
Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage Brazzaville
Conseiller Marcel SAMBA
Directeur de Cabinet du Ministre du Plan Brazzaville
Continue
<section>g</section>
Continued
COSTA RICA
Delegado Rodolfo GONZALEZ AGUERO Embajador de Costa Rica en Italia
Representante Permanente ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Marco CALVO MATA
Primer Secretario
Embajada de Costa Rica
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Sra. Doña Yolanda GAGO de SINIGAGLIA
Segundo Secretario
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Arnoldo FERNANDEZ BAUDRIT
Agregado Embajada de Costa Rica Roma
CUBA
Delegado Arnaldo MILIAN CASTRO
Vicepresidente del Consejo de Ministros y Ministro Agricultura La Habana
Suplente José FERNANDEZ COSSIO
Vicepresidente Comité Estatal de Colaboración Económica (CECE) La Habana
Suplente Julio Cesar VALMASEDA
Viceministro Agricultura La Habana
Suplente Pedro A. MORALES CARBALLO
Embajador de Cuba ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto Rafael GARCELL
Director Ministerio Agricultura La Habana
Adjunto Sra. Doña Grafila SOTO
Funcionaria
Comité Estatal de Colaboración Económica (CECE) La Habana
Asesor Ernesto TIZOL
Funcionario
Misión Permanente de Cuba ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Emmy MUÑOZ
Funcionario de Agricultura La Habana
Asesor Sra. Doña Francisca PONS
Ministerio de Agricultura La Habana
Asesor Arturo COSTA VALDEZ
Ministerio Relaciones Exteriores La Habana
CYPRUS
Delegate Nicos PATTICHIS
Minister of Agriculture and Natural Resources Nicosia
Alternate Fotis G. POULIDES
Ambassador of Cyprus to FAO Rome
Alternate Andreas PAPASOLOMONTOS
Director-General
Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources Nicosia
Alternate Avraam LOUCA
Director
Department of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture ant Natural Resources Nicosia
Alternate Vlassios KRENTOS
Director Agriculture Research Institute
Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources Nicosia
Associate George CAMELARIS
Agriculture Officer
Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources Nicosia
Associate George F. POULIDES
Alternate
Permanent Representative of Cyprus to FAO Rome
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Delegate Miloslav VELEBIL
Federal Vice-Minister of Agriculture and Food Chairman of the National FAO Committee Prague
Alternate Ján SCHWARZ
Permanent Representative of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic to FAO Rome
Alternate Jaroslav ROSA
Director Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Food Prague
Adviser Václav VOCILKA
Attaché Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs Prague
Adviser Jiri NEUMANN
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Food Prague
Adviser Václav KRÁKORA
Federal Ministry of Foreign Trade Prague
DEMOCRATIC KAMPUCHEA
Délégué TE SUN HOA
Représentant permanent auprès de l'Office des Nations Unies Geneva
Suppléant SUTH SOM BOUN
Département des conférences internationales
Ministère des affaires étrangères Kampuchea
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
Delegate LI HACK CHERL
Vice-Chairman of the Agricultural Commission Pyongyang
Alternate KIM TAE RYONG
Deputy Permanent Representative of the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea to FAO Rome
Adviser JANG MYONG SIK
Head of the Foreign Ministry Rome
Adviser RIM SU MAN
First Secretary
Embassy of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in Yugoslavia Belgrade
Adviser O MYONG SUONG
Third Secretary
Permanent Representative of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to FAO Rome
DENMARK
Delegate Hans Jørgen KRISTENSEN
Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture Copenhagen
Alternate John GLISTRUP
Counsellor
Permanent Representative of Denmark to FAO Rome
Associate Erik FIIL
Head of Division
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Copenhagen
Associate Carl THOMSEN
Professor The Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University Copenhagen
Associate Erik HJELMAR
Head of Division Ministry of Agriculture Copenhagen
Associate Jørgen PEDERSEN
Head of Secretariat Federation of the Danish Smallholders Societies Copenhagen
Associate A. VESTERN PEDERSEN
Head of Division The Agricultural Council Copenhagen
Associate Georg NIELSEN
Director Danish Agricultural Information Office Copenhagen
Adviser Johannes DAHL-HANSEN
Head of Section
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Copenhagen
Adviser Mrs. Bitten LOLK
Head of Section
Ministry of Agriculture Copenhagen
Adviser Jorgen MOLDE
Head of Section
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Copenhagen
Adviser John ZIMMERMANN
Agricultural Attaché
The Royal Danish Embassy Alternate
Permanent Representative of Denmark to FAO Rome
Adviser Mrs. Marianne KJAERHOLM HANSEN
The Royal Danish Embassy Rome
DJIBOUTI
Délégué Ali Mahamade HOUMED
Ministre de l'agriculture et du développement rural Djibouti
Suppléant Mohamed MOUSSA CHEHEM
Directeur du Service de l'élevage et des pêches Djibouti
Conseiller Domenico SORRENTI
Conseiller du Ministre pour les projets de développement Djibouti
DOMINICA
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Delegado Hipólito MEJIA D.
Secretario de Estado de Agriculture Santo Domingo
Suplente Sra. Doña Elena CAMPAGNA DE READ
Embajador
Representante Permanente de la República Dominicana ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Rubén D. NUÑEZ C.
Director del Departamento de Informaciones Estadisticas y Cómputos
Secretaría de Estado de Agricultura Santo Domingo
Suplente Sergio GRULLON
Santo Domingo Director del Departamento de Recursos Externos Secretaría de Estado de Agricultura Santo Domingo
Asesor Sra. Doña Jeannette Josefina GUZMAN SANCHEZ
Ministro Consejero
Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO Roma
ECUADOR
Delegado Carlos VALLEJO LOPEZ
Ministro de Agricultura y Ganadería Quito
Suplente José Luis TAMAYO-RIGAIL
Representante Permanente Alterno del Ecuador ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Alejandro SUAREZ
Representante Permanente Adjunto del Ecuador ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Miguel RIOFRIO
Ingeniero Agrónomo Ministerio de Agricultura Quito
Asesor Luis SANCHEZ
Ingeniero Agrónomo
Ministerio de Agricultura Quito
EGYPT
Delegate Mahmoud DAWOOD
Minister of State for Agriculture and Food Security Cairo
Alternate Ahmed SIDKY
Ambassador of the Arab Republic of Egypt in Italy
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate Mohamed DESSOUKI
Under-Secretary Ministry of Agriculture Cairo
Alternate Mohamed Abdel Rahman DIAB
Minister
Plenipotentiary Embassy of the Arab Republic of Egypt Rome
Alternate Yousef A. HAMDI
Agricultural Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt to FAO Rome
Alternate Adel H. EL SARKI
Director of International Organizations and Conference Division
Ministry of Agriculture Cairo
Adviser Miss Magda SHAHEEN
First Secretary
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Cairo
EL SALVADOR
Delegado Joaquín Alonso GUEVARA MORAN
Ministro de Agricultura y Ganadería San Salvador
Suplente Ivo P. ALVARENGA
Embajador de El Salvador en Italia
Representante Permanente ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto Sta. M. Eulalia JIMENEZ
Consejero y Representante Permanente Alterno ante la FAO Roma
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
Delegado Emiliano BUALE BORICO
Comisario de Estado Ministerio de Agricultura, Ganadería, Pesca y Forestal Malabo
Suplente Anatolio NDONG MBA
Director de Ganadería
Ministerio de Agricultura, Ganadería, Pesca y Forestal Malabo
Suplente Marcos-Manuel NDONGO OGUONO
Agregado Comercial Embajada de Guinea Ecuatorial Madrid
Asesor Eduardo ORTI DE LA TABLA
Asesor del Ministerio de Agricultura, Ganadería, Pesca y Forestal Malabo
ETHIOPIA
Delegate Geremew DEBELE
Minister of Agriculture Addis Ababa
Alternate Getahun IJIGU
Special Assistant to the Minister for Foreign Economic Relations,
Ministry of Agriculture Addis Ababa
Alternate Belachew TILAHUN
Deputy Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to FAO Rome
Associate Tedla SEYOUM
National Revolutionary Development Campaign and Central Planning Supreme Council (NRD and CPSC) Addis Ababa
Associate Getachew JEMBERE
Head, Agricultural Technology Department Relief and Rehabilitation Commission Addis Ababa
Adviser Eshetu DEBABU
Head of Foreign Aid, Planning and Programming Department
Ministry of Agriculture Addis Ababa
FIJI
Delegate Robin YARROW
Permanent Secretary for Agriculture and Fisheries Suva
FINLAND
Delegate Antti NIKKOLA
Chairman of the National FAO Committee Helsinki
Alternate Aarno LUTZ
Permanent Representative of Finland to FAO Rome
Alternate P.W. JOKINEN
Director-General
National Board of Forestry Helsinki
Alternate Reino URONEN
Secretary-General Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Helsinki
Alternate Samuli SUOMELA
Director-General National Board of Agriculture Helsinki
Alternate Matti HANNULA
Consultant Counsellor
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Helsinki
Adviser Holger MAURIA
Forestry Adviser Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Helsinki
Adviser Mrs. Irma-Liisa PERTTUNEN
Program Officer Ministry for Foreign Affairs Helsinki
Adviser Esko LINDSTEDT
Director Central Union of Agricultural Producers Helsinki
FRANCE
Délégué Mme Edith CRESSON
Ministre de l'agriculture Paris
Suppléant Claude BATAULT
Ambassadeur
Représentant permanent de la France auprès de l'OAA Rome
Suppléant André LEWIN
Ministre plénipotentiaire
Directeur des Nations Unies et des Organisations internationales
Ministère des relations extérieures Rome
Suppléant Philippe GUERIN
Ingénieur du GREF
Chef du Service des relations internationales
Ministère de l'agriculture Paris
Suppléant Pierre ELMANOWSKY
Administrateur civil
Secrétaire général du Comité interministériel pour l'agriculture et l'alimentation Paris
Suppléant Mlle Mireille MUSSO
Secrétaire des affaires étrangères
Direction des Nations Unies et des Organisations internationales
Ministère des relations extérieures Paris
Suppléant Jean-Noël MENARD
Ingénieur du GREF
Chef du Bureau de la Coopération internationale
Service des Relations internationales
Ministère de l'agriculture Paris
Suppléant Norbert CARRASCO-SAULNIER
Représentant permanent adjoins de la France auprès de l'OAA Rome
Conseiller Lucien MEADEL
Directeur du Cabinet du Ministre de l'agriculture Paris
Conseiller Marcel MAZOYER
Professeur à l'Institut national agronomique
Président du Comité français de la Journée mondiale de l'Alimentation Paris
Conseiller Robert BAILHACHE
Sous-Directeur de la division des politiques sectorielles et des évaluations rétrospectives à la Caisse centrale de coopération économique Paris
Conseiller Pierre COSSEVIN
Administrateur civil Chef du Bureau des organismes internationaux
Ministère du budget Paris
Conseiller Bernard BLUA
Conseiller commercial à la Direction des relations économiques extérieures
Ministère de l'économie et des finances Paris
Conseiller Jean BIDAUT
Chargé de mission à la Direction du développement économique
Ministère de la coopération et du développement Paris
Conseiller Renaud FABRE
Conseiller technique au Cabinet du Ministre de l'agriculture Paris
Conseiller Bernard BOURGET
Conseiller technique Direction de l'aménagement Ministère de l'agriculture Paris
Conseiller Jean-Pôl NEME
Ingénieur du GREF
Attaché scientifique à la Représentation permanente de la France auprès de l'OAA Rome
Conseiller Michel YOVANOVITCH
Attaché d'administration
Adjoint au Chef de bureau de la coopération internationale Service des relations internationales
Ministère de l'agriculture Paris
Conseiller Mile Bernadette WODOWSKA
Représentation permanente de la France auprès de l'OAA Rome
Conseiller Thierry BORJA de MOZOTA
Chef du Service de presse et d'information
Ambassade de France auprès du Gouvernement de la République italienne Rome
Conseillers spéciaux Michel CEPEDE
Président du Comité interministériel pour l'agriculture et l'alimentation Paris
Conseillers spéciaux Michel SOUPLET
Membres du Conseil économique et social Paris
Conseillers spéciaux Alain BIENAYME
Membres du Conseil économique et social Paris
GABON
Délégué Michel ANCHOUEY
Ministre de l'agriculture, des eaux et forêts et du développement rural Libreville
Suppléant Hervé ANIMBO
Secrétaire Général permanent de la Commission nationale de la FAO Libreville
Suppléant Clément ONDO OBAME
Directeur Général adjoins des eaux et forêts Ministère de l'agriculture, des eaux et forêts Libreville
Adjoint Paul MOMBEY
Directeur de Cabinet du Ministre de l'agriculture, des eaux et forêts et du développement rural Libreville
Adjoint Faustin LEGAULT
Directeur du reboisement Ministère de l'agriculture, des eaux et forêts Libreville
Adjoint Benjamin DOUKAGA-KOUMBA
Directeur adjoint de l'agriculture et du développement rural Libreville
Conseiller Théophile MINKOUE
Premier Conseiller Ambassade du Gabon
Représentant permanent du Gabon auprès de la FAO Rome
GAMBIA
Delegate Seni SINGHATEH
Minister of Agriculture Banjul
Alternate B.O. JOBE
Chargé d'Affaires Permanent Representative of The Gambia to FAO Rome
Alternate A.M.B. JAGNE
Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources Banjul
Alternate Ousman OTHMAN
Permanent Secretary Ministry of Water Resources and the Environment Banjul
GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF
Delegate Josef ERTL
Federal Minister of Food, Agriculture and Forestry Bonn
Alternate Rüdiger van WECHMAR
Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany in Italy Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate Karl GROSS
Ministerialdirektor Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry Bonn
Alternate Wolfgang A.F. GRABISCH
Ministerialrat Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry Bonn
Alternate Reinhard SCHIFFNER
Ministerialrat Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry Bonn
Alternate Rainer MORBACH
Ministerialrat Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation Bonn
Alternate Gerhard LIEBER
Counsellor Alternate Permanent Representative of the Federal Republic of Germany to FAO Rome
Associate Horst WETZEL
Regierungsdirektor Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation Bonn
Associate Josef SCHERER
Regierungsndirektor Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry Bonn
Associate Mrs. Gudrun LÜCKE-HOGAUST
Legationsrätin I. Klasse Federal Foreign Office Bonn
Associate Rolf BUSCH
First Secretary (Agriculture) Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Associate Gerhard WESTDICKENBERG
Legationsrat I. Klasse Federal Foreign Office Bonn
Associate Lothar KOCH
Oberregierungsrat Federal Ministry of Finance Bonn
Adviser Hans RAU
Vorsitzender der Landmaschinen - und Ackerschlepper - Vereinigung (LAY) im VDMA Frankfurt/Main
Adviser Friedhelm MEIER
Geschäftsführer der Landmaschinen - und Ackerschlepper - Vereinigung (LAV) im VDMA Frankfurt/Main
GHANA
Delegate N.Y. AGBESI
Minister of Agriculture Accra
Alternate Bawa AWUMBILA
Deputy Minister of Agriculture Accra
Alternate A.B. SALIH
Principal Secretary Ministry of Agriculture Accra
Alternate Horatio MENDS
Minister Counsellor (Agriculture) Permanent Representative of Ghana to FAO Rome
Adviser Ms Mensimah MENSAH
Assistant to the Permanent Representative of Ghana to FAO Rome
GREECE
Délégué Assimakis FOTILAS
Sous-Secrétaire d'Etat aux affaires étrangères Athènes
Suppléant Stathis MITSOPOULOS
Ambassadeur Directeur de la Division des organisations internationales Ministère des affaires étrangères Athènes
Suppléant Achilles EXARCHOS
Ambassadeur de Grèce auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint Mattheos MARANGOUDAKIS
Division des Communautés européennes économiques Ministère des affaires étrangères Athènes
Adjoint Nicolas SALTAS
Représentant permanent adjoins de la Grèce auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint Karolos GADIS
Division des organizations économiques internationales Ministère des affaires étrangères Athènes
Conseiller Agathoclis PAPASSARANTOPOULOS
Directeur de la Division de la planification Ministère de l'agriculture Athènes
Conseiller George SAKKAS
Directeur de la Division des forêts Athènes
Conseiller Mlle Zoe PAPADOPOULOU
Division des relations économiques internationales Ministère de l'agriculture Athènes
Conseiller Mlle Ioanna EFSTATHIOU
Division des relations économiques internationales
Ministère de l'agriculture Athènes
Conseiller Mlle Zabetta IERONIMAKI
Attaché
Représentation permanente de la Grèce auprès de la FAO Rome
GRENADA
Delegate George LOUISON
Minister of Agriculture, Forestry, Cooperatives and Rural Development St. George's
Alternate Denis NOEL
Chief Technical Officer Ministery of Agriculture, Forestry, Cooperatives and Rural Development St. George's
Alternate George Randolph E. BULLEN
Ambassador of Grenada in Belgium Permanent Representative of Grenada to FAO Brussels
Alternate Joseph C. CAMPBELL
Agricultural Planner Ministry of Planning St. George's
Alternate G.C. FRANK
Assistant to Minister of Agriculture Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Cooperatives and Rural Development St. George's
GUATEMALA
Delegado Humberto VIZCAINO LEAL
Embajador de Guatemala en Italia Representante Permanente de Guatemala ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Guillermo ESTRADA STRECKER
Consejero Representante Permanente Alterno de Guatemala ante la FAO Roma
GUINEA
Délégué El Hadj Toumany SANGARE
Ministre de l'agriculture, des eaux et forêts et conditionnement Conakry
Suppléant Morou BALDE
Ambassadeur de Guinée en Italie Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Mamadou Cellou DIALLO
Chef de Cabinet du Ministre des Fermes agro-pastorales d'arrondissement et des Coopératives agricoles Conakry
Conseiller Sékou Mohamed CAMARA
Conseiller Représentant permanent adjoins auprès de la FAO Rome
Conseiller Bernard KOUNDIANO
Directeur général de l'agriculture Conakry
Conseiller Amara TRAORE
Vétérinaire au Bureau d'études Ministère de l'élevage et de la pêche Conakry
GUINEA-BISSAU
Délégué Avito DA SILVA
Ministre du développement rural Bissau
Suppléant George OLIVEIRA
Directeur général
Département de l'agriculture Ministère du développement rural Bissau
Conseiller Sadjo BAYO
Technicien au Ministère du développement rural Bissau
Conseiller Mme Melesiana PEREIRA
Directrice du Bureau de planification de la sécurité alimentaire Bissau
GUYANA
Delegate J.A. TYNDALL
Minister of Agriculture Georgetown
Alternate J.S.L. BROWMAN
Permanent Secretary of Agriculture Georgetown
HAITI
Délégué René DESTIN
Ministre de l'agriculture, des ressources naturelles et du développement rural Port-au-Prince
Suppléant Alex L. TANIS
Coordonnateur de l'assistance externe
Département de l'agriculture, des ressources naturelles et du développement rural Port-au-Prince
Suppléant Henri LOUIS-JEUNE
Responsable du programme SOLAMAR Chef du service de la production vivrière
Département de l'agriculture, des ressources naturelles et du développement rural Port-au-Prince
HONDURAS
Delegado Juan Alberto LARA BUESO
Representante Permanente Alterno de Honduras ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Sra. Doña Amelia GARCIA OVIEDO
Funcionaria Administrativa de la Embajada de Honduras en Italia Roma
HUNGARY
Delegate Tibor LAKATOS
Chairman of the Hungarian National Committee of the Food and Agriculture Organizations of the United Nations Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Food Budapest
Alternate István OZORAI
Secretary-General of the Hungarian National Committee of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Budapest
Alternate Peter VÁNDOR
Counsellor
Permanent Representative of Hungary to FAO Rome
Adviser Ms Julia SZÁNTO
Senior Officer
Secretariat of the Hungarian National Committee of the Food and Agriculture Organizations of the United Nations Budapest
ICELAND
Delegate Pálmi JÓNSSON
Minister of Agriculture Reykjavik
Alternate Björn SIGURBJÖRNSSON
Director Agricultural Research Institute Reykjavik
Alternate Thorsteinn INGÓLFSSON
Minister-Counsellor Ministry for Foreign Affairs Reykjavik
Continue
<section>h</section>
Continued
INDIA
Delegate Rao Birendra SYNGH
Minister of Agriculture, Rural Reconstruction, Irrigation and Civil Supplies New Delhi
Alternate M.S. SWAMINATHAN
Member (Agriculture) Planning Commission New Delhi
Alternate S.P. MUKHERJI
Secretary Department of Agriculture and Cooperation New Delhi
Alternate J.C. AJMANI
Ambassador of India in Italy Rome
Alternate M. SANKARANARAYANAN
Joint Secretary Department of Agriculture and Cooperation New Delhi
Alternate H.L. CHAWLA
Economic and Statistical Adviser Department of Agriculture and Cooperation New Delhi
Alternate RAMADHAR
Counsellor (Agriculture) Embassy of India Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Associate P.R. MADAN
Private Secretary to the Minister of Agriculture, Rural Reconstruction, Irrigation and Civil Supplies New Delhi
INDONESIA
Delegate SOEDARSONO HADISAPOETRO
Minister of Agriculture Jakarta
Alternate A. KOBIR SASRADIPOERA
Ambassador of Indonesia in Italy Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate SALMON PADMANAGARA
Director-General Agency for Agricultural Education, Training and Extension Ministry of Agriculture Jakarta
Alternate WARDOYO
Director-General of Food Crops Ministry of Agriculture Jakarta
Alternate ALHAMBRA RACHMAN
Director Bureau for Foreign Cooperation Ministry of Agriculture Jakarta
Associate AMIDJONO MARTOSUWIRYO
Agricultural Attache Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Associate HERRY HARYONO
Chief of Economics Division Embassy of the Republic of Indonesia Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Associate Mrs SAODAH SJAHRUDDIN
Senior Official Directorate for Multilateral Economic Cooperation Ministry for Foreign Affairs Jakarta
Associate HIDAYAT GANDA ATMAJA
Senior Official Bureau for Foreign Cooperation Ministry of Agriculture Jakarta
Associate SUHARYO HUSEN
Assistant Agricultural Attache Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
IRAN
Delegate Hassan TOFIGHI
Head of International Relations Department Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development Teheran
Alternate Parviz KABASSI
Agricultural Expert in Field Crops Teheran
Alternate Keyvan RAHNAMA
Alternate Permanent Representative of Iran to FAO Rome
IRAQ
Delegate Amer Mahdi SALEM KHASHALY
Minister of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform Baghdad
Alternate Moustafa HAMDOON
Ambassador of Iraq to FAO Rome
Associate Abd Alabbas KERIM
Director in the Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform Baghdad
Associate Hazem Fadhli NAJEB
Counsellor
Alternate Permanent Representative of Iraq to FAO Rome
Adviser Shakir SABR MOHAMMED
Senior Adviser to the Minister of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform Baghdad
Adviser Badie Jamil AL-KADDO
Acting Director-General National Committee for FAO Activities Baghdad
IRELAND
Delegate Alan Dukes
Minister for Agriculture Dublin
Alternate Michael J. D'ARCY
Minister of State Department of Agriculture Dublin
Alternate Robert McDONAGH
Ambassador of Ireland In Italy Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate S. CUFFE
Deputy Secretary General Department of Agriculture Dublin
Alternate J. ROWAN
Assistant Secretary General Department of Agriculture Dublin
Alternate P. O'DONOGHUE
Chairman Irish National FAO Committee Dublin
Alternate Miss Nuala RAYEL
First Secretary Embassy of Ireland Alternate Permanent Representative of Ireland to FAO Rome
ISRAEL
Delegate Simha EHRLICH
Vice Prime Minister
Minister of Agriculture Jerusalem
Alternate Moshe ALON
Ambassador of Israel in Italy Rome
Associate Yaacov PRIDAN
Counsellor
Permanent Representative of Israel to FAO Rome
Associate Amikam SHAPIRA
Assistant Director-General (Special Duties) and Assistant to the Minister Jerusalem
Associate Samuel POHORYLES
Director of Rural Planning and Development Authority Ministry of Agriculture Jerusalem
Associate Mrs. M. Lotte ROMAN
Director, Technical Assistance and Foreign Relations Bureau Ministry of Agriculture Jerusalem
Associate Hayim S. BAR-SHAI
Assistant Director Food Division Ministry of Industry and Commerce Jerusalem
Associate F. Dan MAAS
Agricultural Adviser Jerusalem
ITALY
Délégué Giuseppe BARTOLOMEI
Ministre de l'agriculture et des forêts Rome
Suppléant Aldo CONTE MAROTTA
Ambassadeur d'Italie auprès de la FAO Rome
Conseiller Giacomo IVANCICH BIAGGINI
Vice-Directeur général
Département de la coopération au développement
Ministère des affaires étrangères Rome
Conseiller Giorgio TESTORI
Conseiller d'ambassade
Directeur du Bureau VIII de la Direction générale des affaires économiques
Ministère des affaires étrangères Rome
Conseiller Giovanni ARMENTO
Trésorerie générale - Section VII Ministère du Trésor Rome
Conseiller Nunzio GUGLIELMINO
Direction générale du Trésor Ministère du Trésor Rome
Conseiller Giuseppe MAGGIO APRILE
Directeur adjoins de division Direction générale de la pêche maritime
Ministère de la marine marchande Rome
Conseiller Mme Giovannella ROSSI PEROTTI
Représentant permanent adjoins de l'Italie auprès de la FAO Rome
Conseiller Antonio PEROVICH
Direction générale de la tutelle
Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts Rome
Conseiller Mme Paola PORCINAI
Direction générale pour l'économie des montagnes et des forêts
Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts Rome
Conseiller Mme Elena LENER-MAMMONE
Chef de service Bureau des relations internationales Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts Rome
Conseiller Mme Francesca ZAFFARANA
Chef de service Bureau des relations internationales Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts Rome
Conseiller Silvano SALVATICI
Direction générale de l'économie forestière
Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts Rome
Conseiller Bernardo PALESTINI
Inspecteur en chef Direction générale de la production agricole
Ministère de l'agriculture et des forêts Rome
Conseiller Giovanni PREVITI
Trésorerie générale - Section VII
Ministère du Trésor Rome
Conseiller Mme Marina VACCARI
Département de la coopération au développement Ministère des affaires étrangères Rome
Conseiller Mme Maria Grazia SCAGLIA
Département de la coopération au développement Rome
Conseiller Pietro ANTINORI
Département de la coopération au développement
Ministère des affaires étrangères Rome
IVORY COAST
Délégué Kemiangan OULAI
Directeur de la production Secrétariat d'Etat à l'agriculture Abidjan
Suppléant Makambou NANGUY
Directeur des statistiques rurales et agricoles Abidjan
Suppléant Hyacinthe LEROUX
Ingénieur agronome au Ministère de l'agriculture Abidjan
Suppléant Marcelin Yao AGBATOU
Adjoint au Directeur du reboisement
Ministère des eaux et forêts Abidjan
Suppléant Honoré GADJI
Vétérinaire au Ministère de la production animale
Direction de la production de l'élevage Abidjan
Suppléant N'Guessan EHOUMAN
Conseiller Ambassade de Côte-d'Ivoire en Italie Rome
Suppléant Paul-Désiré TANOE
Représentant permanent adjoins auprès de la FAO Rome
JAMAICA
Delegate Percival BRODERICK
Minister of Agriculture Kingston
Alternate Derrick DYER
Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture Kingston
Alternate K.G.A. HILL
Permanent Representative of Jamaica to the United Nations and Specialized Agencies Geneva
Adviser Trevor CLARKE
Director of Budget and Planning Ministry of Agriculture Kingston
Adviser Mrs Stella HENRY
Personal Assistant to the Minister of Agriculture Kingston
Adviser Ms Marie STRACHAN
Director Planning and Policy Review Division Ministry of Agriculture Kingston
Adviser S. ALFANO
Consul Rome
Adviser Miss Ann MATTIS
Research Associate Society for International Development Rome
JAPAN
Delegate Umeo KAGEI
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Japan in Italy Rome
Delegate Sakue MATSUMOTO
Vice-Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Tokyo
Alternate Yasushi KUROKOCHI
Minister Embassy of Japan Rome
Alternate Akira NAGA
Minister, Permanent Representative of Japan to FAO Rome
Alternate Koichiro RAMADA
Director International Cooperation Division International Affairs Department Economic Affairs Bureau Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Tokyo
Alternate Kazuhiro MATSUSHITA
Director Planning Division International Affairs Department Economic Affairs Bureau Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Tokyo
Alternate Hiromi SATO
Director Specialized Agencies Division United Nations Bureau Ministry of Foreign Affairs Tokyo
Alternate Shoji SUNAGA
Planning Division International Affairs Department Economic Affairs Bureau Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Tokyo
Alternate Minoru MORIMOTO
First Secretary Alternate Representative of Japan to FAO Rome
Associate Takakata OKAMOTO
International Cooperation Division International Affairs Department Economic Affairs Bureau Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Tokyo
Associate Takeo YOSHIKAWA
Specialized Agencies Division United Nations Bureau Ministry of Foreign Affairs Tokyo
Associate Takaaki KOJIMA
First Secretary Embassy of Japan Rome
Associate Jun YANO
Attaché Embassy of Japan Rome
JORDAN
Delegate Marwan DUDEIN
Minister of Agriculture Amman
Alternate Salem AL-LOZI
Under Secretary of State for Agriculture Amman
Adviser Sand SHUTOUT
Director, Agricultural Planning and Economics Amman
Alternate Musa ARAFAH
Deputy Director-General The Cooperative Organization Amman
Alternate Hassan HAMMAD
Chief, International Relations Ministry of Agriculture Amman
KENYA
Delegate Gilbert Kabere M'MBIJJEWE
Minister for Agriculture Nairobi
Alternate Moses Mike MUKOLWE
Deputy Director of Agriculture Ministry of Agriculture Tokyo Nairobi
Alternate J.L. LIJOODI
Head of the Development Planning Division Ministry of Agriculture Nairobi
Alternate George K. GITHAE
Senior Assistant Secretary Ministry of Livestock Development Nairobi
Alternate Cyrus M. NDEGWA
Conservator of Forests Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Nairobi
Alternate W.K. NGULO
Deputy Director of Livestock Development (Veterinary Services) Ministry of Livestock Development Nairobi
Alternate E.B.M. BARUA CHELE
External Aid Department (Treasury) Office of the Vice-President and Ministry of Finance Nairobi
Alternate Walter E. ADERO
Chief, Crop Production Division Ministry of Agriculture Nairobi
Alternate Reuben B. RYANGA
Minister Plenipotentiary Permanent Representative of Kenya to FAO Rome
Alternate Peter M. AMUKOA
First Secretary Permanent Representation of Kenya to FAO Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate Elias Nkonge BIRICHI
Agricultural Attaché Kenya High Commission London
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
Delegate KOH, KUN
Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries Seoul
Alternate KWAN-HO AHN
Ambassador of the Republic of Korea in Italy Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea to FAO Rome
Alternate DEUK-PO KIM
Minister Embassy of the Republic of Korea Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate DONG-BAI LEE
Agricultural Attaché Embassy of the Republic of Korea Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate JONG-TACK YOO
Director-General Agricultural Planning and Budget Bureau Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Seoul
Associate JOONG-IN CHUN
Director International Cooperation Division Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Seoul
Associate HYO-SEUNG AHN
Assistant Director International Organizations Division I Ministry of Foreign Affairs Seoul
Associate BYUNG-HARK MIN
Second Secretary Embassy of the Republic of Korea Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Associate CHUNG-OCK SEO
Assistant Agricultural Attaché Embassy of the Republic of Korea Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Associate BYUNG-HWAN LO
Assistant Director International Cooperation Division Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Seoul
Adviser SHIN-HAENG HUH
Senior Fellow Department of Agricultural Policy Analysis Korea Rural Economics Institute Seoul
Adviser KYO-EUN KIM
Deputy Director General Research Department National Agricultural Cooperative Federation Seoul
KUWAIT
Delegate Abdulla DAKHIL AL RASHEED
Minister of Public Works Kuwait
Alternate Salem Ibrahim AL MANNAI
Assistant Under-Secretary for Agricultural Affairs Ministry of Public Works Kuwait
Alternate Ahmad Mohammad Saeed AL NAKIB
Controller of Agricultural Wealth Kuwait
Alternate Ms Fatima H. JAWHAR HAYAT
Head, Foreign and Technical Relations Division Department of Agriculture Ministry of Public Works Kuwait
Alternate Mohamad A. AL-SANEH
Head of Animal Production Division Ministry of Public Works Kuwait
LEBANON
Délégué Mustapha DERNAIKA
Ministre de l'agriculture Beyrouth
Suppléant Mustapha ZEIDAN
Directeur général Ministère de l'agriculture Beyrouth
Suppléant Amin Abdel MALEK
Inspecteur général Inspection centrale
Présidence du Conseil des Ministres Beyrouth
Suppléant Rachid EDRISS
Directeur général Office de la production animate Beyrouth
Suppléant Raymond ROUPHAEL
Directeur général de l'Office fruitier Beyrouth
Suppléant Khalil CHOUERI
Directeur de l'Office de la soie Kfarchima
Conseiller Bassim KABBANI
Journaliste
Ministère de l'information Beyrouth
LESOTHO
Delegate P.N. PEETE
Minister of Agriculture Maseru
Alternate Chaka NTSANE
Ambassador of the Kingdom of Lesotho in Italy Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate S.J. KAO
Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture Maseru
Associate M. PHOOFOLO
Counsellor Deputy Permanent Representative of Lesotho to FAO Rome
Associate Obed-Monyooe SELIKANE
Director of Extension Ministry of Agriculture Maseru
LIBERIA
Delegate Alfred M. FROMOYAN
Minister of Agriculture Monrovia
Alternate R. Francis Tuan KARPEH
Deputy Minister of Agriculture Monrovia
Alternate J.B. FREEMAN
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate A. SEAWAY
Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
LIBYA
Delegate Mohamed Sidki ZEHNI
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Associate All Ben RAMADAN
Director-General Research Department Secretariat for Agricultural Development and Land Reclamation Tripoli
Associate Bashir M. SAID
Head of Planning and Follow-up Department Secretariat for Agricultural Development and Land Reclamation Tripoli
Associate Abdul Bari KHALIL
Director-General for Agricultural Planning Secretariat for Planning Tripoli
LUXEMBOURG
Délégué Paul MERTZ
Ambassadeur du Grand-Duché de Luxembourg en Italie Rome
Suppléant Ghislain BOMBLED
Attaché à l'Ambassade du Luxembourg en Italie Rome
MADAGASCAR
Délégué Th. C. RAJAONA
Représentant permanent adjoint de Madagascar auprès de la FAO Rome
MALAWI
Delegate D.D.K. CHIPHWANYA
Minister of Youth and Sports Lilongwe
Alternate W.K. BANDA
Principal Secretary of Ministry of Agriculture Lilongwe
Alternate J.F. MWENECHANYA
Assistant Chief Agriculture Development Officer Lilongwe
MALAYSIA
Delegate DATO' ABDUL MANAN
Minister of Agriculture Kuala Lumpur
Alternate RADIN SOENARNO
Secretary-General Ministry of Agriculture Kuala Lumpur
Alternate KAMARUDDIN ARIFF
Ambassador of Malaysia in Italy Rome
Alternate DATUK AHMAD YUNUS
Director-General Department of Agriculture Kuala Lumpur
Alternate ABU BAKAR bin MAHMUD
Director of Development and Training Department of Agriculture Kuala Lumpur
Alternate ABDUL WAHID bin ABDUL
JALIL
Agricultural Attaché Alternate Permanent Representative of Malaysia to FAO Rome
Alternate YUSOF bin KHALID
Principal Assistant Director Economic Planning Unit Prime Minister's Department Kuala Lumpur
Alternate MAZLAN bin JUSOH
Senior Fisheries Officer Department of Fisheries Kuala Lumpur
Alternate MOHD. YUSOF bin AHMAD
First Secretary Embassy of Malaysia Rome
Alternate MOHD. YASIN bin MOHD SALLEH
Assistant Agricultural Attaché Embassy of Malaysia Rome
Alternate ISKANDAR DZAKURNAIN bin BADARUDDIN
Senior Assistant Director of Budget, Treasury Ministry of Finance Kuala Lumpur
MALDIVES
Delegate Abdul AZEEZ
Under-Secretary Ministry of Agriculture Malé
MALI
Délégué N'Fagnanama KONE
Ministre de l'agriculture Bamako
Suppléant Sekou SANGARE
Ambassadeur du Mali en République fédérale d'Allemagne Bonn
Suppléant Samba SIDIBE
Directeur général du Service de l'élevage Ministère de l'élevage et des eaux et forêts Bamako
Suppléant Sinaly COULIBALY
Premier Conseiller Ambassade du Mali en France Paris
Adjoint M. Tidiani DIARRA
Directeur adjoins de l'Opération Haute Vallée Bamako
MALTA
Delegate V. SEYCHELL
Chargé d'affaires Embassy of Malta Rome
Alternate Istvan MOSKOVITS
Counsellor (agriculture) Permanent Representative of Malta to FAO Rome
Alternate D. CAUCHI
Third Secretary Embassy of Malta Rome
MAURITANIA
Délégué Mohamed Ould AMAR
Ministre du développement rural Nouakchott
Suppléant Mohamed Sidya OULD BAH
Directeur de l'élevage Nouakchott
Suppléant Hamadi Amadou LAM
Directeur de l'agriculture Ministère du développement rural Nouakchott
MAURITIUS
Delegate Satcam BOOLELL
Minister of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment Port-Louis
Alternate Lutchun PURMESSUR
Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment Port-Louis
MEXICO
Delegado Francisco MERINO RABAGO
Secretario de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos México
Suplente Cassio LUISELLI FERNANDEZ
Coordinador General de Evaluación del Sistema Alimentario Mexicano México
Suplente Oscar VALDES ORNELAS
Subsecretario de Ganadería Secretaría de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos México
Alterno Dionisio PEREZ JACOME
Subsecretario de Regulación y Abastos
Secretaría de Comercio México
Suplente Antonio JUAN-MARCOS ISSA
Embajador de México ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Sra. Doña Amorita WESTPHAL de MERINO RÁBAGO
Presidente del Comité de Promoción de Servicios Sociales de la Secretaría de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos México
Asesor Luis EQUIHUA HERNANDEZ
Asesor Titular del Secretario de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos México
Asesor Guillermo KELLEY SALINAS
Representante Permanente Alterno de México ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Miguel AGUIRRE AGUIRRE
Asesor de la Secretaría de Comercio México
Asesor Melchor DE LOS SANTOS
Consejero
Representación Permanente de México ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Joaquín PIÑA ARMENDARIZ
Consejero Comercial Representación Permanente de México ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Victor Manuel HORCASITAS
Consejero Agrícola de los Estados Unidos de América de la Secretaría de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos México
Asesor Miguel Angel CUADRA PALAFOX
Asesor del Secretario de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos México
Asesor Francisco MARTINEZ GOMEZ
Consejero Agrícola Representación Permanente de México ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Carlos ARCINIEGA
Primer Secretario Representación Permanente de México ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Sra. Doña Mercedes RUIZ ZAPATA
Tercer Secretario Representación Permanente de México ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Arturo NAVARRO MURILLO
Consejero Agrícola Secretaría de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos México
MONGOLIA
Delegate T. SUGARRAGCHA
Deputy Minister of Agriculture Ulan Bator
Alternate S.O. BOLD
Permanent Mission of the Mongolian People's Republic to the Office of the United Nations Geneva
Alternate T. TORNON
External Relations Department Ministry of Agriculture Ulan Bator
MOROCCO
Délégué Ahmed Abdellaloui ALAOUI
Secrétaire général Ministère de l'agriculture Rabat
Suppléant Abdelaziz KADIRI
Ingénieur des eaux et forêts Ministère de l'agriculture Rabat
Suppléant Mlle Farida JAIDI
Représentant permanent adjoint du Maroc auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Abdessamia IRAQUI
Ministère de l'agriculture Rabat
Suppléant Moulay Abdelhakim SAISSI
Directeur de la planification et des affaires économiques Ministère de l'agriculture Rabat
Suppléant Abdelhay BOUZOUBAA
Directeur de la production végétale
Ministère de l'agriculture Rabat
Suppléant Mohamed MOULINE
Directeur de la vulgarisation agricole et de la réforme agraire Ministère de l'agriculture Rabat
Suppléant Ben Mohamed NAJEM
Chargé de la coopération technique
Ministère de l'agriculture Rabat
Conseiller Mohamed BENJELLOUN
Directeur représentant le Ministère des pêches maritimes Casablanca
Conseiller Saïd TAZI
Attaché de Cabinet au Ministère de l'agriculture Rabat
MOZAMBIQUE
Delegate Mario DA GRAÇA MACHUNGO
Minister of Planning and Agriculture Maputo
Alternate Mrs. Maria Margarida TAVARES MARTINS
Deputy-Director Planning Department Ministry of Agriculture Maputo
Associate Mrs Leopoldina DALIA DIAS
Officer of Planning Department Ministry of Agriculture Maputo
Adviser José FOCOLONE
Ministry of Planning and Agriculture Maputo
Continue
<section>i</section>
Continued
NAMIBIA
NEPAL
Delegate Bahadur MALLA
Minister of Agriculture Kathmandu
Alternate PRITHU NARSING RANA
Director-General Department of Agriculture Patan
Alternate Deep Raj SHARMA
General Manager Agriculture Development Bank Kathmandu
NETHERLANDS
Delegate J. de KONING
Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries The Hague
Alternate W.M. OTTO
Director-General for Land Development and Forest Administration Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries The Hague
Alternate J. SONNEVELD
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to FAO and the World Food Programme Rome
Associate N. SLOT
Policy Adviser to the Director-General for Agriculture and Food Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries The Hague
Associate H. RIEM
Division for International Economic Affairs Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries The Hague
Associate J. DOORENBOS
Deputy Director Agricultural Assistance to Developing Countries Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries The Hague
Associate A.P.J.M. OOMEN
Food production and nutrition programmers coordinator Ministry of Foreign Affairs The Hague
Associate J.H.M. AALDERS
General Affairs, Environment and Physical Planning Division Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries The Hague
Associate Ms. S.M. MAIER
International Organizations Department Ministry of Foreign Affairs The Hague
Associate J. NEETESON
Directorate for Agricultural Assistance to Developing Countries Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries The Hague
Associate S. HEIDSMA
Deputy Permanent Representative to FAO and the WFP Rome
Adviser C.J.A.M. de BONT
Public Board of Agriculture The Hague
Adviser A.J.M. OOMEN
Information and External Relations Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries The Hague
NEW ZEALAND
Delegate E.J. STONYER
Director Economics Division Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Wellington
Alternate W.A. COCHRANE
Counsellor New Zealand Embassy and Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate R.W.M. JOHNSON
Deputy Director Economics Division Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Wellington
Alternate J.B. JACKMAN
Counsellor (Agriculture) New Zealand High Commission London
Alternate J.G. BOXALL
Second Secretary (Commercial) Embassy of New Zealand and Alternate Permanent Representative of New Zealand to FAO Rome
Associate Miss A. SKELLY
Embassy of New Zealand Rome
NICARAGUA
Delegado Jaime WHEELOCK ROMÁN
Comandante de la Revolución Ministro de Desarrollo Agropecuario y Reforma Agraria Managua
Suplente Victor Hugo TINOCO
Vice Ministro de Relaciones Exteriores Managua
Suplente Pedro Antonio BLANDON
Vice Ministro de Desarrollo Agropecuario y Reforma Agraria Director del Programa Alimentario Nacional (PAN) Managua
Suplente Roberto GUTIERREZ
Vice Ministro Director General de Planificación del Ministerio de Desarrollo Agropecuario y Reforma Agraria Managua
Suplente Mauricio S. CUADRA
Director de Relaciones Internacionales y Cooperación Externa del Minieterio de Desarrollo Agropecuario y Reforma Agraria Managua
Suplente Humberto CARRION McDONOUGH
Representante Permanente Alterno de Nicaragua ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Sra. Doña Ligia ELIZONDO C.
Directora del Programa de Desarrollo Agropecuario y Reforma Agraria Ministerio de Desarrollo Agropecuario y Reforma Agraria Managua
Asesor José BARRIOS
Responsable de Relaciones Internacionales del Ministerio de Planificación Managua
Asesor Sra. Doña Virginia ESPINOSA
Agregada de la Embajada de Nicaragua en Italia Roma
Asesor Sergio DE CASTILLA
Asesor Ministerio de Desarrollo Agropecuario y Reforma Agraria Managua
Asesor Carlos HUETE
Asesor Ministerio de Desarrollo Agropecuario y Reforma Agraria Managua
NIGER
Délégué Ari-Toubo IBRAHIM
Ministre du développement rural Niamey
Suppléant Haladou SALHA
Secrétaire Général Ministère du développement rural Niamey
Adjoint Ibrahim MAAZOU
Directeur du Service de l'élevage Ministère du développement rural Niamey
Adjoint Ibrahim OUMAROU
Directeur du Service de l'Agriculture Ministère du développement rural Niamey
NIGERIA
Delegate Alhaji Ibrahim GUSAU
Federal Minister of Agriculture Lagos
Alternate M. LIMAN
Permanent Secretary Federal Ministry of Agriculture Lagos
Adviser O. AWOYEMI
Director Federal Department of Agriculture Lagos
Adviser D.E. IYAMABO
Director of Agricultural Sciences Federal Ministry of Science and Technology Lagos
Adviser B.F. DADA
Director Federal Department of Fisheries Lagos
Adviser J.O. ALABI
Permanent Representative of Nigeria to FAO Rome
Adviser Mrs. G.F. OLUWASANMI
Administrative Officer Federal Ministry of Agriculture Lagos
Adviser Mrs. F.R. FAJEYISAN
Legal Officer Federal Ministry of Agriculture Lagos
Adviser Sheriff Ajibade ADETUNJI
Assistant Director Ministry of Science and Technology Lagos
Adviser Aremu AGBE
Counsellor Embassy of Nigeria Rome
NORWAY
Delegate Johan LØKEN
Minister of Agriculture Oslo
Alternate Hans Kr. SKIP
Director-General of Forestry Ministry of Agriculture Chairman of the National FAO Committee Oslo
Alternate P.H. GRUE
Director-General of Agriculture Ministry of Agriculture Oslo
Alternate A. F. BOTHNER
Ambassador Ministry of Foreign Affairs Oslo
Associate Stein Vegard HAGEN
Deputy Permanent Representative of Norway to FAO Rome
Associate Olav LINDSTAD
Head of Division Norwegian Agency for International Development Oslo
Associate Leif FORSELL
Counsellor Ministry of Agriculture Oslo
Associate Mrs. W. Barth EIDE
Assistant Professor Institute of Nutrition University of Oslo Oslo
Associate Oskar HEGGE
Head of Department Norwegian Farmers' Union Oslo
Associate Kåre RINGLUND
Assistant Professor Agricultural University of Norway Oslo
Associate Mrs. Sonja LOFSTAD
Assistant to the Permanent Representative Royal Norwegian Embassy Rome
OMAN
Delegate Ahnaf Omar AL-ZABAIDI
Director in the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Muscat
Alternate Malalla AKEEL
Assistant Alternate Permanent Representative of Oman to FAO Embassy of the Sultanate of Oman Rome
Alternate Abdulla Ibrahim AL-HAKIM
Alternate Permanent Representative of the Sultanate of Oman to FAO Rome
PAKISTAN
Delegate Mohammad Fazil JANJUA
Minister for Food, Agriculture and Cooperatives Islamabad
Alternate Saeed Ahmed QURESHI
Secretary Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Cooperatives Islamabad
Alternate Abdul WAHEED
Ambassador of Pakistan in Italy Permanent Representative of Pakistan to FAO Rome
Associate Saleem MURTZA
Deputy Secretary (International Cooperation)Ministry of Food and Agriculture Islamabad
Adviser Tanwir AHMAD
Agricultural Counsellor Embassy of Pakistan Rome
Adviser Arif AYUB
Second Secretary, Embassy of Pakistan Rome
Adviser Amanullah I. LARIK
Second Secretary, Embassy of Pakistan Rome
PANAMA
Delegado Alfredo ORANGES BUSTOS
Ministro de Desarrollo Agropecuario Panamá
Suplente Sra. Dra. Mayra IVANKOVICH DE AROSEMENA
Embajador de Panamá ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Winston SPADAFORA
Asesor del Ministro de Desarrollo Agropecuario Panamá
Suplente Raul SIERRA
Secretario General del Ministro de Desarrollo Agropecuario Panamá
Suplente Alfredo ACUÑA
Representante Permanente Alterno de Panamá ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto Sra. Doña Mitzila BOUTET
Agregado
Representación Permanente de Panama ante la FAO Roma
Asesor R.A. GONZALEZ
Presidente del Banco de Desarrollo Agropecuario Panamá
Asesor César ARROCHA
Asesor del Ministro de Desarrollo Agropecuario Panamá
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Delegate P.E. KAHATA
Technical Director Department of Primary Industry Port Moresby
Alternate E. PAUGARI
Department of Primary Industry Port Moresby
PARAGUAY
Delegato Luís María AVEIRO MONELLO
Encargado de Negocios a.i. Embajata de la República del Paraguay Roma
PERU
Delegado Nils ERICSSON CORREA
Ministro de Agricultura Lima
Suplente Javier GAZZO F.D.
Embajador del Perú ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Harry BELEVAN
Ministro Consejero Representante Permanente Alterno del Perú ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Sra. Doña Ingrid LINDANGER SAIZ
Embajada del Perú Roma
PHILIPPINES
Delegate Arturo R. TANCO, jr.
Minister of Agriculture Manila
Alternate Teodoro PEÑA
Minister of Natural Resources Manila
Associate Jesus TANCHANCO
Minister, Administrator of National Food Authority Manila
Associate Orlando SACAY
Deputy Minister of Agriculture Manila
Adviser Ms. Rosalinda TIRONA
Counsellor and Acting Assistant Minister U.N.I.O. Ministry of Foreign Affairs Manila
Adviser Domingo PANGANIBAN
Director of Plant Industry Manila
Adviser Ms. Marinela CASTILLO
Chief Assistant International Affairs Ministry of Agriculture Manila
Adviser Cesar DE VEGA
Director for Technical Research and Extension National Food Authority Manila
Adviser Nelson BUENAFLOR
Special Assistant of Administrator National Food Authority Manila
Adviser Antonio CAPAY
Assistant Secretary Ministry of Natural Resources Manila
Adviser Jesus VALERIO
Planning Officer Ministry of Natural Resources Manila
Adviser Ms. Luz MARIANO
Acting Executive Officer for FAO Affairs, U.N.I.O. Ministry of Foreign Affairs Manila
Adviser Horacio CARANDANG
Agricultural Attaché and Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Adviser Aladin VILLACORTE
Vice Consul and Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Adviser Ms. Maria Luisa GAVINO
Agricultural Analyst Embassy of the Philippines Rome
Adviser Rica CORTES BERNAS
Head Executive Assistant Ministry of Agriculture Manila
POLAND
Delegate Jerzy WOJTECKI
Minister of Agriculture and Food Economy Warsaw
Alternate Zdzislaw GROCHOWSKI
Vice-Minister of Agriculture and Food Economy Warsaw
Alternate Emil WOJTASZEK
Ambassador of the Polish People's Republic in Italy Rome
Alternate Eugeniusz MAZURKIEVICZ
Rector of the Central School for Political Sciences Warsaw
Alternate Antoni CZARKOWSKI
Deputy Director Department of International Organizations Ministry of Foreign Affairs Warsaw
Associate Jan GORECKI
Director of the World Agricultural Division Agricultural University Warsaw
Associate Czeslaw MUSZALSKI
Adviser to the Minister Department of International Organizations Ministry of Foreign Affairs Warsaw
Adviser Janusz ROWINSKI
Head of Division Agricultural, Economics Institute Warsaw
Adviser Ms Malgorzata PIOTROWSKA
Polish National FAO Committee Ministry of Agriculture Warsaw
PORTUGAL
Delegate Basílio HORTA
Minister of Agriculture, Trade and Fisheries Lisbon
Alternate José Eduardo MENDES FERRÃO
Chairman of the Portuguese National FAO Committee Lisbon
Alternate Rui Fernando MEIRA FERREIRA
Permanent Representative of Portugal to FAO Rome
Alternate João José PEREIRA REIS Jr.
Secretary General Portuguese National FAO Committee Lisbon
Alternate Henrique Germano SALLES de FONSECA
Ministry of Agriculture Trade and Fisheries Lisbon
Alternate Luis BRAMÃO
Portuguese National FAO Committee Lisbon
Alternate José Manuel BULHÃO MARTINS
Second Secretary Portuguese Embassy Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Adviser Ilídio BARBOSA
Ministry of Agriculture, Trade and Fisheries Lisbon
QATAR
Delegate Mohammed Fahd AL-FAIHANI
Director of Agriculture and Water Research Ministry of Industry and Agriculture Doha
Alternate All Mohd AL-KUBAISI
Head of the Agriculture Service Center Ministry of Industry and Agriculture Doha
Alternate Mostafa M. El-Sheikh SEOUDI Heat of Soils Section Ministry of Industry and Agriculture Doha
ROMANIA
Délégué Ion MÃRGINEANU
Ambassadeur de la République socialiste de Roumanie en Italie Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Tudor MIRCEA
Conseiller Représentant permanent suppléant de Roumanie auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Dumitru VASILIU
Vice-Président du Conseil mondial de l'alimentation Directeur général Ministère de l'agriculture Bucarest
Adjoint Nicolae DIMITRIU
Secrétaire du Comité national pour la FAO Bucarest
Adjoint Stefan MANOLESCU
Expert à l'Agence économique de la République socialiste de Roumanie Rome
RWANDA
Délégué Anastase NTEZIRYAYO
Secrétaire général Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage Kigali
Suppléant D. NSABIMANA
Directeur général de l'agronomie Ministère de l'agriculture et de l'élevage Kigali
SAINT-LUCIA
Delegate Cyril MATTHEWS
Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture, Lands and Fisheries Castries
SAINT-VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
SAMOA
SANTO TOME AND PRINCIPE
Délégué Fradique DE MENEZES
Directeur de la Représentation commerciale de São Tomé-et-Principe Londres
Suppléant Carlos PIRES DOS SANTOS
Directeur du Plan Ministère de l'agriculture et des pêches Sao Tomé
SAUDI ARABIA (KINGDOM OF)
Delegate Mohammed Ali MAKKI
Deputy Minister for Agricultural Affairs Riyadh
Alternate Atif Y BUKHARI
Ambassador of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to FAO Rome
Adviser Abdulghani HAMZA
Counsellor Ministry of Agriculture and Water (K.A. University) Riyadh
Associate Mostafa I. MAHDI
Assistant to the Ambassador of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to FAO Rome
Associate Wasel AL-AHMADI
External Relations Department Ministry of Agriculture and Water Riyadh
Associate Saleh AL-HARBI
Agricultural Development Department Ministry of Agriculture and Water Riyadh
Associate Majed EL-HAMOUD
Animal Resources Department Ministry of Agriculture and Water Riyadh
SENEGAL
Délégué Serigne Lamine DIOP
Ministre du développement rural Dakar
Suppléant Robert SAGNA
Secrétaire d'Etat à la pêche maritime Dakar
Suppléant Falilou Mbacké GUEYE
Conseiller technique Ministère du développement rural Dakar
Suppléant Bakary Djileh COLY
Directeur général de la production agricole Ministère du développement rural Dakar
Adjoint Alioune BADARA PAYE
Directeur général de la Société de la Foire internationale de Dakar (SOFIDAK) Dakar
Adjoint Sidaty AIDARA
Conseiller Représentant permanent adjoins du Sénégal auprès de la FAO Rome
Conseiller Mme Marième KASSE
Secrétaire générale du Comité national sénégalais pour l'Alimentation et le Développement Ministère du développement rural Dakar
SEYCHELLES
SIERRA LEONE
Delegate A. F. Joe JACKSON
Minister of Agriculture and Forestry Freetown
Associate Birch M. CONTE
Ambassador Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone to FAO Rome
Alternate M.M. BANGURA
Deputy Secretary Ministry of Agriculture Freetown
Alternate A.R. SIAFFA
Chief Agriculturist Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Freetown
Alternate R.S. RAMADA
Chief Veterinary Officer Ministry of Natural Resources Freetown
Alternate T.J. SHORUNKEK-SAWYERR
Chief Fisheries Officer Ministry of Natural Resources Freetown
Alternate M.B.D. FEIKA
Chief Conservator of Forests Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Freetown
Alternate T.E.C. PALMER
Agricultural Attaché Alternate Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone to FAO Rome
SOMALIA
Delegate Mohamed Ali NUR
Minister of Livestock, Forestry and Range Mogadishu
Alternate Sheikh Abdula SHEIKH MOHAMED
Ambassador of the Somali Democratic Republic in Italy Rome
Alternate Mohamed Burale FARAH
Adviser to the Minister of Agriculture Mogadishu
Alternate Ismail Alin NOOH
Director of Planning Ministry of Livestock, Forestry and Range Mogadishu
Associate Abdirahim HAJI MOHAMED
Director of Planning Ministry of Agriculture Mogadishu
Associate Abdullahi SHIRE MOHAMUD
Director of Production Ministry of Fisheries Mogadishu
SPAIN
Delegado José Luis GARCIA FERRERO
Subsecretario de Agricultura Madrid
Suplente Juan Ramón PARELLADA SOTERAS
Ministro Plenipotenciario de Primera Clase Madrid
Adjunto José Luis MESEGUER
Jefe del Servicio Derecho Internacional de Pesca Ministerio de Agricultura y Pesca Madrid
Adjunto Juan LESMES GARCIA
Vicesecretario General Técnico del Ministerio de Hacienda Madrid
Adjunto Jesús MIRANDA DE LARRA
Represent ante Permanente de España ante la FAO Roma
Adjunto Leopoldo MEDINA DEL CERRO
Secretario del Comité Nacional Español pare FAO Madrid
Asesor José PUERTA ROMERO
Subdirector General de Producción Vegetal de la Dirección General de Producción Agraria Madrid
Asesor Jesús ALVAREZ GONZALEZ
Subdirector General de Promoción del SEA Madrid
Asesor Ismael DIAZ YUBERO
Director Técnico de los Servicios Ganaderos del FORPA Madrid
Asesor Enrique PANES CALPE
Secretario Embajada de España Roma
Asesor Miguel BUENO GOMEZ
Jefe, Gabinete Técnico del IRYDA Madrid
Asesor Antonio RUIZ DIAZ
Asesor Ministerio de Economía y Comercio Madrid
Asesor Alejandro ALONZO MUÑOZ
Jefe Servicio Producción Animal de la Dirección General de la Producción Agraria Madrid
Asesor Manuel CHAVEZ SANCHEZ
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas Madrid
Asesor José Maria HERRERA PEREZ Jefe Sección Sectores Primarios Ministerio de Hacienda Madrid
Asesor Andrés DE LEON LLAMAZARES
Jefe Sección de Fertilizantes de la Dirección General de la Producción Agraria Madrid
Asesor Antonio PEREZ MARSA
Jefe Provincial del Servicio de Defensa contra Plagas e Inspección Fitopatológica Madrid
Asesor Sra. Doña Asunción CAVERO MONCANUT
Representante Permanente Alterno de España ante la FAO Roma
SRI LANKA
Delegate E.L. SENANAYAKE
Minister of Agricultural Development and Research Colombo
Alternate Fairlie WIJEMANNE
Ambassador of Sri Lanka in Italy Permanent Representative of Sri Lanka to FAO Rome
Alternate Mrs. S. SENANAYAKE
Personal Assistant to the Minister of Agricultural Development and Research Colombo
Alternate A.S. KUNASINGHAM
Additional Secretary Ministry of Agricultural Development and Research Colombo
Alternate W.R.D. NILAWEERA
Additional Secretary Ministry of Agricultural Development and Research Colombo
Alternate Justin ABEYAGOONASEKERA
Counsellor Alternate Permanent Representative of Sri Lanka to FAO Rome
Alternate A.H. SENEVIRATNE
First Secretary Embassy of Sri Lanka Alternate Permanent Representative of Sri Lanka to FAO Rome
Adviser Armigio ARDITO
Embassy of Sri Lanka Rome
Adviser L.T. JAYASEKERA
Chancellor Embassy of Sri Lanka Rome
Adviser Don Lakshman SENANAYAKE
Director, Commercial Bank Colombo
Adviser Ernest Reginald SENANAYAKE
Proprietary Planter Kandy
Continue
<section>j</section>
Continued
SUDAN
Delegate Omer EL AMIN MOHAMED Minister of Agriculture, Food and Natural Resources Khartoum
Alternate Kamal Ali BABIKER
Under-Secretary Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Natural Resources Khartoum
Alternate Hassan MOHAMADI BATAIK
Director of Soil Conservation and Rural Water Programming Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Natural Resources Khartoum
Alternate Amir Abdalla KHALIL
Minister Plenipotentiary Permanent Representative of the Sudan to FAO Rome
Alternate Gamal Mohamed AHMED
Director of Agricultural Planning and Follow-up Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Natural Resources Khartoum
Associate Mohamed A.M. IBRAHIM
First Secretary Alternate Permanent Representative of the Sudan to FAO Rome
SURINAME
Delegate Franklin E. VREDEN
Minister of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Fisheries and Forestry Paramaribo
Alternate Fred W. van AMSON
Director of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Fisheries and Forestry Paramaribo
Alternate Harold LIONARONS
Fisheries Adviser Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry Paramaribo
Associate J. DE VLETTER
Forestry Researcher Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Forestry Paramaribo
Adviser Hendrik A. ALIMAHOMED
First Secretary Embassy of Suriname in the Netherlands The Hague
SWAZILAND
Delegate Gilbert F. DLAMINI
Under-Secretary Ministry of Agriculture Mbabane
Alternate Victor B. PHUNGWAYO
Director of Agriculture Mbabane
Adviser Jabula DUBE
Senior Veterinary Officer Ministry of Agriculture Mbabane
Adviser Vocoka E. DLAMINI
Agricultural Economist Mbabane
Adviser Savas EROZER
Project Manager Programme for Better Family Living Mbabane
SWEDEN
Delegate Anders DAHLGREN
Minister of Agriculture Stockholm
Alternate Axel LEWENHAUPT
Ambassador of Sweden in Italy Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate Ingvar WIDEN
Director-General National Board of Agriculture Joenkoeping
Alternate Claes SENNING
Head of Department Ministry of Agriculture Stockholm
Alternate Stefan DE MARE
Head of Division Ministry of Agriculture Secretary General of the Swedish National FAO Committee Stockholm
Adviser Gunnar ANDRE
Agricultural Counsellor Alternate Permanent Representative of Sweden to FAO Rome
Adviser Gösta ERICSSON
Development Cooperation Counsellor Swedish Embassy Dar-es-Salaam
Adviser Gunnar HOERSTADIUS
Head of Division Ministry of Agriculture Stockholm
Adviser Karl-Erik NORRMAN
Counsellor Alternate Permanent Representative of Sweden to FAO Rome
Adviser Claes-Erik ODHNER
Head of Research Department Federation of Swedish Trade Unions Stockholm
Adviser Hans RAMEL
Member of the Board of the Federation of Swedish Farmers Sjöbo
Adviser Borje STENSSON
Member of Parliament Stockholm
Adviser Anders TRYDELL
Head of Section Swedish International Development Authority Stockholm
Adviser Staffan AABERG
Head of Section Ministry of Foreign Affairs Stockholm
SWITZERLAND
Délégué Jean-Claude PIOT
Directeur de l'Office fédéral de l'agriculture Président du Comité national suisse de la FAO Département fédéral de l'économie publique Berne
Suppléant Hans POPP
Sous-directeur de l'Office fédéral de l'agriculture Département fédéral de l'économie publique Berne
Adjoint Theodor GLASER
Conseiller agricole Représentant permanent de la Suisse auprès de la FAO Rome
Adjoint Dino BETI
Direction de la Coopération au développement et de l'Aide humanitaire
Département fédéral des affaires étrangères Berne
Adjoint A. RITZ
Section des Nations Unies et Organisations internationales Division politique III Département fédéral des affaires étrangères Berne
Adjoint René BRUGGER
Secrétaire du Comité national suisse de la FAO
Office fédéral de l'agriculture Département fédéral de l'économie politique Berne
SYRIA
Delegate Hamed MASOUKER
Minister of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform Damascus
Alternate Michel GHASSI
Director of Agricultural Affairs Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform Damascus
Alternate Adnan DOUEDARI
Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to FAO Rome
Associate Mahmoud SALAMEH
Deputy Director Bureau for Institutional Affairs Damascus
Associate Raghad Cheikh ELARD
SPC Directorate of Agriculture and Irrigation Damascus
TANZANIA
Delegate J.J. MUNGAI
Minister for Agriculture Dar-es-Salaam
Alternate Abbas K.
Ambassador of Tanzania in Italy and Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate Said A. MADALLALI
Principal Secretary Ministry of Livestock Development Dar-es-Salaam
Alternate J.S. MTENGA
Minister Counsellor Alternate Permanent Representative of Tanzania to FAO Rome
Adviser R.T. DOGANI
Third Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Dar-es-Salaam
Adviser Omar A. JUMA
Director of Livestock Development Ministry of Agriculture Zanzibar
Adviser B. TENESI
Principal Economist Ministry of Agriculture Dar-es-Salaam
THAILAND
Delegate Narong WONGWAN
Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives Bangkok
Alternate Kangwan DEVAHASTIN
Deputy Under-Secretary of State Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives Bangkok
Alternate Nguen SRISURAK
Deputy Secretary-General Office of Agricultural Economics Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives Bangkok
Alternate Chote SUVIPAKIT
Secretary-General Office of the National FAO Committee Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives Bangkok
Alternate Vanrob ISARANKURA
Agricultural Counsellor Royal Thai Embassy Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate Sunai TEPHAVAL
Commercial Counsellor Royal Thai Embassy Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate Mrs. L. LAOHAPHAN
First Secretary Alternate Permanent Representative of Thailand to FAO Rome
Alternate Suchat PRACHIMDHIT
First Secretary Department of Economics Ministry of Foreign Affairs Bangkok
Adviser Wallop SARASUP
Adviser to the Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives Bangkok
TOGO
Délégué C. Anani GASSOU
Ministre du développement rural Lomé
Suppléant M. HOUYENGAH
Directeur de l'animation rurale et de l'action coopérative Lomé
TONGA
Delegate Crown Prince TUPOUTO'A
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Defence Nuku'alofa
Alternate Inoke Fotu FALETAU
Ambassador of Tonga to the Republic of Italy London
Alternate Tomasi SIMIKI
Director of Agriculture, Forests and Fisheries Nuku'alofa
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
Delegate Wilfred S. NAIMOOL
Permanent Representative of Trinidad and Tobago to the UN Geneva
Alternate E. Laurence ITON
Acting Chief Technical Officer Ministry of Agriculture, Lands and Food Production Port-of-Spain
Adviser Winston RUDDER
Acting Director Agricultural Planning Ministry of Agriculture, Lands and Food Production Port-of-Spain
TUNISIA
Délégué Lassaad BEN OSMAN
Ministre de l'agriculture Tunis
Suppléant Mohamed ABDELHEDI
Chef de cabinet du Ministre de l'agriculture Tunis
Suppléant Mohsen BEL HADJ AMOR
Représentant permanent de la Tunisie auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Adel KAMOUN
Administrateur Conseiller
Sous-Directeur de la coopération internationale Tunis
Adjoint Madame Fatma LARBI
Ingénieur principal Chef du Service de suivi des programmes à la Sous-Direction de la coopération internationale Tunis
Conseiller Mohsen CHEBIL
Directeur des affaires foncières et de la législation Tunis
Conseiller Mohsen BOUJBEL
Directeur de la planification agricole Tunis
Conseiller Abdelbaki BACHA
Ministère de l'agriculture Tunis
Conseiller Abderrazak ELADAB
Président Directeur général de l'Office des céréales Tunis
Conseiller Bechir DJEDIDI
Commissaire Général à la pêche Ministère de l'Agriculture Tunis
Conseiller Sadok DJELLOULI
Directeur des projets PAM au Ministère de l'agriculture Tunis
TURKEY
Delegate Sabahattin ÖZBECK
Minister of Agriculture and Forestry Ankara
Alternate Hâmit BATU
Ambassador of the Republic of Turkey in Italy Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate Ismet BIRSEL
Director General International Economic Affairs Ministry of Foreign Affairs Ankara
Alternate Erdinc KARASAPAN
Minister Counsellor Turkish Embassy Alternate Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Alternate Hayati ÖLEZ
Director General Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Ankara
Alternate Mrs Nurinisa ÖZBECK
Director at the Turkish Atomic Council Ankara
Alternate Argun ÖZER
Director of the International Economic Organizations Department Ministry of Foreign Affairs Ankara
Alternate Deniz UZMEN
Counsellor, Turkish Embassy Alternate Permanent Representative of Turkey to FAO Rome
Alternate Adnan ÖZTÜRK
Agricultural Counsellor of the Turkish Embassy Alternate Permanent Representative of Turkey to FAO Rome
Associate Yurdun TUNCEL
Director of the Marketing Department Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Ankara
Associate Hasim ÖGÜT
Deputy Director of Department Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Ankara
Associate Taylan ONUL
Chief of Division Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Ankara
UGANDA
Delegate Samwiri MUGWISA
Minister of Agriculture and Forestry Entebbe
Alternate Augustino K. OSUBAN
Ag. Commissioner for Agriculture Entebbe
Alternate Mansoor SIMBWA - BUNNYA
Permanent Representative (Designate) to FAO Entebbe
Alternate Joash KAHANGIRWE
Ag. Chief Agricultural Planning Economist Entebbe
Adviser E.K. SERWANGA
Assistant Chief Forest Officer Entebbe
Adviser Amos KALYEGIRA
Assistant Commissioner for Veterinary Services and Animal Industry Kampala
Adviser Edward SEMPIRA-KANYIKE
Deputy Commissioner for Fisheries Ministry of Animal Industries and Fisheries Kampala
Adviser J.M. NSIMBI
Planning Economist Ministry of Planning and Economic Development Kampala
Adviser G. OBBO
Personal Assistant to Minister of Agriculture and Forestry Entebbe
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Delegate Hamad Abdulla SALMAN
Under-Secretary Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Abu Dhabi
Alternate Mohammed Mousa GASEM
Deputy Under-Secretary Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Dubai
Associate Rashid AL KUETBI
Director of Personnel Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Dubai
Associate Saeed Gaefer KAZIM
Director of Public Relations Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Dubai
Adviser Safouh HATAHET
Adviser of Marketing and Cooperative Ministry of Agriculture Dubai
UNITED KINGDOM
Delegate Neil. MARTEN
Minister for Overseas Development London
Alternate R.A. BROWNING
Deputy Secretary Overseas Development Administration London
Alternate J.L.F. BUIST
Under-Secretary Overseas Development Administration London
Alternate P.S. McLEAN
Minister Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to FAO Rome
Alternate J.B. WARREN
Agricultural Adviser Overseas Development Administration London
Alternate J.M. SCOULAR
Principal Overseas Development Administration Secretary, FAO National Committee London
Alternate A.B. CAWTHORN
Principal Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food London
Alternate J.E. MURPHY
Chief Press and Publicity Officer Overseas Development Administration London
Alternate J.W. HUTCHINSON
Higher Executive Officer Overseas Development Administration London
Adviser Miss G.J. LYONS
Assistant Private Secretary to the Minister for Overseas Development London
Adviser T.W. WHITING
Executive Officer British Embassy Rome
Adviser Miss E.R. HIGGINS
Overseas Development Administration London
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Delegate Thomas A. HAMMER
Deputy Under-Secretary for International Affairs and Commodity Programs Department of Agriculture Washington, D.C.
Alternate Roger A. SORENSON
Minister Counsellor U.S. Representative to the U.N. Agencies for Food and Agriculture United States Embassy Rome
Alternate Martin KRIESBERG
Office of International Cooperation and Development Department of Agriculture Washington, D.C.
Alternate Edmund M. PARSONS.
Director Office of International Development Bureau of International Organization Affairs Department of State Washington, D.C.
Alternate Gordon STREEB
Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic and Social Affairs Bureau of International Organization Affairs Department of State Washington, D.C.
Alternate Ms Joan S. WALLACE
Office of International Cooperation and Development Department of Agriculture Washington, D.C.
Adviser Chester R. BENJAMIN
Office of International Cooperation and Development Department of Agriculture Washington, D.C.
Adviser Charles FRENCH
Office of International Organization Affairs International Development Cooperation Agency Washington, D.C.
Adviser Allan R. FURMAN
Attaché for Field Programs and Development United States Embassy Rome
Adviser Brian Rogers FURNESS
Office of Food Policy and Programs Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs Department of State Washington, D.C.
Adviser Antonio GAYOSO
Deputy Director Office of International Development Bureau of International Organization Affairs Department of State Washington, D.C.
Adviser Avram E. GUROFF
Attaché for U.N. Food and Agricultural Affairs United States Embassy Rome
Adviser Scott MacKENZIE
Bureau of International Organization Affairs Department of State Washington, D.C.
Adviser Michael D. METELITS
Alternate U.S. Representative to the U.N. Agencies for Food and Agriculture United States Embassy Rome
Congressional Tom HAGEDORN
(Hon.)Adviser House of Representatives Washington, D.C.
UPPER VOLTA
Délégué André Roch COMPAORE (7-13 Nov.)
Ministre du développement rural Ouagadougou
Délégué Bangré Sylvestre OUEDRAOGO(16-20 Nov.)
Ministre de l'environnement et du tourisme Ouagadougou
Délégué Sié Faustin SIB (23-26 Nov.)
Ministre de l'enseignement supérieur et de la recherche scientifique Ouagadougou
Suppléant Albert DJIGMA
Directeur de la recherche agronomique Ouagadougou
Suppléant Luc Ounanini LOMPO
Directeur des services agricoles Ministère du développement rural Ouagadougou
Suppléant André BERE
Directeur des services de, l'élevage et, des industries animales Ouagadougou
Suppléant Joseph ZONGO
Directeur de l'aménagement forestier et du reboisement Ouagadougou
Conseiller Louis David SAWADOGO
Conseiller économique et commercial Ambassade de Haute-Volta en France Paris
URUGUAY
Delegado Carlos MATTOS MOGLIA
Ministro de Agricultura y Pesca Montevideo
Suplente Mateo MARQUES SERE
Embajador Representante Permanente del Uruguay ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Pedro OLMOS MORALES
Director de Programación y Política Agropecuaria Montevideo
Suplente Sra. Doña Rosario MEDERO
Asesora Secretaria de Planeamiento, Coordinación y Difusion Montevideo
Suplente Joaquín PIRIZ JORGE
Primer Secretario Representante Permanente Alterno del Uruguay ante la FAO Roma
VENEZUELA
Delegado José Luis ZAPATA
Ministro de Agricultura y Cría Caracas
Suplente Hector HERNANDEZ CARABAÑO
Embajador de Venezuela ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Heliodoro L. CLAVERIE RODRIGUEZ
Ministro Consejero Representante Permanente Alterno de Venezuela ante la FAO Roma
Suplente Sra. Dra. María Isabel CASELLAS
Consejero Representación Permanente de Venezuela ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Srta. Zoed KARAM DUAIJI
Primer Secretario Representación Permanente de Venezuela ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Alberto BRUGNOLI CRUCIANI
Segundo Secretario Representación Permanente de Venezuela ante la FAO Roma
Asesor Sra. Dra. Alexandra PARIS
Tercer Secretario Dirección de Política Exterior Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores Caracas
Asesor Bartolomé SANCHEZ
Tercer Secretario Misión Permanente de Venezuela ante la FAO Roma
VIET NAM
Délégué DUONG HONG DAT
Vice-Ministre de l'agriculture Hanoi
Suppléant NGUYEN ANH VU
Ambassadeur de la République socialiste du Viet Nam en Italie
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant Mme PHAN THI MINH
Ambassadeur Directrice du Département des Organisations internationales Ministère des affaires étrangères Hanoi
Suppléant LA XUAN DINH
Directeur du Département de la coopération internationale Ministère de l'agriculture Hanoi
Suppléant MAI LUONG
Représentant permanent adjoins du Viet Nam auprès de la FAO Rome
YEMEN ARAB REPUBLIC
Delegate Ahmed ALI-HAMADANI
Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries Resources Sana'a
Alternate Hassan Ali Ahmed EL-HURAIBI
Permanent Representative of the Yemen Arab Republic to FAO Rome
Alternate Anwar Rizq AL-HARAZI
Assistant Under-Secretary Central Planning Agency Sana'a
Associate Mohammad AL-NOWAIRAH
Director of Statistics Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Sana'a
Associate Abdulrahman SALLAM QASIM
Director-General of Research Agricultural Research Service Taiz
PEOPLE'S DEM. REP. OF YEMEN
Delegate Muhammad SOLEYMAN NASSER
Minister of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform Aden
Alternate LUGMAN
Director of Planning Ministry of Agriculture Aden
Alternate F. ANBOOL
Director of Research Ministry of Agriculture Aden
Alternate Mohamed Ahmed MANSOOR
Assistant Deputy Minister Ministry of Fisheries Aden
Alternate Anwar Mohammed KHALID
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Suppléant SALEM SALEM GASSOS
Director of Agricultural Development Aden
YUGOSLAVIA
Delegate Milovan ZIDAR
Member of the Federal Executive Council President of the Federal Committee for Agriculture Belgrade
Alternate Milan TRKULJA
Professor University of Novi Sad Novi Sad
Alternate Vladimir STIPETIC
President of the National FAO Committee Professor, University of Zagreb Zagreb
Alternate Milan ZJALIC
Minister Counsellor Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia to FAO Rome
Associate Ljubomir STAMBUK
Federal Committee for Agriculture Belgrade
ZAIRE
Délégué MASSAMBA KAMITATU
Commissaire d'Etat à l'agriculture et au développement rural Kinshasa
Suppléant BENGA-NTUNDU KITITWA
Ambassadeur Représentant permanent du Zaire auprès de la FAO Rome
Suppléant LUMBALA KABUYI
Directeur des études et de la politique agricole Département de l'agriculture et du développement rural Kinshasa
Adjoint NZAU BEWA
Directeur de la production et santé animales Département de l'agriculture et du développement rural Kinshasa
Conseiller NGA-MA MAPELA
Représentant permanent adjoint du Zaire auprès de la FAO Rome
Conseiller NDJABU KHAMITO
Directeur de la promotion rurale Département de l'agriculture et du développement rural Kinshasa
Conseiller Mme TUPEMUNYI MUTSHOKO
Assistante du Commissaire d'Etat à l'agriculture et au développement rural Kinshasa
ZAMBIA
Delegate Unia MWILA
Minister of Agriculture and Water Development Lusaka
Alternate N. MUKUTU
Acting Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture and Water Development Lusaka
Alternate H.M. NZUNGA
Ambassador of Zambia in Italy Permanent Representative of Zambia to FAO Rome
Alternate C.M. LINYAMA
Assistant Secretary Ministry of Agriculture and Water Development Lusaka
Adviser N.E. MUMBA
Director of Agriculture Ministry of Agriculture and Water Development Lusaka
Adviser B.O.M. CHIYAMBWE
Conservator of Forests Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources Lusaka
Adviser B.E. PHIRI
Alternate Permanent Representative of Zambia to FAO Rome
ZIMBABWE
Delegate D.R. NORMAN
Minister of Agriculture Salisbury
Alternate E. OSBORN
Permanent Secretary Ministry of Agriculture Salisbury
Alternate R.M. MUPAWOSE
Permanent Secretary Ministry of Lands, Resettlement and Rural Development Salisbury
HOLY SEE
The Most Rev. Agostino FERRARI-TONIOLO Permanent Observer of the Holy See to FAO
Vatican City
Mons. Biagio NOTARANGELO Vatican City
P. Aloysius FONSECA, S.J. Vatican City
Pietro CAIAZZA Vatican City
Paolo VICINELLI Vatican City
Bruno DATO Vatican City
Lelio BERNARDI
Agricultural Adviser
Vatican City
LIBERATION MOVEMENTS
AFRICAN NATIONAL CONGRESS OF SOUTH AFRICA
Thami SINDELO
Chief Representative in Italy Rome
Ms. Dulcie SEPTEMBER
Representative Lusaka
PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION
Sa'ad Eddin GHANDOOR
Director, Agricultural Department Damascus
Nimer HAMMED
Representative in Italy Rome
Mousa SAMMAN Beirut
Hussein AL AFLAK
Vice-Director Rome
PAN AFRICANIST CONGRESS OF SOUTH AFRICA
Mosoeu MAGALEFA
Education and Manpower Development Division Dar-es-Salaam
Continue
<section>k</section>
Continued
SOUTH WEST AFRICAN PEOPLE'S ORGANIZATION
Deputy Secretary Economic Affairs Luanda
REPRESENTATIVES OF UNITED NATIONS AND SPECIALIZED AT AGENCIES UNITED NATIONS
W.H. TARZI
Director of External Relations and Interagency Affairs Geneva
Vladimir LISSITSKY
External Relations and Interagency Affairs Division GENEVA
ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR AFRICA
Q.B.O. ANTHONIO
Chief Joint ECA/FAO Agriculture Division Addis Ababa
L. DEBELIAN
Chief of Agriculture Production Institutions and Services Section Joint ECA/FAO Agriculture Division Addis Ababa
Ephata P. PALLNGYO
Regional Adviser of Agricultural Marketing Addis Ababa
ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR EUROPE
E. KALKKINEN
Director, Agriculture and Timber Division Geneva
ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR WESTERN ASIA
Abdul-Sahib ALWAN
Director Joint ECWA/FAO Division of Agriculture Beirut
OFFICE OF THE UN HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES
U. KARDY
Representative for Italy Rome
Mrs Antonella PRANDI
Assistant to Representative for Italy Rome
WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME
B. de AZEVEDO BRITO Executive Director ad interim Rome
M. EL MIDANI Director, Resources Management Division Rome
R.M. CASHIN Director, Project Management Division Rome
E.L. LÜHE Director, Division of External Relations and General Services Rome
J. MOSCARELLA Economic Adviser to WFP Rome
A. DAWSON Director, Evaluation Service Rome
D.E. SINTOBIN Deputy Director Resources Management Division Rome
Y. ZAKARIA Deputy Director Division of External Relations and General Services Rome
J. BAENSDALE Assistant to Executive Director Rome
D.J. SHAW Senior Economist, Policy Unit Rome
Q.H. HAQUE Chief, External Relations and General Affairs Branch Rome
I.G.M. TAYLOR External Relations Officer External Relations and General Affairs Branch Rome
W.J. WICKENS Project Management Officer Rome
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
D.L. PIKE Commodities Division Geneva
UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
Pierre BOURGOIS Assistant Administrator Director, European Office Geneva
Niranjan DESAI Chief of External Relations Section European Office Geneva
Wally S.NDOW Chief, Regional Office for Sahelian Operations Ouagadougou
UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION
Gabriel REZEK Chief, Interagency Programme Coordination Section Division of Policy Coordination Vienna
Ms Lisa COMER Interagency Programme Coordination Section Division of Policy Coordination Vienna
UNITED NATIONS SOCIAL DEFENCE RESEARCH INSTITUTE
Tolani ASUNI Director Rome
UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME
R. J. OLEMBO Director Environmental Management Service Nairobi
I. GARBOUCHEV Senior Programme Officer Environmental Management Service Nairobi
WORLD FOOD COUNCIL
Francisco MERINO RABAGO Secretario de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos Presidente México
Maurice J. WILLIAMS Executive Director Rome
Salahuddin AHMED Deputy Executive Director Rome
Paul KELLOWAY Assistant Director Rome
Alain VIDAL-NAQUET Chef de Cabinet Rome
L.A. ODERO-OGWEL Council Secretary Rome
Arturo GOETZ Chief, Policy Analysis Rome
Rajinder KAUSHIK Senior Economist Rome
Uwe KRACHT Senior Economist Rome
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION
F. D'ATTILIA Director, Branch Office Rome
I. CORDISCHI Deputy Director, Branch Office Rome
UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION
Mrs. B. FRANK-TURPAULT Programme Specialist Cooperation for Development and External Relations Sector Paris
WORLD BANK
Marius VERAART FAO and IFAD Coordinator Agriculture and Rural Development Department Washington, D.C.
WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION
D.A. RIJKS Chief, Agricultural and Applications Programmes Division Geneva
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
Abbas ORDOOBADI Assistant President General Affairs Department Rome
S. ASMAR Director, Near East and North Africa Division Project Management Department Rome
M. BENJAMIN Director, Asia Division Project Management Department Rome
D. DONIDA Director, Latin America Project Management Department Rome
B. MANSURI Director, Africa Division Project Management Department Rome
Asoka JAYASINHA External Relations Officer Rome
Mokhtar TRIBAK External Relations Officer Rome
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
Maurice FRIED Director Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Isotope and Radiation Applications of Atomic Energy for Food and Agricultural Development Vienna
Carl G. LAMM Deputy Director Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Isotope and Radiation Applications of Atomic Energy for Food and Agricultural Development Vienna
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
Edgard PISANI Membre de la Commission des Communautés européennes Bruxelles
Jean-Charles LEYGUES Conseiller à la Direction générale de l'agriculture Bruxelles
Horst MARMULLA Direction des relations extérieures Bruxelles
Lorimer MacKENZIE Chef de Division Direction générale de l'agriculture Bruxelles
Bruno SÜSSMILCH Administrateur principal Bruxelles
Patrick HOGUET Administrateur principal Bruxelles
Jacques BEL Administrateur principal Bruxelles
Marc FRANCO Administrateur Direction générale du développement Bruxelles
Edmond F. JAGER Administrateur Bruxelles
OBSERVERS FROM INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
ARAB CENTER FOR THE STUDY OF ARID ZONES AND DRY LANDS
Mohamed EL-KHASH Damascus Director-General
COMMON WEALTH SECRETARIAT
R.N. AZAD Assistant Director Food Production and Rural Development Division London
J.J. McNERNEY Economic Affairs Division London
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Members of the Sub-Committee on Relations with FAO of the Committee on Agriculture of Parliamentary Assembly as follows:
F. A. GRUSSENMEYER Paris
P. HARDY
Acting Chairman of Parliament London
P. HEGARTY
Member of Parliament Dublin
G. MÜLLER Bonn
Johann WINDSTEIG
Member of Parliament Vienna
Joern STEGEN
Secretary of the Committee Strasbourg
DESERT LOCUST CONTROL ORGANIZATION FOR EASTERN AFRICA
Daniel Meshack WAKO
Director-General Addis Ababa
ITALIAN LATIN-AMERICAN INSTITUTE
J.D. FALDINI
Secretario Economico y Social Rome
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
Luciano BARRAZA
Chief, Agricultural and Forestry Development Division Project Analysis Department Washington, D. C.
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF REFRIGERATION
André GAC
Directeur Paris
INTERNATIONAL OFFICE OF EPIZOOTICS
Louis BLAJAN
Directeur général Paris
INTERNATIONAL SERICULTURAL COMMISSION
H. BOUVIER
Secrétaire général Lyon
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COMMITTEE FOR MIGRATION
A. ARDITTIS
Chief of Mission Rome
INTERNATIONAL WHEAT COUNCILAntonio NAVARRO VELASCO
Chairman London
J.H. PAROTTE
Executive Secretary London
JOINT ANTI-LOCUST AND ANTI-AVIARIAN ORGANIZATION
Abdallahi SOUEID
Directeur général Dakar
Appolinaire BADA
Chef des services administratif et financier Dakar
ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES
Francisco PRIETO
Resident Economist European Regional Office Geneva
ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY
P.E. ETIANG
Assistant Secretary-General in charge of the Economic Development and Cooperation Department Addis Ababa
Libere BUZINGO
Senior Economist O.A.U. Office in Switzerland Geneva
Ibrahim ELBATT EMAD
Liaison Officer Joint OAU/FAO/WHO Addis Ababa
ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
Gérard VIATTE
Deputy Director Directorate for Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Paris
G. VASTA
Consultant Directorate for Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Rome
ORGANIZATION OF THE ISLAMIC CONFERENCE
Ashraf-uz-ZAMAN
Director of Economic Affairs General Secretariat Jeddah
Mrs. Güler Elfie GORUN
Expert Ankara
PERMANENT INTERSTATE COMMITTEE FOR DROUGHT CONTROL IN THE SAHEL
Seck MAME N'DIACK
Executive Secretary Ouagadougou
OBSERVERS FROM NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
ASSOCIATED COUNTRY WOMEN OF THE WORLD
Mrs. Lucy BRADER
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
CARIES INTERNATIONALS
Mrs. Derna CERBELLA Rome
CENTRE ON INTEGRATED RURAL DEVELOPMENT FOR ASIA AND PACIFIC
Aziz-Ul HAQ (Bangladesh)
Director Comilla
EUROPEAN ASSOCIATION FOR ANIMAL PRODUCTION
K. KALLAY
Secrétaire Général Rome
INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE OF WOMEN
Mrs. L. ARULPRAGASAM
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Mrs. S.R. PILLAY
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR CEREAL CHEMISTRY
G. FABRIANI
Member of the Executive Committee Rome
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF AGRICULTURAL ECONOMISTS
Margaret LOSEBY
Representative in Italy Rome
INTERNATIONAL CATHOLIC RURAL ASSOCIATION
Filippo CORTESI
Secretary-General Rome
Rev. Bhagvant BOAVIDA COUTINHO Rome
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Roberto GIORDANI
Membre du Centre d'études de la Confédération générale agricole italienne Rome
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION OF AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING
Giuseppe PELLIZI
Professeur de mécanique agricole Université de Milan Milan
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE
Michele BOTTALICO
President Rome
Giuseppe BELLONI Rome
Paolo BURI Rome
INTERNATIONAL CONFEDERATION OF FREE TRADE UNIONS
Mrs. Maria-Teresa GUICCIARDI
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATIVE ALLIANCE
Umberto CANULLO
Representative to FAO Rome
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR GAME AND WILDLIFE CONSERVATION
K. KALLAY
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC UNION
Flaminio FIDANZA
Institut des Sciences de l'alimentation Perugia
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN
Mrs Lena PASSERINI
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION FOR HOME ECONOMICS
Mme Odette GONCET
Secretary General Paris
Mrs Betty WILLIAMS
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Mme Pauline YAYA
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
Ms Shirien ZAFAR Rome
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF PLANTATION, AGRICULTURAL AND ALLIED WORKERS
Tom BAVIN
President Brussels
Mrs Maria-Teresa GUICCIARDI
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCERS
Henry PLUMB
President London
M.P. CRACKNELL
Secretary-General Paris
Mrs Giuseppina PELA
Liaison Officer with FAO Rome
F. SHEFRIN
North American Representative Ottawa
INTERNATIONAL FOOD POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
Alberto VALDES Director, Trade Policy Program Washington, D.C.
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION OF CONSUMERS' UNIONS
Ms Annelies ALLAIN Geneva
INTERNATIONAL RAIFFEISEN UNION
Fulvio D'ADAMO Rome
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANIZATIONS
André DUFFAURE
Représentant permanent auprès de la FAO Paris
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF NUTRITIONAL SCIENCES
Flaminio FIDANZA
Permanent Representative to FAO Perugia
INTERNATIONAL UNION FOR CONSERVATION OF NATURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Bernardo ZENTILLI
Regional Officer Geneva
LEAGUE OF RED CROSS SOCIETIES
Seve AXELL
Permanent Representative to FAO and WFP Rome
NITROGEN STUDY CENTER
D.J. HALLIDAY
FAO/FIAC Liaison Office Rome
A.E.M. HOOD
FAO/FIAC (Fertilizer Industry Advisory Committee) Liaison Office Rome
ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN TRADE UNION UNITY
Kwaku HALIGAH
Secretary-General of the Pan-African Federation of Agricultural Trade Unions (PAFATU) Accra
PANAFRICAN INSTITUTE FOR DEVELOPMENT
J. Yanney EWUSIE
Secrétaire Général Genève
Georges LAMBERT-LAMOND
Conseiller principal Genève
TRADE UNIONS INTERNATIONAL OF AGRICULTURAL, FORESTRY AND PLANTATION WORKERS
Valeri KALACHNIKOV
Secretary Prague
WORLD CONFEDERATION OF LABOUR
Mrs A. BARONE
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
WORLD FEDERATION OF TRADE UNIONS
Emil HAMERNIK
Head of the Department for relations with intergovernmental organizations Prague
Giuseppe CASADEI
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
WORLD UNION OF CATHOLIC WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS
Mrs Geneviève GARZERO
Permanent Representative to FAO Rome
WORLD VETERANS FEDERATION
Aldo VICINI
Membre de l'association nationale des mutilés et invalides de guerre Rome
<section>l</section>
XII. Appendix C
LIST OF DOCUMENTS
C 81/1-Rev.1
Agenda
C 81/2
The State of Food and Agriculture 1981
C 81/2-Sup.1
Supplement to C 81/2
C 81/3
Programme of Work and Budget for 1382-83
C 81/3-Corr.1
Corrigendum to C 81/3
C 81/3-Corr.2
Corrigendum to Spanish version of C 81/3 (Spanish only)
C 81/3-Corr.3
Corrigendum to Spanish version of C 81/3 (Spanish only)
C 81/3-Corr.4
Corrigendum to Arabic version of C 81/3 (Arabic only)
C 81/3-Corr.5
Corrigendum to C 81/3
C 81/3-Sup.1
PWB 1982-83 - List of Publications
C 81/3-Sup.2
PWB 1982-83 - List of Sessions
C 81/3-Sup.2-Corr.1
Corrigendum to C 81/3-Sup.2
C 81/4
Review of Field Programmes 1980-81
C 81/4-Corr.1
Corrigendum to C 81/4
C 81/4-Corr.2
Corrigendum to C 81/4
C 81/5
Financial Report and Statements Vol. I: Regular Programme 1978-79
C 81/6
Financial Report and Statements Vol. II: UNDP 1979
C 81/6 (a)
Financial Report and Statements Vol. II: UNDP 1980
C 81/6 (a)-Corr.1
Corrigendum to C 81/6 (a)
C 81/7
Financial Report and Statements Vol. III: World Food Programme 1979
C 81/7 (a)
Financial Report and Statements Vol. III: World Food Programme 1980
C 81/8
Review of the Regular Programme 1980-81
C 81/9
Medium-Term Objectives
C 81/9-Corr.1
Corrigendum to C 81/9
C 81/10
Statutory Report on Status of Conventions and on Agreements Thereto 81/10-Sup.1 Supplement to C 81/10
C 81/11
Election of Council Members
C 81/12
Arrangements for the Twenty-first Session of the Conference
C 81/13
Admission to the Session of Representatives and Observers of Internationals Organizations
C 81/13-Sup.1
Supplement to C 81/13
C 81/14
Applications for Membership in the Organization
C 81/14-Corr.1
Corrigendum to Arabic version of C 81/14 (Arabic only)
C 81/15
Appointment of Independent Chairman of the Council
C 81/16
Appointment of Member Government's Representative to the Staff Pension Committee
C 81/.7
Relations with International Organizations including International Trade Unions
C 81/18
Appointment of Director-General
C 81/19
Recent Development in the United Nations System of Interest to FAO
C 81/19-Sup.1
Supplement to C 81/1919
C 81/19-Sup.l-Corr.1
Corrigendum to C 81/19-Sup.1
C 81/19-Sup.2
Supplement to Arabic version of C 81/19-Sup.1 (Arabic only)
C 81/20
Report on the Progress in implementation of the Plan of Action on World Food Security
C 81/21
UN International Development Strategy for the Third Development Decade
C 81/22
Regional and National Strategies Some Selected Issues for the 1980's
C 81/23
Follow-up of WCARRD
C 81/24
International Agricultural Adjustment: Third Progress Report
C 81/25
Energy in Agriculture and Rural Development
C 81/25-Sup.1
Summary of the Nairobi Programme of Action on New and Renewable Sources of Energy with Particular Reference to Energy for Rural Development
C 81/26
National Agricultural Research in Developing Countries
C 81/27
World Soil Charter
C 81/27-Rev.1
Revision of Arabic version of C 81/27 (Arabic only)
C 81/28
Development Assistance for Food Production and Rural Development
C 81/28-Corr.1
Corrigendum to C 81/28
C 81/29
The Regional Office for the Near East (RNEA)
C 81/INF/Series
C 81/INF/1
Information Note for Delegates and Observers
C 81/INF/2
Guide on Conduct of Plenary Meetings
C 81/INF/3-Rev.2
Provisional List of Delegates and Observers
C 81/INF/4-Rev.1
Provisional List of Documents
C 81/INF/5
FAO Member Nations, Council Members, Members of Council Committees and of the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes of the UN/FAO World Food Programme
C 81/lNF/6
Presentation of B.R. Sen Awards (1980 and 1981)
C 81/INF/7
Presentation of A.H. Boerma Award 1981
C 81/INF/8
Notification of Membership in the Open Committees of the Council (1982-83)
C 81/INF/9
Twelfth Biennial Frank L. McDougall Lecture
C 81/INF/10
Implementation of 1980-81 Regional Conference Recommendations
C 81/INF/11
Provisional Checklist of Documents for Commission I
C 81/INF/12
Provisional Checklist of Documents for Commission II
C 81/INF/13
Provisional Checklist of Documents for Commission III
C 81/lNF/14
Address of His Holiness Pope John Paul II to the Twenty-first Session of the FAO Conference
C 81/INF/15
Report of the Informal Meeting of International Non-Governmental Organizations
C 81/INF/16
Support Costs
C 81/INF/17
Elements of a Global Food Programme
C 81/INF/18
Statement by Dr. Edouard Saouma, Director-General of FAO, to the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy
C 81/INF/l9
Resolution Approved by the European Parliament on 30 September 1981 Concerning the Appeal of Nobel Prize Winners (CL 79/INF/10)
C 81/INF/20
Programme of Work and Budget 1982-83
C 81/INF/21
Summary of the Co-Chairmen of the International Meeting on Cooperation and Development (Cancún 1981)
C 81/INF/22
Director-General's Opening Speech to Commission II
C 81/INF/23
Countries Where an FAO Representation has been Established as of November 1981
C 81/LIM/Series
C 81/LIM/1
Abolition of Audited Interim Accounts (extract from CL 79/REP)
C 81/LIM/2
Amendments to the Provision of the Special Reserve Account (extract from CL 79/REP)
C 81/LIM/3
Scale of Contributions 1982-83 (extract from CL 79/REP)
C 81/LIM/4
Statement by the Director, IAA, to the Seventy-Ninth Council Session
C 81/LIM/5
Arrangements for the Conference (extract from CL 80/REP)
C 81/LIM/6
First Report of the General Committee
C 81/LIM/7
First Report of the Credentials Committee
C 81/LIM/8
Second Report of the Credentials Committee
C 81/LIM/9
Report of the Nominations Committee
C 81/LIM/10
WFP Pledging Target for the Period 1983-84 (extract from CL 80/REP)
C 81/LIM/11
First Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 81/LIM/12
Audited Accounts (extract from CL 80/REP)
C 81/LIM/13
Statement by the Director-General to the 21st Session of the FAO Conference - 9 November 1981
C 81/LIM/14
Headquarters Accommodation (extract from CL 80/REP)
C 81/LIM/15
Status of Contributions (extract from CL BO/REP)
C 81/LIM/16
Replenishment of the Working Capital Fund (extract from CL 80/REP)
C 81/LLM/17
Increase in the Level of the Working Capital Fund (extract from CL 80/REP)
C 81/LIM/18
Remuneration of the Director-General (extract from CL 80/REP)
C 81/LIM/19
Council Elections
C 81/LIM/20
International Agricultural Adjustment (extract from A: Report of the 53^rd Session of the CCP; B: CL 80/REP)
C 81/LIM/21
Current Assessments (extract from CL 80/REP)
C 81/LIM/22
Second Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 81/LIM/23
Third Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 81/LIM/24
Second Report of the General Committee
C 81/LIM/25
Third Report of the Credentials Committee
C 81/LIM/26
Fourth Report of the Credentials Committee
C 81/LIM/27
Third Report of the General Committee
C 81/LIM/27
Corrigendum to Corr.1
C 81/LIM/27
(French only)
C 81/LIM/28
Fourth Report of the General Committee
C 81/LIM/29
Fourth Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 81/LIM/30
Fifth Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 81/LIM/31
Sixth Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 81/LIM/32
Seventh Report of the Resolutions Committee
C 81/LIM/33
Fifth Report of the General Committee
C 81/REP/Series
C 81/REP/1 to )
C 81/REP/8-Sup.1 )
Draft Reports of Plenary
C 81/REP/8-Sup.2 )
C 81/I/REP/1 to )
C 81/I/REP/3 )
Draft Reports of Commission I
C 81/II/REP/1 to )
Draft Reports of Commission II
C 81/II/REP/5 )
C 81/III/REP/1 to )
Draft Reports of Commission III
C 81/III/REP/2 )
C 81/PV/Series
C 81/PV/1 to )
First to Twentieth Verbatim Records of Plenary
C 81/PV/20 )
C 81/I/PV/17 to )
First to Eighteenth Verbatim Records of Commission I
C 81/I/PV/18 )
C 81/II/PV/1 to )
First to Twenty-first Verbatim Records of Commission II
C 81/II/PV/21 )
C 81/III/PV/1 to )
First to Fourth Verbatim Records of Commission III
C 81/III/PV/4 )
C 31/DJ/1 to )
Journals of the Conference
C 81/DJ/14 )
<section>m</section>
XIII. Appendix D
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL
Mr. Chairman, Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates and Observers, Ladies and Gentlemen,
On an occasion such as this, when the leaders of world agriculture gather under one roof, it would be easy to believe that we live in a global society. It would be easy - but it would be wrong. The idea that we find ourselves in a global society is an illusion, created by the spectacular advances in transport and communications which have marked our time. We do not find, in our world, the degree of mutual solidarity, the coherence of policies and institutions, which alone could give reality to that splendid ideal. On the contrary, international commitments are constantly subordinated to national interests. Political divisions are becoming more acute, economic gaps loom larger, the anxieties of the people are mounting. Ploughshares are beaten back into swords.
Nevertheless, the first World Food Day - with manifestations organized in over 140 countries, in every quarter of the globe - has shown beyond a shadow of doubt the extent to which humanity aspires to a better state in its affairs. Almost at the same time, the Cancún Summit has struck a responsive chord in peoples around the world, in opening up at least some possibility of negotiating a new deal for the world's under-privileged peoples. Let us do all we can to ensure that the global negotiations are swift, substantive, and oriented towards action in the real world - not towards two-dimensional agreements, born and entombed on paper.
Alongside World Food Day and Cancún, and connected with both, I find cause for hope in the unremitting dedication to international development among men and women in all walks of life, and of all ages. I wish to pay a special tribute to the non-governmental organizations which, in many industrialized countries, have moved against apathy and indifference, mobilizing public opinion in favour of the hungry and under-privileged.
If we are to build a global society, where could we start more appropriately than with food and agriculture? At the dawn of history, it was the development of a settled and productive agriculture which brought about the growth of civilization. And at the dawn of what we must hope will be a new age, there can surely be no foundations for a global society before we have completed the solution of man's ancient problem of hunger and malnutrition.
If this is to be achieved in our time, there must be a genuine reordering of priorities. The arms race should be transformed into a collective search for food security. Of what avail is a nuclear arsenal that could destroy every city in the world several times over? Indeed, the capacity to overkill the underfed is surely the foremost evidence of irrationality in human affairs. By no means is this irrationality confined to the great powers. The proportion of global arms expenditure accounted for by developing countries, although still low, has doubled in a decade. Yet the frenzied search for military security brings little but an intensification of rivalries, each tip in the balance of power provokes a counteraction, and there remains the barely thinkable prospect that all these weapons, made not to be used, may one day start firing.
Food security may seem remote from military affairs. Yet the tensions that stem from food shortages have proved to be one of the most powerful factors of destabilization. Even for some countries in Europe, the era of national food crises is not yet over. A government that fears for its security could do well to equip itself with an arsenal of grain, not bombs. The training of farmers may do more for peace-keeping than the drilling of soldiers.
The risk of military danger is truly worldwide, and so too is the danger created by food insecurity. Science and technology are doing much to insulate agricultural production against the fluctuations of weather and the impact of diseases. But man is still far from being master of nature. Where the climate is erratic, such as monsoon Asia and large parts of the Soviet Union, output may vary year by year over a considerable range. Even the United states is by no means immune from unexpected setbacks. It is therefore highly disturbing that carryover stocks of cereals at the end of the 1981-82 season are expected to be still below the 17-18 percent of world consumption which we regard as the very minimum necessary for food security.
What does this mean in practice? It means that there will be only about 60 million tons of cereals available to meet abnormal import requirements, if there should be widespread harvest failures next year. We regard an emergency of these dimensions as highly improbable, but not impossible. If it were to occur, prices would rapidly climb to unprecedented heights, There is no mechanism to ensure that poorer, food-deficit countries would be able to obtain the supplies they need. On the contrary, they would once again find themselves bidding against the economic giants for the cereals that represent their lifeline.
We had high hopes that these dangers could to some extent be avoided through an international grains arrangement, designed to ensure both market stability and food security. However, after almost a year, negotiations in Geneva broke down in February 1979. More recently, the world has seemed to be moving still further away from the establishment of an effective system of food security. Even the idea of international coordination of nationally held stocks does not at the present time appear acceptable to all the main parties concerned.
Let me reiterate that the requirements of a food security system are reasonably clear, and the main elements have been under discussion or negotiations for several years. At the national level, all countries should have a well defined policy on stock-holding: stocks should be held by importers as well as by exporters. Regional arrangements should supplement those made by countries individually. At global level, there should be a formal agreement comprising specific measures on prices and stocks, and arrangements, including financial provisions, to meet the special needs of developing countries. An agreement of this type should allow for the constitution of a global security reserve of at least 25 to 30 million tons of wheat. Here indeed is a matter for global negotiation, with conflicts of interest to be resolved not only between North and South, but also among developed countries.
The cost of a system of world food security, although certainly high, would be trivial compared to global military expenditures now running at about one million dollars a minute.
Pending the establishment of such a system, we must live with interim measures, and strive to make them more effective. I may briefly recall that this Conference, and the General Assembly of the United Nations, have endorsed the Plan of Action on World Foot Security which I put forward after the failure of the Geneva negotiations on a grains arrangement. The Plan of Action remains the only international policy framework for action on this subject - but its provisions need to be refined and strengthened. The International Emergency Food Reserve, established by the General Assembly at its Seventh Special Session in 1975, is the only security stock managed on a multilateral basis. I have spared no effort to attract additional donors, and have advanced various proposals, still under discussion, for strengthening the Reserve by its development into a convention, or by arranging multi-year pledges. The Reserve's modest target of 500 000 tons of cereals will be attained for the
first time this year, thanks to generous initiatives by the European Economic Communities and the OPEC Special Fund. The Committee on World Food Security was created at the time of the crisis of the mid-seventies - but it still waits to be used by governments as a major negotiating forum.
The Food Security Assistance Scheme, a timely creation by the members of this Conference, has mobilized help for national ant sub-regional projects in developing countries. Yet far more resources are needed to finance - bilaterally or multilaterally - the projects it had drawn up together with governments. I would draw the special attention of donors to the need for support to the regional and national food security programmes of the Sahelian countries.
We have laid out the ground work. The need now is to advance towards a real food security system.
I make no apology for dwelling at such length on this subject. It is, I think, agreed by all that world food security must be high on the list of topics for the forthcoming global negotiations.
Food security is, by definition, a form of global insurance policy, of particular importance for the poorer countries while they work their way up the development ladder. But trade issues have a greater direct impact on the development prospects of these nations.
The problems of their agricultural trade must arouse the highest concern. Many of the developing countries entered the global economy in colonial times as exporters of tropical products for the metropolitan countries. After independence, agricultural exports continued in many cases to be the mainstay of their economy. Yet developments over the last two decades have whittled away the favourable balance of their agricultural trade. Recent price weakness in commodities such as sugar, coffee, cocoa, sisal, jute, rubber and tea lead us to fear that in 1981, for the first time in history, the credit balance in the agricultural trade of the developing countries may be eliminated.
There are three separate trends at work. In the first place, the developing countries' import needs have been going up faster than the demand for their exports. Sales of tropical commodities to relatively stagnant markets in the industrialized world have not kept up with the rapid growth of imports required by rising populations. Ten years ago, the raw material and beverage exports of low-income developing countries sufficed to finance all their food imports, with a margin to spare. Now, they are quite inadequate for this purpose, and cover only two thirds of the food import bills.
At the same time, certain commodities are in a long-term price decline. The most significant is tea, which is now fetching, in real terms, only one third of its value 20 years ago. In contrast, imports of oil and some manufactured goods have risen dramatically in price and represent a major burden on the balance of payments.
The third negative factor for developing countries is the chronic instability of prices in international markets, which can totally disrupt their development plans. The extreme example right now is sugar, which has gone down in less than a year from 40 cents a pound to 12 cents a pound.
On top of these difficulties come tariff and non-tariff barriers, which president the developing nations from exporting in processed form, and thus benefiting from the value added.
The deteriorating trade situation of the developing countries must be tackled on both sides of the balance. Imports must be lowered by increasing domestic production, a theme to which I shall return in a minute. And export earnings must be increased, by larger sales at equitable prices. The issues relating to exports lend themselves, par excellence, to international negotiation
But negotiation does not necessarily end in success, and International commodity agreements have, in most cases, proved elusive. The International Monetary Fund has developed useful schemes for compensating for export shortfalls and, recently, for increases in cereal import costs. The EEC Stabex Scheme is a valuable contribution towards stability of export earnings among the associated countries. Yet the total impact of these arrangements is not adequate in relation to the dimensions of the problem. The difficulties of the developing nations in agricultural trade need to be tackled on a comprehensive. across-the-board basis in any round of global negotiations. The mechanisms conceived by UNCTAD, in cooperation with FAO, and in particular the Common Fund, must be given a chance to play a role that is genuinely commensurate with the issues at stake.
It needs to be borne in mind that, whereas a manufacturer can make quick and rational decisions regarding the volume of his production and the price of his product, the exporters of tropical commodities have far more difficulty in controlling production levels and have almost no control over prices on international markets. Ideally, there should be some form of indexation linking the prices of the major export items and the most significant imports of the more vulnerable developing nations.
Long-term global negotiations should also support the efforts of the developing countries to foster trade among themselves. There is a paradox in the concentration of trade along historical routes, accompanied by a relative neglect of import-export markets in the South. Economic cooperation among developing countries must, in the eighties, become more than a concept: it must be translated into practical economic relations, involving the development of the necessary infrastructure, transportation links, and financial arrangements. Indeed, a rational development path must be mapped out for global trade as a whole if the future is to be guided, and not left to the random working of uncontrolled forces.
While trade can make a major contribution towards solving world food problems, the heart of a lasting solution must be increased agricultural output by developing nations, combined with greater purchasing power for the poor, enabling them to buy more food and better food.
Fortunately relatively good production results have been achieved in recent years by the largest developing countries, particularly China and India, and by the middle-income countries, especially in Latin America. As a result, the overall growth of food production in developing countries during the decade of the seventies has reached a figure of 3.3 percent per annum, substantially below the 4 percent target but well above population growth, and better than the figure for the sixties. However, this is an average, which covers wide differences between countries, and in particular masks the enormous difficulties of a great many smaller countries, especially in Africa. While we must recognize the unprecedented challenge of population growth, it is nevertheless more than disturbing that in about half the developing Member Nations of FAO, food production is failing to keep up with the increase in the numbers to be fed. A few of these countries are relatively well off, but most of
them are among the poorest countries of the world. The acute, even disastrous, situation of their agriculture is one of the most urgent and compelling challenges that face FAO and the international community at large.
At global level, the situation calls for an increase in the level of external aid to agriculture. In fact, we find that the reverse is happening: official commitments of assistance to the sector have been falling in real terms since 1978. In the context of an increase in total aid for all purposes, the proportion of bilateral aid devoted to agriculture should be raised to a third, following the example of the multilateral funding organizations.
Food aid can be an important form of developmental assistance, as long as it is regarded neither as a means for solving the problems of the donor, nor as an alibi for failure to increase domestic production in the recipient. With that proviso, cereal aid should attain and surpass the target of 10 million tons, set at the World Food Conference. In the seven years since it was established, the cereal imports of the developing countries have gone up by over 60 percent. Yet food aid has still not reached the 1974 target figure, and is even tending to decline.
The food-deficit developing countries themselves must re-examine their policies in the widest possible framework. Agricultural weakness must be redressed not merely by action in the agricultural sector: for many countries, a re-orientation of their overall development towards the achievement of agricultural objectives is necessary in order to bring about a major improvement in the trend. The allocation of resources for domestic investment, the impact of changed price policies, the merits of import substitution versus export promotion, the effect of exchange rates, these are just a few of the basic issues affecting the whole economy which may need to be considered. For this reason, we consider that national food strategies should generally be prepared as an integral part of the overall development plan, and not as an independent exercise.
Such strategies will normally need to embody specific programmes or projects on which action can be started quickly. Indeed, a great many governments are probably ready to under take significant new action programmes without going through a major planning exercise. It is, in any event, the Member Nations themselves that must decide, and if they want our help in this field we are ready to assist in any way that is technically and financially possible for us.
Particular attention needs to be paid to the role of small farmers, and to the general development of traditional agriculture. It is not merely that social justice demands the possibility of development for all. In many areas, and particularly in Africa, the necessary increases in production must come mainly from the small farm sector.
The World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development has pointed the way. Structural reform must enable the under-privileged to have equitable access to resources of land and water. The re-orientation of services for extension, credit, inputs and marketing must bring the small producer the means to contribute increasingly to national food supplies, and especially towards meeting the requirements of urban populations.
The WCARRD Programme of Action has also brought out the importance of organizations of the people for the people, organizations which allow them to shape their own development. Ideally, such organizations should be spontaneous, not sponsored from outside. In practice, some degree of encouragement may be necessary, and FAO in cooperation with governments is now in the early stages of a programme for this purpose.
For no social group is the concept of participation in development more vital than for women. Agricultural modernization can very quickly break up the patterns of village life, and the division of labour between the sexes, to the disadvantage of the women unless deliberate action is taken. Improvement of the woman's life needs to be a constant objective of agricultural and rural development schemes.
As cropping patterns change, so there may be a gradual evolution in the diets of rural areas. Because of the woman's traditional role in the home, it is important that she be made aware of basic nutritional considerations. Ignorance must be ranked along with poverty as a main cause of malnutrition. In the age of the universal transistor radio, is it unrealistic to aim at bringing a message on nutrition into every village, and intro every home?
The overall challenge of the transfer of technology is one of the most difficult with which we have to deal. Not only is there the problem of reaching the farmers, there is often a much more basic issue of "which technology'>" For increasing productivity, it is true that the transfer of technology from the highly successful agriculture of the advanced countries is of major importance for the developing nations. But the fact remains that this technology was conceived in an entirely different agro-ecological, social and economic environment from that found in tropical countries.
There are major gaps. For instance, there is no technology that is ecologically sound and economically viable for intensive production on fragile tropical soils in the humid and sub-humid zones, except for tree crops and rice. In other cases, the technology of industrialized countries is ill-adapted to the circumstances of most developing areas. The international community must strengthen its support, not only for the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research and the network of international centres connected with it, but even more for national research stations in individual developing countries. Research networks can link centres in different areas working on similar problems: indeed the concept of TCDC is one that needs to be increasingly fostered in the years ahead.
The existing technology for intensifying productivity is unfortunately energy-intensive While research must aim at developing approaches based on renewable energy sources, there is at the moment no viable alternative to the expanded use of fossil energy for fertilizer, pesticides, mechanization and pumping. Of these, the most expensive in energy, and the most vital for increasing yields, is the provision of fertilizer.
After expanding at high rates for many years, the level of fertilizer use in developing countries now has serious economic consequences.
These countries need to invest an estimated a billion a year in new manufacturing capacity (at 1980 prices), and must also finance imports that in 1979 were over $4 billion. A comprehensive fertilizer strategy must be built on the work already accomplished by our Commission on Fertilizers.
A different aspect of the energy problem is the fuelwood crisis. At present there are about 100 million people living in areas of serious fuelwood shortage. By the end of the century, if nothing were done, over two billion people would be affected - a third of the entire population of the globe.
The main lines of action are clear, although the achievement of solutions will be neither easy nor quick. The productivity of existing fuelwood resources must be improved through conservation and management; the level of planting must on average be increased fivefold to create new resources; the distribution of firewood, including the long-distance transportation of wood in the form of charcoal, must be rationally and economically organized; the efficiency of fuelwood use must be increased, so as to make better use of available supplies; and where necessary, substitutes for fuelwood must be made available. It is surely a devastating comment on the lopsided and distorted way in which the world is progressing that while some regions are graduating from pocket calculators to personal computers, others are less and less able to find the fuel for cooking and heating on which they have beer. able to count since the first days of civilization. FAO must play a leading role in the
international attack on this problem, at once so simple and so complex.
The oceans, too, are in crisis. World production of fish for human consumption providing one sixth of our animal protein requirements - has failed for several years to expand in line with population growth. Some species have been over-fished, while the technology for the development of non-conventional species is not yet ready. At the same time, the establishment of Exclusive Economic Zones is leading to a re-distribution of the present catch among countries. Only an international approach by all concerned countries, both regionally and globally, will enable the fisheries sector to meet the dual challenge of coping with structural change and an increase in production. FAO's programmes are helping to meet these requirements. Countries are being assisted to build up their capacity to manage their Exclusive Economic Zones, The rational exploitation of over-fished species is being promoted, waste is being reduced, processing and distribution are being made more efficient. At the
same time, production increases are being sought through aquaculture, and work is being promoted in view of the exploitation of non-conventional species.
The international dimension of the fisheries sector is perhaps more obvious than that of certain agriculture problems. Yet if there is one thought I wish to leave behind today, it is that virtually every aspect of food and agriculture is caught up in the web of international economic relations. Agricultural weakness in the poorest countries drives up their cereal import needs, and may thus put pressure on international food prices and ultimately contribute to inflation in the industrialized world. Subsidies or tariffs in the advanced nations affect the livelihood of producers in the tropics.
We have had in recent years an impressive series of important international meetings and seminal texts: the resolutions of the World Food Conference in 1974; the Declaration of Principles and Programme of Action of WCARRD, and the Lagos Plan for the Development of Africa, both in 1979; the report of the Brandt Commission and the adoption of the New International Development Strategy in 1980; while this year we have seen important development at the Western Economic Summit in Ottawa, the Nairobi Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, the Paris Conference on the Least Developed Countries, the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne, and the North-South Summit in Cancún. It: would be comforting to think that this cascade of conferences was the outward and visible sign of a growing commitment to internationalism. But what do we find? What is actually going on in the read world?
Protectionism is denounced in international fora, and new protectionism legislation is introduced at national level. The new International Development Strategy is a remarkable text, almost eleven months old. I have yet to see a serious attempt by governments to start implementing it.
The replenishment of IFAD is about to be accomplished, yet we are already at the end of the first year of the triennium 1981-83 for which funds were sought, and new contributions will be at a level which in real terms is lower than the first cycle. The sixth replenishment of IDA is, de facto, to cover a period of four years rather than three. UNDP is up to 27 percent underfinanced in its next five-year programming cycle. The World Food Programme is still more than 25 percent short of its 1981-82 target and, allowing for inflation, the commodities available to the Programme in this biennium are less than for a long time past. In total, ODA for agriculture has been falling in real terms since 1978.
The gulf between what governments say collectively, and what they do individually, has perhaps never been wider. We shall see a test case.
At Cancún, twenty-two Heads of States not only declared that the eradication of hunger was the "first priority both at the national level and in the field of international cooperation", but also that "increasing self-sufficiency in food production... requires timely and sufficient international technical and financial support".
Mr. Chairman, FAO is a unique and indispensable instrument in achieving precisely those objectives. It is not an alternative but an adjunct and partner to bilateral aid. We can gain acceptance and achieve impact in geographic or sub-sectoral areas where bilateral aid cannot go, and in so doing make all sources of aid to agriculture and other sectors more complete and effective.
In all the circumstances, my budget proposals envisage what is a very modest increase indeed - on an annual basis only about the same as the rate of increase in population growth.
Yet, some major contributors, among whom several were at Cancún, nave hitherto signalled their reservations about this increase, although their respective shares of the total increase could be said to be minuscule.
It would be a strange post-script to Cancún if virtually their first public act thereafter were to vote against FAO's budget.
In saying that, I am fully aware that reference will be made to the need for effective use of resources and greater efficiency.
This is undoubtedly important. We must and will pursue these objectives with concrete measures. I must, however, plead that these objectives are considered in the light of the facts of our record.
I am circulating to the Conference a summary of the facts, comparing our situation now with that six years ago. This, I believe, demonstrates clearly our unparalleled record of a much larger field programme totalling some $3 billion per annum, in the form of investment, emergency action, support for food aid, for development and technical cooperation for development projects in the field, having been delivered by a smaller force of established posts at Headquarters, Regional and Liaison Offices, and Joint Divisions. The proportion of the budget which goes to established posts has been brought down from 75 percent in 1972 to 55 percent in 1982-83. The proportion devoted to administration and common services will also be further reduced.
This is our record. It speaks for itself of our steadily increasing effectiveness and efficiency. It speaks also of our consistent and persistent will to improve further whenever and wherever possible.
I ask respectfully that this record be remembered in the next few days when you come to discuss my proposed Programme of Work and Budget and, I hope, reach a positive and willing conclusion thereon.
The scandal of death by hunger and malnutrition has entered the world's conscience. The message of World Food Day has echoed round the globe. Let us work together to solve, finally, man's oldest problem. Let us seek to create, in food and agriculture, the foundations of a truly global society.
<section>n</section>
XIV. Appendix E
STATEMENT SHOWING THE COMPUTATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 1982 AND 1983
MEMBER NATIONS
ASSESSMENTS PER ANNUM
LESS: CREDITS FROM TAX EQUALIZATION FUND PER ANNUM
CONTRIBUTIONS PAYABLE PER ANNUM
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burma
Burundi
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Costa Rica
Cuba
Cyprus
Czechoslovakia
Democratic Kampuchea
Democratic People 's Republic of Korea
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Germany
Federal Republic of Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Korea
Republic of Kuwait
Lao
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Rwanda
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Kingdom of Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States of America
Upper Volta
Uruguay
Venezuela
Viet Nam
Yemen Arab Republic
Yemen, People's Democratic Republic of
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe
<section>o</section>
XV. Appendix F
SCALE OF CONTRIBUTIONS 1982-83
(1980-81 Scale shown for comparative purposes)
Member Nations
Scale 1982-83
Scale 1980-81
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burma
Burundi
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Vet de
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Costa Rica
Cuba
Cyprus
Czechoslovakia
Democratic Kampuchea
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Germany, Federal Republic of
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Korea, Republic of c/
Kuwait
Lao
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Rwanda
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States of America
Upper Volta
Uruguay
Venezuela
Viet Nam
Yemen Arab Republic
Yemen, People's Democratic Republic of
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe
<section>p</section>
XVI. Appendix G
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE BUDGET OF THE ORGANIZATION OUTSTANDING AT 19 NOVEMBER 1981
Member Nations
Payable in 1981
Arrears: Payable in 1980 and prior years
Total outstanding
Total outstanding contribution as % of 1981
Argentina 80.091 80.091 6
Bangladesh 65.443 65.443 97
Belgium 395.578 395.578 20
Benin 13.557 16.201 29.758 220
Bhutan 3.400 3.400 100
Brazil 1.936.563 1.936.563 92
Bulgaria 64.452 64.452 24
Burundi 4.566 4.566 34
Cape Verde 13.089 13.089 97
Central African Republic 20.361 20.361 150
Chad 17.321 23.846 41.167 304
Colombia 34.429 155.401 189.830 108
Comoros 13.557 38.391 51.948 383
Costa Rica 26.458 26.458 98
Cuba 265 265 -
Dominica 200 200 1
Ecuador 20.245 20.245 75
El Salvador 13.557 13.557 100
Equatorial Guinea 3.400 3.400 100
Fiji 13.053 13.053 96
Gabon 26.646 26.646 98
Gambia 13.089 13.089 97
Greece 32.896 32.896 6
Grenada 13.557 2.293 15.850 117
Guinea 786 786 6
Guinea-Bissau 13.557 13.159 26.716 197
Iran 1.084.560 2.080.605 3.165.165 292
Israel 345.267 152.219 497.486 118
Ivory Coast 16.730 4.104 20.834 38
Japan 10.267.811 10.267.811 65
Korea, Republic of 236.530 236.530 97
Lao 13.089 13.089 97
Lebanon 32.001 32.001 59
Liberia 13.557 13.089 26.646 197
Libya 370.230 370.230 98
Madagascar 13.089 13.089 97
Mali 2.639 2.639 19
Mauritania 13.557 3.778 17.335 128
Mexico 35.762 35.762 3
Morocco 78.532 78.532 97
Namibia 13.089 13.089 97
Niger 2.386 2.386 18
Nigeria 38.734 55.093 93.827 35
Paraguay 20.877 65.387 86.264 636
Poland 1.980.111 1.980.111 96
Romania 142.772 142.772 41
Saint Lucia 13.553 13.553 100
Saint Vincent and The Grenadines 3.400 3.400 100
Samoa 13.557 13.557 100
Sao Tome and Principe 13.557 13.096 26.653 197
Saudi Arabia, Kingdom of 8.473 8.473 1
Senegal 13.557 18.698 32.255 238
Sierra Leone 13.295 13.295 98
Somalia 2.864 2.864 21
Spain 2.241.123 2.241.123 79
Swaziland 13.557 111 13.668 101
Togo 10.408 10.408 77
Tonga 3.400 3.400 100
Tunisia 24.541 24.541 45
Turkey 501.609 347.989 849.598 169
Uganda 13.557 23.864 37.421 276
United States of America 1.678.702 1.678.702 5
Viet Nam 849 849 2
Yemen Arab Republic 13.089 13.089 97
Yugoslavia 668.927 668.927 97
Zaire 26.177 26.177 97
Zimbabwe 6.800 6.800 100
PROGRAMME COMMITTEE (November 1981-November 1983)
Chairman:
Members
Yugoslavia (M. Trkulja) Argentina (C.O. Keller Sarmiento) Kuwait (F.H.J. Hayat)
Brazil (A.F.M. de Freitas) Libya M. Sidki Zehni)
France (P. Guérin) Pakistan (T. Ahmad)
India (Ramadhar) Sierra Leone (T.E.C. Palmer)
United Republic of Cameroon (A.G. Ngongi Namanga) United States of America (R.A. Sorenson)
FINANCE COMMITTEE (November 1981-November 1983)
Chairman
Members
Sri Lanka
(D.H.J. Abeyagoonasekéra)
Australia (J.L. Sault) Peru (J. Gazzo)
Canada (D.W. Ware) Saudi Arabia (A.Y. Bukhari )
Ghana (H. Mends) Senegal (S. Aidara)
Greece (M.A. Papageorgiou) 
Panama (M. Ivankovich de Arosemena)
COMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL MATTERS
(November 1981-November 1983)
Hungary Philippines
Switzerland United Kingdom
Italy United States of America
Nigeria
COMMITTEE ON FOOD AID POLICIES AND PROGRAMMES (1982)
Term of office expiring
Elected by FAO Council
Elected by ECOSOC
31 December 1982 Cuba Argentina
Egypt Ireland
France Lesotho
Germany, Federal Republic of Mexico
Sierra Leone United Kingdom
31 December 1983 Australia Denmark
Bangladesh Greece
Canada Hungary
Saudi Arabia India
United States of America Morocco
31 December 1984 Brazil Belgium
Congo Finland
Mali Japan
Netherlands Pakistan
Thailand Somalia
FAO MEMBER NATIONS
(as from 7 November 1981)
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burma
Burundi
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Costa Rica
Cuba
Cyprus
Czechoslovakia
Democratic Kampuchea
Democratic People's Rep. of Korea
Democratic Yemen
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Germany, Fed. Rep. of
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Kuwait
Lao People's Dem. Rep
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Republic of Korea
Romania
Rwanda
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
São Tomé and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Rep.
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United Republic of Cameroon
United Republic of Tanzania
United States of America
Upper Volta
Uruguay
Venezuela
Viet Nam
Yemen
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe
P-90
ISBN 92-5-101 160-5
