<title>SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF SMALLHOLDER IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT IN ZIMBABWE</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Throughout the world irrigation is considered as a vehicle for agricultural and economic development. As a result investments in irrigation have been accelerated in recent years. This is a welcome situation for the world as a whole and for Zimbabwe in particular, where the agricultural growth rate lags behind the population growth rate. Given the limitations posed by the climate in Zimbabwe, irrigation is necessary in many parts of the country for achieving agricultural growth.
Irrigation plays a pivotal role in food security, income generation, employment creation, improved nutrition and raising of the standard of living of farmers. However, some irrigation schemes have been found to be non-viable and causing a lot of financial burden on the government. It is therefore important to assess both the good schemes and the bad schemes and come out with the factors that make good schemes good and bad schemes bad. This socio-economic assessment generates information useful for directing the future planning and development of smallholder schemes.
Acknowledgements
This report was prepared by Mr. Dagmore Tawonezvi, in collaboration with Mr. Kennedy Mudima, under a contract with the FAO Sub-Regional Office for East and Southern Africa (SAFR) in Harare, Zimbabwe. Mr. Tawonezvi is a Senior Agricultural Economist in the Department of Agricultural, Technical and Extension Services, AGRITEX, of the Ministry of Lands and Agriculture in Zimbabwe. Mr. Mudima is a Senior Irrigation Engineer at AGRITEX and former Young Professional Officer (YPO) at the FAO-SAFR Office.
The report is the result of a combination of literature review and fieldwork to assess the performance of ten smallholder irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe. It was reviewed by Mr. Andreas Savva and Ms. Karen Frenken, Water Resources Management Officers at the FAO-SAFR Office, and Ms. Tove Lilja, APO Water Resources Management Officer. They provided useful comments and suggestions for improvement.
List of acronyms
AFC Agricultural Finance Corporation
AGRITEX Agricultural Technical and Extension Services
ARDA Agricultural and Rural Development Authority
BCR Benefit Cost Ratio
CSO Central Statistical Office
DA District Administrator
DANIDA Danish International Development Agency
DC Development Committee
DDF District Development Fund
DERUDE Department of Rural Development
DWR Department of Water Resources
EIRR Economic Internal Rate of Return
ESAP Economic and Structural Adjustment Programme
EW Extension Worker
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FAO-SAFR FAO Sub-Regional Office for Eastern and Southern Africa
FIRR Financial Internal Rate of Return
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GMB Grain Marketing Board
GOR Government of Rhodesia
GOZ Government of Zimbabwe
HPC Horticultural Promotion Council
IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute
IMC Irrigation Management Committee
ISF Irrigation Support Fund
KfW Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
MSU Michigan State University
MP Member of Parliament
NFIF National Farm Irrigation Fund
NPV Net Present Value
NR Natural Region
O & M Operation and Maintenance
PRA Participatory Rural Appraisal
RDC Rural District Council
RO Resettlement Officer
SADC Southern African Development Community
SSIP Support to Smallholder Irrigation Programme
UZ University of Zimbabwe
WUA Water Users Association
YPO Young Professional Officer
ZESA Zimbabwe Electricity Supply Authority
ZFU Zimbabwe Farmers' Union
ZIMPREST Zimbabwe Policy Reforms for Social and Economic Transformation
<section>2</section>
Executive summary
Zimbabwean debates on irrigation have concentrated on expansion of hectarage under irrigation, whilst skirting around the socio-economic effects of such investments. Attention paid to the socio-economic impact of smallholder irrigation development although growing is still limited. This study aims at contributing to a better understanding of the smallholder irrigation sector.
The impact assessment was carried out on ten smallholder irrigation projects through Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) covering the farmers, various institutions and local authorities. Comparative impact analysis was effected across agro-ecological zones, between different irrigation systems as well as between farmer managed and government managed schemes. Five of the schemes (Chitora, Murara, Mzinyathini, Principe and Wenimbi) were pre-assumed to be operating well and the other five (Longdale, Mambanjeni Ngezi, Mamina, Oatlands and Rozva) were pre-judged to be poor.
It came out from the study that whilst some schemes can be performing very well others can actually be performing badly. Good schemes can result in increased productivity, improved incomes and nutrition, employment creation, food security and drought relief savings for the government. All these effects are paramount for economic and social development. Poor schemes struggle to achieve the above improvements.
Efforts were made to assess what makes good schemes good and bad schemes bad. Factors, which determine the performance of an irrigation scheme, include planning, group cohesion, institutional support, strength of the Irrigation Management Committee (IMC), choice of crops, appropriateness of the technical design and the commitment of the farmers.
The following are the major findings of the study:
* Projects that are planned with full farmer participation perform better than those that are planned by experts on their own do.
* Projects planned by consultants without PRA experience have operational problems.
* Projects that are viewed by farmers as being their projects perform better than projects that are viewed by them as belonging to the government.
* Investment in operation and maintenance is determined by the feeling of the farmers on the ownership of the scheme. Those schemes for which farmers have a sense of ownership are better looked after than those for which farmers think assets belong to the government.
* The question of inheritance is a critical determinant of the level of investment by the farmers.
* Government managed schemes have operation and maintenance problems because of budgetary constraints.
* Farmer managed schemes tend to embark on high value crops, while government managed schemes concentrate on grain crops which are easy to market.
* Water management is good on farmer managed schemes, for fear of high electricity bills, and poor at government managed schemes, since they do not pay the costs.
* Chitora, Murara, Mzinyathini, Principe and Wenimbi were found to be financially and economically viable while the rest are not viable from both financial and economic points of view.
* Projects which use recommended high levels of inputs get higher yields than those which do not.
* Farmer managed schemes have developed commercial mentality in contrast to government managed schemes.
* Surface irrigation systems are more labour intensive than sprinkler irrigation systems.
* Escalating energy costs threaten the viability of some schemes.
* The farmers do not welcome interference of government officials on the running of the schemes.
* Transporters shun projects where roads are not well developed, thereby affecting their marketing potential.
* Projects which draw participants from different backgrounds may have internal problems and usually suffer from lack of group cohesion.
* Politicians should not interfere much on the planning of the projects
The study led to the following recommendations:
* Farmers should participate in all the project phases from planning to implementation and evaluation.
* A bottom up approach should be followed for irrigation development, treating farmers as "owners" rather than "beneficiaries" of the projects.
* Consultants who are not familiar with PRA methods and who have no smallholder irrigation development experience should not be engaged for these kinds of jobs.
* It is legitimate to develop farmer managed irrigation schemes, as they result in very little financial burden on the government for operation and maintenance.
* The government, given the budgetary constraints affecting it, should find a way of handing over the existing schemes to the farmers for management.
* Only projects which are technically sound should be handed over to the farmers.
* Given that water is the most important factor in smallholder irrigation development, efficient water saving systems should be adopted.
* For any planned schemes, study tours to existing irrigation schemes should be organized prior to the introduction of irrigation.
* Training in water management, general crop production and marketing are important for the new as well as the old schemes.
* It might be important to help farmers with inputs for the first season so that they can build a cash flow base.
* Institutional support should be enhanced in smallholder irrigation development.
* Continuous monitoring of irrigation schemes is necessary to provide feedback information that helps in the planning, implementation and management of future schemes.
* An integrated rural development approach should be followed in any agricultural development programme.
<section>3</section>
Presentation of the survey
Background information
Zimbabwe is a landlocked country in the Southern Africa region with an area of over 390 000 km^2. It is bordered by Zambia, Mozambique, South Africa, Botswana and Namibia (Figure 1). It is situated between 15 and 22_ south latitude and 26 and 34_ east longitude. Climatic conditions are largely sub-tropical with one rainy season, between November and March. Rainfall reliability decreases from north to south and also from east to west. Only 37% of the country receive rainfall considered adequate for agriculture.
FIGURE 1. Location map of Zimbabwe within Southern Africa (Source: Atlas Mondial ENCARTA, Microsoft)
The country has been divided into five broad Natural Regions (NRs) in which the dominant partitioning factor is rainfall (Table 1 and Figure 2). Agricultural production patterns depend on these natural regions.
TABLE 1
Rainfall characteristics in the five natural regions of Zimbabwe (Source: adapted from Rukuni and Eicher, 1994 pp.42)
Natural
Region
Area (km^2) % of total Rainfall Characteristics
I 7 000 2 More than 1 050 mm rainfall per year with some rain in all months.
II 58 600 15 700 - 1 050 mm rainfall per year confined to summer.
III 72 900 18 500 - 700 mm rainfall per year. Infrequent heavy rainfall. Subject to seasonal droughts.
IV 147 800 38 450 - 600 mm rainfall per year. Subject to frequent seasonal droughts.
V 104 400 27 Normally less than 500 mm rainfall per year, very erratic and unreliable. Northern Lowveld may have more rain but topography and soils are poorer.
Total 390 700 100
Natural Region I is a specialized and diversified farming region. The region is suitable for forestry, fruit and intensive livestock production. Smallholders occupy less than 20% of the area of this region.
In Natural Region II flue-cured tobacco, maize, cotton, sugar beans and coffee can be grown. Sorghum, groundnuts, seed maize, barley and various horticultural crops are also grown. Supplementary irrigation is done for winter wheat. Animal husbandry like poultry, cattle for dairy and meat, is also practiced in. Smallholder farmers occupy only 21% of the area in this productive region.
Natural region III is a semi-intensive farming region. Smallholders occupy 39% of the area of this region. Large-scale crop production covers only 15% of the arable land and most of the land is used for extensive beef ranching. Maize dominates commercial farm production. The region is subject to periodic seasonal droughts, prolonged mid-season dry spells and unreliable starts of the rainy season. Irrigation plays an important role in sustaining crop production.
Natural regions IV and V are too dry for successful crop production without irrigation, but communal farmers have no other choice but to grow crops in these areas even without access to irrigation. Millet and sorghum are the common crops but maize is also grown. Communal farmers occupy 50% of the area of Natural Region IV and 46% of the area of Natural Region V.
The current population in Zimbabwe is about 12 million (FAOSTAT, 1999) with an estimated annual growth rate of over 3%. The annual growth in agricultural output is currently estimated at 2.5%, but fluctuates with weather conditions. Therefore, whereas in years of good rainfall the country produces enough food to feed the nation and enjoys surpluses for export, in years of drought the reverse is the case. Additionally, even in good years many households are not able to grow enough food for home consumption largely because of poverty and because of inadequate access to land. Moreover the little land they occupy is poor land in general.
Zimbabwe's economy is driven by agriculture and the majority of the rural people depend on it for their livelihood. Moreover, about 80% of the rural population live in Natural Regions III, IV and V where rainfall is erratic and unreliable, making dryland cultivation a risky venture. The success rate of rainfed agriculture in Natural Regions IV and V has been known to be in the order of one good harvest in every four to five years.
FIGURE 2. The five natural regions of Zimbabwe (Source: Derived from "Natural Regions and Provisional Farming Areas of Zimbabwe", 1:1,000,000 (Surveyor-General, 1998); Information supplied by the department of Agricultural, Technical, and Extension Services (Agritex) in Zimbabwe.
LEGEND
Natural regions
I Specialized and Diversified Farming Region
IIA Intensive Farming Region
IIB Intensive Farming Region
III Semi-Intensive Farming Region
V Extensive Farming Region
___70___ 70% probability of receiving more than 500 mm rainfall during the period October-April. The 70% probability isoline is based on information from the Meteorological Department as compiled by the early warning Unit for Food Security.
The Government of Zimbabwe (GOZ) has recognized the role of irrigation development as a key drought mitigation measure. Tremendous strides have been made by the government, the private sector and the donor community in the area of irrigation development since independence in 1980. It is estimated that 120 000 ha are under irrigation of which only 11% are on smallholder and out-grower schemes^1 (Table 2).
TABLE 2
Current status of irrigation development in Zimbabwe (Source: AGRITEX estimates, 1999)
Sector Area under Irrigation
(ha)
As % of total area under irrigation
Large-scale 98 400 82
State Farms 8 400 7
Out-grower Schemes 2 200 2
Smallholder 11 000 9
Total 120 000 100
The development of smallholder schemes has been followed by a number of socio-economic studies during the last two decades in order to help policy makers in formulating sound policies for future development. However more studies are needed and at a regular interval since the whole process of policy formulation changes with time. The importance of socio-economic evaluation to fully equip policy makers can not be over-emphasized. This study attempts to contribute to a better understanding of the smallholder irrigation sub-sector, in order to be able to derive lessons from past experiences for the planning of future irrigation projects.
Current status of smallholder irrigation and potential for future development
The use of water from river flow, reservoir storage and deep motorized boreholes has seen the development of 187 smallholder schemes, covering an area of about 11 000 ha on communal and resettlement land. A further 2 200 ha has been developed on small-scale purchase land. This gives a total of 13 200 ha of land under smallholder irrigation in Zimbabwe.
In addition to the already existing irrigation the total potential for further irrigation development, based on the available potential water resources, is estimated to be 240 000 ha (Ministry of Lands, Agriculture and Water Development, 1994). The potential includes water available in transboundary rivers such as the Zambezi and in inland dams. Out of this potential about 90 000 ha is expected to be in the smallholder irrigation sub-sector.
In terms of management, there are three broad types of smallholder schemes: government managed, farmer managed, and jointly managed schemes. Government managed schemes are developed and maintained by the Department of Agricultural Technical and Extension Services (AGRITEX). In the new schemes, there tends to be a shift away from this practice towards farmer managed projects. Farmer managed schemes are developed by the government but owned and managed by the farmers' Irrigation Management Committees (IMCs) with minimal government interventions in terms of management. For jointly managed schemes the farmers and the government share the financial responsibility for the operation and maintenance. For such schemes the government is usually responsible for the headworks, while farmers take responsibility for the infield infrastructure.
In terms of scheme numbers, 50% of the smallholder schemes are farmer managed, 32% are government managed and 18% are jointly managed (Table 3). However, in terms of area, the government is still managing a larger hectarage, as most of the farmer-managed schemes tend to be small. The high cost of available appropriate irrigation technology is still a problem. The private sector irrigation companies were traditionally involved with the commercial sub-sector and as such they have limited know how on planning, design, construction and provision of services to the smallholders. Their company branches are limited to major city centres, which are not close enough to communal areas to provide back-up services to smallholders. Irrigation technologies in use include surface irrigation, which comprises 68% of the schemes and sprinkler irrigation, which makes up 32% of the schemes. Localized irrigation is not yet in use in this smallholder irrigation sub-sector.
TABLE 3
Government managed, farmer managed and jointly managed smallholder irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe (Source: AGRITEX estimates, 1998)
Total Number of irrigation schemes
Province area
(ha) Total Government
managed Jointly
managed Farmer
managed Surface irrigation Sprinkler irrigation
Matebeleland South 1 234 21 16 3 2 19 2
Masvingo 2 796 37 22 3 12 32 5
Manicaland 4 248 29 5 13 11 25 4
Midlands 695 34 13 6 15 30 4
Matebeleland North 169 8 4 4 0 8 0
Mashonaland East 378 35 0 0 35 5 30
Mashonaland Central 659 8 0 2 6 0 8
Mashonaland West 821 15 1 2 12 8 7
Total 11 000 187 61 33 93 127 60
Percentage 100 32 18 50 68 32
Problem Statement
Smallholder irrigation has been promoted since the 1930s as a means of ensuring food security as well as improving the standard of living of the rural people. A lot of studies have been carried out on the impact of such investments for a better understanding of the smallholder irrigation sub sector.
Often questions are raised about the viability of smallholder irrigation schemes such as:
* Are smallholder irrigation schemes financially viable?
* Are the schemes sustainable?
* Is it worthwhile developing more schemes?
* Are these projects not inducing a financial burden on the government as far as operation and maintenance are concerned?
* Are smallholder irrigation projects the best way of investing the limited financial resources at the government's disposal?
* Are the farmers able to manage these projects?
This study attempts to answer some of these questions.
Objectives of the study
The broader objective of this study is to evaluate the socio-economic impact of smallholder irrigation development in Zimbabwe so as to help in formulating future policies on smallholder irrigation investment.
The specific objectives of the study, as provided by the terms of reference, are to:
* Collect and review all the available data on the overall performance of ten selected smallholder schemes since they started operating, paying particular attention to the agricultural, financial, social, institutional and commercial aspects.
* Review the operation and management structure in each of the selected schemes paying particular attention to the functions and effectiveness of the Irrigation Management Committees (IMCs) and Water Users Associations (WUAs) and propose how this can be improved.
* Carry out financial, economic and social analysis on the performance of each scheme, paying particular attention to what was envisaged in the feasibility report.
* Conduct an ex-post evaluation of each selected scheme.
* Evaluate the impact of each scheme, paying particular attention to its contribution towards standard of living, income generation, employment creation and the potential to reduce rural to urban migration and dependence on drought relief.
* Review the contribution of each selected scheme to the overall rural, agricultural and economic development of the nation.
* Prepare a report on the major findings and give conclusions and recommendations for future smallholder irrigation development in Zimbabwe.
Presentation of the report
The report is organized into four chapters and three annexes. Chapter 1, the presentation of the study, contains the study background, a statement of the problem and the research objectives. Chapter 2 reviews the literature and theory relevant to the study. It analyses some of the available literature on the impact of smallholder irrigation schemes, paying particular attention to food security. Chapter 3 gives the general synthesis, based on the literature review and the fieldwork. Chapter 4 summarizes the conclusions of the study and presents some recommendations.
Annex A contains the detailed descriptions of the ten selected schemes concentrating on topics highlighted in the study objectives. Annex B gives the checklist used in the gathering of data from the ten schemes studied. Annex C presents typical bye-laws or constitution found on an irrigation scheme.
1 Outgrower schemes refer to a group of individual plot holders adjacent and linked to a core estate. The outgrowers irrigate a crop independently but on behalf of the core estate. The plot holders depend on the main estate for provision of irrigation water, transport, managerial, technical and marketing services.
<section>4</section>
Literature review and study methodology
This chapter reviews a selection of the existing literature on smallholder irrigation. An attempt is made to cover not only literature specific to Zimbabwe but also some literature on other African and Asian countries. The last part of this chapter presents the methodology used in the study, a brief description of the study areas selected and the justification for selecting them.
Literature Review
Literature on smallholder irrigation in Zimbabwe gives conflicting conclusions on the viability and sustainability of smallholder schemes. A number of studies have claimed that earlier irrigation schemes, established by missionaries in the 1930s, performed well in terms of agricultural performance, financial and economic viability. Roder (1965) indicated that irrigation projects have been successful in enabling farmers to obtain a certain amount of wealth, "... substantially more than dryland farmers, probably more than employees of white farmers, and comparable to levels enjoyed by urban workers". This suggests that farmers in irrigation schemes as long back as the 1930s were earning higher incomes than dryland farmers. The schemes helped in reducing the rural to urban migration by offering the rural population an alternative source of employment and income. Roder further reported that irrigators' wealth was chiefly held in farm implements and in better houses. In a
comparative analysis between irrigators at Nyanyadzi irrigation scheme in Zimbabwe and their dryland counterparts, irrigators' investment was estimated to be between Z$ 150 and Z$ 200 while dryland farmers' investment was estimated to be lower at Z$ 100. This indicated that irrigators were in a better position to invest in capital items than non-irrigators because of their higher incomes.
Alvord (1933) claimed that Mutema irrigation scheme in Manicaland Province of Zimbabwe had alleviated famine in the area. The same author further claimed that 28 ha under irrigation in Mutema area reduced the need for drought relief grain from government by approximately 90 to 180 tons per year.
Meinzen-Dick et al (1993) reported that the greatest food deficits in Zimbabwe appear to occur in dryland areas of Natural Region V. In their study they noted that fewer irrigation schemes ran out of food during the year than dryland areas. The same study mentions that the majority (72%) of farmers with between 0.25 ha and 0.5 ha of irrigated land reported that irrigated land was their only source of livelihood.
Rukuni (1984) showed that, in general, yields achieved on smallholder schemes are higher than rainfed dryland yields in communal areas. Meinzen-Dick et al (1993) showed that gross margins for irrigating farmers were significantly greater than for dryland farmers. They further pointed out that the effect of irrigation on increasing crop production and incomes is even more marked in the dry winter season, when dryland production is impossible because of lack of rain.
Ruigu and Rukuni (1990) indicated that smallholder schemes are generally financially viable. Makombe and Meinzen-Dick (1993) also shared the same sentiments.
FAO (1997a) also reported benefits from smallholder irrigation. In this socio-economic impact assessment of Hama Mavhaire, Hoyuyu 5 and Nyaitenga, irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe, it is reported that:
* Farmer incomes from irrigated agriculture are significantly higher than incomes of dryland farmers.
* Levels of inputs in terms of quantity are higher in irrigation schemes than in dryland areas, suggesting that there is more intensive crop production in irrigation schemes than in dryland agriculture.
* Using the income figures from the three schemes for 1996, the returns to labour were Z$ 117 per person per day for Hama Mavhaire, Z$ 376 for Hoyuyu 5 and Z$ 234 for Nyaitenga. This is much higher than the average of Z$ 21 per person per day paid in the Zimbabwean industry for non-skilled labour. From a social point of view farmers in an irrigation scheme were found to be far much better off than labourers in urban industries who are faced with a lot of other demands such as rent, water and electricity charges.
In the same report it is further pointed out that smallholder schemes can be even more viable if aspects such as reduction in drought relief handouts, employment creation and reduction of rural to urban migration are considered in the economic analysis of these schemes. With a more integrated approach smallholder irrigation can be the basis for rural development and improved standards of living among Zimbabwe's rural communities.
FAO (1997a) also gave some principal recommendations that can improve the management of smallholder irrigation schemes and enhance the benefits to farmers. Some of the recommendations are:
* There is need to provide irrigators with security of land tenure.
* While it is important to give farmers autonomy in managing irrigation schemes, there is need to devise some mechanisms of assisting farmers to ensure minimum acceptable levels of production by each individual farmer to adequately justify the investments.
* There is need to have a clear and well defined policy on the handing-over of irrigation schemes to farmers, which should be specific on:
* Timing of hand-over
* The respective roles of farmers and government after hand-over
FAO (1997b) in a brief general overview of the smallholder irrigation sub-sector in Zimbabwe concluded that smallholder irrigation has brought many successes to farmers. The following observations were made:
* Smallholder farmers are now able to grow high value crops both for the local and export markets, thus effectively participating in the mainstream economy.
* In areas of very low rainfall, as in Natural Regions IV and V, farmers enjoy the human dignity of producing their own food instead of depending on food handouts from the Department of Social Welfare.
* Irrigation development has made it possible for other rural infrastructure to be developed in areas which could otherwise have remained without roads, telephones, schools and clinics.
* Smallholder irrigators have developed a commercial mentality.
* Crop yields and farmer incomes have gone up manifold.
The report, however, identified a number of constraints, which are hampering smallholder irrigation development in Zimbabwe. Some of them are:
* The high cost of capital investment in irrigation works when one considers that communal farmers are resource poor.
* Rural infrastructure to facilitate input procurement and produce marketing is weakly developed in some areas, for example roads, telecommunications and electricity.
* Lack of reasonably priced appropriate irrigation technology for the smallholders.
* Shortage of human resources at both technician and farmer levels. · Poor catchment management, which results in siltation of some water bodies.
* Lack of decentralized irrigation service companies to give back-up service in rural areas.
Mupawose (1984) questioned the economic viability of smallholder irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe. The author pointed out that certain smallholder schemes have failed and are under-utilized. He attributed this to poor management, lack of inputs and irrigation experience by farmers. In the same report Mupawose advocated for the reduction of subsidies on smallholder irrigation and indicated that irrigation development has become expensive. He suggested that some form of cost recovery should be employed in these schemes.
A Southern African Development Community (SADC) report in 1992 reported that most new smallholder irrigation schemes in the Southern Africa region will not cover the cost of development and operation and are therefore uneconomic. The report further suggested that these schemes have a negligible impact on the national and household food security.
FAO (1997c) pointed out that many Sub-Saharan countries have realized the critical role of irrigation in food production, but that a number of constraints have been responsible for a relatively slow rate of irrigation development in this region. The constraints are:
* Relatively high cost of irrigation development
* Inadequate physical infrastructure and markets
* Poor investments in irrigation
* Lack of access to improved irrigation technologies
* Lack of cheap and readily available water supplies
FAO (1997c) further identified the following constraints to be affecting the capacity of farmers to invest and manage irrigation projects:
* Poor resource base of farmers
* Fragmented and small size of land holdings
* Unsecured or lack of land titles
* High interest rates
* Poor transportation and marketing facilities
The same report also identified technologies that might be appropriate for the smallholder farmers like:
* Treadle pumps and other manual pumps including hydraulic rams.
* Sprinkler irrigation including conventional systems and drag-hose.
* Micro-irrigation systems such as pitcher, porous clay pipes, micro-sprinklers, bubblers and drips.
Jansen (1993) showed that for almost all crops, except cotton in marginal areas, irrigation is only profitable when it is subsidized by government. However the report left out the analysis of high value horticultural crops.
Elsewhere in Africa, in The Gambia, in the study of an irrigation scheme in the village of Chakunda Webb (1991) gave the following as some of the benefits of irrigation:
* Increased income that was translated into increased expenditure, investment, construction and trade.
* Backward and forward linkages: traders were reportedly coming to purchase irrigation produce (rice) and in turn sell cloth, jewelry and other consumer items.
* Increased material wealth. At the village level, this was in the form of construction of a large mosque built through farmers' donations and an improvement of the village clinic. At household level, increased wealth could be seen in 55 houses built in the village, fourteen with corrugated metal roofing.
However, in the same report Webb pointed out that some of the irrigation schemes collapsed because of the following reasons:
* Frequent pump breakdowns due to poor operation and maintenance.
* Poor design of canal structures.
* Pest infestation of crops.
* Periodic fuel shortages.
In India, Sing and Misra (1960) compared the Sarda Canal irrigation and non-irrigating villages and made the following observations:
* Gross farm output per acre is on the whole 8.6% higher in the canal-irrigated villages than outside.
* The crop produce as distinct from the total farm output is 5.5% more with canal irrigation than without, mainly due to the cropping pattern under irrigation incorporating cash crops.
* The value of crop produce sold per acre is 48% higher in the canal-irrigated area than outside. This was again attributed to the superior cropping pattern incorporating cash crops.
* Total inputs per acre are 3.7% higher in terms of quantity in the canal-irrigated area than outside, indicating more intensive farming under irrigation.
* Payment to outside labour, including casual and permanent farm servants, is about 21% more in irrigated areas than outside.
The study by Sing and Misra showed the benefits of irrigation in terms of improved crop productivity and employment creation to communal people.
The foregoing literature review indicates varying and sometimes contradicting views on the economic viability and socio-economic impact of smallholder irrigation development. Some literature has pointed out that smallholder irrigation schemes are agriculturally, financially and economically viable while other literature argues that such projects are not viable. However, none of the literature reviewed has gone a step further to explore and identify the factors which make good irrigation schemes perform well and those factors which make bad schemes non-viable. This study attempts to do this by examining ten smallholder irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe, thus contributing to a better understanding of this smallholder irrigation sub sector.
Study Methodology
The study looks at the performances of ten irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe, five of which are presumed to be doing well and the other five are poorly performing. The list of the selected schemes, and a summary of their details are given in Table 4.
TABLE 4
Selected irrigation schemes
Scheme name
Irrigation technology
Natural Region
Type of management
Performance rating
Chitora
Sprinkler III Farmer managed Excellent
Longdale
Sprinkler III Farmer managed Poor
Mambanjeni
Sprinkler IV Government managed Poor
Murara
Surface IV Farmer managed Good
Muzinyathini
Surface IV Farmer managed Good
Ngezi Mamina
Sprinkler III Government managed Poor
Oatlands
Surface III Government managed Poor
Principe
Sprinkler II Jointly managed Average
Rozva
Surface III Government managed Poor
Wenimbi
Sprinkler III Farmer managed Good
Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) techniques were used in collecting data from the schemes. Descriptive statistics were generated to identify factors, which lead to conclusions on scheme viability or non-viability. Farm and scheme level data were generated to study the financial and economic viability of each scheme. The study draws on both primary and secondary data sources. The main emphasis was on the collection of survey data from household members of irrigators and non-irrigators for each scheme.
Informal interviews were carried out with some key informants. The objective was to get enough background information on what were the main issues on each individual irrigation scheme, so as to focus on these during PRA or on the other hand to fill the gaps in information left by the PRA. A checklist of questions used is presented in Annex B. The following key informants were interviewed for each irrigation scheme studied:
* AGRITEX extension staff
* Irrigation Management Committee (IMC)
* Department of Social Welfare staff
* Local Councilor
Selection criteria for irrigation schemes studied
Five of the ten irrigation schemes selected are performing well and the other five are performing poorly. The objective of balancing the good and bad schemes was to adequately explore what factors makes good schemes perform well and what factors makes bad schemes perform poorly.
Sixty percent of the selected schemes use sprinkler irrigation technology and the rest use surface irrigation. The reason for selecting more sprinkler schemes is that in Zimbabwe water is considered to be the most limiting resource in irrigation development. There is need to promote more efficient irrigation technologies like low pressure, low cost sprinkler and localized technologies.
A balance of farmer managed and government managed schemes was considered in the selection of the schemes. Emphasis was also put on schemes in the drier Natural Regions III and IV. These are the regions where crop production is severely curtailed by climate.
<section>5</section>
General synthesis
This chapter presents a comparative analysis of the ten selected irrigation schemes, namely Chitora, Longdale, Mambanjeni, Murara, Mzinyathini, Ngezi Mamina, Oatlands, Principe, Rozva and Wenimbi. The findings are part of the study aimed at assessing the socio-economic impact of smallholder irrigation development in Zimbabwe. The chapter goes further to give a broader view of the role of irrigation development in agricultural and economic development.
Location of the ten irrigation schemes studied
The locations of the ten irrigation schemes studied are summarized in Table 5 and are also shown on Figure 3.
TABLE 5
Location of irrigation schemes studied (Source: AGRITEX, 1999)
Scheme Province District Area NR Distance from major town
Chitora Mashonaland East Mutoko Resettlement III 120km North East of Harare
Longdale Masvingo Masvingo Resettlement III 20km South of Masvingo
Mambanjeni Midlands Gweru Communal IV 46km North West of Gweru
Murara Mashonaland East Mutoko Communal IV 180km East of Harare
Mzinyathini Matebeleland South Umzingwane Communal IV 120km South of Bulawayo
Ngezi Mamina Mashonaland West Kadoma Communal III 130km South West of Harare
Oatlands Masvingo Masvingo Resettlement III 36km from Masvingo
Principe Mashonaland Central Shamva Resettlement II 140km North East of Harare
Rozva Masvingo Bikita Communal III 80km East of Masvingo
Wenimbi Mashonaland East Marondera Resettlement III 42km South East of Marondera
Five irrigation schemes, Mambanjeni, Murara, Mzinyathini, Ngezi Mamina and Rozva are located in the communal areas while the rest of the schemes are located in resettlement areas. All the schemes, except Murara, are within a 150 km radius from a major town. Murara is over 180 km from Harare, however with very good main and feeder roads.
Water sources and irrigation technology types
Seven of the ten schemes studied abstract water from dams. Chitora gets water from a pick up weir on the Chitora river, Longdale gets water from a borehole on the scheme and Wenimbi gets its water from a pick up weir on the Macheke river. The water sources are secure, except the sources for Longdale, Murara and Wenimbi irrigation schemes. The details of the water sources and water delivery systems for all the schemes covered in this study are given in Table 6. Longdale and Principe irrigation schemes use imported electric pumps to pump water up to the field edge. The rest of the schemes either uses gravity supply or are supplied by locally manufactured electric pumps. Table 6 also gives the type of irrigation technologies available in each irrigation scheme.
FIGURE 3. Location of the ten selected irrigation schemes
Source: Atlas Mondial ENCARTA, Microsoft
Scheme sizes and number of beneficiaries
The schemes studied vary in size. The smallest scheme is Oatlands with an area of 5 ha and the largest scheme is Ngezi Mamina with 216 ha. The number of plot holders in each scheme also varies depending on the allocated plot size. The plot sizes vary from 0.3 ha at Mambanjeni to 1.55 ha at Wenimbi. Mambanjeni has the highest number of beneficiaries with 168 farmers while Oatlands has the lowest with 12 farmers (Table 7).
Irrigation in the schemes can be full time irrigation or part time irrigation as also shown in Table 7. Full time irrigation refers to the situation where the plot holders do not have any other land outside the scheme. Part time irrigation is the situation where by the irrigators, in addition to their irrigated plots, are also allocated a dryland plot outside the scheme which they also cultivate in the rainy summer season.
TABLE 6
Water sources and irrigation technology types on the selected schemes (Source: AGRITEX, 1999)
Scheme Water source 
Water delivery system
Irrigation technology Remarks
Chitora Chitora river Water is pumped from a pick up weir on the river by an electric motor driven pump through a buried pipeline in to the field. Sprinkler The water source is secure.
Longdale Borehole Water is pumped from a borehole by an electric motor driven sub-mersible pump through a buried pipeline in to the field. Sprinkler The water source is not secure. Pump was imported.
Mambanjeni Insukamini dam Water is pumped from dam by an electric motor driven pump through a buried pipeline in to the field. Sprinkler The water source is secure. Pumps frequently breakdown.
Murara Murara dam Water is delivered through gravity from the dam via a concrete lined canal to the scheme. Surface The dam is silting.
Mzinyathini Umzingwane dam Water is delivered through gravity from the dam via a concrete lined canal to the scheme Surface The water source is secure.
Ngezi Mamina Mamina dam Water is pumped from the dam by electric motor driven pumps to a reservoir from which it is gravitated into the field. Sprinkler The pumps were imported.
Oatlands Oatlands dam Water is delivered through gravity from the dam via a concrete lined canal to the scheme. Surface The water source is secure.
Principe Eben dam Water is pumped from dam by an electric motor driven pump through a buried pipeline in to the field. Sprinkler The water source is reliable. Pumps were imported.
Rozva Rozva dam Water is pumped from the dam by electric motor driven pumps to a reservoir from which it is gravitated into the field. Surface The water source is secure.
Wenimbi Macheke river Water is pumped from a pick up weir on the river by an electric motor driven pump through a buried pipeline into the field. Sprinkler The weir runs out of water in winter.
TABLE 7
Scheme sizes and number of beneficiaries (Source: Farmers and Extension Workers at schemes)
Scheme Area (ha) Number of female plot holders Number of male plot holders Total number of plot holders Plot size (ha) Average dyland area (ha) Full time or part time irrigation
Chitora 9 0 18 18 0.5 Nil Full time
Longdale 7.5 2 13 15 0.5 Nil Full time
Mambanjeni 78 100 68 168 0.3 - 0.5 Nil Full time
Murara 18 12 24 36 0.5 Nil Full time
Mzinyathini 32 20 61 81 0.4 Nil Full time
Ngezi Mamina 216 30 124 154 0.5 - 1.5 Nil Full time
Oatlands 5 8 4 12 0.4 4 Part time
Principe 60 10 50 60 1 0.4 Full time
Rozva 21 8 25 33 0.5 - 1 1 Part time
Wenimbi 34.2 2 20 22 1.55 8 Full time
Total 480.7 192 407 599 
Planning of the irrigation schemes
All the schemes selected, except Chitora and Wenimbi, were initiated by the government in its endeavour to provide the farmers with a source of self-sustenance. The farmers did not actually request for the development of the schemes. As for Wenimbi and Chitora, farmers identified the project and approached the government for assistance. The farmers made contributions towards the costs of the infield development. In the rest of the schemes farmers did not make any financial contributions towards the development of the projects. The Ngezi Mamina, Rozva and Mambanjeni farmers participated only as hired labour. The Oatlands and Principe farmers were resettled after the schemes had already been constructed. The details on the planning of each irrigation scheme are given in Table 8.
TABLE 8
Planning details of the irrigation schemes studied (Source: AGRITEX, 1999)
Scheme Identi-fied by Planner /Designer Funding Year project developed
Name of contractor
Farmer involvement in construction Construction supervisor
Chitora GOZ AGRITEX DANIDA
/GOZ
1994 Stewarts & Lloyds Provided labour AGRITEX
Longdale GOZ AGRITEX DANIDA 1993 Wright Rain Provided labour AGRITEX
Mambanjeni GOZ DAN GROUP Consultants GOZ 1987 Civil Construction Hired as casuals DWR
Murara GOZ DDF/AGRITEX 1982 DDF Provided labour AGRITEX
Mzinyathini GOR GOR GOR 1965 GOR Provided labour GOR
Ngezi Mamina GOZ HALCROW Consultants KfW 1994 Cochrane Trenching of infield lines and hired as casuals AGRITEX
Oatlands GOZ Not Known GOZ 1987 DERUDE Never Participated DERUDE
Principe GOZ AGRITEX DANIDA
/GOZ
1993 Wright Rain Never Participated AGRITEX
Rozva GOZ Dorsh Consult Consultants GOZ 1994 Civil Construction Hired as casuals AGRITEX
Wenimbi Farmers AGRITEX DANIDA/
FARMER
1990 Wright Rain Provided labour and infield funding AGRITEX
Due to the different approaches taken in implementation, the Wenimbi and Chitora farmers view their schemes differently from the farmers of the other schemes. For example, the Mambanjeni, Oatlands and Ngezi Mamina farmers consider their projects to be government projects. One would believe that if they had contributed towards the development of the irrigation schemes they would strongly regard the projects as theirs. The Chitora, Longdale, and Murara farmers on the other hand strongly feel that the schemes belong them. This is mainly because they participated throughout the project cycles, providing labour for construction and repair and maintenance of all infrastructure. As such they have developed a sense of ownership.
When irrigation scheme performance of each of the studied schemes is examined in relation to farmer involvement during planning, it appears that all the schemes in which farmers participated during implementation are doing very well. However, for Ngezi Mamina, although the farmers participated during construction, there are other problems which outweigh this element of participation, hence the poor performance of the scheme, as explained below.
A common feature of the four communal schemes, Ngezi Mamina, Murara, Mambanjeni and Rozva, is the fact that some farmers initially refused to join irrigation for fear of being used as "government workers". However, later on they returned to demand plots after realizing that others who had joined were not working for the government. Rozva in particular had many farmers refusing the scheme and it is believed that some political influence was behind their resentment. Although they later accepted, they are still not convinced about the merits of the investment. At Ngezi Mamina, those who had refused to join the scheme in the beginning have now forced themselves in and a lot of people considered as outsiders have been removed. Some plots have been subdivided to benefit the children of the people who claim to be the real beneficiaries of the project. The confusion on land allocation has a lot of bearing on the performance of this scheme.
The Oatlands and Principe farmers were resettled after scheme construction and they generally view the schemes as government properties. In the case of Principe, in which farmers were resettled after scheme construction, some communal farmers refrained from applying for resettlement at the scheme for fear of being used as government workers.
Three of the schemes studied, Mambanjeni, Ngezi Mamina and Rozva, were planned and designed by consultants. Government departments planned the rest. The three planned by consultants have technical problems. Mambanjeni is failing to perform because of frequent pump breakdowns, poor lateral spacing and wrongly placed hydrants. It is believed that the system was poorly designed. In Ngezi Mamina, the system has high pressure requirements and pumping requires a lot of energy. Farmers feel that they can not take over the energy bill. Rozva was not properly levelled and the infield designs are believed to be sub-standard.
Scheme ownership and inheritance
The question of scheme ownership raised a lot of problems because it was not clear to the farmers what "scheme ownership" means. The confusion was brought about by the fact that an irrigation scheme comprises of land and irrigation infrastructure on it. Some farmers could not understand what could be owned: the land or the irrigation equipment or both.
Generally, the farmers at Mambanjeni, Ngezi Mamina, Oatlands, Principe and Rozva felt that the projects did not belong to them but to the government. However the farmers at Chitora, Longdale, Murara, Mzinyathini and Wenimbi schemes were convinced that the schemes belong to them. The farmers' perceptions on scheme ownership for each of the ten schemes are summarized in Table 9.
At Mambanjeni, Ngezi Mamina and Rozva schemes, the farmers generally agreed that the irrigation schemes belonged to the government as far as irrigation equipment was concerned but the land belonged to them. The farmers whose dryland plots were converted into the irrigation scheme felt that the land was their birthright. For Ngezi Mamina scheme, those who joined the scheme from outside and did not have their land taken by the scheme felt that the land did not belong to them.
The irrigators at Principe scheme believed that the scheme is theirs only with regards to the operation and maintenance costs, but that the land and irrigation infrastructure belonged to the government. The fact that they are not consulted by local authorities on who and when to resettle new farmers on abandoned plots is testimony to their beliefs.
TABLE 9
Farmers' perceptions on irrigation scheme ownership (Source: Author's personal communication with farmers on schemes, 1998)
Scheme Whether farmers were displaced by the scheme 
Perception of scheme ownership
Chitora Farmers came for resettlement from communal lands. Farmers feel that the scheme belongs to them.
Longdale Farmers were resettled from communal lands. Farmers consider the scheme to be theirs.
Mambanjeni Farmers lost their fields to irrigation. Farmers feel land belongs to them but infra-structure to the government.
Murara Farmers lost their fields to irrigation. Farmers consider the scheme to be theirs.
Mzinyathini Farmers were displaced by the scheme. Farmers consider the scheme to be theirs.
Ngezi Mamina Some farmers lost their fields and some came from outside. Infrastructure is considered government property while land belongs to the farmers who lost their fields.
Oatlands Farmers were resettled after the scheme had already been constructed. Farmers feel that the scheme belongs to the government.
Principe Farmers were resettled after the scheme had already been constructed. Farmers view the scheme as belonging to the government.
Rozva Farmers lost their fields to irrigation. Farmers perceive the infrastructure as belonging to the government and land to them.
Wenimbi Farmers came for resettlement from communal lands. Farmers feel that the scheme is theirs.
As regards inheritance, the plot holders at all the schemes, except Oatlands, agreed that wives should inherit the plots in the event that the husband died. At Oatlands scheme, the question of inheritance is not clear. At Principe, inheritance was complicated by numerous polygamous marriages.
Management of the irrigation schemes
Chitora, Longdale, Murara, Mzinyathini and Wenimbi schemes are farmer managed schemes, Principe is jointly managed by government and farmers and the remaining four schemes are government managed schemes. Principe farmers feel that they have no full autonomy of running the scheme. This is because the farmers have no right as to who joins the project and they have no reason to believe that the irrigation equipment is theirs. According to them, nobody informed them about what belonged to the farmers and what did not. Therefore, farmer management in Principe only relates to the operation and maintenance of the irrigation infrastructure.
Each of the ten schemes has an Irrigation Management Committee (IMC) and sub-committees under the IMC. The sub-committees can be for marketing, water management, crop production and security. Table 10 summarizes the composition and functions of the various IMCs at the ten schemes. The IMCs use a system of bye-laws to manage and run the schemes. A typical bye-law or constitution that can be found in an irrigation scheme is presented in Annex C. Some of the IMCs are effective in running the schemes properly while others are not. Table 11 summarizes the strengths of the various IMCs as perceived by the farmers and the Extension Workers.
The farmers at Principe felt that the government weaned them too early. The views at Chitora scheme were that farmers should be given assistance during the first or first two seasons after which they are weaned. Farmers at this scheme were helped with inputs for the first season only and thereafter were left to source inputs on their own. They were comfortable with this arrangement.
Farmers at Chitora, Murara, Mzinyathini and Wenimbi farmer managed schemes have no problems maintaining their schemes. They collectively raise funds to carry out the O&M work necessary.
Longdale farmers are capable of maintaining the scheme but have problems with their imported pump. Spare parts for the pump are difficult to find, and as such the irrigation scheme can go for several months without irrigation following just a minor pump breakdown.
Farmers at Principe scheme complained that poor farmer selection is affecting the performance of the scheme. The O&M costs were reported to be eroding some farmers' income as evidenced by the failure of some of them to contribute towards the costs of energy and repairs on time. The farmers felt that the selection of plot holders was not stringent enough to screen those who are not committed to irrigation. The uncommitted group is reported to be responsible for the poor performance of the project by failing to pay the O&M costs on time.
TABLE 10
Management structures at the irrigation schemes (Source: Scheme Extension Workers' record books, 1998)
Scheme Type of Management Management Structure Responsibilities of the Irrigation Management Committees
Chitora Farmer Chairperson, secretary and their deputies, treasurer and two committee members. Linking the scheme with various institutions.
Longdale Farmer Chairperson, secretary and their deputies, treasurer and two committee members. Overall management of scheme, cropping programme formulation and collection of operation and maintenance funds from farmers.
Mambanjeni Government Chairperson, secretary and their deputies, treasurer and seven committee members. Act as a link between institutions and farmers.
Murara Farmer Chairperson, secretary and their deputies, treasurer and nine committee members. Overall management of scheme, cropping programme formulation and collection of operation and maintenance funds from farmers.
Mzinyathini Farmer Chairperson, secretary and their deputies, treasurer and two committee members. Overall management of scheme, cropping programme formulation and collection of operation and maintenance funds from farmers.
Ngezi Mamina Government Chairman, secretary and their deputies, treasurer, five committee members and a marketing sub-committee. Cropping programme formulation, linking farmers with institutions and markets. Plot allocation.
Oatlands Government Chairperson, secretary and their deputies, treasurer, four committee members and a production sub-committee. Overall management of scheme, cropping programme formulation and collection of operation and maintenance funds from farmers.
Principe Jointly Chairperson, secretary and their deputies, treasurer, two committee members, water management, marketing and crop production sub-committ. Overall management of scheme, cropping programme formulation and collection of operation and maintenance funds from farmers.
Rozva Government Chairperson, secretary and their deputies, treasurer and two committee members. Linking the scheme with various institutions.
Wenimbi Farmer Chairperson, secretary and their deputies, treasurer, four committee members and a crop production sub-committ. Overall management of scheme, cropping programme formulation and collection of operation and maintenance funds from farmers.
TABLE 11
Performance of the Irrigation Management Committees (Source: Author's personal communication with scheme Extension Workers, 1998)
Scheme
Effectiveness of the IMC
Chitora Very effective. O&M is done well and in time
Longdale Very efficient. Good at formulating cropping programmes and ensuring that all the repairs are done on time. They are let down by their imported pump which frequently breaks down. The physical condition of the scheme is good.
Mambanjeni IMC not involved in O&M. However, it is considered being effective in linking farmers with various institutions. The scheme however is in a poor state.
Murara Very effective. They enforce the bye-laws and make sure that O&M works are adequately done and in time. It is well respected by the farmers. The scheme is in a good state.
Mzinyathini Very efficient. The IMC is well respected by the farmers. It mobilises farmers to carry out the entire O&M works. The scheme is in a good state
Ngezi Mamina Ineffective. The IMC is actually anti government institutions. The IMC is actually opposed to those government institutions, which they are supposed to work with. They do not want to participate in O&M operations.
Oatlands Very ineffective. The IMC views the scheme as a government property. They do not participate in O&M works. The scheme is in a bad state.
Principe Effective. However, they feel that there is a lot of interference from the council and the Resettlement Officer (RO). For example the reallocation of vacant plots is done by the RO without consulting the IMC. Farmers feel that this is not good for the scheme. The scheme is doing well.
Rozva Ineffective. There are two groups of people different on the basis of the kraal from which they come from. These groups find it difficult to work together and the IMC is failing to control the situation. The scheme is in a poor physical condition.
Wenimbi Very effective. O&M is done well. Electricity bills are paid on time and repairs are done promptly.
In the case of the government managed schemes Mambanjeni, Ngezi Mamina, Oatlands and Rozva, the operation and maintenance of infrastructure is not adequate.
At Mambanjeni scheme there are always delays in repairing the pump whenever it breaks down. Electricity is sometimes disconnected due to non-payment of the bills. Department of Water Resources (DWR) is the government department responsible for the maintenance of the pump and payment of electricity bills. DWR is facing budgetary constraints.
Ngezi Mamina is also in a bad state with electricity being frequently disconnected by the Zimbabwe Electricity Supply Authority (ZESA), due to unpaid electricity bills. The payment of the bill is the responsibility of AGRITEX. The bill averages Z$ 100 000 per month, which translates into over Z$ 1.2 million per year. This is equivalent to more than 50% of the budget allocated to AGRITEX for managing and operating all the irrigation schemes in the country. This is not enough given that a lot more schemes require a share of that budget. Efforts are being made to hand over the payment of the bill to the farmers. The farmers are reluctant to accept this responsibility and they accuse the planners of producing a complicated design that can not be managed by the farmers themselves.
At Oatlands the gate valves are leaking, the canals are broken and the whole system is operating inefficiently. AGRITEX, which is the government department responsible for maintaining the scheme has silently withdrawn without handing over the scheme to the farmers.
Rozva scheme has problems with the headworks and infield infrastructure. Pump breakdowns are common and the infield hydrants are leaking. The government is failing to provide adequate maintenance.
Water savings were observed to be better at Chitora, Longdale, Principe and Wenimbi schemes than at any of the government managed schemes. This can be attributed to the electricity charges which farmers pay at the farmer managed schemes. The charges compel the farmers to be more careful and efficient in using the water. At the government managed schemes like Ngezi Mamina and Oatlands water management is very poor because farmers do not pay for electricity and water bills.
In conclusion it can be said that farmer managed schemes are better managed than government run schemes. Budgetary constraints on the part of government have been cited as the main reason for the failure of government institutions to effectively maintain and manage irrigation schemes.
Agricultural performance
Farmers at farmer managed schemes generally grow high value horticultural crops. The reason for this is that the farmers want to raise enough money for O&M purposes. Chitora, Longdale, Wenimbi and Murara all grow lucrative crops that can not be grown under dryland conditions, like green pepper, cucumber, carrots, squash, butternut, peas, tomatoes and potatoes (Table 12).
TABLE 12
Crops grown at the different irrigation schemes (Source: Extension Workers' record books, 1998)
Scheme 
Major crops grown
Cropping Intensity (%)
Chitora Tomatoes, peas, green pepper, groundnuts, green maize, cucumber, rape ± 300
Longdale Green maize, wheat, tomatoes, beans, rape ± 200
Mambanjeni Maize, beans, green maize, wheat ± 200
Murara Tomatoes, butternut, cucumber, okra, beans, grain maize ± 200
Mzinyathini Maize, groundnuts, sugar beans, wheat, cabbage, rape, tomatoes ± 200
Ngezi Mamina Green maize, wheat, beans, groundnuts, grain maize ± 200
Oatlands Maize, beans, groundnuts, tomatoes ± 80
Principe Tomatoes, maize, baby corn, green maize, beans ± 200
Rozva Beans, green maize, leafy vegetables ± 90
Wenimbi Tomatoes, green maize, grain maize, leafy vegetables ± 150
In the government managed schemes it appeared the choice of crops grown is not of importance. Ngezi Mamina scheme for example concentrates on low value crops such as wheat, grain maize and beans. Wheat seems to be very important because farmers believe that it is easy to produce and to market. The farmers have a running contract with a private company National Foods so they do not have any marketing problems. However, they complained that the prices given by National Foods are too low. The farmers at this scheme are scared of growing horticultural crops. According to them, horticultural crops demand a lot of labour and they are not easy to market. They tend to concentrate on crops that can be bought straight from the scheme. Farmers at Oatlands scheme are also not worried about producing high value crops. It is highly probable that if the Ngezi Mamina and Oatlands farmers were made to pay for O&M costs their cropping patterns would otherwise change.
High crop yields were reported at Chitora, Murara, Mzinyathini, and Principe and Wenimbi. The high yields are due to the use of high levels of inputs. The yields on these schemes are substantially higher than those obtained under rainfed conditions. For example, maize yields for Wenimbi during the 1996/97 season ranged between 6 - 9 tons/ha as compared to the 1 - 2 tons/ha obtained under rainfed. For Mzinyathini, maize yields during the 1995/96 season were between 6 - 8 tons/ha, as compared to the 0.6 - 2 tons/ha obtained under rainfed conditions. Groundnuts yields were 2 tons/ha in Mzinyathini, as compared to 0.7 - 1 tons/ha obtained in the dryland. The above examples indicate that crop yields have gone up manifold with irrigation. Average yields for selected crops obtained in the various ten schemes are presented in Table 13.
TABLE 13
Average yields in tons/ha for selected crops at the different irrigation schemes during the 1997/1998 season (Source: AGRITEX and farmers' estimates, 1998)
Scheme Maize Green maize* Wheat Tomatoes Beans Groundnuts
Chitora --- 35 000 --- 40 --- 4
Longdale 3 15 000 1 15 0.7 ---
Mambanjeni 2 --- 2.5 --- 0.8 ---
Murara 6 --- --- 28 2 ---
Mzinyathini 7 --- --- 20 --- 2
Ngezi Mamina 2.5 20 000 3 --- 0.8 1.2
Oatlands 2 --- --- 12 0.6 1.0
Principe 5.5 35 000 --- 20 1.5 ---
Rozva 1.8 ---- --- --- --- 0.8
Wenimbi 7 35 000 --- 30 --- ---
* yield for green maize is given in cobs.
For schemes such as Mambanjeni, Ngezi Mamina, Oatlands, and Rozva crop yields were found to be much lower and comparable with those obtained under dryland conditions. For example maize yields obtained for Oatlands scheme were 0.8 - 2.5 tons/ha during the 1995/96 season and these yields are similar to those obtained under dryland conditions. The low yields are due to lack of inputs and commitment on the part of the farmers.
Crop yields obtained in the various schemes seem to be related to the planning stage of the scheme. Those schemes in which the farmers were against irrigation development at the planning stage seem to be performing badly in terms of yields. Farmers who feel that the schemes belong to them are committed and are producing good yields.
Commercial aspects
Marketing
All the schemes that produce high value horticultural crops have organized marketing strategies and structures. They hire transport collectively and go to the markets as a group. Chitora, Murara, Principe and Wenimbi (all farmer managed schemes) fall into this category. For example Wenimbi scheme produces peas for export through the Horticultural Promotional Council^2 (HPC).
Schemes such as Ngezi Mamina, Oatlands and Rozva concentrate on locally marketed crops and they prefer buyers to come to the scheme. The quality of their produce is poor in most cases meaning that they can not compete fully on the lucrative markets. The other reason why they do not make an effort to exploit the lucrative markets is that they are not paying for O&M costs. It is highly probable that once they start paying for these costs they will undergo a complete transformation.
Acquisition of inputs
All the schemes demand some inputs from local and outside dealers. Table 14 summarizes the perceptions of local dealers on the importance of the irrigation schemes studied.
TABLE 14
Role of the irrigation schemes in promoting local dealers (Source: AGRITEX Extension Workers, 1998)
Scheme Dealers' and Extension Workers' Perceptions
Chitora High levels of input use lead to very high demands for inputs, most of which are supplied by local dealers.
Longdale The scheme demands substantial amounts of inputs from local and Masvingo dealers.
Mambanjeni The levels of inputs are low so the scheme does not demand inputs as expected.
Murara Local dealers benefit a lot from the scheme.
Mzinyathini The scheme demands substantial amounts of inputs from the local dealers.
Ngezi Mamina Local dealers benefit a lot from the scheme.
Oatlands The demand of inputs is very low from this scheme.
Principe The scheme provides the local dealers some brisk business throughout the year
Rozva The demand for inputs is far below expectations.
Wenimbi The scheme demands very high amounts of fertilizer throughout the year. Dryland farmers only demand inputs during summer.
Some schemes are more important than others in terms of their role in supporting the local dealers. Schemes that grow horticultural crops demand larger amounts of inputs than those which cultivate field crops. In this case Chitora, Murara, Principe and Wenimbi schemes demand a lot of inputs from the local dealers. These schemes also provide a lot of support to the local transporters during marketing operations. Transport is hired to transport produce to the nearest towns for marketing. This demand for agricultural inputs and transport for marketing purposes by the irrigation schemes are forms of forward and backward linkages important for economic development.
Incomes derived from the irrigation schemes
Farmer incomes derived from the schemes are presented in Table 15. High incomes are derived from Chitora, Murara, Mzinyathini, Principe and Wenimbi schemes. The individual farmers in these schemes get monthly incomes which are higher than the minimum wage of Z$ 600 per month which is paid for unskilled labour in the agricultural industry of Zimbabwe. The incomes are even higher than the minimum wage of Z$ 1 400 per month which is paid for unskilled labour in the Zimbabwean industry. Chitora scheme has the highest income levels per hectare while Wenimbi has the highest income per farmer. Oatlands scheme has the lowest incomes in terms of both per farmer and per hectare basis.
From the study it was discovered that farmers with low incomes tend to participate in off farm activities such as fishing, beer brewing, gold panning and pottery. This is true for Mambanjeni and Ngezi Mamina schemes. Farmers at Oatlands and Rozva schemes tend to concentrate on dryland farming during the rainy season and not paying enough attention to their irrigated plots.
TABLE 15
Incomes derived from the irrigation schemes during the 1997/1998 season (Source: AGRITEX extension staff and farmers, 1999)
Scheme Plot size (ha) Annual average income per farmer (Z$) Income per ha (Z$) Monthly average income per farmer (Z$)
Chitora 0.5 60 000 120 000 5 000
Longdale 0.5 6 000 12 000 500
Mambanjeni 0.5 3 000 6 000 250
Murara 0.5 25 000 50 000 2 083
Mzinyathini 0.4 20 000 50 000 1 667
Ngezi Mamina 0.5 3 000 6 000 250
Oatlands 0.4 2 000 5 000 167
Principe 1.0 30 000 30 000 1 250
Rozva 0.5 3 000 6 000 250
Wenimbi 1.55 79 000 50 968 6 583
Financial and economic analysis of the irrigation schemes
Financial analysis
Financial analysis was conducted on all ten projects to judge their impacts on the different stakeholders, including the farmers and the government. The analysis follows the "time adjusted cash flow approach". This assumes that every transaction falls at the end of the accounting period, which is the end of year in this case. This means that the initial investment is considered to have taken place during the first year of the project. A constant price approach was also adopted, thus expressing the costs and benefits in real terms.
Included in the benefit stream of the financial analysis are government savings on drought relief. These were estimated using an average family size of six people for each scheme and the basic requirement of 550 kg maize per person per year.
In order to assess the financial viability of the schemes, the Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) and the Net Present Value (NPV) were computed for each project. The discount rate used was 9.75%, which is the cost of borrowing money from the Agricultural Finance Corporation (AFC) for irrigation development in Zimbabwe. The results of the financial analysis are presented in Table 16.
TABLE 16
Results of the financial and economic analysis of the irrigation schemes
Scheme Financial analysis Economic analysis
FIRR (%) NPV (Z$) EIRR(%)
Chitora 85 230 947 90
Longdale 5 -13 595 8
Mambanjeni * -4 373 022 *
Murara 45 635 058 50
Mzinyathini 24 62 524 19
Ngezi Mamina * -25 042 648 *
Oatlands * -16 225 *
Principe 20 57 133 25
Rozva * -30 654 *
Wenimbi 68 410 965 71
*: FIRR and EIRR could not be computed because the cash flows are negative.
From Table 16 it transpires that Chitora, Murara, Mzinyathini, Principe and Wenimbi schemes are financially viable, while the rest are not viable. Using the FIRR as an indicator Chitora is the most viable scheme followed by Wenimbi. The viability of these schemes can be attributed to the high incomes derived by the farmers who grow high value horticultural crops. The FIRRs for all non-viable schemes, except Longdale, could not be computed because the cash flows are negative.
Economic analysis
Economic analysis was performed to assess the impact of the schemes from the point of view of the society. Shadow prices, which reflect the real value of projects, were used in the analysis. To arrive at the shadow prices, conversion factors have been used to adjust the financial prices. This adjustment is necessary to correct for various market distortions, including transfers, premiums on foreign exchange, etc. The conversion factors used are 0.78 for fertilizers, 0.9 for irrigation, 0.76 for chemicals, 0.4 for labour and 0.78 for energy. The conversion factors were derived from earlier work done by FAO in Zimbabwe (FAO, 1998)
The opportunity cost of capital used is 8.5%. The Economic Internal Rates of Return (EIRR) for the projects are presented in Table 16. The projects which were found to be financially viable are also economically viable as shown by the ERR. Chitora is the most economically viable scheme followed by Wenimbi. The economic parameters for Mambanjeni, Ngezi Mamina, Oatlands and Rozva schemes could not be calculated because the cash flows are negative.
Notes on the financial and economic analysis of the schemes
Care should be taken in the interpretation of the financial and economic analysis figures as presented in Table 16. The results reveal very useful information on the performance of the individual irrigation schemes but a direct comparison can not be made between the schemes due to the different conditions on each scheme. The details and conditions for the individual schemes, which should be read in conjunction with Table 16, are presented in Annex A.
The schemes Chitora, Wenimbi and Murara, with very high FIRR and EIRR, practice a cropping pattern dominated by high value horticultural crops with high returns. At the three schemes the main crops grown include some of the following: groundnuts, tomatoes, onion, peas, butternut, green pepper, rape, okra, cabbage carrots, green maize and cucumbers. The schemes Principe and Mzinyathini, practizing a mixed cropping of horticultural and field crops, demonstrated FIRR values of 20 - 24% and EIRR values of 19 - 25%. The cropping patterns for the other five irrigation schemes, which are shown to be non-viable, concentrate on low value field crops like grain maize and wheat. The successful Chitora, Wenimbi and Murara schemes also practice high cropping intensities, growing two to three (even four at times in the case of Chitora) crops per year.
Related to the production of high value horticultural crops by well performing schemes is the issue of marketing. If high returns are to be realized from the marketing of perishable horticultural crops, then there is need for easy access to markets and an organized marketing strategy. Chitora, Murara and Wenimbi schemes are very close to tarred main roads and linked with fairly good feeder roads. This makes access to the major towns like Harare and Mutoko for marketing of produce relatively easy. The marketing on these schemes is also well organized and the quality of produce from the schemes is high. It is important to note that the schemes which are not having marketing problems are relatively smaller in size (for example Chitora is 9 ha) as compared to the larger schemes (for example Ngezi Mamina is 216 ha) which can not easily market their produce. The volume of produce coming from the smaller schemes like Chitora is lower and can be easily disposed off on the market.
The smaller groups of farmers at the smaller schemes can cooperate and organize themselves much easier as compared to a large group of farmers. This cooperation is important for the good performance of a scheme especially when it comes to activities like operation and maintenance, input acquisition and marketing.
In general the costs of a dam, constructed for irrigation purposes, constitute 70 - 80% of the total capital costs of the irrigation system development. For the irrigation schemes studied and indicating high FIRR and EIRR values it is important to note that they are not abstracting water from a dam and therefore have low cost headworks. This is particularly true for Chitora and Wenimbi schemes, where the headworks are made up of small electric pumps with direct abstraction from rivers. The conveyance pipeline for Chitora is small (the scheme area is only 9 ha) and short, as the irrigated fields are close to the water source. Although an old weir is in place for Wenimbi scheme, the costs of the weir were considered as sunk costs as it was already in place well before the scheme was planned and constructed. In the case of Murara, which is taking water from an old dam, the costs were also considered as a sunk cost in the economic and financial analysis. This is because the dam
is very old and was originally built for domestic water supplies and livestock watering. It was already in existence when the irrigation scheme was planned and constructed. In the case of Mzinyathini scheme, the water is supplied from a dam constructed before 1965 (the year the actual irrigation scheme was constructed) and therefore was considered as a sunk cost. Principe scheme abstracts water directly from a weir across Mfurudzi river, using submersible pumps with water being released from a dam further upstream. The dam and weir were already in existence before the scheme was planned and constructed.
In contrast, schemes like Mambanjeni, Ngezi Mamina and Rozva, which are shown to be financially and economically non-viable, have expensive headworks (dam, weir, night pump and conveyance pipeline/canal) drawing water from dams which were constructed mainly for irrigation purposes. The irrigation systems in these schemes were either constructed simultaneously with the dams or immediately after the dam.
Problems facing the irrigation schemes
Transport
Lack of transport to the markets seems to be a problem for several schemes (Table 17). According to the farmers, transport is either not available or when it is available it is too expensive. The costs charged by transporters depend largely on the condition of the roads. For poor roads charges are very high. For example the Chitora farmers complained that transporters are shunning their scheme because their feeder road is in a bad state. Those transporters who accept to come to the scheme charge exorbitant prices.
Water availability
Wenimbi scheme faces water shortages in the dry winter season as a result of the system of water allocation being used in the country. The water allocation system uses the "priority date system" which dictates that in times of water shortages from a source being used by more than one user, the user who was granted a water right first will always have first priority of getting the water. Upstream of Wenimbi scheme there is a commercial farmer who has an earlier water right than the smallholder scheme. In times of water shortage in the Wenimbi weir the commercial farmer gets all the water causing shortages to the downstream Wenimbi smallholder scheme. Due to these shortages the farmers can not attain the intended 200% cropping intensity. However, at the time of writing this report the system of water allocation in Zimbabwe was being revised to ensure equitable distribution of water to all users in times of shortages.
Operation and maintenance
The government managed schemes, Ngezi Mamina, Mambanjeni and Rozva, often experience electricity cuts because of failure by government to pay the electricity bills in time. The pumps break down frequently, and the government takes time to repair them due to financial constraints. Longdale has problems with the imported pump. Spare parts for the pump are scarce and difficult to source. As a result, when the pump breaks down it takes time to repair it thus affecting the performance of the scheme.
The operation and maintenance of infrastructure is poor on government managed schemes. Hydrants are leaking both at Mambanjeni and Rozva. Hydrants are wrongly positioned at Mambanjeni causing poor water distribution during irrigation. Farmers at Murara, Mzinyathini and Rozva complained that their irrigation systems are labour intensive. They cited siphoning as the most difficult task. They would prefer systems that are less labour intensive.
Social problems
Rozva scheme has problems of conflicts between two kraal heads, whose subordinates are the scheme participants. The two kraal heads are also in the scheme with one being the chairman of the IMC. The two kraals can not work together. The conflict between the two kraals in the scheme dates back to the 1950s, well before the scheme started. One kraal accuses the other of being lazy, negative about the management of the scheme and does not want to cooperate. This social problem is affecting the performance of the scheme negatively.
TABLE 17
Problems facing the irrigation schemes (Source: Farmers and Extension Workers on the schemes, 1998)
Scheme Problems
Chitora Poor feeder road. High transport costs.
Longdale Frequent pump breakdown. Lack of spare parts for the pump. Cash flow problems.
Mambanjeni Poor cash flows. Low yields. Poor maintenance of infrastructure. Poor water distribution, Frequent shutdown of electricity.
Murara Silting of dam. Transport to market expensive.
Mzinyathini High transport costs.
Ngezi Mamina Frequent shutdown of electricity. Poor relations between farmers and institutions. Lack of inputs and draught power.
Oatlands Poor maintenance poor infrastructure, Cash flow problems.
Principe Some farmers do not pay O&M on time. Resettlement Officer interferes with scheme management.
Rozva Friction between two kraal heads. Poor maintenance of infrastructure. Waterlogging on some plots.
Wenimbi Shortage of water in winter. High transport costs to markets.
Socio-economic impact of the irrigation schemes
All the schemes studied had some positive impacts on the farmers, the surrounding areas and the economy in general. However, some schemes had more impact than others and generally farmer managed schemes seemed to have more positive impacts than government managed schemes. The impact of the schemes has been examined in the following areas:
Agricultural production
Farmer managed schemes, such as Chitora, Murara, Mzinyathini and Wenimbi, have resulted in higher crop yields than the yields found under rainfed agriculture. Irrigation has permitted the growing of crops that would not be grown under dryland conditions. The production of high value crops by some of these schemes, both for local and export markets, means that they are now effectively participating in the mainstream economy. Longdale has also managed to achieve higher yields during the first few years, but this was later on affected by frequent pump breakdowns. The government managed schemes have not managed to produce high value crops on a large scale and their yields have been low and not very different from dryland yields.
Incomes
High incomes have been reported for Chitora, Murara, Mzinyathini and Wenimbi schemes. Average annual incomes of Z$ 79 000 per farmer for Wenimbi, Z$ 60 000 for Chitora, Z$ 25 000 for Murara and Z$ 20 000 for Mzinyathini are substantially higher than the annual minimum wage of Z$ 16 800 paid to an unskilled worker in the Zimbabwean industry (Table 15). The schemes are providing gainful employment for the participants, as few household heads for these schemes are employed in towns (Table 18).
TABLE 18
Monthly average income from irrigated plot and percentage of household heads working in towns (Source: Farmers and Extension Workers on schemes, 1998)
Scheme Monthly average income from plot per farmer(Z$) Household heads working in towns as a percentage of total plot holders on the scheme
Chitora 5 000 0
Longdale 500 70
Mambanjeni 250 90
Murara 2 083 20
Mzinyathini 1 667 30
Ngezi Mamina 250 80
Oatlands 167 100
Principe 1 250 *
Rozva 250 75
Wenimbi 6 583 5
*: Could not be established.
Table 18 also shows that Longdale, Mambanjeni, Ngezi Mamina, Oatlands and Rozva schemes have a lot of household heads working in towns. This can be attributed to the low incomes the families are deriving from the schemes which are not enough to sustain their daily living.
All farmer managed, schemes except Longdale, are giving high incomes to the farmers. These high incomes are mainly due to the cropping patterns being practised which incorporate high value horticultural crops. Government managed schemes are generating very little income for their farmers. Lack of commitment and poor cropping patterns are attributed to this
Labour
All the ten schemes hire labour to assist in land preparation, weeding and harvesting. Payment is in cash and/or in kind. Schemes that grow high value horticultural crops generate much more labour than schemes that concentrate on grain crops. This means that farmer managed schemes, which produce horticultural crops, provide more labour than government managed schemes. For example at Wenimbi scheme villagers prefer to work at the scheme rather than on neighbouring commercial farms because the scheme farmers pay more. At Wenimbi they are paid Z$ 20 per day plus vegetables as opposed to Z$ 15 per day and nothing else on the other farms.
Food security
The ten schemes were found to act as sources of food security for the participants and the surrounding communities. Schemes with high production levels, such as Chitora, Murara, Principe and Wenimbi, provide more food security than the low producing schemes. Some of the schemes like Murara, Mambanjeni and Mzinyathini are located in harsh climatic regions and act as important sources of food for the farmers and surrounding communities. The farmers in these schemes never run out of food as compared to their dryland counterparts. The payment of labour in kind by most schemes also ensures food security and better nutrition.
Drought relief savings
All the schemes that are performing well do not get drought relief from the government. Chitora, Murara, Mzinyathini, Principe and Wenimbi are examples of such schemes. Wenimbi, for example, created in 1998 an annual drought relief saving of Z$ 38 016. The figure is based on the current drought relief monthly ration of 10 kg per person, the then current Grain Marketing Board (GMB) maize price of Z$ 2 400 per ton, an average family size of six persons and a six month drought relief provision per year. This figure excludes the transport and administrative costs. If these were added the above costs would be higher. Those schemes that are performing badly run out of food during the year and get drought relief from the government.
It can be concluded that if a scheme is performing well, it can result in substantial savings for the government in terms of drought relief costs.
Conservation of natural resources
Principe and Murara in a way contribute towards the conservation of natural resources. While dryland farmers adjacent to these schemes engage in gold panning^3 to earn a living, irrigators do not. By working in the irrigation schemes farmers are distracted from engaging in environment destructive activities like gold panning. In addition, gold panning is very risky and as such most non-irrigators prefer to work in the irrigation schemes for cash rather than to go for gold panning.
Assets
All schemes that are doing well in terms of crop production and income generation have had their participants acquiring various assets. Chitora farmers who were living with their parents when the scheme started have now brick walled houses of their own. They have all managed to buy farm implements, cattle and they are all married now. Four Wenimbi farmers have managed to buy a 5 tons truck, each using income derived from irrigation to buy it. Some three farmers on this scheme have managed to buy lighter vehicles. On those schemes that are performing badly most farmers have not managed to acquire any assets.
The conclusion that can be drawn from these observations on the ten schemes is that good schemes can permit the accumulation of wealth by the participants.
Gender aspects and technology
Surface systems are more labour intensive than sprinkler or localized systems. Women on the surface schemes Murara, Mzinyathini, Oatlands and Rozva complained of too much labour on the schemes. It's the women who on these schemes tend to provide the bulk of the labour required during irrigation.
Entrepreneurial skills
Most of the schemes have had their participants acquiring entrepreneurial skills. This is evidenced by the ability of the farmers to do their own budgeting, keep record books and manage their own affairs. These skills are most evident in farmer managed schemes. Farmers have to search for marketing information, organize cropping programmes which fit the markets, and organize transport to such markets. They are also capable of negotiating contracts, although they still need assistance in this aspect.
Backward and forward linkages
The increased demand for inputs from the local dealers, necessitated by the growing of horticultural crops in most schemes, is an example of the backward linkages offered by the irrigation schemes. All the ten schemes studied provide some degree of demand for inputs in their areas. Transport, which is hired for marketing by schemes such as Chitora, Murara and Wenimbi, is another example. Most dealers interviewed accepted that they are benefiting from the schemes. The fact that most schemes go for more than 150% cropping intensity means that most dealers are in business all year around. This is different from dealers who service dryland farmers and who experience brisk business only in summer.
The demand for scheme produce by some vegetable canning and grain processing private companies in Zimbabwe such as National Foods, Hortico, Olivine and Interfresh is an example of the forward linkages offered by irrigation schemes. By offering such produce, the schemes create businesses in the companies they supply.
Economic development
The fact that some irrigation schemes result in the increase in incomes for the farmers means that the schemes are promoting economic development of the nation, which is measured by the well-being of the people. The changes which occur to the people such as improved houses for farmers, better nutrition, self-independence, improved assets and so on are part of economic development. The high Economic Rates of Return obtained for Chitora, Murara, Mzinyathini, Principe and Wenimbi show that some irrigation projects can significantly contribute towards increasing national income (Table 16).
Reasons for successes or failures of the irrigation schemes
The study showed that the performance of the schemes depend on a number of factors (Table 19). The most important factors revealed by the study are the following:
Planning
Those schemes, which were planned and implemented with full farmer participation, are performing well as illustrated by the Chitora and Wenimbi schemes. The opposite is true for the schemes, which were planned without involving the farmers. Schemes which were planned by consultants without Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) experience are also performing badly as shown by the Ngezi Mamina, Mambanjeni and Rozva irrigation schemes.
Group cohesion
Projects whose farmers cooperate among themselves are doing well, while the schemes in which the farmers do not work together are failing. Cooperative action is important in activities such as marketing, transport hiring and O&M work.
Type of management
The type of management came out to be very important in the performance of the schemes. All farmer managed schemes, except Longdale which has some technical problems, are doing well. However, all government managed schemes are performing badly. The reason for this is that farmers in farmer managed schemes feel that the schemes belong to them and as such they invest heavily in them. In the government run schemes farmers have no sense of ownership and they are not worried about efficient utilisation of resources.
Type of irrigation technology
The type of irrigation technology, whether sprinkler or surface, affects the labour inputs and leisure time for the farmers. It appeared that sprinkler schemes require less labour, while surface systems are relatively more labour intensive. Farmers on the surface irrigation schemes complained of the high labour demands of the irrigation leaving very little time for other important activities like weeding, spraying and organizing marketing of produce.
TABLE 19
Reasons for irrigation schemes successes or failures (Source: Study findings, 1998)
Scheme Overall performance rating Reasons for success or failure
Chitora Very good
* Good planning. Farmers were involved at the planning stages and so they have a sense of ownership.
* Strong IMC.
* Security of tenure.
* Group cohesion.
* Irrigation is valued.
* Training was provided to farmers.
Longdale Poor
* Frequent pump breakdown.
* Lack of spare parts for the imported pump.
Mambanjeni Poor
* Poor planning. Farmers were not involved at the planning stage and hence they have no sense of ownership.
* Poor maintenance of the system.
* Poor designs.
* Poor construction, as hydrants are not in position.
* Low levels of inputs.
Murara Good
* Good planning. Farmers were involved at the planning stages and so they have a sense of ownership.
* Group cohesion.
* Security tenure.
Mzinyathini Good
* Good planning. Farmers were involved at the planning stages and so they have a sense of ownership.
* Irrigation is valued. The fact that the scheme is in NR IV makes irrigation very much important.
* Security of tenure.
Ngezi Mamina Poor
* Poor relations between farmers and various institutions.
* Poor water management.
* Poor O & M.
* No group cohesion.
* Poor cropping pattern dominated by low value crops.
* Poor marketing strategies.
* Irrigation is not valued.
Oatlands Poor
* Poor planning. Farmers were not involved at the planning stage and as such they have no sense of ownership.
* Irrigation is not valued. Farmers concentrate on their dryland plots in summer, leaving part of their irrigation plots unattended.
* Inheritance issue is not clear.
* Farmers received no training.
* Management of infrastructure poor.
* No group cohesion.
Principe Average
* Secure water supply.
* Strong IMC.
* Group cohesion.
* However the above strengths are negatively affected by :
i. Some farmers who are not capable of meeting their O & M obligations.
ii. Poor selection of farmers.
iii. Interference by government officials, especially the Resettlement Officer, on allocation of vacant plots.
iv. Insecurity of tenure.
Rozva Poor
* Poor planning. Farmers only participated as hired labour during construction, so they have no sense of ownership.
* Conflicts between the two kraals.
* Poor O & M by the government.
* Irrigation is not valued. Farmers prefer dryland since they are in a high agricultural potential area.
* Crops grown are of low value.
* No group work.
Wenimbi Good
* Sense of ownership.
* Good O & M.
* Group work (especially on marketing).
* Strong IMC.
* Security of tenure.
* AGRITEX support.
Strength of Irrigation Management Committees
Generally irrigation schemes with strong and effective IMCs are doing well.
Reliability of water supply
Secure water supply is important for the attainment of higher cropping intensities. For example Wenimbi, which is affected by water shortages in winter, can not attain the intended 200% cropping intensity.
Cropping patterns
Schemes, which concentrate on high value crops, are doing better than those cultivating traditional grain crops.
Marketing
Schemes that seek lucrative markets are doing better than those that prefer to sell locally.
Sources of capital items
Schemes that have imported capital items have problems in acquiring spare parts, and hence their performances are affected negatively.
The broader context
Agriculture in Zimbabwe is the mainstay of the economy and a source of livelihood for the country's rural population. Yet its growth over the past decade has been inadequate to meet the needs of the growing population. The average growth in the gross agricultural product of 2.5% per year is well below the government's target of 3.2% set out in its economic reform programmes. It is clear that unless we can achieve an average growth in farm production that is substantially higher than the population growth rate, estimated at 3.2% from the 1992 national census, then the future for the people of Zimbabwe is of serious concern. While large-scale commercial farmers are doing their best to increase agricultural production, the smallholder farmers are still lagging behind. As such, the long-term development in agriculture in Zimbabwe is based on realizing the potential of smallholder agriculture. Raising the productivity and incomes of smallholder farmers is the most direct route
towards achieving agricultural growth. The major constraints facing these smallholders are persistent droughts and harsh climatic conditions in the areas they live. More than 80% of the smallholder farmers live in the rural areas, depending largely on agriculture for food security, incomes and employment. Most of these farmers live in Natural Regions III, IV, and V, where rainfall is erratic and unreliable thereby making dryland cultivation a risky business, thus seriously constraining them to commercialize their agricultural activities.
Irrigation can be the answer to the above problems and can permit the farmers to operate on commercial lines. The high yields obtained at Chitora and Wenimbi schemes for example strongly substantiate this point. Most of the farmers have adopted some stringent farm management practices, such as record keeping, which helps to keep track and continuously assess their profits. The high levels of inputs used in most irrigation schemes also indicate that the farmers have developed a commercial mentality. The other benefits that can accrue from irrigation development as shown by the study of the ten schemes are as follows:
Impact on incomes
The development of smallholder irrigation schemes can result in substantially high incomes for the smallholder farmers. In Wenimbi, for example, the incomes are as high as Z$ 6 583 per farmer per month (each farmer having a 1.55 ha plot holding), while dryland incomes can be as little as Z$ 1 250 per farmer per month (considering a 5 ha dryland plot holding)
Irrigation affords farmers a means to be gainfully employed away from urban centres. The earnings from the irrigation schemes far exceed the industrial minimum wage for unskilled labour in Zimbabwe of Z$ 1 400 per worker per month, thus giving every reason for the government to channel more resources to smallholder irrigation development.
Effect on food security
Zimbabwe's food situation is characterized by food insecurity at both micro and macro levels. The major area of concern is the availability of food at household level. The country is able to produce most of its cereal requirements and in normal years manages to export to neighbouring countries. However, this national level of security is not translated to household level. There is need to address the issue of distribution and effective demand. Poverty and the lack of an effective distribution system cause household food insecurity.
Zimbabwe's national target is to achieve food security both at national and household levels. To achieve this, specific programmes are needed to address the two sides of the food security equation: availability of food through increased production and storage, and access to food through family production, purchasing on the market and through effective food transfer programme.
Smallholder irrigation can lead to availability of food at household level through increased productivity, stable production and increased incomes as shown by the analysis of the ten irrigation schemes. It appeared that all the ten schemes offer some form of food security for the participants and the surrounding communities.
Drought relief savings
The Government of Zimbabwe has spent large amounts of money since 1980 on drought relief. Irrigation development can contribute towards drought savings. The importance of irrigation in drought relief savings can be illustrated by a comparative analysis of the cost of a drought relief programme and the investment required in irrigation to obtain a similar relief.
Under the drought relief programme at least 550 kg of maize is supplied annually to each family of six persons. Considering, for example, 1 000 families living in Natural Region V, where rainfall is erratic, unreliable and inadequate for any meaningful dryland cultivation, these families would require 550 tons of maize per year if placed on a drought relief programme. The government expenditure in 1998 to purchase this quantity of maize at Z$ 2 400 per ton would be Z$ 1.32 million. The estimated transport cost would be Z$ 110 000 and the administrative cost amount to another Z$ 200 000, leading to a total annual drought relief cost of Z$ 1.63 million.
The question now is can smallholder irrigation schemes produce the equivalent of drought relief requirements and at what cost? If an average yield of 6 tons/ha is assumed for maize in the smallholder schemes, 92 ha would be needed to produce 550 tons annually. The total cost of developing 92 ha at Z$ 70 000 per ha in 1998 is Z$ 6.44 million. The annual financial equivalent (which is obtained by multiplying the investment cost by the capital recovery factor for 20 years at a 9.75% discount rate) is Z$ 0.74 million. The production costs for maize produced on 92 ha is about Z$ 0.37 million. This means the total annual cost of producing maize is Z$ 1.11 million.
Comparing both costs shows that the cost of irrigation is Z$ 0.52 million less than the cost of drought relief. Furthermore, the experience with drought relief is that often it does not get to people who need it most. In addition, under normal circumstances a complete drought relief package includes other commodities such as beans which, if included, can double the cost of drought relief thereby making irrigation even much more attractive.
Clearly smallholder irrigation is important as a development strategy since it results in government savings and ensures access to food by smallholder farmers.
Impact on employment
The economic situation, which prevails in Zimbabwe right now, is that the formal sector (which is the dynamic part of the economy) contributes a greater part of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). This sector however only employs about 20% of the labour force (1 million people), while the remaining 80% of the labour force is employed in the informal sector. The development of the informal and rural sectors is therefore important as a way to reduce unemployment in Zimbabwe. It will also help reducing the rural to urban migration, which has reached critical levels. According to the 1992 Zimbabwe National Census, among the country's ten provinces the major urban centres Harare and Bulawayo exhibited the highest in-migration rates, at 54.7% and 53.1% respectively (CSO, 1992). The influx of people into these two and other centres exerts phenomenal pressure on the urban municipalities in their attempt to provide adequate services such as housing, water, sewerage, education and
health. The need therefore to curb high rates of rural to urban movement is a challenge to the Government. Agriculture, which is viewed as the most important potential employer of rural people, is not achieving its objectives because of constraints posed by weather. Without irrigation, rural people are not assured of any meaningful incomes, so they tend to move into cities. It is therefore important to give rural people water to improve their incomes and subsequent standards of living. The reduction in rural to urban migration can also be a saving for the urban municipalities as they will no longer need to provide services for the migrators.
Cash crops grown under irrigation can directly create employment in the field, through forward and backward linkages, and indirectly through multiplier effects. In the field cash crops require more labour input per unit land than non-cash crops and hired labour input tends to be higher for cash than non-cash crops. For example, 1 ha of irrigated tomato (or any other vegetable) at Chitora or Wenimbi requires 120 days of hired labour for planting, weeding, harvesting and marketing over a period of four months. At a rate of Z$ 20 per labour day, this translates to Z$ 2 400 per hectare for one crop only. The farmers at Chitora and Wenimbi reported that over a year 1 ha requires more than Z$12 000 for hired labour. Considering Wenimbi scheme which is 34ha, hired labour will require over Z$ 408 000 per year. This means the scheme can employ about 56 people permanently for 1 year at the agricultural minimum wage in Zimbabwe of Z$ 600 per month.
Equitable distribution of wealth
Soon after independence, the government of Zimbabwe adopted a policy of growth with equity and transformation and this policy has been carried over into the Economic Structural Adjustment Programme (ESAP) and its successor, the Zimbabwe Programme for Economic and Social Transformation (ZIMPREST). The government philosophy in this respect is:
The welfare of the people depends largely on the attainment of sustainable rapid economic growth and development and an equitable distribution of income and wealth. Given a rapidly growing population, distribution without economic growth and development leads to decline and deterioration in living standards and hence to a decline in the welfare of the people. Conversely, growth with non-equitable distribution of income and wealth, while benefiting a few, diminishes the welfare of the society as a whole and invariably leads to socio-political instability.
Looking at the agricultural sector in line with the above philosophy, it seems that only a small proportion of the population (about 4 500 commercial farmers) is cushioned against the vagaries of weather through the irrigation systems they have developed. The smallholder farmers have limited access to water resources and finance for irrigation development. The smallholders are therefore disadvantaged to participate in the mainstream economy. It is important to develop irrigation schemes as a means of maximizing the welfare of the majority of people in Zimbabwe. There is no way the above philosophy can be achieved with the existing agricultural system in the rural areas.
Backward and forward linkages
Irrigated farming can create economic backward and forward linkages. Backward linkages will take the form of creating and enhancing business activities for those dealing in farm inputs. This is due to the fact that high value crops, which are grown under irrigation, rely heavily on recommendations for improved purchased agricultural inputs. This has positive employment implications for agricultural input industries, which is particularly important in the seed industry because most seed is produced locally. Even though the impact on the fertilizer and pesticides industries is not yet fully realized locally, such expenditures contribute to increased labour use in the marketing and distribution sectors.
Forward linkages can occur if irrigation leads to cash cropping, which no doubt would be the case as the cost of setting up an irrigation system may have to be justified by producing cash crops for the market. This production of crops for sell will promote agro-industries and will lead to increased employment opportunities and increased standards of living. As food insecurity at the household level is usually caused by lack of purchasing power, irrigation brings extra income to the farmers, thus enabling them to access food. These effects have been reflected in the analysis of the ten schemes.
Impact on the management of natural resources
Soil erosion has been recognized in Zimbabwe as a long-term problem that needs to be addressed. Elwell and Stocking (1988) estimated that the country is losing Z$ 1.5 billion worth of nitrogen and phosphorus each year from arable lands and 2.5 million tons of organic matter essential for soil fertility. This loss of nutrients, accompanied by environmental deterioration, poses tremendous implications for agricultural development in Zimbabwe. With the average demographic rate of 3.2% per year against an average agricultural output of about 2.5% per year, the area for dryland cropping is expected to increase. This will further aggravate the existing situation where large tracts of land are without vegetation cover. Consequently more land will be exposed to soil erosion leading to losses in arable and grazing lands, siltation of rivers and reservoirs, dissected landforms and gullies. This form of degradation severely reduces productivity.
Irrigation development, when properly planned, implemented and managed, provides a real opportunity to conserve the land in the face of ever increasing human and livestock population. The potentials are many and they present themselves in a variety of forms. Some of these follow below:
* Intrusion onto marginal lands
Due to the increasing shortage of arable lands in the communal areas, marginal areas (shallow soils, salt affected soils, foothills and mountain slopes) are under crops. This results in extremely serious erosion and land degradation. Irrigation development takes place on relatively smaller and concentrated plots. This prevents encroachment onto unsuitable land that could be easily degraded. In fact, where irrigation is developed, the current arable lands can be released for other, less degrading uses. Although this benefit did not come out clearly from the study of the ten schemes, it is worth mentioning.
* Irrigation as a source of additional income for further investment in resource management
While there are cases of soil degrading activities that are carried out due to ignorance, many people fail to conserve the environment due to lack of financial resources. Irrigation gives farmers that additional income which they can use in such activities as:
* Planting of trees and woodlots. Irrigation farmers at Murara and Principe schemes are already carrying out this activity.
* Mechanical soil conservation works.
* Fish farming.
* Zero grazing for beef and dairy cattle.
* Irrigation as a form of employment
There is prevalence of unemployment in the country. Consequently, some people have resorted to land degrading activities, such as gold panning, as a way of earning a living. For example, dryland farmers at Murara and Principe schemes carry out this activity. Gold panning is highly destructive to the environment. Apart from the physical damage to the land, some of the chemicals used, such as mercury, are highly toxic to the environment. However irrigation, when properly practiced, can provide alternative employment and a more environmentally friendly source of livelihood.
2 The Horticultural Promotional Council (HPC) is an organization that assists horticulture farmers in Zimbabwe in the sourcing and supplying of external markets with horticultural produce.
3 Gold panning is a process whereby people illegally dig deeper channels on the river banks in search for gold. This process is highly dangerous for both humans and the environment. During the digging process the channels usually collapse resulting in injuries or even deaths of the panners. The process also results in the formation of gullies, soil degradation and subsequent siltation of rivers.
<section>6</section>
Conclusions and recommendations
Smallholder irrigation has a role to play in agricultural and economic development of Zimbabwe. The high yields obtained in irrigation, coupled with other benefits such as increased incomes, food security, employment creation, drought relief savings and so on, are an indication that irrigation can be a vehicle for the long term agricultural and macro-economic development. With water being the scarcest resource especially in the smallholder sector, the need for irrigation development in this sector is quite apparent.
The ten schemes studied indicated that smallholder schemes can be financially, economically, socially and technically viable or non-viable. The most important factor that came out as affecting the viability of the irrigation schemes is the mode of planning. Projects that are planned with full farmer participation appear to be more viable than those that are imposed on farmers. By involving farmers in the planning they develop a sense of ownership, making them willing to participate in the operation and maintenance. The planning of schemes by consultants lacking PRA and smallholder irrigation development experiences seems to create problems. These professionals normally lack participatory approaches that are very important as far as smallholder agricultural development is concerned. Such consultants do not have the time to invest in doing the necessary social investigations in consultation with the farmers. For example, the failure of the consultants to involve farmers during
the identification phase of Rozva scheme created a lot of problems. Farmers were only told when the land had already been identified. This was not welcomed by the farmers and up to now this is one of the factors negatively affecting the performance of Rozva. Similar problems occurred at Mzinyathini and Ngezi Mamina. The technical designs made by consultants are not suited for smallholder management and no farmer input was searched for during the design process.
It also came out clearly that social aspects, such as land tenure and the social setting, should be considered in the planning of a scheme. Some of the problems at Ngezi Mamina are of a social nature and were not addressed at planning. The question of inheritance is an important determinant of the level of infield investment by the farmers. If farmers are able to inherit the plots, some element of security is felt and thus farmers can invest. For example, the Oatlands farmers who have no sense of security are reluctant to take part in any form of O&M for their scheme. The selection of people of different backgrounds may create problems on a scheme. For example, at Principe and Rozva participants were drawn from different places and from people with different backgrounds. Some farmers at Principe are good while others are not and this affects the scheme performance negatively. At Rozva farmers were taken from two kraals which are historically enemies and can not work
together. This aspect was not captured at the planning stage and is now affecting the smooth running of the scheme. It is therefore recommended that some thorough social investigations, involving sociologists or social anthropologists, should be done prior to any irrigation development.
The choice of technology came out to be important, especially for women. Surface systems were said to have higher labour demands than sprinkler systems. It is recommended that future planning should take this into account. High electricity bills are a problem for some pumped schemes and generally the energy costs seem to be rising every now and again. Systems that require less energy, like low pressure sprinkler and localized systems, should be looked at seriously.
The type of management was found to very important as it affects the level of O&M, the cropping pattern practiced, and the general viability of the schemes. Farmer managed schemes, if properly planned, have better O&M than government managed schemes. It came out that all farmer managed schemes, except Longdale which is having some technical problems, have efficient O&M. Government managed schemes have problems because of budgetary constraints. Frequent pump breakdowns and disconnection of electricity are common at government managed schemes. The ability of some farmer managed schemes like Chitora and Wenimbi to pay for their O&M costs indicate that these schemes can be self sustaining and that the government in future should concentrate in establishing such type of irrigation schemes. This will be in line with the thrust of ZIMPREST to cut down on government expenditure.
Good irrigation water management is a problem at schemes which do not pay for O&M costs. Schemes such as Ngezi Mamina and Oatlands tend not to use water efficiently. The farmers have nothing to loose since the government pays the electricity bills. It is recommended that some cost recovery measures should be instituted to make farmers much more responsible. Given that water is a scarce resource, allowing these farmers to continue wasting water is not acceptable. These schemes should be turned over into farmer managed schemes to make farmers more responsible.
Marketing, especially through contract farming, has proven to be a problem for smallholder farmers. Most of the contracts are verbal and farmers usually are cheated by unscrupulous dealers at the end. The terms are always in favour of the buyers and farmers lack the bargaining power. Training in contract marketing is hereby recommended as a means of safeguarding the farmers against some unscrupulous companies.
The study of the ten schemes has also shown that in future all smallholder irrigation development should take an integrated rural development approach covering irrigation infrastructure and associated communication and health facilities. This will result in schemes not being shunned by transporters because of poor roads, as is happening at present at Chitora scheme. Improved communication facilities will ensure that farmers get marketing information timely through such means as telephone. Health facilities should also be near the scheme. For example, Principe farmers complained that the nearest clinic was 22 km away and this was too far for them. Given the fact that irrigation development can be associated with diseases such as malaria and bilharzia, the need for health facilities can not be over-emphasized.
The "priority date" system for water allocation, which is based on the "first come first served" principle, has proven to work against smallholder irrigation in Zimbabwe. This was illustrated by the Wenimbi scheme where a commercial farmer upstream fails to release water for the smallholder scheme downstream during times of shortages. This is because the commercial farmer has an earlier water right, which gets precedence over the Wenimbi farmers' water right, which was granted at a later date. This tends to affect the performance of Wenimbi negatively during times of water shortages. The government is already in the process of replacing this biased Water Act by a better system that results in equitable distribution of water. This new system utilizes the concept of water permits, which are issued for a five-year period and renewable if need be. The permit system is managed by Catchment Councils, which are appointed on a catchment basis to administer the allocation of water.
The councils comprise representatives of all stakeholders including the smallholder farmers. The permits issued to farmers can be revised at any time at the discretion of the Council to ensure equitable distribution of water. During times of water shortages the Catchment Council distributes water according to its availability and ensures that all users get an equal share. This means that for most smallholder irrigation schemes, like Wenimbi, problems once caused by the old system of water allocation will soon be a thing of the past.
In the analysis of the ten schemes it has come out clearly that at times the government just stops its management obligations on irrigation schemes without properly handing over the O&M to the farmers. This creates problems at such schemes as farmers remain with the understanding that the government is still responsible. It is important that the government works out a clear, transparent and systematic system of handing over government managed schemes to the farmers. This will avoid some of the problems cited in this report. It is also important to be transparent and not to threaten people as a way of making them accept a project. These blunders were made at Rozva scheme and farmers always refer to such events. The farmers claim that they were promised inputs by AGRITEX at the beginning of the scheme, but this promise up to now has not been honoured. Some politicians also threatened them with eviction if they refused the project. This was all done in an attempt to make
farmers accept the scheme and this did not go well with the farmers.
Civil servants and other employed people should not get priority during plot allocation in irrigation schemes. Government officials should not unnecessarily interfere with the running of irrigation schemes. The problems at Ngezi Mamina are said to be partly due to this interference. At Principe, the Resettlement Officer and the Council are making decisions on behalf of the farmers and the farmers are not happy at all. They now consider the project to belong to the government, despite the fact that they are responsible for the O&M costs.
A major constraint in irrigation development in the past was the top-down approach by the government, which viewed the "target population" primarily as beneficiaries rather than as customers or stakeholders. In turn, "beneficiaries" perceived the government as a "free delivery channel" and consequently no one would be willing to pay for O&M. There was also a tendency for technical experts and politicians to make decisions on behalf of the farmer. The experts pretended to know what was best for the poor, uneducated farmer. The government is moving away from this approach and participatory planning is now being highly emphasized.
Irrigation planning should be treated seriously with full farmer involvement. The following is a summary of the recommendations that have come out of the study of the ten schemes. These are important for the implementation of viable and sustainable projects.
* Farmers should participate throughout the project planning, implementation and evaluation phases.
* A bottom-up approach is ideal for irrigation development, treating farmers as "owners" and not as "beneficiaries" of the projects.
* Consultants with no PRA and smallholder irrigation development experience should not be engaged to plan smallholder irrigation schemes.
* It is sustainable to develop farmer managed irrigation schemes, as they reduce the financial burden on the government in terms of O&M.
* The government, given the budgetary constraints facing it, should come up with a clear, transparent and systematic policy and method of handing over government managed schemes to farmers.
* Only projects which are technically sound should be handed over to farmers.
* Given that water is the most limiting factor in smallholder irrigation development in Zimbabwe, efficient irrigation systems must be encouraged in this sector in order to save water.
* The rising electricity costs in Zimbabwe call for the development and testing of irrigation technologies with low energy requirements.
* Study tours for farmers and Extension Workers prior to irrigation should be organized for any new scheme.
* Training in water management, marketing and general crop production is important for new and old irrigation schemes.
* It is important to help farmers with inputs for the first season, so that they can build a cash flow base.
* Institutional support should be enhanced in smallholder irrigation development.
* Continuous monitoring and evaluation of irrigation schemes is necessary to provide feedback and information important for the future planning the management of new schemes.
* The issue of inheritance should be considered seriously in the planning and management of smallholder irrigation schemes.
* Coordination of all relevant institutions involved in smallholder irrigation development is important during the planning and implementation of irrigation projects.
* An integrated rural development approach should be followed in any agricultural development programme such as irrigation.
<section>7</section>
References
Alvord, T. 1933. An assessment of the impact of smallholder irrigation in Manicaland Province. A technical paper prepared for the Department of Agricultural Development, Rhodesia.
CSO, 1992. Agricultural production on communal land irrigation schemes. Central Statistical Office Publications. Harare, Zimbabwe.
Chopak, K. 1989. Family Income Source and Food Security, In: Mudimu, G.D. and Bernstern, R.H. (editors) Household and national food security in Southern Africa. University of Zimbabwe (UZ) / Michigan State University (MSU), Food research in Southern Africa, pp 193-208.
Elwell, H.A and Stocking, M.A. 1988. Loss of nutrients by sheet erosion is a major hidden farming cost. The Zimbabwe Science News Vol. 22 No. 7/8, pp79 - 82. Harare, Zimbabwe
FAO. 1997a. Assessment of the socio-economic impact of smallholder irrigation development on smallholder farmers in Zimbabwe: A report prepared by R. Dhlodhlo for FAO.
FAO. 1997b. Smallholder irrigation and poultry development in Zimbabwe: A brief general overview. A paper prepared by R.J. Chitsiko for the FAO.
FAO. 1997c. Summary of findings of missions in selected countries in East and Southern Africa. In : Irrigation technology transfer in support of food security. Proceedings of an FAO sub-regional workshop, Harare, Zimbabwe. 14 - 17 April 1997, prepared by A. Kandiah.
FAO, 1998. Nyadire 4 proposed drip irrigation project. Water control component preparation report for the Special Programme for Food Security in Zimbabwe.
FAOSTAT, 1997. Website http://www.fao.org/ or http://apps.fao.org/
Geza, S. and Makadho, J. 1984. Irrigation in Zimbabwe. A paper delivered at the symposium of irrigation experts of the coordinating bureau of food and agriculture of the non-aligned countries held in Pyongyang, Democratic People's Republic of Korea. 16 - 22^ June 1984.
Hunt, A. F. 1958. Manicaland irrigation schemes: An economic investigation. Department of Agriculture, Southern Rhodesia.
Jansen, D. J. 1993. Economics of irrigation: A modular methodology for comparing the benefit with the costs. A background paper prepared for the planning and water development as an input into the national irrigation policy.
Makombe, G. and Meinzen-Dick, R. 1993. A descriptive analysis of sample irrigation systems. Paper presented at the UZ/AGRITEX/IFPRI workshop on irrigation performance in Zimbabwe. Juliasdale, Zimbabwe. 1 - 6 August 1993.
Meinzen -Dick, R. 1993. Objectives of irrigation development in Zimbabwe. Paper presented at the UZ/AGRITEX/IFPRI workshop on irrigation performance in Zimbabwe, Juliasdale. Zimbabwe. 1 - 6 August 1993.
Meinzen -Dick, R. Makombe, G. and Sullins, M. 1993. Agro-economic performance of smallholder irrigation in Zimbabwe. Paper presented at the UZ/AGRITEX/IFPRI workshop on irrigation performance in Zimbabwe. Juliasdale, Zimbabwe. 1 - 6 August 1993.
Ministry of Lands, Agriculture and Water Development, Zimbabwe. 1994. Irrigation policy and strategy. Draft document.
Mupawose, R. M. 1984. Irrigation in Zimbabwe: A broad overview. In: Blackie, M.J. (editor): African regional symposium on smallholder irrigation. University of Zimbabwe.
Paraiwa, M.G. 1975. An economic analysis and appraisal of Chilonga rrigation scheme in Matibi Tribal Trust Land. Economics and Marketing Branch, Ministry of Agriculture. Zimbabwe
Roder, W. 1965. The Sabi valley irrigation projects. Department of Geography Research No. 99. Chicago, Illinois.
Ruigu, G.M and Rukuni, M. 1990. (editors) Irrigation policy in Kenya and Zimbabwe. Proceedings of the second intermediate seminar on irrigation farming in Kenya and Zimbabwe. Juliasdale, Zimbabwe. 26 - 30 May 1987
Rukuni, M. 1984a. Cropping patterns and productivity on smallholder irrigation schemes. In: Blackie, M.J. (editor) African regional symposium on smallholder irrigation. University of Zimbabwe.
Rukuni, M. 1984b. An analysis of economic and institutional factors affecting irrigation development in communal lands of Zimbabwe. Thesis submitted for Dphil. Department of Land Management. University of Zimbabwe.
Rukuni, M. 1987. The evolution of smallholder irrigation policy in Zimbabwe: 1928-1986. Department of Agricultural Economics and Extension. University of Zimbabwe.
Rukuni, M. 1988. The evolution of smallholder irrigation policy in Zimbabwe: 1928 - 1986. Review paper. Department of Agricultural Economics and Extension. University of Zimbabwe.
Rukuni, M. 1993. Impact of smallholder irrigation in Zimbabwe: A framework and data needs: Paper presented at the UZ/AGRITEX/IFPRI workshop on irrigation performance in Zimbabwe. Juliasdale, Zimbabwe. 1 - 6 August 1993.
Rukuni, M. and Bernstern, R.H. 1987. Major issues in designing a research programme on household food insecurity. In: Southern Africa: Food security policy option. UZ/MSU Food security project. University of Zimbabwe publications. Harare.
Rukuni, M. and Eicher, C.K. 1987. Food security for Africa:, UZ/MSU Food Security Project. University of Zimbabwe publications. Harare.
Rukuni, M. and Eicher, C.K. 1994. (editors). Zimbabwe's agricultural revolution. University of Zimbabwe publications. Harare.
SADC. 1992. SADCC Regional irrigation development strategy: Zimbabwe Country Report. Harare, Zimbabwe
Sing, V. and Misra, N. 1960. Cost benefit analysis: A case study of the Sarda canal irrigation project. India
Webb, P. 1991. When projects collapse: Irrigation failure in the Gambia from a household perspective. Journal of International development Vol. 3, No. 4. July Institute, Washington D.C.
<section>8</section>
Annexes
Annex A-1 Chitora Irrigation Scheme
Summary
The 9 ha Chitora irrigation scheme is located in Mutoko District of Mashonaland East Province. It is one of the most successful farmer managed irrigation schemes in the country. Started in 1994, the scheme has had significant positive impact on the living standard of the participants. Before the scheme started the participants, whose ages ranged between 22 and 27 years, were still living with their parents. They had nothing for themselves and they depended on their parents for almost everything. Today, however, they are getting net incomes as high as Z$ 100 000 per farmer per year (1997 incomes) with an average of Z$ 60 000. These incomes are much higher than the minimum wage of Z$ 16 800 per year paid for an unskilled labourer in the Zimbabwean industry. The good performance of the scheme is due to the fact that the farmers have a sense of ownership and believe that the scheme belongs to them. The farmers were asked to participate during the planning and implementation of
the scheme. The operation and maintenance of the scheme is good and cooperation among the farmers is excellent. All these factors have contributed towards the good performance of the scheme.
Introduction
Chitora irrigation scheme is located in Mutoko District of Mashonaland East Province. It was established in 1994, using funding from the Government of Zimbabwe and the Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA). The area of the scheme is 9 ha with 18 plot holders, each having 0.5 ha. It is located 120 km North East of Harare and about 5 km from the Harare-Nyamapanda main road. The project is in Natural Region III, a relatively low rainfall area, which receives on average 500-700 mm of rainfall per year.
The scheme utilizes a drag-hose sprinkler irrigation system with water being pumped from a pick-up weir on the Chitora river. The farmers are fully responsible for all the operation and maintenance of the scheme. AGRITEX provides the extension services required. Chitora is one of the best schemes in the country. In 1998 it was judged the best smallholder scheme in the country in a national smallholder irrigation schemes competition, organized annually by AGRITEX.
Planning of the scheme
The irrigation scheme is located in Nyadire resettlement area. People were resettled into the area in 1984 from places around Mutoko District. The resettled farmers engaged in dryland crop production, which was heavily affected by harsh climatic conditions. On realizing the constraints posed by unfavourable weather conditions in the resettlement, AGRITEX and other government institutions initiated an intensive project identification process. FAO and DANIDA gave a lot of support in this process of project identification. Land to the north of a weir on Chitora river was identified as irrigable. In 1990, an AGRITEX/FAO team approached farmers in villages 10, 12 and 13 to find out if they were interested in the development of an irrigation project. Most of the older farmers were scared of the high labour demanded by irrigation. The farmers felt they were too old to engage in irrigated agriculture. However, the refusal by elders to adopt irrigation did not mean the failure of the
project. Children of the old resettlement farmers, at that time aged between 22 and 27 years, expressed their willingness to take up the project, which had been turned down by their parents. Eighteen youngsters came forward to participate in the project. Sixteen of these youths had four years of secondary education, but employment in towns was not forthcoming. All of them were staying with their parents and did not have land of their own to cultivate. They depended on their parents for everything.
The idea of giving these youngsters a project was accepted by AGRITEX and the then Department of Rural Development (DERUDE). They accepted because they had witnessed the success of a nearby irrigation scheme which was being run by youths. The youngsters were taken on a study tour to that scheme and they were all convinced that irrigation was an important investment.
In 1991, an AGRITEX team carried out topographic and socio-economic surveys with full farmer participation. The designs were made during the same year and in 1992 the project was tendered out for construction. In 1993 construction started and the scheme started operating in 1994. Inputs for the first season were provided and thereafter farmers had to source their own inputs. Farmers provided labour during scheme construction. The youths were all single when the scheme started and they depended on hired labour for scheme operations. Their parents provided draught power.
Social aspects
Land tenure and inheritance
The tenure system is such that if the plot holder dies, the wife will take over the plot. This is covered in the bye-laws of the scheme. However, the question of what happens when both spouses die is not clear, since most of the scheme members' children are still too young. No child is over five years of age. Farmers said that this was never looked at. The IMC is responsible for all matters concerning inheritance on the scheme. Neither the Resettlement Officer nor the AGRITEX officers interfere with the IMC on such matters. Farmers are all comfortable with the bye-laws. The fact that they are all married now makes the inheritance system much more important.
Relationship with outsiders
All farmers came from villages 10, 12 and 13 and these villages happen to be adjacent to the scheme. Irrigators have no problem with the non-irrigators since they are their parents. There is a good working relationship between these two groups of people. Non-irrigators provide labour in the scheme for money or agricultural produce. At the beginning of the scheme, villagers used to hire out draught power to irrigators for a fee. Currently most of the irrigators have acquired oxen of their own for draught power.
Scheme operation, maintenance and management
Irrigation Management Committee
The scheme is entirely farmer managed through a system of bye-laws which are enforced by an IMC elected on a two year term basis. The IMC comprises of the following members:
i. Chairperson and vice chairperson
ii. Secretary and vice chairperson
iii. Treasurer
iv. Two committee members
v. Member responsible for security
There are no women in the committee. Women are not considered as plot holders and this has something to do with how the scheme originated. At scheme inception the plot holders were eighteen single men and their committee was selected out of these. When they got married, they did not want to involve women in the day to day running of the scheme. The male farmers feel that women can not cope with the demands of scheme management.
The IMC is responsible for coordinating all scheme activities. These include collection of electricity payments from individual farmers, repair and maintenance works and collection of monthly subscriptions for the savings account. The committee is also responsible for maintaining discipline in the scheme. Reallocation of plots is also the responsibility of the IMC. The IMC of this scheme is very strong as evidenced by the group cohesion in the scheme. In addition to be above functions, the IMC acts as a link between the farmers and institutions serving them.
Under the IMC there is a production sub-committee. This sub-committee reports directly to the IMC. It is composed of a chairman, secretary and treasurer and is elected on a two-year term basis. The sub-committee organizes cropping programmes and transport for taking the produce to markets. It also acts as a marketing committee giving advice on price movements and sourcing for contract markets. Disease and pests control in the scheme is another function of the production sub-committee. The committee ensures that pests and disease control is adequate in the scheme and any violators are heavily fined.
Water management
Water management and efficient water use are of importance at Chitora irrigation scheme. Farmers acknowledged that they receive a lot of support from AGRITEX on water management. Visual crop inspection is used to determine when to irrigate. The main thrust is to save water, giving enough at the same time. Farmers set irrigation times according to the AGRITEX advise. One farmer is designated to open and close the water. Late comers are not given extra time to irrigate. The state of the fields indicated that there is no water wasting on this scheme. This is good for the farmers given the escalating energy costs.
Electricity bills
Bills are received every month and the IMC collects money from the individual farmers. For the 1998 season the bills ranged between Z$ 150 and Z$ 300 per farmer per month with an average of Z$ 200. Farmers have no problems with the payment of these bills as their sound cash flows allow them to pay the bills as they come.
Repairs and maintenance
Each individual farmer is responsible for the maintenance of his infield infrastructure. This includes hydrants, hoses, tripods and sprinklers. The pumping unit is maintained by the farmers as a group. If the pump breaks down the IMC quickly collects money from the members for repairs. For example in July 1998 the motor got burnt and the farmers raised Z$ 4 900 for the repairs. More that 50% of this amount was drawn from the scheme maintenance fund, in which farmers contribute Z$ 30 per month each. Some farmers are able to do some minor repairs. The contractor who installed the pump when the scheme started trained them.
Replacement of any capital item is the responsibility of the farmers. Farmers are quite happy with this arrangement. They do not want the government to manage their affairs. They said that the government takes time to correct any problems.
Security
The scheme employs a security guard who is paid Z$ 600 per month. The guard was engaged following a spate of robberies in the scheme and vandalism on the pump.
Institutional support
AGRITEX
AGRITEX provides technical advice to the irrigators. There is an Extension Worker who supports both the dryland and irrigation farmers. He is also the Extension Worker for the nearby Nyaitenga irrigation scheme. Farmers were pleased with his contributions.
Local Government
The Ministry of Local Government is represented by a Resettlement Officer who works very well with the irrigators. He does not interfere with the day to day running of the scheme. He only deals with administrative matters concerning the whole resettlement area.
Training
The local Extension Worker organized a course on the basics of irrigated crop production and water management for the farmers when the scheme started. DANIDA also financed another course that was run by AGRITEX staff from the Provincial Office and Head Office. Two farmers were also sent on a course on pump maintenance by DANIDA when the scheme started.
Agricultural performance
A variety of crops are grown at Chitora. There is no rigid cropping programme, the programme is dictated by the market. It is the responsibility of the production sub-committee to scan the market and find out the most profitable crops at a particular time. Their cropping pattern is based on the principle of diversification to reduce risk associated with price variations and market uncertainties. The major crops grown on the scheme are leafy vegetables, cabbage, onion, butternuts, green maize, groundnuts, tomatoes, peas, butternut, green pepper, carrots, cucumber, and beet root. One crop may be grown this year, but fail to be considered next year. Each farmer selects a mixture of crops he thinks is best, depending on the information from the production committee and his own personal inclination.
The important thing to note about the cropping programme at Chitora is that it consists mainly of high value horticultural crops. Non horticultural crops such as maize and groundnuts are sold while still green to realize substantial returns. Grain maize is not included in the programme, because the farmers argue that it is cheaper to buy it elsewhere than to produce it. The argument is based on the principle of opportunity cost. Its better to put say 0.3 ha under tomatoes for a period of four months, get high incomes, say Z$ 30 000, and then buy 20 x 50 kg bags of maize for subsistence at Z$ 2 400. This leaves the farmer with over Z$ 27 000. The cropping intensity on the scheme is about 300%. Crop yields are very high (Table 20).
TABLE 20
Average yields for different crops during the 1997 season at Chitora irrigation scheme (Source: Farmers' record books and extension staff, 1998)
Crop Yield (tons/ha)
Tomatoes 40
Peas 7
Green pepper 8
Groundnuts 4
Green maize 35 000*
Cucumber 10
Rape 25
* Yield is in cobs
Farmers stagger their crops in such a way that at any one point there is a crop being marketed. This ensures continuous inflow of cash, which makes it easier for the farmers to pay the monthly electricity bills. The yields shown in Table 20 are high and they compare very well with yields obtained by commercial farmers. This means that the Chitora farmers have become highly commercialized. These high yields are a result of high levels of inputs, commitment on the part of the farmers, AGRITEX support and efficient water management. The input levels used at Chitora for various crops are shown in Table 21. The levels are within the recommended levels.
Commercial aspects
Marketing
The major market for Chitora scheme is Mbare Musika in Harare, which absorbs most of the horticultural crops. Farmers harvest during the day, hire a truck and leave for Mbare Musika around 19.00 hours. They sleep at Mbare Musika and start selling at 06.00 hours the following day when the market opens. Prices at the market are a function of supply and demand for the day. Some buyers come to buy at the scheme using their own transport. Green maize is an example of a crop, which is marketed at the farm-gate. Farmers are willing to be assisted to enter export markets.
TABLE 21
Fertilizer levels for different crops at Chitora irrigation scheme. (Source: Farmers' record books and extension staff, 1998)
Crop Ammonium Nitrate (kg/ha) Compound D (kg/ha) Compound S/L (kg/ha)
Green maize 400 400 500
Cucumber 100 550 600
Peas 100 500 
Green pepper 100 500 
Butternut 100 
Rape 500 
Transport
The mode of transport is hired trucks which cost about Z$ 1 500 for a trip to Harare. Most transporters shun Chitora scheme because of the bad feeder road. Sometimes, some transporters do not fulfil their promises forcing the farmers to use long distance haulage trucks, which requires on the spot arrangements between the driver and the farmer. Sometimes the transporters are unreliable making it difficult for the farmers to handle the harvested perishables.
Input acquisition
Inputs such as fertilizer, lime and most chemicals are acquired locally. A hardware shop in village 10 and the corner store business centre are the major suppliers of inputs. Harare is the only source of seed for horticultural crops. All inputs are financed from crop proceeds. Farmers are not interested in AFC loans because of high interest rates.
Labour
Irrigators' families are still too small, with an average number of two children. All the children are not yet going to school. The age indicates that they can not provide any form of labour. Husband and wife alone can not provide adequate labour on the scheme. Hired labour is therefore drawn from a radius of more than 7 km. The hired labour helps with weeding, transplanting and harvesting. The plot holders do the marketing themselves and in most cases it is men who go to the markets.
Farm income analysis
Chitora farmers get very high incomes from irrigated cropping. In an interview with the farmers, net incomes from Z$ 40 000 to Z$ 100 000 per year per farmer were revealed. They attributed these high figures to the choice of crops. Tomatoes, for instance, can give over Z$ 150 000 gross income per ha.
At the time of visiting the scheme, the chairman was found harvesting green pepper, which was grown on 0.1 ha. The farmer was paid Z$ 4 100 on the spot by a private buyer. The farmer had sold another Z$ 4 000 worth of green pepper the previous week. He was expecting 2 -3 more harvests which was going to give him more or less the same income. The expressions on the chairman's face indicated that he was very happy with the income.
Another farmer had harvested 800 bundles of rape and was anticipating a price of Z$ 20 per bundle. This means getting Z$ 16 000 on one marketing day.
Financial and economic analysis
Farm cash flows are always on the positive side because of the farmers cropping strategies. The cropping intensity of 300%, supported by the staggering of plantings, ensures that inflows are realized almost everyday. The ability of the farmers to meet costs as they come is an indication of a viable project. Measures of project worthiness and the cash flows are presented in Table 22. The FIRR of 85% indicates a very viable project. The NPV is also significantly high. The EIRR of 90% indicates that the project is very important for the national income.
TABLE 22
Discounted cash flow analysis for Chitora irrigation scheme
Year Investment Cost (Z$) Energy Costs (Z$) Drought savings (Z$) Replace-ment Costs (Z$) Repair & maintenance (Z$) Extension (Z$) Irrigation income (Z$) Incremental benefit (Z$)
NPV 230 947
FIRR 85%
Socio-economic impact
If the textbook definition of development were taken into account (i.e. change or the process of economic and social transformation), then the Chitora farmers would be described by this definition. They have undergone a complete change or overhaul in the history of their lives. They have changed from dependent sons to independent household heads. They have left the habit of begging money from parents for cigarettes to that of assisting their parents on monetary problems. They moved from the state of being fed by parents to that of feeding the surrounding people. All these are indicators of development.
When these irrigators started they had absolutely nothing of their own, but now they boast of having their own families. They are now all married. Money for dowry was derived from the irrigation scheme. All the irrigators own at least an animal with an average of three cattle per plot holder. It is important to note that these animals were not acquired out of non-farm incomes, but they are the products of irrigation proceeds. Almost all farmers have managed to buy ploughs, harrows cultivators and scotch carts (owned by 90% of the farmers). Self-esteem is the best definition for this state of affairs.
All basic needs such as housing, food and clothing come from the scheme. Sixteen farmers have managed to build brick walled, asbestos roofed houses. One of these farmers has a six-roomed house. Two farmers are in the process of building four roomed houses. Aerials for televisions can be seen as one moves along the road from Corner store business centre towards the irrigation scheme. The exact number of farmers with TVs could not be established, but it is believed that at least five have TV sets in their homes. The houses are fully furnished.
Women expressed their appreciation of the project by saying that they managed to buy utensils such as pots, cups and plates. One of the women said that with her utensils she can make tea for 30 people and make them drink all at once. Men boasted of having bought suits and shoes among other things. They are no longer drinking opaque beer as they used to do. They do not have to ask others to buy them beer.
The hiring of labour by the irrigators is very important for the surrounding villagers. This fits well with the concept of income distribution. Hired labour is paid Z$ 20/day for hoeing and Z$ 15/day for harvesting. These rates are more than those charged in commercial farmers (Z$ 10 on average).
None of the irrigators is engaged in off-farm activities to raise cash. They are satisfied with returns from irrigation enterprises and all of them indicated that they would not want to work in towns. They gave a simple but legitimate calculation in their argument. It went as follows:
With them being non-skilled workers they would not expect any salary more than Z$ 2 000/month if they work in towns. This is far below the Z$ 3 600 - Z$ 8 300/month they get in the scheme. Even if they could get Z$ 4 000 in town they could not be compared with irrigators. In town, with that Z$ 4 000, one has to pay rent, say Z$ 600 for two rooms, bus fare of Z$ 500/month and food for Z$ 1 000. This leaves him with an effective income of Z$ 1 900. If the net income of Z$ 4 000 is obtained at the scheme, he does not buy food (except breakfast), no bus fare and nor rent leaving him with over Z$ 3 000 for banking. This comparison indicates that a person at the scheme is better off than one in town. So there is no point migrating to town.
This was a very strong argument and it is quite sensible. The irrigators have become employers in their own right.
The diversification of crops at the scheme means a diversification of diet for the irrigators and surrounding villagers. Crops hitherto unknown to the non-irrigators are now being produced at the scheme.
Local dealers such as those at the Corner store business centre and the hardware shop near the scheme are all benefiting a lot from the scheme. The demand for agricultural inputs is mainly from the scheme. Sometimes the dealers are faced with problems in meeting the demand of inputs from Chitora and other nearby irrigation schemes. One interesting thing to note is that the hardware shop only started operating after the scheme. Before that dryland farmers were relying mainly on the Corner store business centre for their input requirements. When one gets to Corner store business centre he or she is met by a large number of women retailers, selling vegetables, green maize and all sorts of fresh produce. Most of this produce is acquired from Chitora irrigation scheme and other schemes in the area. All these are examples of backward and forward linkages provided by the scheme.
Conclusion
Chitora is indeed a successful scheme. It derives its success from a number of factors, of which the following were found to be the main ones:
Good planning: The involvement of farmers in the planning and implementation of an irrigation project instills a sense of ownership in them.
Irrigation is valued: The climatic limitations on agriculture make irrigation very important in the area.
Financial support: The inputs given to the farmers at the start of the scheme allowed them to take off without any bank liabilities. This helped them to build sound cash flows.
Strong Irrigation Management Committee: The ability of the IMC to mobilize financial resources for electricity and maintenance of the scheme makes it successful.
Efficient use of water: The ability of the IMC to manage water result in high yields and lower energy costs.
Independence: The non-involvement of the Resettlement Officer in the affairs of the scheme makes the irrigators feel secure.
Land tenure: The system of inheritance that is in place makes farmers comfortable about the future of their spouses and children.
Diversification: Diversification of enterprises reduces the risk of fluctuating prices and income variability.
Group cohesion: The spirit of togetherness, which prevails in the scheme, puts them in a position to face challenges as they come.
Training: The training and support offered by AGRITEX and DANIDA boosted the farmers' technical knowledge.
<section>9</section>
Annex A-2 Longdale Irrigation Scheme
Summary
The 7.5 ha Longdale irrigation scheme is located in Masvingo District of Masvingo Province. This is a scheme whose great potential is being curtailed by technical problems. Having started very well in 1993 the scheme started to perform badly when the scheme's imported submersible pump started giving technical problems. The spare parts for the pump are difficult to source locally and when the pump breaks down it takes several months before it is repaired. The planning of the scheme was done well, with the farmers having participated during the planning and implementation of the scheme. Due to this there is a very strong feeling among the farmers that the scheme belongs to them. The market for this scheme is Masvingo town, which is about 20 km away. If the pump problems are addressed the scheme can be turned into a very successful investment.
Introduction
The 7.5 ha Longdale irrigation scheme lies in the Mushandike resettlement area of Masvingo District in Masvingo Province. It is located about 20 km south east of Masvingo, in Natural Region III, a low rainfall area with 500-700 mm of rainfall per year on average. The region is characterized by periodic dry spells and mid season droughts, features that make irrigation a worthwhile investment in this area.
The scheme utilizes a pressurized drag-hose sprinkler irrigation system, using a submersible pump to abstract water from a borehole. The scheme supports fifteen plot holders, each with a 0.5 ha plot size. Two of the fifteen plot holders are widows and the rest are married couples. Three male heads of households are working in towns. The scheme membership was drawn from the resettlement area. These people were moved from the nearby Nemanwa area in 1987 to make room for the development of Nemanwa business centre.
Planning of the scheme
The scheme was established in 1993, using Government of Zimbabwe and DANIDA funding through the DANIDA Support to Smallholder Irrigation Programme (SSIP) which ran between 1986 and 1995. The designs were done by AGRITEX and construction was contracted out to a private irrigation company. The scheme was planned and implemented with full farmer participation. Farmers provided labour for trenching and laying down of pipes. This makes Longdale scheme very different from other resettlement irrigation schemes that are developed first before the beneficiaries come in.
Social aspects
Land tenure and inheritance
Longdale farmers are full time irrigators with no extra plots outside the scheme for rainfed agriculture. However farmers feel that their 0.5 ha plots are too small to sustain both subsistence and cash cropping. If a plot holder dies, the plot is inherited by the surviving spouse and the children. The scheme bye-laws designed and formulated by the farmers have a clause which caters for inheritance. Eviction of the remaining family is only done if it seriously violates certain bye-laws and the decision has to be endorsed by the Resettlement Officer.
If the surviving spouse dies, then the eldest son or daughter takes over. The Resettlement Officer will have to endorse the child's suitability for inheritance. The son has no automatic take over and has no say on inheritance. However, a remaining spouse automatically takes over the plot. This system does not go well with the youths, because they feel that they lose out if both parents die. The youth argued that this system should be replaced by the traditional "Nhaka" custom, which dictates that a son has automatic inheritance over his father's property when the father dies.
Scheme operation, maintenance and management
Irrigation Management Committee
The scheme is completely farmer managed through an IMC with seven members, six of whom are women. At this particular scheme, the chairperson of the IMC is a woman. The committee comprises of a:
i. Chairperson and vice chairperson
ii. Treasurer
iii. Secretary and vice secretary
iv. Two committee members
The IMC runs the scheme through a system of bye-laws and it seems to be doing very well as evidenced by great cohesion on the scheme and the ability of the farmers to pay electricity bills on time. Any plot holder who fails to pay the electricity bills will be denied access to irrigation water by having valves leading to the farmer's plot from the main line closed.
The IMC is responsible for drawing up the cropping programme, in consultation with AGRITEX and the rest of the farmers. The IMC coordinates all the operation and maintenance activities on the scheme, making sure that all the operations and maintenance schedules are met. In case of emergencies, like when the pump breaks down, the IMC collects money from the individual members for repairs.
Water management
Irrigation is done using the irrigation schedules prepared by AGRITEX. Through these schedules farmers know how often to irrigate and for how long. The IMC determines when the farmers should come to irrigate. It is usually between 06.00 and 18.00 hours, depending on the crop. There is one farmer designated for opening and closing the pump. No extra time for irrigation is given for farmers who come late for irrigation. This is done in an attempt to ensure efficient water usage and cut down on energy costs.
Electricity bills
The farmers pay electricity bills and so far they have not had any problems in paying. This may be due to the strict system of bye-laws on the scheme. Farmers realize that once they are denied access to irrigation water they will not have any alternative land to cultivate. The monthly bills per farmer range from Z$ 160 to Z$ 450 (1998 bills).
Repairs and maintenance
Farmers are responsible for the maintenance of infrastructure. Each farmer is responsible for the repair, maintenance and replacement of his/her infield infrastructure. These include sprinklers, hydrants, hose pipes and garden tapes. Communally owned equipment, such as the pump, borehole and conveyance pipeline, is maintained by the farmers as a group.
Farmers are having problems with their pump, which frequently breaks down. Once the pump breaks down it will take several months before it is repaired because spare parts for the pump are difficult to source locally, even though the farmers will be having the money to buy spares. This pump was imported from Denmark by DANIDA without any back up spares. In November 1997 the pump broke down and it was only repaired in May 1998 for only Z$ 1 500. Prior to that, it had broken down in May 1997 only to be repaired at the end of June the same year for Z$ 1 096. From the above costs it is clear that the problems are just minor, but according to the farmers a very small problem can lead to the closure of the scheme for more than six months. Another problem with the pump is that once it breaks down it is difficult to lift it from the borehole, as the farmers do not have the equipment to lift the pump from the borehole. They have to hire other people to do it for them and they usually
hire private irrigation companies or the nearby Agricultural and Rural Development Authority (ARDA) estate. These companies charge over Z$ 2 000 for a single lifting done. The problems with the pump have negatively affected a scheme, which has a potential of doing very well.
Institutional support
AGRITEX
The scheme is supported by an Extension Worker, who covers both dryland and irrigation. He visits the scheme at least once a week and he offers technical advice on cropping and water management. He receives technical backstopping from the irrigation engineers based at the AGRITEX provincial office in Masvingo. The engineers are responsible for producing irrigation schedules for the scheme.
Training
Farmers received intensive training at the beginning of the scheme, which was run by AGRITEX and AFC. The programme was funded by DANIDA. The training programme covered topics such as production of crops, water management, inputs acquisition, record keeping and loan application. In addition to the course farmers were taken on study tours to other operational smallholder irrigation schemes, namely Hama-Mavhaire, Fuwe Panganayi, Verlos and Marowa irrigation schemes. Currently periodic training programmes are offered by the Extension Worker, sometimes on request and mostly at his own accord after carrying out a training needs analysis.
Agricultural performance
The scheme started very well in 1993, producing green maize (50% of the area), wheat (50%) in winter, and tomatoes (50%), beans (25%) and rape (20%) in summer. The crops were intensively produced using AFC financed inputs. The average fertilizer levels applied to the different crops during the 1993/94 agricultural season at Longdale are presented in Table 23. These levels match those recommended by AGRITEX.
TABLE 23
Fertilizer levels applied at Longdale irrigation scheme during the 1993/94 season (Source: Farmers' and Extension Worker's record books, 1998)
Crop Ammonium Nitrate (kg/ha) Compound D (kg/ha) Compound L (kg/ha)
Green maize 420 400 500**
Wheat 300 400 800**
Tomatoes 100 600
Beans 100 
Rape 150 
* Compound S. ** Compound C.
As a result of these high input levels farmers managed to get high yields during the 1993/94 season. Yields as high as 7 tons/ha were obtained for maize, with an average of 6.5 tons/ha. Wheat achieved high yields of up to 6 tons/ha with an average of 4.5 tons/ha. Yields for tomatoes averaged 25 tons/ha. Beans yields averaged 1.4 tons/ha. The yields for rape could not be estimated but a good quality crop was reported. Despite these good yields farmers failed to repay their debts to AFC, thus affecting their credit worthiness. This failure to repay the debt was due to poor financial management. Farmers went on to buy a lot of luxury goods ignoring paying back the debt. They had taken the loan as a group and when 20% of the members defaulted the whole group was affected. From 1995 onwards AFC stopped giving credit to these farmers.
The crop yields for the 1995/96 season were poor due to cash flow problems. The situation was worsened by the frequent breakdown of the pump, which at one point in time was down for three months with farmers not irrigating. Farmers claimed that they could not get the spares for their imported pump. They were later helped by a private irrigation company that somehow modified the pump. Yields of as low as 2 tons/ha were recorded for maize during the 1994/95 cropping year. Wheat was attacked by the streak virus, thus worsening the already bad situation. Tomatoes and rape were also affected. In 1996, the situation improved slightly with the pump breakdowns being less frequent. However, inputs remained a major problem. Remittances from town for some of the plot holders could not help much.
In 1997, the situation got critical with the pump breaking down between May and June. Farmers were helped by the nearby Agricultural and Rural Development Authority (ARDA), which made yet some more modifications to the pump. The winter crop which had been planted between April and May was affected by moisture stress. Between November 1997 and May 1998 the pump broke down again. Farmers resorted to dryland cultivation, which did not pay because incidentally a severe drought ravaged the area. Farmers only resumed cropping in June 1998, but were affected by cash flow problems. They could not raise enough money for the inputs. During the scheme visit in October 1998 most plots had no crops.
An analysis of the agricultural performance of Longdale scheme indicated that the factors that are affecting negatively the scheme are more to do with planning rather than farmers' attitudes. The problems with the pump seem to be the most important issue affecting the performance of Longdale scheme.
Commercial aspects
Marketing
The main market for the produce of Longdale, when it was performing well during the first year, was Masvingo town. The town is only 20 km from the scheme and the two are linked by the excellent Masvingo - Great Zimbabwe tarred highway. The nearby Nemanwa business centre and surrounding villages have been also very important local markets for the produce.
Transport
The mode of transport is hired trucks to Masvingo. Smaller quantities of produce are ferried by the farmers to Nemanwa business centre using public transport, which operate between Nemanwa and Masvingo several times a day.
Input acquisition
During the first good years Longdale scheme used to demand substantial quantities of fertlizers and chemicals from dealers at Nemanwa business centre and Masvingo town. During this period high levels of inputs were used as the farmers were still eligible for AFC loans and the pump was not giving any problems. This demand of inputs has gone down as the scheme continues to perform badly and with farmers experiencing cash flow problems. At the time of visit some dealers at Nemanwa business centre who used to experience brisk business with the farmers confirmed this marked reduction in demand for agricultural inputs by the scheme.
Farm income analysis
Incomes for the scheme seem to be correlated to yields. When the scheme started, the incomes were quite high. When the yield performance went down the incomes followed suit. During the 1993/94 season, annual average incomes of Z$ 20 000 per farmer were attained. However during the 1995/96 season low incomes were recorded. The average annual incomes were Z$ 4 000 - Z$ 8 000 per farmer. During the 1996/97 season incomes were reported low, but figures could not be obtained at the time of visit. For the 1997/98 season, figures were not available, but the long period the pump was down with farmers not irrigating is a strong indicator that incomes were bad.
Financial and economic analysis
Longdale scheme has been experiencing cash flow problems over the years, especially after 1995. The major reasons advanced for this were:
i. Lack of credit facilities, which was caused by farmers' failure to repay AFC loans
ii. Frequent pump breakdown, resulting in low yields and subsequent low incomes.
Financial cash flows for Longdale irrigation scheme are presented in Table 24. All the values are derived from the 1998 prices, which are deflated to reflect the 1993 equivalent values. These constant 1993 values are applied in the discounted cash flow analysis. A rate of 9.75% was considered as the discount rate. The parameters considered in the analysis are the NPV and the FIRR. The NPV was found to be negative, indicating that the project is not viable. The FIRR of 5% is less than the discount rate 9.75% again indicating a non-viable project. The economic analysis gives a NPV of minus Z$ 789 and an EIRR of 7.9%. These figures again reflect that the project is not viable economically.
Table 24
Discounted cash flow analysis for Longdale irrigation scheme.
Year Investment Costs (Z$) Replacement Costs (Z$) Repair & Maintenance Costs (Z$) Extension (Z$) Irrigation Income (Z$) Incremental Benefit (Z$)
NPV -13 595
FIRR 5%
Socio-economic impact
The scheme started positively in 1993 achieving the targeted yields. For example maize yields of 7 tons/ha for maize were achieved in the scheme. This was a form of transformation from low potential dryland cultivation to a more commercialized type of agriculture. The high levels of inputs, used by the farmers during the 1993/94 season, are a clear indication that farmers were geared for an improved type of farming.
Farmers did not have problems in adopting the technology, as evidenced by their ability to set up an IMC responsible for coordinating all the operation and maintenance works. The high adoption rate and good maintenance are evidenced by the high yields obtained during the first year of operation. High incomes were obtained during the first year and the incomes were much higher than those, which could be obtained under dryland agriculture. Given the limited opportunities for off-farm employment in the Mushandike resettlement area, the scheme was beginning to become a source of employment for the farmers and outsiders.
The installation of an imported pump with no spares readily available locally, however, hampered all the potential the scheme had of transforming the peoples' lives. It should be a lesson to planners that imported material without back-up services should not be included as a package in the development process. Now farmers have developed a wait and see attitude without knowing the future of the scheme. They ask the question: "Can't AGRITEX get us a locally manufactured pump?" With the cash flow problems affecting them, the farmers can not raise money to replace the pump themselves.
The potential the irrigation scheme had of creating employment has been affected. Three male household heads decided to migrate to town to seek for employment. They were tired of the frequent pump breakdowns and unreliable cash inflows. Farmers can not hire outside labour because they are not sure about the performance of their scheme.
The objectives of food security and drought relief savings have not been met by the scheme, save for the first year of operation. According to the farmers irrigation is not giving enough food or money. Farmers are struggling to raise funds to buy grain from their dryland counterparts. Dryland farmers have much bigger plots than irrigators from which they can get reasonable yields during good years. They are therefore more secure in the sense that they can keep the grain for more than one year as a drought mitigation measure. Due to the poor performance of Longdale scheme the irrigators wish they had bigger dryland plots.
The irrigators are on top of the grain loan scheme list being run by the government. In the grain loan scheme the government gives farmers maize during times of drought and it is expected that the farmers must return this maize when they get a good harvest. In October 1998 the irrigators of Longdale were given maize for consumption under this scheme. They do not know when they are going to receive maize again. This grain-loan support was very important for the irrigators since they could not harvest anything in 1997 due to pump breakdowns.
Entrepreneurial skills acquired by the farmers such as record keeping, opening of savings account and budgeting have all been wasted. It is unfortunate that the scheme is not doing well because the enthusiasm the farmers had at the beginning was let down by the quality of pump installed for the scheme. Transporters and input traders who had viewed the irrigation scheme as a major trading partner have not been spared by the declining scheme performance. The quantities of fertilizers that used to be demanded by the scheme have gone down since 1995. The volume of produce that used to be ferried to Masvingo markets has gone down. The linkage, which existed between these partners, has been eroded. There is need to resuscitate Longdale irrigation scheme.
Conclusion
The scheme has a lot of potential, which needs to be strengthened by some interventions. The most important intervention is replacing the current pump with a properly functioning pump. The new pump should have spares and back-up service readily available in the country. This intervention, coupled with a number of strengths that the scheme has, will lead to a viable Longdale irrigation scheme. Some of the strengths revealed by the study are:
Group cohesion: There is strong group cohesion, probably due to the fact that the irrigators came from the same village.
Availability of draught power: Farmers have adequate animals for draught power.
Sense of ownership: Farmers feel that the scheme belongs to them. The fact that farmers participated in the construction of the scheme, is a positive attribute.
Irrigation is valued: The scheme is located in the Natural Region III, which is prone to mid season droughts. This makes irrigation critical. Since irrigation is important, farmers' attitude to the scheme is very positive.
<title>SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF SMALLHOLDER IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT IN ZIMBABWE</title>
Annex A-4 Murara Irrigation Scheme
Summary
Murara irrigation scheme is located in Mutoko District of Mashonaland East Province. It is one of the successful farmer managed schemes. The scheme utilizes water from the Murara Dam to irrigate a variety of high value horticultural crops. The yields for these crops are high, due to high input use. The marketing of most of the crops at Mbare Musika brings very high incomes for the farmers. For example, the 1997 annual incomes ranged between Z$ 15 000 and Z$ 35 000 per farmer. Apart from these high incomes, the scheme also acts as a source of food security for the surrounding communities. The strengths of the scheme are based on good planning, involvement of farmers during planning and construction, excellent group cohesion and effective institutional support. The future of the scheme looks bright with the only problem being the siltation of the dam. However, the responsible authorities are taking steps to address this problem.
Introduction
Murara irrigation scheme is located in Chimoyo communal area in the Mutoko District of Mashonaland East province. It is located about 30 km east of Mutoko town. The scheme is located in Natural Region IV, a low rainfall area, which receives about 400 mm of rainfall per year on average. The rainfall is not adequate for meaningful crop production, making irrigation a critical investment in the area. The scheme is 18 ha large with 36 plot holders, each holding 0.5 ha. It comprises members from the same village. Murara irrigation scheme is a gravity fed surface irrigation system.
The scheme draws water from Murara Dam, which was constructed in 1975 by the then Government of Rhodesia (GOR). The reasons behind the development of the dam are unclear, but some believe that it was constructed to provide drinking water for both livestock and human beings. Today the dam supports, apart from the irrigation scheme, some eighteen villages. These villages use the dam for livestock watering, brick moulding and other domestic purposes.
Planning of the scheme
The scheme was initiated in 1982 by the Mutoko District Administrator (DA), in liaison with the Katavhinya village kraal head. This particular village was chosen because the soils were suitable for irrigation. Furthermore, the kraal expressed keen interest in the development of the irrigation. The District Development Fund (DDF) was given the responsibility of designing and constructing the scheme with full farmer participation.
The DA asked people to mould bricks for the construction of the project. They were also asked to dig pits for the toilets. The idea of making farmers provide labour was met with mixed reactions. Some of the villagers left, as they feared that they would end up "working for the government". Nearby villagers contributed to this feeling as they asserted that people at Katavhinya were losing their land. (Ironically the same people are now jealous of the irrigators). However, some thirty villagers decided to participate in brick moulding. The DA's Office provided firewood to cure the bricks.
The construction of the scheme was finished in 1983 and it was 9 ha large, with 30 participants each holding 0.3 ha. The participants were taken on study tours to Nyamaropa and Ngondoma irrigation schemes. These visits were quite helpful since they motivated the Murara farmers. In 1991, an extension of the scheme was proposed. Designs were made by AGRITEX for a further 9 ha to make a total of 18 ha for the scheme. Again the DA's Office mobilized people to mould bricks. A further 6 people participated, bringing the number of irrigators to the current 36.
DDF constructed the scheme, with AGRITEX supervision. The plots were reallocated, with each irrigator getting 0.5 ha spread over three blocks to facilitate rotation. In 1993, the whole 18 ha became operational.
Social aspects
Land tenure and inheritance
The Murara farmers are full time irrigators, with no dryland plots. All their labour is devoted to irrigated agriculture. The irrigated plot passes to the surviving spouse if the plot holder dies. If both spouses die, the eldest son takes over. If the son is not available, the plot passes to the next son in line. In a polygamous marriage the plot is divided between the wives, with the husband remaining the registered plot holder. There are six women plot holders on the scheme, whose plots will pass to the children when they die. Some irrigators have divided their plots to accommodate their children.
Relationship with outsiders.
There are conflicts between the irrigators and the villagers outside the scheme on the use and management of the Murara dam. Villagers outside the scheme practice stream bank cultivation and graze their animals in the catchment, leading to erosion upstream of the dam. This is resulting in the siltation of the dam. At one time, some of the responsible people were removed by AGRITEX. However, the problem remains. Villagers in the catchment do not realize the dangers of siltation. This was confirmed by some of the villagers. However steps are being taken to arrest soil erosion and protect the dam wall. DDF has planted some grass on the dam wall to reduce erosion. However, some jealous villagers are reported to have uprooted some of the grass.
The Kraal head does not own a plot in the scheme, since he did not participate in the brick moulding exercise due to injuries. He, however, rents a plot in the scheme. In addition he has 2.5 ha of dryland outside the scheme which he does not cultivate. Most irrigators do not want him in the scheme. However, he tries to work closely with the IMC. In fact, some IMC members sit in his advisory council. The kraal head is working hard to improve the relationship between the scheme and the outside villagers.
Scheme operation, maintenance and management
The scheme is fully farmer managed with support coming from institutions such as AGRITEX, DDF and AFC. Management of the scheme is through the Irrigation Management Committee (IMC) and the kraal head who strives to work closely with the IMC.
Irrigation Management Committee
A 15 member IMC is in place, comprising of 7 women (one of whom is the chairperson) and 8 men. The tenure of the IMC is three years. The IMC is composed of:
i. Chairperson and vice chairperson
ii. Secretary and vice secretary
iii. Treasurer
iv. Member responsible for security
v. Nine committee members
The IMC is responsible for enforcing the bye-laws, which were formulated by the farmers with AGRITEX assistance. They coordinate the maintenance of the infrastructure. Under the IMC there are four sub-committees namely:
i. Water sub-committee, which is responsible for water delivery to the scheme, water use in the field well and the maintenance of infrastructure
ii. Transport sub-committee, responsible for organizing transport to markets
iii. Marketing sub-committee, which looks for markets
iv. Security sub-committee, responsible for maintaining order in the scheme
All the sub-committees seem to be effective with the water sub-committee being the most effective.
Water management
Water comes to the scheme from the dam through a 4 km open canal. The closing and opening of this water is the responsibility of one of the water sub-committee members. This seems to be a gender specific task, as women find it difficult to operate the valve. Water is shared among three irrigation groups in the scheme (A to C). Each group has twelve irrigators. At any one time there are two groups irrigating which actually means that a total of 24 people will be irrigating. Farmers irrigate as a group and when one farmer is absent his/her plot is irrigated so as not to disrupt the whole process. When water is scarce, like during the 1991/92 season, irrigators scale down their areas under irrigation. During times of water shortages, outside villagers clamour for the scheme to close down. Some outside villagers illegally take water from the canal to mould bricks and for the irrigation of small gardens along the canals. This inconveniences the irrigators. The irrigators have
reported this problem to the police, but up to now nothing has been done.
Repairs and maintenance
The farmers do the maintenance of canals with the IMC coordinating the activities. Other activities carried out are canal repairs and desiltation of the dam. These activities are normally done every Saturday and fines are imposed on those farmers who absent themselves from the maintenance activities. When necessary, farmers are asked to contribute cement and money to replace damaged infrastructure. Siphons are replaced by farmers on an individual basis.
Institutional support
AGRITEX
AGRITEX provides technical advice to the scheme. Generally this is adequately covered. However the Extension Worker serves both the irrigators and the dryland farmers and he complained that the workload is too much.
DDF
DDF maintains the road and gives advice on the maintenance of the dam.
Agricultural performance
In the 1980s, when the scheme started, grain maize, groundnuts, tomatoes and rape were the major crops grown. Grain maize was grown for subsistence purposes while groundnuts, tomatoes and rape were grown for marketing. They were marketed at Mbare Musika in Harare. In 1993, after the extension of the scheme, new crops were introduced and these were butternut, okra, sweet potatoes, beans, cucumber and paprika. A few fruit trees were also introduced, but most of them have died. The diversification of crops was considered ideal for marketing. High yields have been obtained on the scheme. Average yields for the 1997 cropping season are presented in Table 29. The high yields obtained at Murara scheme are due to the use of recommended levels of fertilizer by the farmers. The farmers also apply a strict rotational system to control soil borne diseases.
TABLE 29
Average crop yields under irrigation for the 1997 season at Murara irrigation scheme (Source: Farmers' and Extension Worker's record books, 1998)
Crop Expected yield (tons/ha) Actual yield (tons/ha)
Maize 6 6
Tomatoes 25 28
Butternut 10 9.5
Cucumber 10 11
Okra 9 8.5
Beans 2 1.8
Commercial aspects
Marketing
All the horticultural crops are mainly marketed at Mbare Musika in Harare. As for green maize, buyers come from places such as Mutoko, Mudzi, Marondera and Harare to buy the crop. They provide their own transport. For horticultural crops farmers either hire transport in groups or they catch buses or heavy vehicles on individual basis. Transport is considered to be expensive.
Input acquisition
Most irrigators purchase inputs in groups from Harare. The truck, which goes with the produce to Mbare, comes back with the inputs. Some of the inputs are bought from local dealers. All inputs are financed by the previous season's proceeds since farmers are not interested in AFC because of high interest rates.
Farm income analysis
In the 1997 season tomatoes were the highest paying crop, followed by butternut. The average incomes obtained from different crops are presented in Table 30. The annual net profit per farmer ranged between Z$ 30 000 - Z$ 70 000 per ha.
TABLE 30
Average incomes for different crops during the 1997 season at Murara irrigation scheme (Source: Farmers' and Extension Worker's record books, 1998)
Crop Average gross margin (Z$/ha)
Tomato 120 000
Butternut 41 000
Cucumber 24 000
Okra 19 000
Beans 10 000
Grain maize 5 000
Financial and economic analysis
The financial cash flows for Murara irrigation scheme are presented in Table 31. The cash flows are based on the 1998 prices, which have been deflated at 20% to give their 1982 values. The 1982 prices are then applied throughout as constant market prices, thereby removing the effects of inflation. The investment costs include the construction of the first 9 ha in 1982 and an additional 9 ha in 1991. The results of the analysis indicate that the project is financially viable. The EIRR for the project was calculated to be 50%, revealing that the project is viable from an economic point of view.
Socio-economic impact
The scheme has had some positive impacts on the beneficiaries and the surrounding area. Some of these impacts are as follows.
Increased incomes
The net incomes of Z$ 15 000 - Z$ 35 000 from 0.5 ha are reasonable. These incomes translate to Z$ 1 250 - Z$ 2 917 per farmer per month. The minimum wage of Z$ 1 400 paid in the Zimbabwean industry for unskilled labour is below what most irrigators are getting. If incomes from irrigation are compared with those obtained from dryland, irrigators are better than their dryland counterparts. Dryland farmers usually get a reasonable yield once in every five years. This means they are assured of incomes only during good seasons. And even in good seasons, because of poor yields (1-2 tons/ha for maize) farmers can not have surplus for marketing.
TABLE 31
Discounted cash flow analysis for Murara irrigation scheme.
Year Investment Costs (Z$) Drought savings (Z$) Replacement costs (Z$) Repair & Maintenance Costs (Z$) Extension (Z$) Irrigation income (Z$) Incremental benefit (Z$)
NPV 635 058
FIRR 45%
Increased yields
The yields in the irrigation scheme are high, as indicated in Table 28. For example, the maize yield of 6 tons/ha under irrigation far exceeds the average dryland yield of 1-2 tons/ha, which is attained only once in every five years. The increased yields indicate that irrigation is good for agricultural development.
Diversification
Murara irrigation farmers can now grow a variety of crops, which are not possible under dryland conditions. This diversification of crops also means a diversification of diet.
Employment creation
The scheme generates employment for both the irrigators and non-irrigators. Eighty percent of the household heads do not work in towns. They consider irrigation as an important source of income. Non-irrigators get seasonal employment on the scheme to perform activities such as weeding and harvesting. They are paid either money (Z$ 15/day) or are paid in kind. Most of the non-irrigators practice gold panning. Gold panning is not good for the environment. The digging of stream banks leads to soil degradation and subsequent siltation of the rivers. Other off-farm activities for non-irrigators include beer brewing and pottery for women. Irrigators do not practice all these activities. They concentrate on irrigation. This means irrigation is giving them gainful employment.
Protection of the environment
The fact that Murara irrigators do not engage in gold panning means that irrigation can act as a way of conserving the environment.
Food Security
The scheme area is prone to drought such that the surrounding villagers rely on the scheme for grain. With average yields of 6 tons/ha and area under maize being 9 ha, the total production is approximately 54 tons. With an average family size of 4.6, each requiring 420 kg per year, the maize produced on the scheme can feed 129 households. This includes 36 households on the scheme and 93 households from the surrounding villages. This means the scheme acts as a source of food security.
Savings on drought relief
The irrigation project results in food relief savings for the government. While the dryland farmers get food handouts, the irrigators at Murara are not given. For example, if we consider the food requirement of 10 kg of maize per person per month, with an average of 4.6 persons per household, the food which would be required monthly by Murara farmers would be 1 656 kg for the 36 households. This translates to 9 936 kg per year, assuming that food is given for 6 months every year. The value of the maize is Z$ 23 846 400. This figure does not include transport and administrative costs. The above value of maize is what the government will save by not providing drought relief to the Murara irrigators.
Management Skills
Farmers are now able to manage their own affairs, as evidenced by the ability to take care of the operation and maintenance of the scheme. Group work is very important on the scheme and the way scheme operates is entirely different from what the outside villages are doing.
Conclusion
While Murara scheme is performing well there are a number of weaknesses that threaten its viability. Some of them are:
* The water source is insecure due to siltation of the dam. This requires the cooperation of all villagers in the catchment area. This cooperation is not forthcoming from the non-irrigators who do not see any tangible benefits accruing to them.
* Vandalizing of the canals and illegal water abstraction by non-irrigators may cause problems when the irrigators start paying for water.
* DWR has introduced water fees, which the farmers can not understand. They claim that the whole issue was never explained to them.
* The farmers complained that the scheme demands a lot of labour.
The scheme does not need much intervention in relation to farm operations. Certain policy issues needed to be addressed and these are:
* Clarification of who owns the dam and the involvement of non-irrigators in the management of the dam.
* Clarification of the benefits from the dam that accrue to the non-irrigators.
* Establishment of income generating projects for other villagers outside the irrigation scheme (for example fishing). This will create a sense of ownership of the dam by the non-irrigators.
* Clarification on water payment.
The study of Murara scheme raises some policy issues, which should be considered in the future planning and management of irrigation schemes. These issues are:
* There is need to involve farmers in the implementation of any project to build a sense of ownership. This is important for the viability of the scheme.
* It should be clear from the onset that the project belongs to the people and not to the government. If this had been spelt out in the planning of Murara, some people would not have run away.
* Benefits accruing to the irrigators can be a source of tension with other members of the community. There is need to explain some of the intangible benefits that accrue to non-irrigators.
* Training is important for the adoption of new technologies.
<title>SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF SMALLHOLDER IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT IN ZIMBABWE</title>
<section>1</section>
Annex A-5 Mzinyathini Irrigation Scheme
Summary
Mzinyathini irrigation scheme is located in Umzingwane District of Matabeleland South Province. It is one of the most successful farmer managed surface irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe. Established in 1965, the scheme has never suffered from any problems, except in 1979 when it had to close down because of the liberation war which was at its peak. The scheme is in the dry Natural Region IV and acts as a source of food security for the surrounding communities. Maize and wheat are sold locally and in most cases they are used to pay hired labour. Crop yields are significantly high due to the use of recommended levels of inputs by most farmers. An average income of Z$ 20 000/ha was realized during the 1996/97 season. This is ten times the average income obtained under dryland. The successes of Mzinyathini irrigation scheme are the result of good planning, group cohesion and a capable IMC. The scheme now needs some rehabilitation since this has not been done since its
implementation in 1965.
Introduction
The Mzinyathini irrigation scheme is in the Mzinyathini communal area of Umzingwane District, Matabeleland South Province. The scheme is about 20 km from Esigodini business centre. The scheme is close to a number of business centres, which are Mawabeni (5 km), Mbalabala (10 km) and Esibomvu (20 km). Roads from the scheme to all these centres are tarred except for that one to Esibomvu, which is a well maintained all weather gravel road.
The scheme is located in Natural Region IV, a region which receives low rainfall and is subject to periodic seasonal droughts. Average annual rainfall is about 563 mm. Mzinyathini scheme is 32 ha large with 81 plot holders, each having 0.4 ha. The scheme draws water from the Umzingwane Dam, which is across Mzinyathini River. A surface irrigation system is used and water is gravitated from the dam to a night storage reservoir. From the reservoir, water is distributed into the fields through concrete lined canals.
Planning of the scheme
Mzinyathini scheme started to operate in 1965, after the construction of the Umzingwane Dam. The scheme was a result of an agreement made between the Bulawayo town municipality and the government Department of Native Affairs in 1959. The two parties agreed to have a dam constructed on the Mzinyathini River. Included in the agreement was the understanding that the government was to be permitted to abstract 1 million m^3 of water from the dam free of charge for communal area development. Under the dam agreement, the Bulawayo municipality donated £30 000 (Rhodesian pounds) to the government for any purpose considered beneficial for the Mzinyathini communal people. Part of the money was used to develop Mzinyathini irrigation scheme and part of the money was used to provide piped water for domestic use and livestock in the Mzinyathini communal area. This involves pumping water from the night storage reservoir in the irrigation scheme to a command point and then bringing it by
gravity to domestic supply points.
Social aspects
Land ownership and inheritance
The system of inheritance in place is that once the plot holder dies, the surviving spouse takes over. If both spouses die, the children inherit the irrigated plot. In some cases, where a registered irrigation plot holder feels he is too old to manage the 0.4 ha, he gives portions of his plot to one or more relatives. In return, these relatives pay the full levy of the plot and/or provide labour for the "landlord". From the survey, it was established that 23% of the farmers were leasing out their plots for labour. The scheme bye-laws allow the leasing to take place, but the owner of the plot will be fully responsible for the operation and maintenance of the scheme infrastructure.
Relationship with outsiders
The irrigators have a good working relationship with the surrounding villages. Irrigators usually hire non-irrigators to provide labour at planting, weeding, harvesting and marketing. The labour is paid either in money or in kind. During droughts, the scheme acts as a source of food for the surrounding community. As such, non-irrigators find it important to work harmoniously with their counterparts.
Scheme operation, maintenance and management
Irrigation Management Committee
The scheme is farmer managed through an Irrigation Management Committee (IMC). The committee consists of seven members who are:
i. Chairperson and deputy chairperson
ii. Secretary and deputy secretary
iii. Treasurer
iv. Two committee members
The IMC is tasked with the day to day running of the scheme. This involves settling disputes, organizing repairs and maintenance of the scheme infrastructure and collecting the irrigation levy. Overall, the IMC is managing to run the scheme. It has been able to collect the fee on a yearly basis. It persuades and motivates the irrigators to pay the O&M fee and difficult irrigators are summoned before the committee as a last resort. The ability of the management committee to mobilize farmers to do maintenance work as well as O&M fee collection is evidence of irrigators' desire to remain in the scheme as well as their capability to run their own affairs. The only problem mentioned by the IMC as hindering the smooth operation of the scheme was lack of back-up service from the police. The IMC has no power to arrest or detain offenders. There were cases where thieves were caught stealing, they handed them to the police only to be released the same day.
Repairs and maintenance
Irrigators pay Z$ 175/ha per year for the operation and maintenance of the scheme. According to the IMC there are no problems regarding the payment of this O&M fee. The irrigators also cut grass, repair canals and repair the main pipeline from the dam to the reservoir. This pipeline is old (over 30 years) and leaks frequently. However, farmers have managed to maintain it properly.
Institutional support
Two institutions facilitate the day to day management of the scheme. These are AGRITEX and DWR
AGRITEX
AGRITEX has a full time resident Extension Worker on the scheme who is responsible for giving technical advice on irrigated crop production, irrigation scheduling and water management.
DWR
This department is responsible for maintaining Mzinyathini dam. A water bailiff is employed by the department to open and close the water for the scheme.
Agricultural performance
Major irrigated crops at the scheme are groundnuts and sugar beans in summer and green maize, wheat and horticultural crops in winter. Horticultural crops include cabbage, onion, rape and tomatoes. The cropping pattern is arrived at after discussions between the IMC, farmers and AGRITEX staff. Agronomic consideration, food requirements and availability of markets are the major factors taken into account in coming up with the cropping programme. An examination of the dryland agriculture revealed that non-irrigators grow maize, groundnuts, bambara nuts and sorghum on an average plot size of 1 ha. Horticultural crops are not grown by non-irrigators. The cropping pattern of the two populations indicated that they are different. While non-irrigators grow crops purely for subsistence, irrigators grow the high paying horticultural crops. This means that irrigators are participating in the mainstream economy while non-irrigators are not.
A comparative analysis of yields showed that irrigators get much higher yields than non-irrigators. Table 32 gives the average yields for the two types of farmers during the 1995/96 cropping season.
TABLE 32
Comparative analysis of irrigation and dryland crop yields during the 1995/96 season at Mzinyathini irrigation scheme (Source: Farmers' and Extension Worker's record books, 1998)
Crop Irrigation yields (tons/ha) Dryland yields (tons/ha) % increase of irrigated over dryland yield
Maize 6 - 8 0.6 - 2 200 - 1 233
Groundnuts 2 0.7 - 1 100 - 186
The analysis in Table 32 indicates that crop yields have gone up manifold with irrigation. The higher yields obtained under irrigation are attributed to the high levels of inputs used in irrigation. In dryland, farmers confirmed that they are scared of using fertilizers, because they will burn their crops due to lack of rainfall. This is a legitimate concept given the limitations posed by weather on their cropping activities. In Mzinyathini scheme, irrigated maize is applied with 400 kg/ha fertilizer as opposed to 100 kg/ha in the dryland. Groundnuts are given on average 300 kg/ha gypsum as opposed to nothing or very little in dryland. These discrepancies in fertilizer application means that the two groups are totally different. While irrigators are operating on commercial lines, non-irrigators are not.
Commercial aspects
Marketing
The main marketing centres for produce from the scheme are the four business centres near the scheme. The centres are all within a 20 km radius from the scheme and are all linked to the scheme by excellent roads. The business centres are namely Esigodini (20 km), Mawabeni (5 km), Mbalabala (10 km) and Esibomvu (20 km). Produce such as green maize and horticultural crops is also marketed in Bulawayo. Some dealers come with their own transport to buy produce at the farm gate.
Input acquisition
The four business centres, which act as markets for scheme produce, are also local sources of inputs and chemicals. However, all horticultural seeds are acquired from Bulawayo town.
Farm income analysis
High incomes were reported at Mzinyathini irrigation scheme. Thirty farmers interviewed reported net incomes ranging from Z$ 6 000 to Z$ 12 000 per year from the 0.4 ha plots for the 1996/97 cropping season. The gross incomes reported by thirty non-irrigators interviewed ranged from Z$ 800 to Z$ 5 000 per year. A comparative analysis of the two groups indicates that irrigators on average get ten times more income than non-irrigators. The irrigators reported that because of these benefits a large number of non-irrigators are now willing to participate in irrigation, as evidenced by the long waiting list of over three hundred dryland farmers.
Financial and economic analysis
The results of the financial and economic analysis are summarized in Tables 33 and 34 respectively.
From the financial analysis it is clear that Mzinyathini irrigation scheme is viable since the FIRR exceeds 9.75%, which is the cost of borrowing. The project gives a positive net present value (NPV), which means that it is an attractive investment. The analysis also shows a favourable benefit cost ration (BCR) of 2.14.
The results of the economic analysis show that the project is economically viable. The NPV is positive and EIRR is greater than the cut off point of 8.5%. This scheme is an attractive project for the society to invest since it contributes positively towards growth.
TABLE 33
Summary of financial analysis for Mzinyathini irrigation scheme
FIRR (%) NPV (Z$) Benefit Cost Ratio
Table 34
Summary of economic analysis for Mzinyathini irrigation scheme
EIRR (%) NPV (Z$) Benefit Cost Ratio
Socio-economic impact
Mzinyathini irrigation scheme is one of the viable schemes in the Matabeleland South Province. It has contributed much in the areas of food security, employment creation and income generation. Irrigators get substantially higher yields than non-irrigators. This is an indication of the importance of irrigation in agricultural development. Given the harsh climatic conditions in the Mzinyathini communal area, the irrigation scheme acts as the only source of grain in times of drought. In fact the scheme has never suffered any grain shortage since inception. It was reported that during the droughts of 1984/85 and 1991/92 the scheme cushioned most villagers against starvation.
The diversification into horticultural crops by irrigators also means a diversification of diet. Women in particular were quite happy with the nutritious food the children eat from the scheme. This includes beans, tomatoes and leafy vegetables. Non-irrigators rely heavily on the scheme for such type of food. The scheme has also been shown to improve household food security in the surrounding area through free transfer of food. Irrigators give significant amount of grain and other crops to non-irrigating friends and relatives. This culture of giving help to ensure that very few if any in the area starve.
The labour hired by the irrigators means that the scheme is a source of employment for the dryland community. Irrigators acknowledge that irrigation demands a lot of labour, especially for siphoning, weeding, harvesting and transplanting. Both full time and hired labour were shown to be important in the scheme. Of the 30 farmers interviewed, 25 had one full time worker each. However this is not enough, so the permanent labour is supplemented by casual labour. The fact that over 95% of the household heads are resident on the farm is another indication that irrigation is providing adequate incomes for the farmers and thus it is an attractive employer. Incomes of Z$ 6 000 - Z$ 12 000 per year from the 0.4 ha plots are being obtained. Farmers feel comfortable with these levels of incomes.
The scheme provides some forward and backward linkages in the community. It provides a market for the retailing business at the Mawani business centre. The high incomes of the farmers result in high demand for retail goods. Irrigators were found to consume meat, bread, rice, soap and other goodies. Esigodini business centre, just 20 km away, also benefits significantly from the scheme. This centre stocks most agricultural inputs such as seed, fertilizer and pesticides. The importance of the irrigation scheme was confirmed by some community leaders in the area during informal interviews. They indicated that while non-irrigators receive food handouts from the government every year, irrigators rely on their own food grown on the scheme. This means the scheme results in a lot of drought relief savings for the government.
Conclusion
Mzinyathini is one of the successful smallholder schemes in Zimbabwe. Being in one of the country's driest regions, the scheme has a significant role to play as far as food security is concerned. The scheme has indeed proven that smallholder farmers can successful manage their own affairs. The ability of the IMC to mobilize farmers to pay the repair and maintenance costs indicates that they are quite capable of managing the scheme. The good performance of the scheme is also attributable to the following factors:
Irrigation is valued: The scheme is located in a dry region where inadequate rainfall limits agricultural production. Without irrigation it is rare to get any good yields and a result the farmers value the role of irrigation.
Group cohesion: Farmers are very much cooperative, making the management of the scheme easy.
Sense of ownership: The fact that farmers are involved in the operation and management of the scheme makes them feel that the scheme is theirs.
Markets are available: Numerous business centres surround the scheme, which makes marketing relatively easy.
Land inheritance: The system of inheritance in place makes the farmers feel secure.
<section>2</section>
Annex A-6 Ngezi Mamina Irrigation Scheme
Summary
Ngezi Mamina irrigation scheme is located in Kadoma District of Mashonaland West Province. It is one of the schemes, which have failed to achieve the intended primary objective of improving the standard of living of the people. The scheme started operating in 1994 and since then the farmers have obtained very little income. The cropping pattern is restricted to low value crops such as wheat, beans and grain maize, with very little horticultural crops being grown. Farmers view the scheme as belonging to the government and as such they do not want to take over the operation and maintenance. The infield irrigation designs are said to be sub-standard and this makes water management difficult. There is conflict between farmers and various institutions serving them, a situation that does not promote the smooth operation of the scheme. Draught power is a problem and most farmers do not use inputs, resulting in very low yields. The electricity bill is always too high and this is
partly blamed on the inappropriate designs. A lot of work on technical, social, institutional, managerial and financial issues need to be done to transform this scheme into a viable one.
Introduction
Ngezi Mamina irrigation scheme lies in the Mhondoro communal area, in Kadoma District of Mashonaland West Province. The scheme is 216 ha large and it consists of 154 plot holders, of whom 139 have 1.5 ha plots and 15 have 0.5 ha each.
The scheme is about 130 km south west of Harare town and located in Natural Region III, a relatively low rainfall area with an average rainfall of 300-700 mm per year. The scheme has a sprinkler system in which water is first pumped into a balancing tank at a high point and then fed into the sprinkler system by gravity. The water source is the nearby Mamina dam, which is located at the boarder of Mashonaland East and West Provinces. The Department of Water Resources (DWR) operates and maintains the dam and the associated infrastructure up to the field edge. AGRITEX operates and maintains the infield infrastructure. The Rural District Council (RDC) is the legal owner of the land upon which the scheme is sited.
Planning of the scheme
The irrigation scheme was identified in the early 1990s and the idea was to have it constructed simultaneously with the Mamina dam. The funding was provided by the German funding agency Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) and the planning of the scheme was done by Halcrow Consultants, a local consulting company. AGRITEX took part in the mobilization of the farmers. At first, farmers were strongly against the project. They thought that they were going to loose their land to the government. They also argued that they were not consulted in the identification of the irrigable lands. Of major concern to them was the issue of land for their children. By loosing their lands to irrigation, their children were going to loose out. This argument originated from the fact that children inherit or are given a portion of parents' fields for cultivation. The development of the irrigation scheme was going to make this impossible, according to the farmers. Farmers also had the impression
that they were going to be used as unpaid government workers
A series of meetings were held between 1991 and 1993 in an effort to convince farmers to accept the project. They were taken on study tours to see how farmers in other irrigation schemes in the country were benefiting from irrigation. The farmers later accepted the project, but they were still suspicious about the whole programme.
In 1992 designs were produced by the consultants and in 1993 construction of the scheme started. Farmers were hired as casual labour. However, each farmer was tasked to clear his/her own plot. Plots were allocated by AGRITEX. The completion of scheme construction preceded the formation of an IMC, an indication that farmer participation during scheme establishment and plot allocation was limited. The allocation of plots by AGRITEX drew people from three surrounding villages, civil servants, local authorities and schools. According to the AGRITEX officials who allocated the plots, irrigation plots were given to civil servants after most of the surrounding villagers refused to join the scheme. The allocation to civil servants was done as a last resort to have all the plots occupied. Some farmers opposed this allocation of plots to civil servants and other employed people. However, they had little influence to change this. In 1994, the scheme became operational. From the
beginning, a lot of social problems affected the scheme negatively.
Social aspects
Land tenure and inheritance
From the beginning most of the farmers who lost their land to irrigation were not happy with the system of plot allocation. These people who used to own what is now the irrigation scheme, felt that they "lost" their land to outsiders even though each family was allocated a 1 or 1.5 ha plot. To worsen the situation, the so called `outsiders' have not given up their dryland plots for redistribution, despite the fact that this was a precondition for them to be allocated irrigation plots. According to the farmers, the District Council and local leadership have ignored this problem. It is also alleged that a group of powerful local leaders and civil servants acquired plots under conditions described by farmers as unfair, given that unmarried sons of the displaced families, single mothers and widows were all denied plots at the beginning of the scheme.
However, the present irrigators appear to be divided as to why outsiders were allowed to join the scheme. One group of farmers (believed to be the displaced families whose land went into irrigation) claim that the selection criteria deliberately created an artificial shortage of plot holders to accommodate outsiders. The other group (believed to be the outsiders) claim that some people opted out thinking that they would be used as government workers in the scheme. According to the latter group it is these doubting people who are now coming back to demand land after realizing the benefits of irrigation.
This situation of land ownership has caused problems at the scheme. The kraal head on his own initiative evicted 26 `outsiders' from the scheme and replaced them with 75 plot holders who included young people and widows who had been denied entry into the scheme at the beginning. This means some plots in the scheme are now less than the designed 0.5 ha or 1.5 ha, which can make water management difficult.
There is no clear policy on plot inheritance in case the plot holder dies. From the study it seemed there are several powerful individuals who can easily decide who will get the vacant plot to suit their selfish interests.
Scheme operation, maintenance and management
Irrigation Management Committee
The scheme is government managed with the assistance of the IMC. The IMC is composed of the following:
i. Chairperson and vice chairperson
ii. Secretary and vice chairperson
iii. Treasurer
iv. Five committee members
Under the IMC there are seven block sub-committees and a marketing sub-committee. Members of the IMC are drawn from all block sub-committees. Of the ten IMC members, three are women. This means that some blocks do not have women for enforcing the bye-laws. Members of block sub-committees basically carry out the functions of the IMC within each block. The marketing sub-committee comprises two members from each block. It does not compose of any women members. Its mandate is to source for inputs, service providers, transport, finance, information on new crops and markets. The sub-committee has managed to source markets for only a few crops.
Generally, the IMC is considered to be working well with the scheme members. The IMC has been in office since 1994 and it was voted back in to office again in 1996 at the end of its two-year term. It is believed that the IMC was voted back because it is strong and efficient.
Water management
Proper water management is not considered important at Ngezi Mamina irrigation scheme. Farmers do not know how much to apply. Symptoms of over-irrigation were apparent at this scheme. The IMC doesn't seem to take initiatives to control the use of water. Some farmers are reported to have their sprinklers operating for up to 48 hours in one position at peak demand instead of about 12 hours as per the design. The fact that farmers are not responsible for paying electricity and water seems to be the reason why they are so careless with water. In the event that farmers start paying for water and electricity it is most likely that they will start using the water carefully
Electricity bills
Electricity bills are paid by AGRITEX. In 1998, the bills were ranging from Z$ 80 000 to Z$ 115 000 per month. This translates to Z$ 370 - Z$ 532 per ha per month. AGRITEX is struggling to pay the costs, due to financial constraints facing the government. This has resulted in electricity being shut off by the power suppliers for periods of up to three months. This has resulted in crop losses. AGRITEX argues that the electricity bill is too high, considering that the annual allocation from central government is on average only Z$ 2 million and this amount will have to cater for more than 180 other schemes. AGRITEX has made some efforts to hand over the payment of bills to the farmers. Several meetings were held between AGRITEX, DWR, the local Member of Parliament (MP) and the farmers on this issue. However, farmers were reluctant to accept this responsibility. They argued that the irrigation design implemented was not suitable for smallholders. The system in place of first
pumping water to a tank on the highest point and then releasing it into the fields is costly according to the farmers.
Repair and maintenance
DWR is responsible for the repairs of the dam and pump. When the pump needs major repairs, DWR takes it for repair on their account. This means that they have a running budget for the scheme. Farmers complained that DWR takes its time to repair the pump whenever it breaks down. Asked if they can manage to maintain the pump if the scheme is handed over to them, farmers pointed out that they can not. They argued that the pumps were imported so they need foreign currency to repair them. This is beyond their capabilities. They even complained on why these pumps were imported in the first place.
AGRITEX is supposed to repair and maintain the infield infrastructure. However, it seems that AGRITEX has since abandoned its obligation of maintaining the scheme. It is now asking farmers to be responsible. Farmers are now paying Z$ 100 per individual per year for the maintenance of the infield pipeline and fittings.
Institutional support
There are three main institutions that are being involved in the running of Ngezi Mamina scheme. These are AGRITEX, DWR and a local Development Committee.
AGRITEX
AGRITEX provides technical advice to the farmers on irrigated crop production, irrigation scheduling and water management. Two full time Extension Workers are resident at the scheme.
DWR
DWR manages the dam, the pumping unit and the conveyance pipeline. The department employs a water bailiff and his assistants and these are responsible for closing and opening the pump and basic maintenance of the dam and pump.
Development Committee
In July 1997, a Development Committee (DC) was formed, comprising of four Chiefs from the area, some IMC members, District Council officials and some government officers. The kraal heads were not included in the DC, except for the IMC chairman (a kraal head himself) who qualified by virtue of being the head of the IMC. The DC's functions are supposed to be the overall development of the area, including the dryland, the Ngezi Mamina irrigation scheme and the proposed Ngezi Block B project. However, the IMC and other members of the scheme view the function of DC very suspiciously. There is a general feeling among irrigators that their own chiefs may not always vote in favour of the scheme. For example, it was reported that during a recent DC meeting, apparently aimed at nullifying the current plot holdings at the scheme, the DC approved the nullification against the wish of IMC mainly because most of the chiefs voted in favour of the nullification.
The current situation suggests that the DC is in conflict with the IMC in a power struggle. This relationship is not good for the smooth running of the scheme. The council, which is supposed to help the scheme in development issues, has its members in the DC and these seem to be against the IMC, especially on the land allocation issues. The situation is worsened by the fact that some council officials who had plots in the scheme were victims of the eviction exercise carried out by the kraal heads. Farmers complained that the District Development Fund (DDF), which works under the District Council and is responsible for maintaining roads in the area, is no longer doing so as a way of sabotaging the scheme. It is also alleged that the DDF tillage unit is no longer keen to send its tractors to service the scheme, because some council officials were evicted from the scheme. The nearby secondary schools, Ngezi and Saint Michael, now have a bad relationship with the scheme, because
they were evicted from the scheme.
Agricultural performance
Major crops grown at the scheme are green maize and wheat in winter, beans, groundnuts and grain maize in summer. Horticultural crops such as tomatoes, onions and leafy vegetables are grown on a very small scale, probably one to two lines per farmer. One farmer who is the vice-chairman of the IMC grows potatoes. Wheat and beans are usually grown on contract with some private companies.
The crop yields obtained by farmers vary greatly. Typical examples are for wheat where some farmers obtain low yields of 2 tons/ha while others get 7 tons/ha. Yields for beans vary from 0.3 tons/ha to 1.5 tons/ha. The very low yields that are obtained by the majority of the farmers are a result of low levels of inputs, late planting due to shortage of draught power or simply lack of commitment on the part of the farmers. Most farmers are not credit worth, so they can not get any financial assistance from AFC. Most farmers believed that they can perform better if they get financial help. However, some good farmers claimed that there is no need to get financial help in irrigated agriculture. One such farmer claimed that he made a net profit of Z$ 80 000 from his 1.5 ha in 1997. He however added that farmers on the scheme had to be innovative to achieve this. Apparently this successful farmer is the chairman of the marketing sub-committee and other farmers accuse him of using
his position for sourcing his own markets.
Most farmers are not keen to grow horticultural crops on a large scale. They are afraid of the high labour requirements of growing such crops and the uncertainty of markets. Farmers have been taken on study tours of other irrigation schemes, which are successfully growing and marketing horticultural crops. The Ngezi Mamina farmers are still reluctant to change.
Commercial aspects
Marketing
The crops grown by the farmers are normally marketed locally either at the farm gate or at the nearby Chizinga business centre. Farmers do not make an effort to grow high value crops and source for lucrative markets in the city. The nearby secondary schools, Ngezi and St Michael, which were expected to buy from the scheme are not doing so. The major reason was that they were evicted from the scheme.
Input acquisition
There is low input use at the scheme and those who use inputs normally buy from the local business centre.
Farm income analysis
Farmer incomes vary greatly from farmer to farmer and this ranges from Z$ 3 000 to Z$ 80 000 per year from a 1.5 ha plot. Farmers with 0.5 ha get much less. Those farmers who concentrate on low value crops obtain low incomes, while a few farmers who take the risk of growing horticultural crops obtain high incomes. Generally it can be concluded that Ngezi Mamina scheme has failed to generate the anticipated incomes.
Financial and economic analysis
The discounted cash flow analysis for Ngezi Mamina irrigation scheme is presented in Table 35. The negative NPV indicate that the project is not viable. The NPV for the economic analysis was found to be minus Z$ 1 258 970, also indicating that the project is not viable economically.
TABLE 35
Discounted cash flow analysis for Ngezi Mamina irrigation scheme
Year Investment Costs (Z$) Energy Costs (Z$) Replacement Costs (Z$) Repair & Maintenance Costs (Z$) Extension
(Z$) Irrigation Income (Z$) Incremental Benefit (Z$)
NPV -25 042 648
Socio-economic impact
Ngezi Mamina is one of the schemes that have failed to achieve their intended objectives. Crop production at the scheme has failed to diversify into lucrative horticultural crops. Farmers still grow the traditional maize and groundnuts in summer instead of high paying crops. The farmers operate as if they are practising dryland agriculture. The yields are too low on average meaning that irrigation as a technology at Ngezi Mamina has failed to boost productivity. This does not fit well with the objectives of irrigation development. In the context of agricultural development of the country where commercialization of the smallholder farmer is emphasized, the scheme has failed. The low levels of inputs being used means that farmers are not yet operating as business minded people. The absence of farm record books also indicated that farmers at this scheme have not developed entrepreneurial skills. A lot of effort has been made by AGRITEX on teaching the farmers financial
management and record keeping but farmers are reluctant to adopt.
Incomes at the scheme are generally very low with incomes per farmer of as low as Z$ 3 000 per year. Farmers acknowledged that the incomes from the scheme are not adequate to meet their basic requirements. They can not also finance inputs for the next season. Employment has not been created by the scheme. The involvement of farmers in non-irrigation activities indicates that irrigation has failed to act as an attractive employer. Hired labour is only used by a few irrigators, with payment being in kind.
Farmers at Ngezi Mamina still receive drought relief from government. For example, during the 1996/97 season despite having the irrigation scheme, the food situation was so bad that irrigators ended up approaching the government department of Social Welfare for food handouts. According to the farmers irrigation has failed to transform their social and economic lives. Farmers acknowledged that they have not managed to buy any assets using irrigation incomes. The incomes are far from being adequate. Despite the shortcomings of the scheme some local dealers have benefited from the scheme. The nearby Chizinga business centre, being the major supplier of inputs, has acknowledged that the scheme has brought in some benefits. Some three tractor owners in the area are also benefiting from the scheme. Tractors are normally hired by irrigators for ploughing the plots at Z$ 500/ha.
Conclusion
The study of Ngezi Mamina irrigation scheme has revealed some factors that are important for the successful implementation of smallholder irrigation schemes. It has come out clearly that an irrigation scheme can be comparatively well designed and in a sound technical state but that social issues, relating to land allocation, population pressure, power struggles and payment of O&M costs can affect the viability of the project. The main issues that affect Ngezi Mamina scheme are as follows:
Land disputes: The main problems on land revolve around the ownership of the scheme. The three kraal heads, under whose authority the scheme falls under, have claimed that the scheme belongs to them and their children. As such they claim that they have a right to allocate lands to themselves and their children and not to `outsiders' who had been settled by the government. This has resulted in the eviction of 26 plot holders who participated during scheme construction. The nearby Saint Michaels Mission Hospital, which had been allocated a plot so as to grow food for hospital patients, was also evicted. The evicted plot holders were replaced by 75 other farmers. It is these new farmers who are said to be performing poorly and not willing to cooperate with the rest. The evicted plot holders argue that they were allocated the land fairly as the project was not meant to be for one clan. They claim that the locals were not willing at first to participate and it was only later
after seeing the benefits of irrigation that they started demanding for plots. It was said that some locals had thought that they were going to be made government workers.
High energy costs: The scheme is the most expensive project to run in terms of energy costs in the country. Electricity charges range from Z$ 80 000 to Z$ 115 000 per month. On an annual basis this consumes more than 50% of the annual budget allocated to AGRITEX for maintaining and running irrigation schemes in the country. Farmers indicated that they can not manage the bills, especially with their current cropping programme.
Poor water management: Poor water management is practised on the scheme. Farmers illegally extend their fields, use sprinkler sizes different from the designed size and tend to irrigate for longer hours than necessary.
Power struggle: There is a conflict between the IMC and the DC. The DC claims to have authority over the IMC, but the latter thinks otherwise. For example, the DC wanted the 24 evicted farmers to be reinstated but the IMC resisted this move. The IMC has also a poor working relationship with the District Council, AGRITEX, the MP and other government institutions in the area.
Choice of crops: Farmers only grow low value crops. As a result, the incomes they derive from the scheme are too low to cover the O&M costs of the scheme.
Gender aspects: Women are believed to be discriminated against in the scheme. It was reported that some widows were denied plots on the grounds that they had no physical strength to engage in land clearing. Young divorced women were also denied plots.
Weak IMC: The IMC is unable to stamp out unauthorized plot extensions and some offences go unpunished.
Scheme name: Farmers are not happy with the name Ngezi Mamina. They claim that this is a foreign businessman's name. Farmers want the scheme name changed to Chikwiriwindi.
Lack of respect for sacred places: Farmers reported that sacred sites were not spared during scheme construction. They claim that they are experiencing some misfortunes every year and this is due to failure by council to complete traditional rituals associated with the dam and the scheme.
Irrigation is not valued: Irrigation is viewed as a labour demanding technology. As such farmers are not willing to engage in horticultural crops which demand a lot of labour.
Despite the above weakness, the Ngezi Mamina scheme has several strengths that were revealed in the study. The strengths are:
Secure water supply: The Mamina dam, which supplies the scheme, is a secure source of water.
Availability of inputs: Inputs are easily available from the nearby business centres. Two big wholesale companies are available at the business centre and they stock all kinds of fertilizers and chemicals that farmers need.
In light of the experiences from Ngezi Mamina the following general recommendations must be considered in the future planning of smallholder irrigation schemes:
* In addition to training in water management and irrigated crop production, farmers should also receive training in leadership skills, gender issues, financial management, record keeping and marketing.
* Employed individuals and civil servants should not be allocated irrigation plots at the expense of farmers.
* Irrigation systems that require less energy requirements must be considered for smallholder irrigation schemes.
* Irrigation schemes should be given names agreeable to both farmers and the local leadership.
* The IMC should be formed during the planning stage to help in the mobilization of farmers and land allocation.
* Land allocation should not be done by one government department, but should include farmers, District Councils and other important institutions.
* A system of land tenure that provides some from of security is important for the smooth operation of an irrigation scheme.
<section>3</section>
Annex A-7 Oatlands Irrigation Scheme
Summary
Oatlands irrigation scheme is located in Masvingo District of Masvingo Province. The scheme is 5 ha large and was established in 1988. It has never performed to the expected levels. Oatlands scheme is fully government managed and farmers were only settled when the scheme had already been constructed. Farmers were never involved in the planning and implementation of the scheme and they currently feel that the scheme belongs to the government. As a result they do not want to participate in any O&M work. The government itself is failing to carry out the O&M of the scheme due to financial constraints. The scheme is in a poor physical condition. In summer farmers leave the irrigation scheme and cultivate their dryland plots in which they have much larger plots (4 ha dryland as compared to 0.4 ha in irrigation). The IMC is not effective and there is no order on the scheme. Water management is very poor and some waterlogged plots can be observed as one moves around the scheme.
Interventions are needed to improve the performance of this scheme.
Introduction
Oatlands irrigation scheme is located in the Mushandike resettlement area in Masvingo District of Masvingo Province. It is located about 36 km south east of Masvingo town, along the Masvingo-Mutirikwi dam highway. The scheme is located in Natural Region III, a relatively low rainfall area which receives on average 400-600 mm of rainfall per year. The scheme is 5 ha large and supports twelve plot holders, whose plots are 0.4 ha each. Eight of the twelve plot holders are widows and the other four are married couples. Of the eight widows, four lost their husbands after settlement and the other four joined the scheme as widows. In addition, each farmer has a 4 ha dryland plot. The scheme uses a gravity fed surface irrigation system with water being supplied from Oatlands dam.
Planning of the scheme
The designs of the scheme were done in 1987 by AGRITEX. However the construction was done by DERUDE, under the supervision of AGRITEX. Farmers did not participate during the planning and the construction of the scheme and were settled after the scheme had already been completed. People who were to be settled came from different areas, namely Murinye, Mugabe and Mapanzure communal areas
Social aspects
Land tenure and inheritance
The question of inheritance is not clear at the scheme. Some farmers interviewed responded that when a plot holder dies the plot pass on to the surviving spouse. Other farmers claimed that when a male plot holder dies the plot passes to the eldest son who in turn makes a part of it available to his mother and if a widow plot holder dies, the plot passes on to her children. However, some farmers said that the plot holder is the only person registered by the resettlement office and if he/she dies, the rest of the family has to vacate. From the above different perceptions on inheritance, it seems farmers are not certain about their security at the scheme.
Relationship with outsiders
The irrigators have a good working relationship with the non-irrigators. Actually, the irrigators in summer spend most of their time attending to their dryland plots rather than the irrigated plots. They cooperate with non-irrigators in most of the activities on the resettlement.
Scheme operation, maintenance and management
The scheme is government managed with the assistance of an IMC.
IMC
The IMC is composed of six members:
i. Chairperson, and vice chairperson
ii. Secretary
iii. Treasurer
iv. Two committee members
Five of the IMC members are women. The IMC coordinates all the scheme activities, including determination of the cropping programme and conflict resolution among other functions. The repair and maintenance of the scheme is viewed as an AGRITEX responsibility so the IMC is not involved. The Extension Worker for the area described the IMC as very weak and unorganized. They do not call for any meetings and do not mobilize irrigators to maintain the scheme.
The Extension Worker suggested that the IMC should undergo some training for the farmers to be able to take over the scheme. In addition, all irrigators should be taken on tour to other successful irrigation schemes in the country so that they can learn how to run the scheme. Planners seemed to have overlooked the training of farmers at the beginning.
Water management
Water management and efficient use of water are not important considerations at Oatlands irrigation scheme. Farmers acknowledged that they did not know the quantities of water they applied to different crops. Visual assessment showed that there is a lot of waterlogging on the scheme. Opening of water is not organized or coordinated. There is no one farmer responsible for opening or closing the water from the dam. Any one farmer can open the water any time he or she wishes, resulting in a lot of wastage. The IMC is aware of this situation, but no action is being taken. The Extension Worker felt that this might be due to the fact that currently farmers are not paying for water. The farmers view everything as for free.
Repairs and maintenance
AGRITEX is supposed to be maintaining Oatlands irrigation scheme. However, AGRITEX abandoned the repair and maintenance of the scheme in 1994, possibly due to financial constraints. Farmers have not taken initiative to take over as they still view the scheme as a government scheme. They have not contributed anything towards the repair and maintenance of the canals and other infrastructure. At one point the IMC tried to raise money from the farmers for O&M but it was unsuccessful.
Institutional support
Two government institutions are supposed to be involved in the running and management of the irrigation scheme, AGRITEX and DWR.
AGRITEX
The irrigators view the scheme as an AGRITEX project, meaning that the department is responsible for the operation and management of the scheme. During the first years of operation and up to 1994, AGRITEX was responsible for all the scheme operations. The department was responsible for repairing the canals, fencing and other infield infrastructure. AGRITEX has, due to financial constraints, since stopped offering maintenance services to the scheme. However, there was no proper hand over of the scheme to the farmers
DWR
Oatlands dam is a state dam and falls under the authority of DWR. However, this department is not involved in the maintenance of the dam. AGRITEX used to maintain the dam to some extent, but they have since stopped.
Agricultural performance
No meaningful crop production takes place at this irrigation scheme. Production is mainly confined to winter, producing crops such as leaf vegetables, green maize, tomatoes and groundnuts. Bambara nuts and beans are the only crops grown in summer, but on a very small scale. Irrigators tend to shift to their 4 ha dryland plots in summer, paying very little attention to the irrigation scheme. Farmers gave the following reasons for their behaviour:
* Irrigation demands a lot of inputs which farmers can not afford, so it is better to concentrate on the dryland plots which demand less inputs.
* Irrigation demands a lot of labour especially activities like land leveling and siphoning which leaves them with no time to do non-farm activities. So they prefer dryland agriculture which is not labour intensive.
Figures for the use of inputs could not be obtained from the farmers due to the scarcity of written records. However, information revealed by the Extension Worker indicated that the levels of inputs used at the scheme are very low. For example, the basal fertilizer used on green maize is around 100 kg/ha as opposed to the recommended 450 kg/ha. The amount of top dressing used is 50 kg/ha as compared to the recommended 400 kg/ha. The bean crop is not fertilized at all. These low input levels, combined with poor water management, are responsible for the poor yields. The yields obtained at the scheme recorded by the Extension Worker over a three-year period are presented in Table 36.
TABLE 36
Average crop yields at Oatlands irrigation scheme (Source: Extension Worker's record book,1988)
Crop Yield (tons/ha) Yield (tons/ha) Yield (tons/ha)
Maize 0.5 - 3 0.8 - 2.5 0.8 - 2.5
Beans 0.4 - 0.8 0.5 - 0.8 0.5 - 0.8
Groundnuts 0.6 - 1.5 0.6 - 1.5 0.7 - 1.5
Tomatoes 8 - 15 10 - 15 10 - 15
Commercial aspects
Marketing
Due to the low yields and poor quality produce obtained at the scheme there is no organized marketing of crops. The crops can not compete on lucrative markets, such as Masvingo, and as a result all crops are marketed locally. Tomatoes and green maize are marketed by the roadside, on the Masvingo - Lake Mutirikwi highway. Irrigators roast green maize cobs for sale to passing motorists and others. Beans and vegetables are also locally marketed. When asked why they do not take their produce to Masvingo, farmers reported that they can not compete with the nearby commercial farmers who use Masvingo as the main marketing centre.
Input acquisition
There is very little use of fertilizers at this scheme. The little fertilizer used is acquired from the local business centre.
Farm income analysis
The incomes obtained by Oatlands irrigators are very low. Farmers reported annual net incomes of Z$ 800 - Z$ 2 000 from a 0.4 ha plot. The Extension Worker confirmed that the majority of the farmers get less that Z$ 2 000 per year. Tomatoes is the highest paying crop, followed by green maize. Beans and vegetables do not give any incomes and bambara nuts are grown for home consumption. These low incomes are a result of poor quality produce and low yield levels.
Financial and economic analysis
The financial cash flow analysis for Oatlands irrigation scheme is presented in Table 37. The cash flows are based on the 1997 prices which have been deflated to reflect 1988 prices. The NPV for Oatlands is negative, indicating that the project is not viable. The FIRR and EIRR could not be computed because the cash flows are negative.
TABLE 37
Discounted cash flow analysis for Oatlands irrigation scheme.
Year Investment Costs (Z$) Replacement Costs (Z$) Repair & maintenance costs (Z$) Extension (Z$) Irrigation income (Z$) Incremental benefit (Z$)
NPV -16 225
Socio-economic impact
The scheme has not contributed much towards improving the standard of living of the participants, as envisaged at the planning stage. In terms of improving rural peoples' incomes the scheme has failed to achieve the expected levels. The net incomes of Z$ 800 - Z$ 5 000 per year per farmer are too low to run and manage the scheme. Considering that the farmers' relationship with AFC is bad, they will remain in financial problems, a situation not good for the viability of the scheme.
The low levels of inputs used indicate that the farmers have not developed a commercial mentality. They are still interested in low dryland farming as evidenced by their migration to the dryland plots during summer. Good yields in the dryland are only obtained once in every four to five years. Most irrigators do not engage hired labour, although the farmers complained that their irrigation system is labour intensive. The farmers complained that they do not have money to engage hired labour. Only a few farmers employ hired labour which is paid in kind. This is quite positive but the level of employment generated is too low to make an impact.
Irrigators still receive food-handouts from government indicating that irrigation has not made them food self-sufficient. In 1997 the farmers received drought relief packages and this was again the case in 1998. If the scheme was operating well, it has the potential to feed all the farmers and other villagers in the area all year round.
The water logging and ponding on the scheme is a health hazard. The scheme is a potential breeding ground for mosquitoes. Although information could not be obtained on the malaria statistics on the scheme, it is likely that the scheme is having negative health impact on the users.
Conclusion
Several factors have been revealed to be responsible for the poor performance of Oatlands irrigation scheme. The main factors are:
Non involvement of farmers at planning: The settling of farmers on to an already constructed scheme was poor planning. Farmers were never involved in scheme construction and decision making They now view the scheme as a government scheme and not theirs.
Irrigation is not valued: The farmers can get good yields in their dryland plots during good years. Due to this they concentrate on their dryland plots in summer.
Lack of farmer training: Farmers did not receive training at the start of the scheme. As a result they are failing to perform well in irrigated agriculture
Management issues: The scheme has a weak and disorganized IMC, which needs training in management and leadership skills
Water management: The scheme is practicing poor water management. Farmers irrigate at will and they are not worried about water losses. Lack of training and non-payment of water by the farmers is responsible for this.
Poor scheme repair and maintenance: Irrigation infrastructure is broken down and there is no repair and maintenance resulting in a lot of water being wasted on the scheme. AGRITEX, which used to maintain the scheme, stopped without a formal hand over of O&M to the farmers. Farmers still consider the scheme to be AGRITEX run.
Inheritance: The question of inheritance is not clear, so plot holders are not sure about the security of tenure.
Off-farm activities: Most of the women on the scheme go on cross boarder shopping in South Africa leaving very little time for irrigation. They consider this shopping to be more paying than irrigation.
Attitude problems: Farmers developed a negative attitude towards irrigation from the very beginning. They complain that irrigation is too labour intensive leaving very little time for other activities.
Some positive factors that work in favour of the scheme were also revealed by the study. The main factors are:
Secure water supply: Oatlands dam the source of water for the scheme is a secure water supply. It was reported that there is enough water to allow for the expansion of the scheme.
Proximity to markets: The scheme is only 36km from Masvingo town, which makes transport costs to the market much lower than other irrigation schemes in Masvingo province. Their nearness to the market puts them in a better position to get timely marketing information.
The study of Oatlands irrigation scheme has shown lot of lessons, which are important for the future planning and implementation of smallholder irrigation projects. Some of the most important lessons are:
* Farmers should be involved in the planning and implementation of irrigation schemes for them to be able to accept the project. They should not be settled on an already developed scheme because they will consider it as a government project.
* Responsibilities of repair and maintenance should be clearly spelt at the beginning of the scheme to avoid problems of scheme hand over to the farmers later on. Scheme hand over to the farmers by government should be done in a transparent and well planned manner.
* Farmers' willingness and attitudes should be considered before implementation of an irrigation scheme.
* Farmer training prior to and during irrigation is important in smallholder irrigation development
* Issues of land tenure should be clear from the onset.
* Full time irrigation may be important to avoid divided loyalty between dryland and irrigation plots by farmers.
<section>4</section>
Annex A-8 Principe Irrigation Scheme
Summary
Principe irrigation scheme is located in Shamva District of Mashonaland Central Province. The scheme can be described as an average irrigation scheme in terms of overall performance. About 60% of the farmers are performing very well in terms of crop production, income generation and the operation and maintenance of the scheme. The other 40% are not performing well. There is a marked difference between these two groups of farmers. The poor performance by some of the farmers is blamed on poor farmer selection. The farmers complained of too much interference in the running of the scheme from the District Council and the local Resettlement Officer. For example, it was alleged that if an irrigation plot become vacant for one reason or another the local authorities normally allocate it to a poor performing farmer without consulting the farmers. Due to this interference, it is not clear to the farmers who is supposed to run the scheme the farmers or the District Council. When asked
the farmers felt that the scheme is theirs only as far as operation and maintenance costs are concerned but the land and the irrigation infrastructure belonged to the government.
Introduction
Principe irrigation scheme, which is divided into blocks A and B, is located in Shamva District of Mashonaland Central Province. It is about 140 km north east of Harare town. The scheme is located in Natural Region II, a region that receives an average of about 900 mm of rainfall per year.
The scheme is 60 ha large with 60 plot holders, each holding a 1 ha plot. Each plot holder also owns a 0.4 ha dryland plot. Each of the blocks A and B utilizes a sprinkler system of irrigation. The water is released from Eben dam down, to a pick-up weir (one weir per block) and then pumped straight into the irrigation system using a single pump per block.
Planning of the scheme
The scheme was constructed between 1991 and 1993, using DANIDA funding under the DANIDA Support to Smallholder Irrigation Programme (SSIP). Farmers were settled after the irrigation scheme had already been completed. People who were settled on the scheme were required to have a Master Farmer training certificate, be between the ages of 18 and 45 years, be married and be in possession of resources with which to undertake agriculture. The District Council and the Resettlement Officer were responsible for vetting the applicants. While local authorities felt that the vetting was thorough, farmers think that it was not done in a transparent manner. It is alleged that there were some irregularities in the whole system. For example, there was no proof of marriage or of cattle ownership required during farmer selection.
Social aspects
Land tenure and inheritance
The system of inheritance on the scheme permits the wife to take over the plot if the husband dies. If both spouses die, the children take over the plot. Farmers are comfortable with this type of arrangement. However problems are envisaged in Block A, where a number of polygamous marriages exist. This situation is not covered in the bye-laws for the scheme. All the farmers interviewed were not sure on how to deal with polygamous families.
Relationship with outsiders
Scheme members do not have a good working relationship with the RO, as they feel he interferes with their bye laws and overall running of the scheme. The farmers want autonomy in the day to day running of the irrigation scheme and want the Resettlement Officer only to represent them in administrative issues concerning the whole resettlement area. This interference by the Resettlement Officer creates some form of insecurity on the part of the farmers.
Scheme operation, maintenance and management
Irrigation Management Committee
Each of the two blocks has its own IMC, elected on a two-year term basis. This means that blocks A and B are operating as two different entities. The structures of the IMCs for the two blocks are similar. Each of the IMCs is composed of:
i. Chairperson and vice chairperson
ii. Secretary and vice secretary
iii. Treasurer
iv. Two committee members
In addition, under each IMC there are three sub-committees namely the water sub-committee, the production sub-committee and the marketing sub-committee. Members of the IMC can be also be members of one or more of the sub-committees. A common feature in the two block committees is the low representation of women. Only block A has a woman committee member. The farmers explained that the non-involvement of women was due to the fact that women do not vote for each other and men do not want their wives to be seen moving around dealing with other men. Male farmers at the scheme are not gender sensitive, as evidenced by their ability to hold meetings even without women. If female farmers are late for a meeting the meeting commences, but if male farmers are late people have to wait.
The IMC uses a system of bye-laws to run the scheme. Fines are usually levied against those who violate the bye-laws. Sometimes the IMC confiscates the plot of a violator and hands it over to another farmer for one season. The IMC performs a number of functions which include creating linkages between farmers and organizations, such as the Zimbabwe Farmers Union (ZFU), AGRITEX and other government departments. The committee also mobilizes farmers to contribute money for the operation and maintenance of the scheme.
Water Management
Each of the two blocks has its own pumping station. Water for irrigation is released from the dam down to two pick-up weirs, from which it is pumped into the blocks. A water sub-committee, which is in place in each block, is responsible for opening and closing the pump. Irrigation in each block is done according to the irrigation schedules provided by AGRITEX. Farmers agree on the time to start and stop irrigation. Any late comers are not given extra time to irrigate. This is a strategy to control the level of water use and hence energy costs. The water sub-committees are very effective in enforcing the irrigation schedules.
Electricity bills
The IMC for each block collects money for electricity bills at the end of each month. On average each farmer pays Z$ 500 - Z$ 600 per month. Any defaulter will have water supply cut off from his or her plot. It was reported that at least 33% of the farmers usually default on electricity payment per year. Farmers blame this on the poor selection of farmers at the beginning of the irrigation scheme.
Repairs and maintenance
Each farmer is responsible for the repair and maintenance of his or her infield infrastructure. Structures such as the pumping station and conveyance pipeline are managed by farmers as a group. The IMC collects an annual maintenance fee of Z$ 47 per farmer for the repair and maintenance of the shared infrastructure. Farmers are having problems with the repairs and maintenance of their pumps, which were imported from Denmark. Spares are not readily available on the local market.
Institutional support
Principe irrigation scheme receives support from AGRITEX and a village committee.
AGRITEX
This institution provides technical advice to the scheme on irrigation water management and irrigated crop agronomy. A full time Extension Worker is responsible for giving the irrigators extension services.
Village committee
There is a local government structure, called a village committee, for the two blocks that operate in parallel with the two IMCs. A village chairperson who is a local government representative heads the village committee. This chairperson is in charge of the farmers as far as dryland cultivation is concerned. The village chairperson has a committee of seven members who are elected by the villagers for a two-year term basis. The committee members under the chairperson are:
i. Secretary
ii. Member responsible for publicity
iii. Member responsible for security
iv. Treasurer
v. Two committee members
There is conflict on the roles of the IMC and the village committee. For example, it was highlighted that people often consult the village committee chairperson for matters concerning conflicts in the irrigation scheme. The IMC feels that it should be their duty to resolve conflicts and misunderstandings among the scheme members.
Agricultural performance
Farmers cultivate both their dryland and irrigation plots. Under dryland maize, cotton and groundnuts are grown. The crops usually do very well since the area is a high rainfall region. Yields of as high as 4 tons/ha for maize, 2 tons/ha for groundnuts and 1.5 tons/ha for cotton were reported. The level of inputs used is also on the high side, although this is less than for irrigated crops. Maize and groundnuts are marketed to the Grain Marketing Board (GMB), while cotton is sold to the Cotton Company of Zimbabwe, a private cotton buying company. Some maize and groundnuts are retained for subsistence.
In the irrigation scheme farmers grow crops on contract. Tomato is the major crop grown in summer, occupying 50% of the scheme area, the remainder being under maize and baby corn. Tomatoes are grown for Interfresh (a private horticultural export company) and maize is grown for home consumption. Baby corn is grown for Hortico (another private horticultural export company). In winter farmers grow maize and beans. Beans are grown for a private vegetable canning company, Olivine, while green maize is marketed at the farm gate. The main problem farmers face with contract farming is that all their contracts are verbal which make them unbinding. The price is not fixed and at times the companies do not come forward to collect the produce. Sometimes the companies promise to supply inputs but they fail to do so.
Irrigated crop yields are normally high for the good farmers, except on instances when they have pump breakdowns. However yields are also low at the scheme for the poor performing farmers. The range of crop yields obtained for some crops at Principe scheme are presented in Table 38.
TABLE 38
Average crop yields at Principe irrigation scheme during the 1997/98 season (Source: Extension Worker's record book.)
Crop Yield (tons/ha)
Maize 1.5 - 5.5
Tomatoes 10 - 20
Beans 0.7 - 1.5
Baby corn 2 - 10
Commercial aspects
Marketing
Grain maize grown on the scheme is mainly for home consumption. Tomatoes, baby corn and beans are grown on contract for private companies. Green maize is sold on the local market and also at the markets in Bindura and Harare towns. When going to the markets, farmers hire transport as a group. They also market as a group to safeguard themselves against thieves, who are usually scared of approaching people who are in a group.
Inputs acquisition
Inputs are acquired from local dealers, using money generated from the previous season's crop. At the beginning of the scheme, farmers borrowed money from the AFC and they failed to repay back the loan. AFC is no longer willing to provide credit to this group of farmers.
Labour
Farmers at the scheme can not manage both their dryland and irrigation plots, because of limited labour resources They tend to hire labour from neighbouring villages. Payment for hired labour is either in kind or cash. Hired labour at Principe scheme is paid Z$ 10 - Z$ 15/day. Some farmers interviewed claimed that they married more than one wife so as to get sufficient labour.
Farm income analysis
Farmers at the scheme are obtaining net incomes that are neither too low nor too high. Net annual incomes for the 1996/97 season ranged from Z$ 6 000 to Z$ 30 000. The incomes are lower than the anticipated net incomes of Z$ 50 000 per farmer per year. However they are still higher than monthly wages paid to unskilled labour in some sectors of the economy. The incomes are lower than expected because of low prices offered by the companies who enter into `contracts' with the farmers. Farmers seem to lack the bargaining power. The energy bill is also considered to be high and as a result the bill is severely reducing the net farm incomes. The low production level by some poorly performing farmers is also responsible for the low income levels.
Financial and economic analysis
Financial and economic analyses of Principe irrigation scheme were conducted at constant 1993 prices. Table 39 gives the financial cash flows and measures of project worthiness. The positive NPV and the FIRR (20%), which is greater than the discount rate of 9.75%, indicate that the project is financially viable. The EIRR at 25% is greater than the opportunity cost of capital (8.5%), indicating that the project is also economically viable.
Socio-economic impact
Principe irrigation scheme can be judged as an average performing scheme whose performance can be improved if its current problems are addressed. The cropping pattern practiced in the irrigation scheme includes high value crops, while dryland plots are put under grain crops of low value. This means that irrigation has permitted the irrigators to grow lucrative crops like baby corn, tomatoes and green maize. Irrigation has permitted these communal farmers to enter into the mainstream economy.
TABLE 39
Discounted cash flow analysis for Principe irrigation scheme
Year Investment Costs (Z$) Energy Costs (Z$) Replacement Costs (Z$) Repair & Maintenance Cost (Z$) Extension (Z$) Irrigation Income (Z$) Incremental Benefit (Z$)
NPV 57 133
FIRR 20%
The cropping intensity in the scheme, which is 200%, is of significance to the farmers. It means that the farmers are occupied throughout the year leaving them with no time to engage in gold panning and animal poaching. Their dryland counterparts in the neighbouring villages are involved in these off-farm activities. This clearly indicates the importance of irrigation in the conservation of environment. The high yields obtained on the scheme, as a result of high level of input use, is a sign that some farmers have developed a commercial mentality. The income farmers are getting from the irrigation scheme is higher than that from off-farm activities. The incomes can be higher if farmers are trained in marketing and contractual agreements. Most farmers interviewed confirmed that the scheme has improved their standard of living. They are able to meet their basic needs from the income derived from the scheme.
The level of literacy on the scheme is high and this was evidenced by the ability of the farmers to record their daily activities and to explain them to visitors. A training programme, organized by AGRITEX on financial management and record keeping, has helped the farmers to be able to keep records. The farmers can compute gross margins and net incomes for their enterprises. They admitted that all this knowledge was gained by working on the irrigation scheme.
Surrounding villagers have found the irrigation scheme as a source of employment. The villagers are employed on the scheme in such activities like weeding, transplanting and harvesting. Hired labour is paid in kind (produce from scheme) and this is important for diet. The number of household heads who work in towns could not be established, but it was indicated to be very small. Farmers indicated that they are comfortable with irrigated farming. Local dealers have benefited a lot from the irrigation scheme. Dealers supply the irrigators with fertilizers and chemicals throughout the year. Dealers interviewed appreciated the role of irrigation in their trading accounts. One dealer ended up saying "If they close down, we also close our businesses". Transport to the markets in Harare and Bindura is usually acquired locally. This form of support for the local transporters is an example of a beneficial linkage, offered by the scheme to other industries.
The scheme farmers operate a savings club and this illustrates that they are an organized group. This group cohesion is also apparent in the payment of electricity bills, collective maintenance of pumps and group marketing. Group initiatives, supported by government institutions, are the vehicle for economic development and Principe scheme fits into this category of projects.
Conclusion
Principe irrigation scheme is an average performing scheme with a mix of good and poor farmers. Several strengths have been identified as working in favour of the scheme and these are:
Secure water supply: Eben Dam, which supplies the scheme, is a secure source of water. There is enough water to allow for the expansion of the scheme. However, leakages at the weir are a problem.
Strong IMC: The IMC is very effective and is involved in creating linkages with organizations, such as ZFU and other government institutions.
Good water management: Although water management can still improve, farmers at this scheme practice good water management. The fact that they pay for the energy costs might be contributing to this.
Contract farming: Farmers grow crops on contract for some horticultural exporting companies. This removes the burden from farmers of seeking for markets. Although prices were reported low at times, farmers are at least assured of a ready market for their produce.
Group cohesion: Farmers at the scheme cooperate on issues such as payment of electricity bills, maintenance of infrastructure and marketing. Although some farmers default, bye-laws are in place to deal with that.
Some weaknesses were also identified on Principe irrigation scheme and these are:
High energy bills: Some farmers find it difficult to pay the monthly energy costs, because they are too high.
No stand by pump: There is a single imported pump for each block. This means that during breakdowns, which are increasing with time, there is no stand by pump to fall back on. If the breakdown period is long a crop can be lost due to lack of irrigation.
Cash flow problems: Some farmers are experiencing cash flow problems, resulting in low input use, and some farmers are defaulting on electricity and maintenance bills.
Poor marketing strategies: The fact that farmers are involved in contract marketing is not enough evidence that farmers are competent in marketing. Knowledge of how to draw up favourable contracts and the implications of contract farming is low among the farmers.
Interference from government officials: The effectiveness of the IMC is being weakened by interference in the running of the scheme from the District Council and the Resettlement Officer. For example, the reallocation of plots is done by the Resettlement Officer without consulting the farmers. Farmers allege that replacement candidates who are given plots by the Resettlement Officer are normally not good farmers and they are usually the ones who default on the payment of electricity bills. Farmers suspected corruption in the reallocation of plots.
Lack of coordination among institutions: Farmers are not clear of the role of AGRITEX, the Resettlement Officer and the District Council on the running of the scheme. Farmers are not sure which organization to approach on what problems.
Lack of other services: Farmers complained of the lack of other essential services, such as a clinic and a school. Farmers travel a distance of 22 km to the nearest clinic.
Ownership of scheme: Farmers are not clear on the ownership of the scheme, since they always receive threats of eviction from AGRITEX and the Resettlement Officer.
Several recommendations, based on the findings at Principe scheme, can be made for the future planning of smallholder irrigation projects. The following are some of them:
* Farmers should always be involved or consulted in scheme operations like farmer selection and reallocation of plots.
* Support services such as clinics, schools and drinking water are important in irrigation development.
* The roles of different institutions in the running of schemes should be made clear from the beginning to avoid conflict of interest and confusing the farmers.
* Imported pumps, without back-up services, should not be used for irrigation development in the smallholder subsector.
* Farmers need to be helped with inputs during the first season to cushion them against high interest debts from the onset.
* Farmers should be trained in marketing before they start irrigation and further training will be required with the changing marketing environment.
<section>5</section>
Annex A-9 Rozva Irrigation Scheme
Summary
Rozva irrigation scheme was established in 1994 and is located in Bikita District of Masvingo Province. The scheme is fully government managed and its performance from the start has been poor. At the planning stage farmers were opposed to the project as they felt the government was imposing the project on them. In the process of convincing the farmers to accept the project, the government made some unrealistic promises, which it failed to fulfil later on. Farmers felt they were let down in this respect. Water management, repair and maintenance are a problem on the scheme. AGRITEX, which is supposed to maintain the infield infrastructure, is not doing so due to budgetary constraints. The farmers, who were drawn from two different kraals, are finding it difficult to work together. The scheme is located in Natural Region III where crop yields from dryland agriculture can be reasonable in a good year. This results in farmers dividing their attention between dryland and
irrigation plots especially during the rainy season.
Introduction
Rozva irrigation scheme is located in Bikita District of Masvingo Province. It is located about 80 km from Masvingo town along the Masvingo-Birchenough Bridge highway. The scheme is 5 km west of Nyika business centre in Natural Region III, a relatively high rainfall area that receives about 700 mm of rainfall per year on average. The 21 ha scheme supports 33 farmers with 9 farmers having 1 ha plots and the rest 0.5 ha. The membership of the scheme was drawn from two villages that are adjacent to each other. There is conflict between these two villages which started well before the scheme begun. The scheme utilizes a surface irrigation system with the water being pumped from Rozva dam. Water is applied onto the field through polythene pipes connected to hydrants.
Planning of the scheme
The Government of Zimbabwe established Rozva scheme in 1994 as part of the government programme to alleviate the effects of recurrent droughts in the communal and resettlement areas. Funds were provided by the governments of Zimbabwe and Germany. Consulting companies Dorsh Consult and Halcrow were employed by the government to plan the scheme. The consultants identified the irrigable lands and made some preliminary studies, after which they called for meetings with the farmers to explain the project to the farmers. On one of these meetings the farmers rejected the project and farmers argued that the plans of the project had been done by the consultants on their own without them being consulted. Several government departments, including AGRITEX, and the District Administrator's (DA's) Office were called in to convince the farmers. However these efforts to convince the farmers were unsuccessful. It appeared that some influential individuals within the community had given
farmers the impression that the project was meant to make the farmers loose their lands and become unpaid government workers on the scheme. The farmers further argued that they were getting enough food from their dryland plots, hence there was no need for the irrigation project.
Politicians were also called in to explain the project to the farmers. Farmers were threatened with eviction if they refused the project. Despite the threats from politicians the farmers continued to refuse the project. The refusal by the Rozva farmers became a national issue and was even captured in the national media as is illustrated in Table 40 where an article appeared in a Zimbabwean daily newspaper "The Herald"
TABLE 40
A newspaper report on the refusal of Rozva irrigation scheme by farmers (Source: The Herald, 29 September, 1993)
Z$ 1 million irrigation plan rejected.
Herald Reporter: 29 September 1993, Masvingo
More than Z$1million, which was earmarked for an intensive irrigation programme on the newly built Z$4.5 million Rozva dam in Bikita, has been channeled to other districts after the intended beneficiaries pledged to resist the project.
While the government was committed to initiating the irrigation scheme in communal Masvingo to alleviate the effects of recurring drought, some 160 families living in the shores of the dam have scorned the idea. The people were not hesitant to express their opposition to the project when the Masvingo Provincial Governor, Dzikamai Mavhaire, addressed them on the importance of the dam to Bikita. It was envisaged that the water would be pumped from the dam to Nyika business centre, a few kilometres away. Today, the business centre depends on two unreliable boreholes for its water.
The District Administrator, Steven Chikasha, said at a meeting here last week that the project was doomed to fail if the villagers maintained their present position on the issue. "These people have come out in the open and told us not to force the scheme on them but we should not let them dictate the trend of development in Bikita" Chikasha said. However, several villagers interviewed indicated that there were some "powerful forces" that were fuelling their resistance to the project. Some independent observers, who asked not to be identified, said that the irrigation had been a rallying point in the last parliamentary elections. Some candidates who stood for election in the constituency are alleged to have promised to back the people against the programme. "Our leaders told us that this irrigation (scheme) would mean working in our fields throughout the year which we cannot do" said Mugini, a villager. The Provincial Development Committee has, meanwhile, resolved to
transfer the money initially allocated to the Rozva Dam Irrigation Scheme to other projects in Chivi District.
The Chivi District Administrator, Felix Mhishi, told the meeting that the money should not be returned to central government when thousands of people elsewhere in the province were craving for funds to ease the effects of droughts. Feasibility studies had already been started on two other dams ...
The proposed project did not die down as was suggested. Some politicians, AGRITEX, the DA and the consultants continued explaining to the farmers the advantages of having the project. They even went to the extent of promising farmers free inputs and a security fence. After a series of further meetings, farmers finally accepted the project in principle. However, they were still not very sure about the benefits. Scheme construction was completed in 1994. Farmers did not participate in the construction, instead they were hired as casual labour.
After completion the scheme was handed over to the two kraal heads for plot allocation. According to the designs each farmer was to be allocated 0.5 ha, thus the 21 ha scheme was supposed to benefit 42 farmers. However during plot allocation there was an argument between the two kraals, one kraal had lost more land to the irrigation scheme, and hence the farmers from this kraal demanded larger plot sizes. This created tension among the farmers and the result was that 9 farmers got 1 ha each and 24 farmers got 0.5 ha each. This means, that 33 farmers benefited from the project instead of the planned 42.
Social aspects
Land tenure and inheritance
The farmers hold either a 0.5 ha or a 1 ha plot in the irrigation scheme, with an average of 1 ha in the dryland. The system of inheritance in place is that if a plot holder dies the surviving spouse will take over the plot. If both spouses die, the eldest son will inherit the plot. This system applies to both irrigation and dryland plots. Farmers are comfortable with this type of tenure.
Disputes and conflicts
There are disputes and conflicts between the two villages who are participating in the scheme. The two groups can not work together and this is affecting the smooth operation of the scheme. One village is said to be lazy, negative about the management of the scheme and does not want to cooperate. The nature of conflict could not be established but it was said to date back to the 1950s when the villagers came to settle in Bikita. This poor relationship between the farmers was said to be threatening the viability of the scheme.
Scheme operation, maintenance and management
The irrigation scheme is fully government run, but there are intentions to hand it over to the farmers. An IMC is in place to assist in the running of the scheme.
Irrigation Management Committee
The main function of the committee is to link the government organizations that run the scheme with the farmers. The IMC consists of:
i. Chairperson and vice chairperson
ii. Secretary and vice secretary
iii. Treasurer and
iv. Two committee members
The IMC uses bye-laws to run the scheme. It ensures that cropping programmes are adhered to, fencing is kept in good state. It is also responsible for ordering water from DWR. The Extension Worker complained that the IMC is not effective. The chairperson, who happens to be the kraal head of one of the villages, is always opposed by the other kraal head and his people. Most of the meetings the chairperson organizes are not attended.
Institutional support
AGRITEX and DWR are the two departments responsible for the management of the irrigation scheme.
AGRITEX
AGRITEX is responsible for technical advice on water management and crop production. It is also supposed to maintain the infield infrastructure. There is a poor working relationship between AGRITEX and the farmers. Farmers pointed out that AGRITEX is not fulfilling the promises it made during scheme planning. Some of the allegations are:
* AGRITEX did not fulfil its promises of giving them free inputs and fencing.
* AGRITEX told farmers at the beginning that they were going to pay only Z$ 145/ha per year as maintenance fee and nothing else. However now they are being asked also to pay for water at Z$ 185/1000m^3 and bear the full cost of operation and maintenance. Farmers preferred to have been told this at the planning stage.
* Farmers claimed that some of their plots were not properly leveled and AGRITEX promised to rectify the situation two years ago, but up to now nothing has been done.
DWR
DWR is responsible for the maintenance up to the night storage dam. In addition they pay for electricity.
Agricultural performance
The scheme is not doing well in terms of crop production. The major crops grown are green maize and vegetables in summer, while beans are grown in winter. Cropping in the scheme is mainly confined to the dry season, while during the rainy season the farmers concentrate on their dryland plots. Yields of less than 2 tons/ha on average were reported for maize, while beans yields do not exceed 1 ton/ha. Use of fertilizer is also very low. For example, maize receives only 150 kg/ha basal fertilizer on average as opposed to the recommended 500 kg/ha. Top dressing fertilizer used on maize is 140 kg/ha as compared to the recommended 400 kg/ha.
The cropping intensity varies from year to year but it hardly exceeds 100%. The situation is worse in summer when people shift to their dryland plots. Some reasons given by the farmers for not achieving the intended 200% cropping intensity are:
* Farmers lack the inputs for irrigated agriculture. They blame AGRITEX for these problems. At the beginning of the scheme farmers were promised inputs on a continuous basis. These promised inputs were not given, even not for the first season so farmers started badly and could not realize the benefits of irrigation.
* Farmers also argued that dryland agriculture is better than irrigated agriculture, since it does not require much labour. Their surface irrigation system is labour intensive
* Farmers further argued that dryland and irrigation are the same in terms of crop production, because of the shortage of inputs.
* The pump breaks down frequently and the DWR takes time to repair it, so farmers find it better to concentrate on their dryland plots.
* Farmers complained that cropping programmes are usually dictated by AGRITEX, so it is better for them to go to the dryland plots where there is no control.
Due to the above mentioned reasons some plot holders are no longer cultivating in the irrigation scheme. They rent out their plots to other willing people. For example currently there are two local dealers (shop owners) who are renting a number of plots in the scheme. This means that benefits are now accruing to the unintended beneficiaries.
Commercial aspects
Marketing
Crops are marketed locally at the farm gate and Nyika business centre. Some buyers come with their own transport to buy green maize at the scheme. Farmers have not exploited far away markets such as Masvingo town. This is due to lack of cooperation among the farmers, lack of knowledge and in most cases the low quality of produce. The farmers realize that they can not compete at the big markets in Masvingo, due to the low quality of their produce.
Inputs acquisition
Inputs are obtained from the nearby Nyika business centre. Inputs are normally funded by the previous season's proceeds and by remittances from children employed in towns. Farmers have cash flow problems and they can not afford to use high levels of inputs.
Labour
Family labour is mostly the source of labour for the scheme. There is very insignificant hiring of labour on the scheme. Those who hire labour pay in kind (for example give vegetables). The labour is available in the community but farmers do not have the money to hire it.
Credit facilities
Most of the farmers are not credit worthy, so they can not get loans from the AFC. Some of them have accumulated arrears on the repayment of loans acquired for dryland cropping. Other farmers claimed that they do not deal with AFC because of high interest rates.
Farm income analysis
Incomes derived from Rozva scheme are very low. Farmers could not reveal their income levels, but they just indicated that they are low. There were no farmer written records to help in the assessment of incomes. The Extension Worker indicated that the annual net incomes do not exceed Z$ 3 000 per farmer. However, the two local dealers renting some plots on the scheme claimed that they were getting net annual incomes of Z$ 40 000 per farmer. This could not be substantiated by written records.
Financial and economic analysis
The discounted cash flow analysis for Rozva irrigation scheme is presented in Table 41. The analysis is done at constant 1993 prices. The NPV is negative, hence the project is non-viable. The economic analysis gives an NPV of minus Z$ 20 754, again indicating that the project is not viable from an economic point of view.
TABLE 41
Discounted cash flow analysis for Rozva irrigation scheme
Year Investment Costs (Z$) Energy Costs (Z$) Water Charges (Z$) Replace-ment Costs (Z$) Repair & Maintenance Costs (Z$) Extension (Z$) Irrigation Income (Z$) Incremental Benefit (Z$)
NPV -30 654
Socio-economic impact
The Rozva irrigation scheme has failed to achieve its intended objectives. The poor performance of the scheme is a direct result of poor planning on the part of the government. The project has failed to alleviate the effects of drought, which was one of the objectives when the scheme was established. Productivity in the irrigation scheme is not very different from that in dryland agriculture. Farmers claimed that during a good rainy season, crop yields obtained from their dryland plots can exceed crop yields obtained from the irrigation plots. The fact that farmers are using low levels of inputs on their irrigation plots is partly responsible for the low yields. Lack of commitment on the part of the farmers can also be blamed on the poor performance of the scheme. The irrigation scheme can allow 200% cropping intensity but the farmers are only practicing less than 100% cropping intensity.
The scheme is not generating enough employment for the local people. Only a few people are employed as hired labour and these are normally paid in kind. The absence of record books at the scheme is an indication that the farmers have not developed a commercial mentality. A lot more work is needed to transform these farmers in to business minded farmers. Farmers interviewed explained that they have not managed to buy any implements using scheme incomes. Most of them still have problems with draught power. The renting out of plots by some farmers is an indication that these farmers have failed to see the benefits of irrigation.
In terms of food security and food self-sufficiency farmers are still struggling. During the 1996/97 drought, irrigators could not get enough food from the scheme despite the fact that they had adequate water resources for irrigation. Farmers had to receive drought relief handouts from the government. An efficient and viable irrigation scheme should act as a source of food for surrounding communities during periods of drought.
Conclusion
Rozva irrigation scheme is performing badly and not meeting the intended objectives. Lessons have to be learnt from this scheme for the future planning of other irrigation schemes. Some of the factors that are contributing to the poor performance of the scheme are:
* Farmers were not consulted or involved in the identification and construction of the irrigation scheme. They were used only as hired labour. As such they now view the scheme as belonging to the government. Farmers do not want to contribute towards the operation and maintenance of the irrigation scheme.
* At the planning stage government made false promises as a way of convincing farmers to accept the project. For example, free inputs and tractors were promised but the promises were not fulfilled. Farmers feel they have been cheated and they are demotivated.
* Irrigation is not valued. The ability of the farmers to get good yields in their dryland plots make them feel that irrigation is not worthwhile. Moreover irrigation demands more labour than dryland agriculture.
* Draught power problems are affecting the scheme. Most farmers do not have cattle for draught power after most of their cattle died during the 1991/92 drought. Tractors that were promised by government during planning have not been delivered. Farmers are unable to plant in time.
* There are frequent pump breakdowns. DWR takes time to repair the pump, due to financial constraints. As a result most crops are stressed, resulting in low yields.
* Farmers have an attitude problem. They believe they know everything and do not want to listen to extension advice from AGRITEX and other institutions.
* Land leveling of some plots was not done properly. This is resulting in poor water control and management. Some plots were observed to be waterlogged at the time of the study.
* Farmers complained that they are being charged for water they do not use. For example, the farmers alleged that DWR continues supplying water to the night storage dam even when it is full. This results in over spilling. They also complained that they pay for water that is pumped to Nyika business centre and Bikita District Offices. There is only one water meter at the dam outlet, which records all the water that comes out irrespective of its destination. The whole water bill is charged to the irrigation scheme despite the fact that some of the water is wasted by DWR and some is consumed by the business centre. Farmers want a separate water meter for every consumer. Farmers also complained that the water charge was imposed on them by DWR without any consultations. The issue of water charges was also not discussed at the planning stage. They were only told of the blanket Z$ 145/ha per year maintenance fee, which was supposed to cover all costs. Farmers now prefer to go
back to their dryland plots rather than to pay for water.
* The irrigation system has technical problems. Some of the hydrants either do not give out water or are leaking. AGRITEX is taking time to repair them.
* Some farmers claimed that they were threatened with eviction to accept the scheme. They are not really interested in the irrigation scheme.
* Farmers have cash flow problems. Most of them are not credit worthy and can not obtain credit from AFC.
* There is no group work at the scheme, mainly because of conflict between the two villages participating in the scheme.
It is recommended that any future smallholder irrigation development planning should avoid the mistakes made at Rozva. The following lessons have been learnt from the Rozva experience:
* Farmers should not be forced to accept projects and planners should not identify projects without consulting the intended beneficiaries.
* Farmers should be involved in the whole project cycle and not just being engaged as hired labour for construction.
* Planners should not make false promises as a way of convincing farmers to accept projects.
* Irrigation technologies that are less labour intensive should be seriously considered in the future planning of smallholder schemes.
* More efficient irrigation technologies should be seriously considered in the future planning of smallholder schemes considering that irrigation water is now being paid for in Zimbabwe.
* It might be important to provide farmers on a new irrigation scheme with inputs for the first season to improve their cash flows.
* The social relationship of participants should be considered in the planning of development projects to avoid conflicts when the projects become operational.
<section>6</section>
Annex A-10 Wenimbi Irrigation Scheme
Summary
The 34.2 ha Wenimbi irrigation scheme is located in Marondera District of Mashonaland East Province. It is one of the most successful farmer managed irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe. Started in 1991, the scheme experienced some problems during the first two years of operation due to frequent breakdowns of the diesel engine. The replacement of this engine by an electric motor driven pump in 1993 was a turning point in the performance of the scheme. The cropping improved, with crop yields being higher than expected levels. The incomes derived from the scheme also increased, resulting in improvement in the standard of living of the participants. In 1997, an average annual net income of Z$ 79 000 per farmer was derived from the irrigation scheme. This income is much higher than the minimum wage of Z$ 16 800 per year paid to an unskilled worker in the Zimbabwean industry. Apart from improving incomes, the scheme also acts as a source of food security in the area, provides
employment for the surrounding villagers and results in government savings on drought relief. The successes of the scheme are linked to good planning and the good day-to-day management of the scheme. The farmers identified the irrigation scheme and they participated in the planning, designing and implementation of the scheme. Labour for trenching was provided by the farmers and the infield infrastructure was financed by the farmers, using medium term loans obtained from the Agricultural Finance Corporation (AFC). This involvement of farmers instilled a sense of ownership. The repair, operation and management of the scheme are the full responsibility of the farmers and these activities are being carried out well and in time. The physical infrastructure of the scheme is in good condition. The good performance of the scheme is improving the standard of living of the farmers and the economy in general.
Introduction
Wenimbi irrigation scheme is located in Marondera District of Mashonaland East Province. The scheme is approximately 12 km south of Macheke, a town which is located 130 km from Harare along the Harare-Mutare highway. The 34.2 ha scheme is in Natural Region III, a region that receives on average 500-700 mm of rainfall per year. Dryland crop production is limited by frequent mid season droughts. A total of 22 farmers are supported by the irrigation scheme, with each irrigator holding a plot of 1.55 ha. In addition, each farmer owns 8 acres under dryland but the dryland plots are not in use at the moment. The scheme uses a pumped sprinkler irrigation system and water is pumped from a pick-up weir across Macheke River.
Planning of the scheme
Farmers initiated the Wenimbi irrigation scheme. In 1987, 46 farmers from Domboshawa communal area were resettled in the Wenimbi resettlement area. During their stay in Domboshawa the farmers successfully practiced horticultural crop production, using water from wetlands (dambos). Upon resettlement farmers wanted to continue with this practice, but the absence of wetlands and the harsh climatic conditions in Wenimbi was a limiting factor.
In 1988, 22 of the 46 farmers on the resettlement scheme approached AGRITEX staff at the Marondera district office for assistance with the introduction of an irrigation scheme. The other 24 farmers were not willing to participate in the project. The AGRITEX Marondera office approached the AGRITEX team in Harare for assistance. This was followed by an AGRITEX reconnaissance visit to the site. Several meetings were subsequently held between the AGRITEX team to discuss the potential for irrigation development and the provisions of the Irrigation Support Fund (ISF), a government fund that was being administered by the AFC to support irrigation development. During these meetings the farmers reiterated their wish to take part in irrigation on a full-time basis and they intended to run the scheme on their own, on an individual basis, with each farmer holding his or her own plot. Between August and September 1988 designs for the irrigation system were carried out by AGRITEX, after
consultations with the farmers. The farmers opted for a sprinkler irrigation system, after AGRITEX had explained to them the various options of irrigation systems available.
In 1990 the scheme was constructed by a private irrigation company, with full farmer participation. The cost to field edge was financed through the Irrigation Support Fund (ISF). This was then a fund put aside by the government for the development of smallholder schemes. The farmers financed the infield works after they borrowed money from the National Farm Irrigation Fund (NFIF), a fund set aside for farmers to borrow for irrigation development. The NFIF was also administered by the AFC. The ISF was a government grant and the NFIF was a medium-term loan which farmers had to pay back over 10 years at a 9.75% interest rate per year. In addition to their funding, farmers also contributed their labour during construction. The summary of construction costs for Wenimbi irrigation scheme are given in Table 42.
TABLE 42
Wenimbi irrigation scheme investment costs (Source: Feasibility and design report for Wenimbi irrigation scheme, AGRITEX 1988)
Item Cost per ha (Z$)
Cost to field edge 54 342
Infield costs 89 000
Total 143 342
According to the designs, water was to be delivered to the field using an electric motor driven pump. However, a transformer could not be found on the market by ZESA to allow this system of operation. The contractor, in agreement with AGRITEX and the farmers, installed a diesel engine to drive the pump since farmers could not wait any longer. The diesel engine operated from 1991 to 1992 after which it was replaced by an electric motor driven pump.
Social aspects
Land tenure and inheritance
If a registered plot holder dies the plot remains for all children and the remaining spouse. The question of inheritance is included in the bye-laws. If the remaining spouse dies, then the children take over. No outsider is allowed into the scheme. Farmers practicing dryland agriculture who shunned the irrigation scheme when it took off are now interested in joining the scheme. However the system of inheritance in place does not allow them to come in. Irrigators feel that if outsiders are allowed to join in they may disturb the smooth operations of the scheme since they do not understand the value of irrigation infrastructure.
Scheme operation, maintenance and management
Irrigation Management Committee
The scheme is fully farmer managed, through a very effective IMC elected by farmers on a two-year term basis. The IMC is composed of the following members:
i. Chairperson (currently a woman) and vice chairperson
ii. Secretary and vice secretary
iii. Treasurer
iv. Three committee members
v. Member responsible for security
The IMC is responsible for the overall management of the scheme. It coordinates the maintenance of infrastructure, such as the pump and motor. It is responsible for collecting maintenance fees and money for payment of electricity bills. The IMC uses a system of bye-laws to ensure that all the scheme members follow the agreed activities. Those farmers that violate the bye-laws are punished in accordance with the scheme bye-laws and constitution. In most cases monetary fines are levied against offenders. Such money goes into the maintenance fund. The IMC is also responsible for reallocating vacated plots. Under the IMC, there is a crop production sub-committee which is responsible for drawing up cropping programmes in consultation with AGRITEX and the rest of the farmers, sourcing markets and enforcing pests and disease control by every farmer.
Electricity bills
The farmers pay the electricity bills. Every month the scheme receives a bill from ZESA, which the farmers share equally. For the 1997/98 production season the bills ranged from Z$ 2 200 to Z$ 13 200 per month. This translates to Z$ 100 to Z$ 600 per farmer per month. Farmers have been successful in the payment of the bills. Their management system has helped a lot in this respect. Any defaulter will have water cut off from his or her plot.
Repairs and maintenance
Farmers are responsible for the repairs and maintenance of infrastructure within their individual plots. Such infrastructure includes hydrants, laterals and sprinklers. For shared items, such as the pump and motor, the whole group is responsible. The IMC collects money from individuals for the necessary repairs. The farmers also do the maintenance of fencing. They make sure that the fence is always intact. If there is any problem to the fence, the IMC mobilizes the scheme members to rectify it.
The scheme also has a maintenance fund, which is kept in the bank. Each farmer contributes Z$ 2 500 per year towards this fund. With this fund farmers are able to meet most of their repair and maintenance costs. For example the farmers successfully replaced their motor when it got burnt four times between 1993 and 1997. Repair costs which were paid by the farmers ranged from Z$ 15 000 to Z$ 40 000.
Security
The scheme has experienced thefts by people from nearby farms who steal items such as hoses, electric motor, sprinklers and crops. Scheme members decided to hire a guard whom they pay every month. The guard is paid Z$ 600 per month with contributions from scheme members. Currently the problems of theft at the scheme have ceased.
Institutional support
The scheme gets support from a number of institutions, including AGRITEX, the Horticultural Promotion Council (HPC), the Ministry of Local Government and other private companies.
AGRITEX
AGRITEX is responsible for offering technical and extension advice to the irrigators. This institution helps the farmers in the formulation of cropping programmes and rotations and also assists in water management. AGRITEX is represented by an Extension Worker at the scheme. The Extension Worker visits the scheme once every week to give advice or to organize training programmes for the farmers. The Extension Worker is backstopped by an extension officer based at Macheke town and an Irrigation Specialist from the provincial AGRITEX office in Marondera. The Irrigation Specialist produces the irrigation schedules for the scheme. At the beginning of the scheme, farmers received numerous training programmes administered by AGRITEX. They were taken on study tours to other operating irrigation schemes. During these study tours the irrigators talked to their counterparts, getting advice on crops and their marketing, leadership skills and financial management. The Wenimbi irrigators
acknowledged that these tours together with the training programmes were very useful. They were practically convinced that irrigation was the only panacea to their food and income problems.
Ministry of Local Government
This ministry is represented by a Resettlement Officer who acts as the overall administrator of the whole resettlement scheme. He deals with administrative problems such as lack of drinking water, disputes on the resettlement scheme. He is not directly involved with the running of the irrigation scheme, unless there are problems between the irrigators and outsiders. For example there was a problem between the irrigators and another water user upstream who did not want to release water to the Wenimbi farmers' weir. The Resettlement Officer was called in to mediate in the discussions.
Horticultural Promotion Council (HPC)
HPC is an organization involved in the export of horticultural crops. The organization contracts the Wenimbi farmers to grow crops such as peas and beans for export. The organization offers seed, technical advice, transport for the crops and it does the grading of the crop. Most farmers who have done business with the HPC have realized good returns.
Agricultural Finance Corporation (AFC)
AFC used to offer assistance in the form of medium and seasonal term loans. In 1991, they financed the infield works through the NFIF. This was a government fund for irrigation development, which farmers could borrow from through the AFC at an interest of 9.75% (which is quite reasonable for the farmers). The Wenimbi farmers were given a total of Z$ 89 000 for 10 years. They were also given Z$ 3 000 each for inputs. Currently, the farmers are no longer getting assistance from AFC. They cited the current interests rates as prohibitive. They rely on proceeds from crops to finance the next season's crop inputs.
Agricultural performance
The agricultural performance of Wenimbi scheme was poor during the first two years of operation (1991 to 1992.) Although farmers managed to grow a variety of crops, like maize, wheat, onions, rape, carrots, cabbage and tomatoes, the yields were far below those expected. This was due to the poor performance of the diesel engine, which frequently broke down. The installation of an electric motor driven pump in 1992 was a turning point in the performance of the scheme. The irrigators rationalized their cropping pattern to focus on what they considered to be strategic crops with high returns. Tomatoes, green maize, grain maize and leaf vegetables became the major crops grown at the scheme and this cropping pattern has been maintained up to today. The typical cropping pattern for a farmer holding 1.5 ha plot at Wenimbi is given in Table 43.
TABLE 43
Cropping pattern for a 1.5 ha plot at Wenimbi irrigation scheme (Source: Extension Worker's record book, 1998)
Crop Summer Winter 
Area (ha) Area as a % of plot size Area (ha) Area as a % of plot size
Tomatoes 0.750 50 0.375 25
Grain maize 0.375 25 0.375 25
Vegetables 0.375 25 0.750 50
Total 1.500 100 
Table 43 reflects a 150% cropping intensity at the scheme. The expected 200% cropping intensity can not be achieved because the scheme experiences water shortages in winter. A strong management, combined with use of the recommended rates of inputs, has resulted in high crop yields being obtained. Crop yields of selected crops obtained during the 1997 season are given in Table 44.
TABLE 44
Irrigated crop yields for selected crops at Wenimbi irrigation scheme (Source: Farmers' and Extension Worker's record books, 1998)
Crops Expected yield* (tons/ha) Actual yield (tons/ha) Variation (%)
Tomatoes 25 30 +20%
Grain maize 6 7 +17%
*: Expected yield is the yield envisaged in the feasibility report.
The levels of inputs being used at the Wenimbi scheme are also summarized in Table 45. The fertilizer levels being used match the levels recommended by extension staff. This achievement is a direct indication of the commitment of the farmers. They have realized the benefits of irrigated agriculture
TABLE 45
Average levels of inputs used at Wenimbi irrigation scheme (Source: Extension Worker's record book, 1998)
Crop Compound D Ammonium Nitrate Compound S
Recommen-ded rate (kg/ha) Actual rate (kg/ha) Recommended rate (kg/ha) Actual rate (kg/ha) Recommended rate (kg/ha) Actual rate (kg/ha)
Maize 450 450 400 400 1000 1000
Green maize 450 450 400 400 
Tomatoes 600 500 
Rape 600 500 
The following is a brief description of the major crops grown at Wenimbi.
Tomatoes
Tomatoes is the most lucrative crop on the scheme, but it is the most demanding in terms of labour and inputs. Farmers stagger the planting of the crop such that it does not mature all at once. Planting is done between September and November. The summer tomatoes are preferred because the crop matures when the market demand is high, which means high returns.
Green maize
Green maize is the major winter crop and is also the second most important in terms of income generation. The crop is normally planted in late July for the November market. Farmers have not experienced any problems in terms of marketing. Buyers come straight to the farm gate to buy the crop. They come with their own transport.
Grain maize
Grain maize is grown for home consumption and the local market. With an average maize yield of 7 tons/ha being obtained the scheme produces enough grain to feed the farmers and the surplus is sold to outsiders.
Vegetables
Vegetables grown include rape, cabbage and onions. These are grown on a relatively smaller scale, usually three to four lines per crop, and are grown throughout the year. The main reason behind this type of programme is to maintain a continuous inflow of cash to meet the electricity bills. Yields for these crops could not be established. However a visual assessment indicated excellent crop stands.
Commercial aspects
Input acquisition
Inputs are financed by incomes generated by selling the previous season's crop. The two main sources of inputs are a local dealer, located in Village 2 within the resettlement scheme, and several supermarkets in Harare town. Farmers prefer to buy from the local dealer due to the nearness of the dealer to the irrigation scheme. If they purchase from the dealer they do not have to worry about transport as they can simply use either a wheelbarrow or an ox drawn scotchchart to transport the inputs.
Marketing
Mbare market in Harare town is the major market for most of the scheme's crops. The main crops sold at Mbare are vegetable and tomatoes. When going to Mbare farmers organize themselves into a group of say ten farmers, harvest their tomatoes or vegetables during the day and at night they hire a truck to the market. They sleep at the market place and at dawn they start selling. Prices are determined by supply and demand resulting in prices fluctuating on a daily basis.
The local market absorbs some of the vegetables produced at the scheme. Farmers from the surrounding villages within the resettlement scheme come to buy at the scheme. Green maize has no problems in terms of marketing. Buyers from as far as Mutare, Rusape, Wedza and Harare towns come straight to the scheme with their own transport to buy green maize. Green maize cobs are sold at prices determined by the irrigators. It is an offence for a farmer to sell cobs at a price lower than the agreed prices. Violators are normally fined a monetary fine. Grain maize is sold locally and some is retained for home consumption.
Transport
Farmers hire transport as a group to go to the market. They organize themselves in groups of say five to ten farmers depending on the crop which is going to be marketed. They share the costs for transport. Different groups do not go the same day. This is a risk aversion technique and a marketing strategy at the same time. The transport that ferries produce to the market is sometimes used to carry inputs on coming back.
Vehicles that are hired by the farmers come from as far as Marondera and Rusape towns. Farmers send representatives to search for vehicles. Four of the farmers at the scheme own a lorry each. These lorries were bought using income generated from the scheme. These lorries are usually preferred for hiring because they are cheaper.
Labour
Labour is hired from the surrounding community. Payment is either in cash or in kind. Labour is usually hired for activities such as planting, weeding and harvesting.
Farm income analysis
The incomes for the first two years of operation were low due to poor yields and the poor quality of produce. This was a direct result of frequent diesel engine breakdowns. According to the AGRITEX monitoring and evaluation report of 1992, the incomes were 50% of the expected. Due to the low incomes farmers could not meet their financial obligations like repayment of seasonal and medium term loans. After the installation of the electric pump, the farmer incomes derived from the scheme improved. In 1993 the average annual net income per farmer was Z$ 17 000 as opposed to the envisaged Z$ 15 000. This was due to the increased crop yields after the installation of a reliable pump. Between 1993 and 1997 the incomes from the scheme continued to rise as farmers gained more experience with irrigated crop production. In 1997, net annual incomes per farmer ranged from Z$ 60 000 to Z$ 150 000. The breakdown of the incomes and costs per farmer (1.55 ha) for the 1997 season is given in
Table 46. Farmers were expecting much higher incomes during the 1998 season.
TABLE 46
Incomes from irrigated cropping at Wenimbi irrigation scheme during the 1997 season (Source: Extension Worker's record book)
Crop Green maize Grain maize Tomatoes Leafy vegetables Total
Gross income (Z$) 16 400 4 000 62 950 16 050 99 400
Costs (Z$) 200 200 300 900
Seed 600 600 1 500 1 500 4 200
Fertilizer 100 100 2 000 400 2 600
Chemicals 200 200 1 000 600 2 000
Labour 300 300 2 000 2 000 4 600
Transport 1 400 1 400 6 700 4 800 14 300
Total Costs (Z$) 15 000 2 600 56 250 11 250 85 100
Gross margin (Z$) 40 000 6 933 150 000 30 000 3 600
Gross margin/ha (Z$) 2 500
Energy Costs (Z$) 79 000
Repair Costs (Z$) 
Net Income (Z$) 
Financial and economic analysis
Financial and economic analyses have been performed to assess the viability of the project. Financial analysis in particular examines the viability of the project from the point of view of the participants. It compares the benefits and costs associated with the project. Market prices are applied throughout the analysis. The analysis utilized the cash flows presented in Table 47. The cash flows include the average gross margins as of 1997. However, since it would be unrealistic to assume the same levels of productivity from the first year onwards, the gross margins are put at 50% for the first two years (have been lowered because of engine breakdowns), 90% in year 3 and 100% from year 4 onwards. Added to the cash flows are government savings on drought relief. The 1997 energy costs are also considered in the analysis (Z$ 300 per farmer per month). The repair and maintenance costs are derived from the Z$ 2 500 each farmer pays every year and the Z$ 1 000 per farmer on average
for the maintenance of infield infrastructure. Added to these are the security guard wages of Z$ 600 per month. The replacements costs incurred from the start to 1997 have also been included. The investment costs have been annualized at 9.75% interest for 20 years. Extension, monitoring and evaluation costs have been included as cash outflows. All the costs and incomes have been deflated by a 20% inflation rate to give the estimates at 1990 prices. The whole analysis was subsequently done at constant 1990 prices. The FIRR was calculated and found to be 68%. If this is compared against the discount rate of 9.75% (interest rate on NFIF loans) the project is financially viable. The figure is even much higher than the 55%, which was envisaged in the feasibility study. This financial viability is due to higher yields, which has resulted in higher incomes. The FIRR could have been higher if the scheme had not experienced numerous engine breakdowns during the first two years.
Economic analysis assesses the project from the point of view of the society. Shadow prices, which reflect the real value of the project, are used in the analysis. To arrive at these prices, conversion factors have been used to adjust the financial prices. This adjustment is necessary to correct for market distortions, which are typical of an economy which was highly regulated up to the year 1990 when the government started implementing economic reforms. The opportunity cost of capital used is 8.5% (a rate recommended by the Zimbabwe's Ministry of Finance). The EIRR for the project is 71%. Since it is higher than the discount rate the project is economically viable.
TABLE 47
Discounted cash flow analysis for Wenimbi irrigation scheme
Year Invest-ment costs (Z$) Energy costs (Z$) Replace-ment costs (Z$) Repairs & Maintenance (Z$) Dryland Income (Z$) extension & monitoring Costs (Z$) Irrigation income (Z$) Drought savings (Z$) Incremental benefit (Z$)
NPV 410 965
FIRR 68%
Socio-economic impact
Wenimbi irrigation scheme is one of the successful smallholder irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe. Its successes are many and varied. Some of them are quantifiable while others are not. The successes are better illustrated from the point of view of the benefits that accrue to the participants, the surrounding areas and the national economy in general. The socio-economic impact of the scheme has been found to be in the following areas.
Crop diversification
The Wenimbi farmers are now able to grow high value crops both for the local and export markets, thus effectively participating in the main stream economy. Their dryland counterparts concentrate on grain maize and groundnuts, which are both low value crops. The large-scale production of high value horticultural crops is not possible under dryland conditions due to climatic limitations.
High yields
Irrigated agriculture produces substantially higher yields than dryland agriculture. Based on the monitoring and evaluation data for Wenimbi scheme from AGRITEX, the crop yields for maize which is grown under irrigation ranges from 6-9 tons/ha as compared to maize yields of 1-2 tons/ha under dryland. This shows that yields have gone up manifold with the introduction of irrigation at Wenimbi.
Human development
Wenimbi irrigators have developed a commercial mentality. This is indicated by the use of high levels of inputs by irrigators in comparison with dryland farmers. For example, irrigated farmers use 450 kg/ha per ha top dressing fertilizer for maize where as dryland farmers use on average 100 kg/ha. This difference reflects that irrigators are operating on commercial lines. The record books which are kept by each irrigator also explains how business minded these irrigators have become. Before joining the irrigation scheme none of the farmers kept records of their daily farming activities. Now they record all activities and financial transactions, which they carry out on the scheme. The hiring of labour is also a characteristic of business minded people. Each irrigator has opened a bank account in which he or she deposits all proceeds from crop marketing.
Employment creation
The scheme provides seasonal employment for people in the surrounding farms and dryland farmers in the Wenimbi resettlement areas. Hired labour is paid in cash or in kind or both. At the time of scheme visit, hired labour was being paid Z$ 20/day plus vegetables or grain. People prefer to work on Wenimbi scheme rather than in the neighbouring commercial farms. This is because the Wenimbi irrigators pay more money (Z$ 20/day as opposed to Z$ 15/day in commercial farms) and the working hours are less than in commercial farms.
The irrigation scheme also acts as an employer to the irrigators. The fact that only one male household head out of twenty male household heads works in town is an indication that the scheme is providing gainful employment. All the males interviewed on the scheme revealed that it is better to work on the scheme than to work in towns. The net average annual income of Z$ 79 000 per farmer, or Z$ 7 082 per month, is higher than the minimum wage of Z$ 1 400 per month paid to an unskilled worker in the Zimbabwean industry. From a broader perspective the irrigation scheme is vital in curbing the rural to urban drift.
Food security
The scheme is located in a relatively low rainfall area, Natural Region III, and acts as a source of food security during times of drought. In times of drought, non-irrigators come as far as Marondera and Rusape towns to buy grain maize from the scheme. The irrigators have not experienced any grain shortage like their dryland counterparts since 1993. The non-irrigators confirmed that they encounter food problems at least once in every three years. They have to rely on Wenimbi irrigation scheme for food.
Drought relief savings
The Wenimbi irrigation farmers are food self-sufficient. While their dryland counterparts often rely on food handouts from government this is not the case with the 22 irrigators on the scheme. By not providing drought relief to the irrigators and their families the government is making a huge financial saving. For example, in 1997 the government saved about Z$ 38 016 by not providing drought relief to the 22 farmers and their families being supported by Wenimbi irrigation scheme. This saving is based on the current drought relief monthly ration of 10 kg per person, and the then Grain Marketing Board (GMB) maize price of Z$ 2 400 per ton, an average family size of six persons and a six months drought relief provision per year. The above government saving only captures the cost of purchasing maize without even taking into account transportation costs, manpower costs and other logistical support required in the distribution of this relief packages. Obviously the saving would be
higher if these costs are incorporated. In addition a complete drought relief package includes other commodities like beans which, if included, would double the drought relief requirement.
Assets
Irrigators have managed to acquire assets using incomes from the scheme. Four farmers on the irrigation scheme have managed to buy each a five-ton truck. Three other farmers now own small cars, which were also bought from scheme generated incomes. The lorries and the three small cars help in the ferrying of produce to the market. Only one out of the twenty two participants has no cattle and the average number of cattle per farmer on the scheme is five. Most of the farmers had no animals when they joined the scheme, but they managed to buy some from the scheme incomes. Twenty out of the twenty two irrigators have managed to build modern brick under asbestos houses. The other two farmers are still in the process of building such type of houses. Five percent of irrigators have TV sets in their houses. All the irrigators have managed to acquire farm implements like scotchcarts cultivators, ploughs and harrows.
Entrepreneurial skills
Irrigators have developed entrepreneurial skills over the years. The fact that they now can budget for their cropping activities, can manage their own affairs and can borrow and repay debts indicates that they have acquired useful skills by participating in the irrigation scheme.
Support to other industries
The scheme enhances business activities for the local dealer who supplies the scheme with inputs. The high value crops grown at Wenimbi require high levels of fertilizer and chemicals and these are mainly purchased from the local dealer. The local dealer confirmed that the greatest demand for inputs comes from the Wenimbi irrigation scheme more than from anywhere else. Transporters also benefit from the Wenimbi farmers who hire trucks to carry produce to the markets.
Conclusion
In conclusion it can be said that the Wenimbi smallholder irrigation scheme has been a success. This is clear testimony that smallholder irrigation schemes can be successfully operated and managed by the farmers themselves. The successes of Wenimbi are attributed to the following factors:
Good planning: The farmers themselves initiated the scheme. This was a bottom-up approach, with no external influence to accept the project. Scheme planning and implementation was done in full consultation with the farmers. This good planning has contributed to the smooth running of Wenimbi irrigation scheme.
Group cohesion: There is strong group cohesion as evidenced in scheme activities like marketing, maintenance of infrastructure, and payment of electricity bills. This cooperation among the farmers works in favour of the scheme.
Effective scheme management: There is an efficient and effective system of management in place, which maintains a tight control on scheme operations. Scheme bye-laws are enforced by the IMC and any violators are dealt with promptly.
Institutional support: The support given by AGRITEX and HPC are important for the scheme. AGRITEX offers the necessary training, extension services and backstopping which is important for the technical performance of the scheme. HPC supports the farmers in the production and marketing of high value export crops.
Training: Training and study tours organized for the farmers at the beginning of the scheme enhanced the farmers' skills in irrigated agriculture. The contractor who constructed the scheme also trained the farmers in the repair of pumps and infield infrastructure. Farmers have found all this training useful in the successful running of the scheme.
Land tenure: The system of land tenure and inheritance in place encourages farmers to invest in their irrigation plots. There are no land disputes in the scheme.
Infrastructure: The roads that link the scheme with other centres are in a good state, therefore transport operators do not shun the scheme.
Some factors that were acting against the smooth running of the scheme at the time of study were also identified. These are:
* The scheme experiences water shortages in winter, making it unable to attain the intended 200% cropping intensity. This is because of the "priority date" system of water allocation, which was operational in the country at the time of study. This system is based on permanent water rights and on the principle of "first come first served". A commercial farmer upstream fails to release water for the Wenimbi smallholder scheme downstream during times of shortages. This is because the commercial farmer has an earlier water right, which gets precedence over the Wenimbi farmers' water right, which was granted at a later date. This tends to affect the performance of Wenimbi negatively during times of water shortages. The government is already in the process replacing this biased Water Act by a better system, which results in equitable distribution of water. This new system utilizes the concept of water permits that are issued for a five-year period and renewable if need be. The
permit system is managed by Catchment Councils, which are appointed on a catchment basis to administer the allocation of water. The councils comprise representatives of all stakeholders including the smallholder farmers. The permits issued to farmers can be revised any time at the discretion of the Council to ensure equitable distribution of water. During times of water shortages the Catchment Council distributes water according to its availability and ensures that all users get an equal share. This means for most smallholder irrigation schemes like Wenimbi problems once caused by the old system of water allocation will soon be a thing of the past.
* The companies that give up back-up service and carry out repairs of irrigation infrastructure are far from the scheme. Most of them are located in Harare
* There are no telephone facilities near the scheme for quick communication.
* The replacement costs of major items such as the pump and motor are very high.
The study of Wenimbi scheme has also revealed several lessons that are important for the future planning and implementation of smallholder irrigation projects. Some of the most important lessons are:
* Farmers' participation in the identification, design, construction and management of irrigation projects is crucial for the success of the projects.
* Technical back up and training are important to facilitate the adoption of new technologies.
* Farmer managed smallholder irrigation schemes can be viable and successful if the planning is done properly.
* Governments can make huge savings on drought relief costs by developing smallholder irrigation schemes in the drought prone areas.
* Smallholder irrigation schemes can result in the commercialization of the smallholder farmers.
* Smallholder irrigation schemes can result in household food security.
* Private sector participation in the smallholder irrigation sub sector should be encouraged so that farmers can receive assistance in areas like export marketing.
<section>7</section>
Annex B Informal survey checklist
The author used the following checklist with questions to guide in the informal interviews held with the irrigation scheme farmers, AGRITEX Extension Workers and Irrigation Specialists.
1. How old is the irrigation scheme?
2. What was the objective of starting the irrigation scheme? What problem was to be solved?
3. Who started the scheme? Whose idea was it?
4. How big is the irrigation scheme?
5. How many households have plots on the scheme?
6. Can we access the list of irrigators?
7. How many villages or wards are covered by the scheme?
8. What type of water delivery system is used from source or reservoir to the field?
9. What maintenance activities have to be performed on the scheme?
+ How often?
+ By whom?
+ If by farmers, how many hours are spent working on the scheme on maintenance activities
10. What types of fees do farmers on the scheme pay?
11. How much do farmers pay per month?
12. How much does operation and maintenance actually cost on the scheme?
13. How much do farmers pay for water (water charge)?
14. What are the major problems encountered by farmers on this scheme?
15. Do farmers in the scheme have access to dryland plots?
16. What types of records are kept on the scheme?
17. Can we access the following
+ Area under different crops during the 1997 and 1998 irrigation seasons
+ Yields, levels of input use, sales records, retentions etc.
18. In your opinion, what is the impact of the scheme to the villagers in general?
19. Which institutions are in one way or another involved in the scheme?
20. What is the role of each institution?
21. Who is the responsible authority in the scheme? Who runs the scheme?
22. Who decides the cropping programme in the irrigation scheme? Is this programme uniform from farmer to farmer?
23. Is there an Irrigation Management Committee (IMC) on the scheme? What is its role? How effective is it? How is it selected?
The author used the following checklist with questions to guide in the informal interviews held with councilors, village chairperson, village heads and the District social welfare officers
1. What criteria are used for allocating drought relief food?
2. Are the criteria the same from ward to ward or village to village?
3. Who determines these criteria?
4. Are there any problems encountered due to these criteria of allocating drought relief?
5. How have you solved/are you solving the problems?
6. How many types of drought relief handouts are there?
7. How many times was drought relief handed out per household during the 1997 and 1998 seasons? Do these records exist? How much was each family given?
<section>8</section>
Annex C An example of irrigation scheme bye-laws or constitution
The irrigation scheme bye-laws or constitution vary from scheme to scheme. The following is a list of bye-laws common in most of the irrigation schemes studied.
1. Dogs are not allowed into the irrigation scheme. A fine of Z$ 50 will be levied on anyone allowing his or her dog to enter the scheme.
2. The scheme gates should be closed at all times. Anyone who leaves the gate open will be levied a fine of Z$ 20. If animals get into the scheme after the gate had been left open and they destroy crops, the culprit (the individual who left the gate opened) will compensate the owner of the crops. The crop loss will be assessed by AGRITEX and given a monetary value.
3. Farmers should get into the scheme through the gate only. Anyone who jumps over or goes under the fence will pay a fine of Z$ 50.
4. All farmers should follow the agreed cropping programme (programme agreed upon by the IMC, AGRITEX and all farmers). Anyone who deviates from the programme will have water cut off from his or her plot.
5. All farmers must attend scheme meetings. Anyone who absent him/herself from the meeting without a valid reason will pay a fine of Z$ 50.
6. Electricity bills for the scheme will be divided equally among the farmers. It is a must that each farmer pays his/her dues on time. If he/she fails to pay by the agreed date, water will be cut off from his or her plot.
7. If a plot holder continuously fails to pay the electricity bills, he or she will be asked to leave the scheme. The fate of the vacated plot will be decided by the IMC .
8. Repair and maintenance works for the pumping unit and the conveyance pipeline is the collective responsibility of all the farmers. Every farmer should pay the agreed monthly subscriptions to cater for the repair and maintenance works. Any defaulter will have water cut off from his or her plot. If the defaulting farmer continues for another six months without settling the debt, he or she will be evicted from the scheme.
9. Every farmer should take care of the repair and maintenance of his or her infield infrastructure. Anyone who does not do the repair and maintenance works properly will lose his or her plot.
10. Thieves from outside, who steal produce or equipment from the scheme, will be handed over to the police if they are caught. If a plot holder steals from the scheme he or she will also be handed over to the police. In addition the stealing farmer will be evicted from the scheme.
11. Fighting is not allowed in the scheme. Any violators will appear before the IMC for punishment. The punishment will vary from a fine to complete eviction from the scheme depending on the gravity of the matter.
12. All land disputes will be settled by the IMC.
13. Re-allocation of plots will be done by the IMC.
14. If the plot holder dies, his or her plot will be taken over by the surviving spouse. If both spouses die, the eldest son will take over the irrigation plot.
15. Opening and closing of the pump will be done only by the individual appointed by the farmers. Any farmer found opening or closing the pump without permission of the IMC will pay a fine of Z$ 200.
16. Irrigation is to be done between 05.00 hours and 17.00 hours. Any late comer will not have any extended time.
<section>9</section>
Annex A-3 Mambanjeni Irrigation Scheme
Summary
Mambanjeni irrigation scheme is located in Gweru District of Midlands Province. It is one of the poorly performing farmer managed smallholder schemes in Zimbabwe. The scheme is 77.7 ha large with 164 plot holders, each holding between 0.3 ha and 0.5 ha. Established in 1987 by the government, the scheme has not managed to perform as expected. The agricultural performance has been poor with the crop yields being far below the expected levels. Incomes have been too low to sustain the day to day living of the participants. This poor performance has been directly due to the numerous technical and planning related problems, which affected the scheme right from the beginning. Frequent pump breakdowns, poor hydrant positioning and wrong lateral spacing has all contributed to the poor performance of the scheme. Farmers never participated in the planning and implementation of the scheme, but were only used as hired labour. Consultants who had no prior experience with smallholder
irrigation made designs. AGRITEX and other local institutions were never involved in the planning of the project. In terms of operations, the DWR, which is responsible for maintaining the scheme and paying electricity bills, is failing to do so due to budgetary constraints. Electricity is frequently disconnected and infield infrastructure is in a very bad state indicating poor maintenance. All these issues need to be addressed for the scheme to function properly. The experiences with Mambanjeni scheme have brought with it very important lessons. Any future irrigation development should make sure that competent personnel are tasked to do the planning and farmers should be involved throughout the planning and implementation processes. In light of the failure of government departments to maintain irrigation schemes, it is important that any future development should prepare the handing over of these projects to the beneficiaries.
Introduction
The scheme is located in the Lower Gweru communal area in Gweru District of Midlands Province. It is about 46 km north west of the town of Gweru. It falls in Natural Region IV, a region in which agriculture is severely limited by inadequate rainfall. This makes irrigation important in this region for any meaningful crop production. The scheme utilizes a semi-portable sprinkler irrigation system. It is divided into three blocks A, B and C having 47, 60 and 57 farmers respectively. Plot sizes are 0.5 ha in blocks A and B and 0.3 ha in block C.
Planning of the scheme
Following the construction of Insukamini Dam, the Government of Zimbabwe in 1986 initiated Mambanjeni irrigation scheme. The government had several objectives in initiating this scheme, namely to improve farm incomes, food security and cutting down on food handouts. The Department of Water Resources (DWR) was the lead government institution in the identification process.
The scheme was to draw its water from the then newly constructed Insukamini dam via a pick-up weir on Gweru River. A number of farmers were to be displaced from their dryland areas by the irrigation scheme. This move of displacing farmers was strongly resisted but after a series of meetings between the farmers and the government officials, an agreement was finally reached. The agreement was based on the understanding that the displaced farmers would get first priority in the allocation of plots, despite their capacity or inability to adopt the new technology. The rest of the irrigators were selected on the basis of willingness to participate.
The responsibility of planning the project was handed over to DAN Group, a private consulting company, under direct supervision of DWR. The consultants were responsible for designing the whole scheme, including both the headworks and infield works. Construction of the scheme was contracted out to a private civil engineering company without farmer involvement. Irrigators were only hired as casual labour.
The scheme started operating in 1987. However, numerous technical problems affected the scheme right from the beginning. Only one pump instead of two as per design was installed on the scheme. The pump could not cope with the demand. Furthermore, laterals and hydrants were wrongly positioned during construction. Frequent pump breakdowns affected the first whole crop on the scheme. This was a heavy blow to the farmers and they viewed irrigation as a useless non-adapted technology. They regretted why they accepted the technology in the first place. In 1991, DWR took up to rehabilitate the scheme. They tried to correct the infield designs and a second pump was put in place to rectify the situation. This move improved the system to the extent that the farmers could at least irrigate but there were still flaws in the system. As a result the scheme continued to perform poorly.
Social aspects
Land tenure and inheritance
Farmers practice full time irrigation with no other plots in the dryland. Plot allocation at the scheme is such that 100 plots are owned by female headed households (widows or divorcees) and 68 are owned by male headed households. If the female owner dies her her children inherit her plot and if it is a male owner the spouse will take over. If both parents pass away the children will inherit the plot. Farmers are comfortable with this land inheritance system.
Relationship with outsiders
Irrigators live harmoniously with the surrounding non-irrigators. In fact, there is some strong interdependence between the two groups. Non-irrigators provide labour in return for vegetables and wheat. During times of drought the scheme provides some considerable amount of food to the non-irrigators. However, the scheme can not provide the expected amounts of food, due to technical problems affecting the scheme.
Scheme operation, maintenance and management
Irrigation Management Committee
The IMC, which was formed at the beginning of the scheme, is responsible for the overall management of the scheme. Apart from enforcing the scheme bye-laws, the IMC takes a leading role in the determination of the cropping programmes, with assistance of AGRITEX. In terms of water management, the IMC acts as a link between DWR and the irrigators. They also represent farmers at various meetings with government institutions. When it comes to marketing, the IMC sometimes organize transport to ferry produce to the markets as far as Gweru and Bulawayo. The overall picture, which came out, was that the IMC is doing a commendable job.
The composition the IMC is as follows:
i. Chairperson and vice chairperson
ii. Secretary and vice secretary
iii. Treasurer
iv. Seven committee members.
The secretary, vice secretary and treasurer are all women. This represents 25% women in the IMC. Most women interviewed viewed this as an unfair representation of women in the IMC, considering that the majority of the plot holders are women. About twenty farmers who were interviewed to give their perceptions on the functions and effectiveness of the IMC were of the feeling that the IMC was performing well. They regarded them as people who know what they are doing. The only problems were the technical problems affecting the scheme.
In addition to the IMC, there are three block committees, each responsible for a particular block, The block committees report directly to the IMC. Each block committee comprises of a Chairman, Secretary and Treasurer. The gender composition for the block committees is given in Table 25.
TABLE 25
Gender composition for the block committees at Mambanjeni irrigation scheme (Source: AGRITEX Extension Worker, 1998)
Post Block A Block B Block C
Chairman Male Male Male
Secretary Female Female Female
Treasurer Male Male Female
The block committees are responsible for solving problems affecting each individual block. They control the use of water and they report to the IMC on all matters affecting the blocks. If a problem, a dispute or a grievance arises in the block, the block committee takes first responsibility to solve it and if it fails it takes the matter up to the IMC. Meetings are held once a month between the IMC and the block committees. The IMC and the block committees are elected on a two-year term basis after which new elections are held.
Water management
The resident Extension Worker offers assistance to the farmers in terms of irrigation water management. He in turn is backstopped by the irrigation engineers based at the AGRITEX provincial office in Gweru who prepare the irrigation schedules for the scheme.
Farmers pay water charges of Z$ 185/1000m^3. In 1997 they paid Z$ 900 for 0.5 ha. The general feeling of the farmers about the water charges is that they are unable to meet them. They regarded their incomes as too low to permit the payment of such huge sums.
Electricity bills
DWR is responsible for the payment of electricity bills. The bills range from about Z$ 23 000 to Z$ 40 000 per month when the scheme is fully operational. There are always delays in payment of the bills leading to frequent electricity disconnection. DWR has been talking about handing over the bills to the farmers. However, with the current level of production farmers can not take up the bills.
Repairs and maintenance
DWR is also responsible for maintaining the pumping unit, the conveyance and the infield infrastructure. The department is failing to discharge its obligations due to budgetary constraints. As a result DWR takes time to respond to pump breakdowns thus affecting the smooth running of the scheme. Furthermore, the department for unexplained reasons has stopped the repair and maintenance of the infield infrastructure.
Institutional support
Various institutions facilitate the day to day management of the scheme. These include AGRITEX, the DWR and the IMC.
AGRITEX
AGRITEX is responsible for offering technical advice on cropping and water management aspects. Currently there are two Extension Workers for the scheme. The farmers appreciated the role of AGRITEX in the management of the scheme.
Department of Water Resources
DWR is responsible for the operation and maintenance of the pumping unit. A water bailiff, employed by DWR, opens and closes water at the farmers' request. There are problems between the farmers and the water bailiff. Farmers accused the bailiff of not being sensitive to their demands. He is not willing to work after 17.00 hours, arguing that he finishes work at 16.45 hours, and sometimes he opens water very late.
Training
AGRITEX has run several training programmes for the irrigators and has taken them on study tours to other operational schemes in the country. The farmers have learnt a lot from such arrangements.
Agricultural performance
The crops being grown under irrigation are grain maize and beans in summer, wheat and green maize in winter. The cropping patterns for the 0.3 ha and 0.5 ha plots at the scheme are given in Table 26 and 27 respectively.
TABLE 26
Cropping pattern on a 0.5 ha plot at Mambanjeni irrigation scheme (Source: Extension Worker's record book, 1998)
Crop Area (ha) Area as % of plot size
Summer: 0.25 50
- Maize 0.25 50
- Beans 0.25 50
Winter: 0.25 50
- Green Maize 
- Wheat 
Total 1.00 200
TABLE 27
Cropping pattern on a 0.3 ha plot at Mambanjeni irrigation scheme (Source: Extension Worker's record book, 1998)
Crop Area (ha) Area as % of plot size
Summer: 0.15 50
- Maize 0.15 50
- Beans 0.15 50
Winter: 0.15 50
- Green Maize 
- Wheat 
Total 0.60 200
Tables 26 and 27 reveal that farmers plan for a 200% cropping intensity, which is good for irrigated agriculture. However this commendable intensity has not been translated into increased production levels at the scheme. Farmers have tried to implement the programme but with limited success. For example, during the period 1987 to 1990 farmers were operating as dryland farmers since the irrigation system was not operating well.
After scheme rehabilitation, production levels were again too low in 1991 and 1994. This was due to frequent pump breakdowns and flaws in the infield designs. Lack of inputs also worsened the situation. Most farmers on the scheme are not credit worthy because of arrears to the AFC, accumulated when they were still dryland farmers. Farmers found it difficult to acquire at least a bag of fertilizer for 0.25 ha of maize. The crop yields were low and were estimated at 0.5-2 tons/ha for maize, 0.8-5 tons/ha for wheat, and 0.6-1 tons/ha for beans.
In 1997, another problem affected the scheme. Gweru city municipality released some thick sewerage effluent into Gweru River, which supplies the weir used for irrigation. This thick waste had an effect of clogging the suction pipe of the pump there by making it impossible to pump water to the scheme. This problem continued for most of 1997. Irrigators lost the whole maize crop. They demanded compensation from the municipality, but they were not paid. Farmers accuse the city fathers of poor planning and being irresponsible. The problem has since been rectified.
The year 1998 witnessed numerous pump breakdowns. The wheat crop was heavily stressed and average yields of 2 tons/ha were reported. This yield is too low for an irrigation scheme. The green maize was only planted in October, which is too late. A question was raised on why the farmers were not diversifying into lucrative horticultural crops. The answer to that was:
"Tingarima sei mirivo isusu tisina chekudya. Zvirinani kurima gorosi ne chibage zvinotipa sadza." This literally means " How can we produce horticultural crops when we do not have enough to eat. It is better to produce maize for our daily meals".
This seems to be justified given the numerous pump breakdowns occurring at the scheme. Horticultural crops are marketed on competitive markets where quality is of paramount importance. This can not be achieved at this problem-ridden scheme. With low input levels and frequent water shortages, only poor quality vegetables can be obtained.
Commercial aspects
Marketing
The produce from the scheme has two major marketing channels, namely the local market and the Gweru town wholesale market. Grain maize and wheat are locally marketed. The dryland farmers usually produce a good crop once in every five years, so they rely heavily on the scheme for grain when it is operating well. The irrigators either sell the grain for cash or exchange the grain for labour. It is important to note that only a small proportion of the grain produce is marketed, the rest is retained for subsistence purposes. This is because production from the scheme is too low. Beans are produced on contract for a private company, Olivine. Transport is sent directly to the scheme to collect the produce. Prices are negotiated when farmers are about to harvest. This is the only crop giving farmers some meaningful returns. Green maize is sold in Gweru and Bulawayo towns. Farmers hire trucks as a group to ferry their produce to the market. Sometimes buyers come straight to the
scheme with their own transport. Farmers are usually disappointed when they to the Gweru or Bulawayo markets. For example, in 1997 they hired a truck to Bulawayo only to come back with little income, as their poor quality could not compete on the market. The same happened to the bean crop, which could not be sold because of poor quality.
Input acquisition
Farmers get inputs from local stores in the area. They use donkey or ox driven carts to carry the inputs.
Farm income analysis
The incomes obtained from the different crops grown are very low. The reasons for such low incomes are the marketing problems farmers face because of their poor quality produce. The total production levels for crops are too low to cover the costs. Incomes for the thirty farmers who were interviewed on the scheme range between Z$ 1 000 - Z$ 4 000 net per farmer per year. The Extension Worker gave the same estimates. Beans is the highest paying crop, followed by green maize. Grain maize and wheat have negative gross margins.
Financial and economic analysis
Financial and economic analyses were carried out to assess the viability of the Mambanjeni scheme. Financial analysis in particular examines the viability of the project from the point of view of the participants. It compares the benefits and costs associated with the project. Market prices are applied throughout the analysis. The analysis utilizes cash flows (Table 28). The cash flows include the average gross margins as of 1997. The 1997 energy costs are also considered in the analysis. The repair and maintenance costs are derived from the costs incurred by DWR. The replacements costs incurred from the beginning of the scheme up to 1997 have been also included. The investment costs have been annualized at 9.75% interest for 20 years. Extension, monitoring and evaluation have been included as cash outflows. All the costs and incomes have been deflated by 20% inflation rate to give the estimates at 1987 prices. The whole analysis was subsequently done at constant 1987
prices. The FIRR could not be calculated, because the cash flows are negative. The NPV was found to be -Z$4 373 022 indicating that the project is not viable. This non-viability is due to a number of factors, including low yields, low-income levels and lack of adequate repair and maintenance of the scheme.
Economic analysis assesses the project from the point of view of the society. Shadow prices, which reflect the real value of the project, are used in the analysis. To arrive at these prices, conversion factors have been used to adjust the financial prices. This adjustment is necessary to correct for market distortions.
The opportunity cost of capital used is 8.5% (a rate recommended by the Ministry of Finance of Zimbabwe). The EIRR for the project could not be calculated, because the cash flow figures are negative. The NPV in economic terms was found to be minus Z$ 3 256 980, showing that the project is not viable from an economic point of view.
TABLE 28
Discounted cash flow analysis for Mambanjeni irrigation scheme.
Year Investment costs (Z$) Energy costs (Z$) Water charges (Z$) Replacement costs (Z$) Repair & maintenance costs (Z$) Extension costs (Z$) Irrigation income (Z$) Incremental benefits (Z$)
NPV -4 373 022
Socio-economic impact
Mambanjeni irrigation scheme can be viewed as one of the unsuccessful smallholder projects in Zimbabwe. From the analysis made in the preceding sections, it is clear that the project failed to meet its paramount objective of improving the standard of living of the farmers. The incomes derived from the irrigation scheme are very low. The monthly incomes of Z$ 90 - Z$ 333 per farmer obtained in the scheme are too low to justify the huge investment costs in irrigation. The incomes are lower than the average monthly salary of Z$ 600 obtained by a farm worker on a commercial farm. The monthly income can not even cover the energy costs which averages Z$ 420 - Z$ 500 per month for a 0.5 ha plot.
Due to the low incomes, the male household heads prefer to work in towns. Of the male headed households on the scheme over 90% of the men work in town. This is perceived as the only means to generate income for the families. The irrigation project cannot meet school fees and other financial needs of the families. Mambanjeni scheme is unable to offer farmers continuous employment throughout the year. Most farmers tend to allocate part of their time to other off-farm activities. This means that the scheme has failed to offer essential incentives for the farmer to be employed full time. However, irrigators sometimes hire labour from the village, which is paid in kind. This is a positive contribution to the development of the area, which could be even more important had the scheme been operating well.
The scheme also contributes positively towards household food security. The maize and wheat that are locally marketed are important for the dryland farmers who can only afford to get a meaningful harvest once every five years. During the scheme's successful seasons villagers do not have to travel all the way to Gweru town to buy maize meal. The payment of labour in kind also ensures the availability of food to the surrounding villages.
Local stores are benefiting to some extend from the irrigation scheme. The fertilizers and chemicals, which are demanded from the local dealers, are an example of the backward linkages provided by the scheme. These dealers have also taken advantage of the electricity line, which was erected to serve the scheme. The whole local business centre is now electrified.
From an economic point of view the scheme has not contributed much towards the well being of the society. In fact, the scheme is relying heavily on government subsidies. From the way it is operating it would be difficult to hand over the scheme to the farmers.
Conclusion
Several factors have been identified to contribute to the overall failure of Mambanjeni irrigation scheme. Some of the important factors revealed by the study are:
Poor planning: (i) The non-involvement of farmers during the planning and implementation instilled a sense of dependence in farmers; (ii) The involvement of consultants with no experience in smallholder irrigation planning was a mistake on the part of government. The irrigation system designed by the consultants is not ideal for farmer management; (iii) The non-involvement of AGRITEX and other institutions who have experience with smallholder schemes in the planning stage was a major error on the part of the planners.
Poor designs: Irrigation system designs made by the consultants were substandard. The construction itself, which was supervised by the DWR, was poorly done. The hydrants are wrongly placed and the lateral spacing selected is not correct. The poor designs have contributed to water management problems on the scheme.
Poor maintenance of the system: There is poor repair and maintenance of the system by DWR, due to financial constraints. The department has stopped the repair of infield works and electricity bills are always paid late leading to frequent power disconnection on the scheme. This poor institutional back up has negatively affected the performance of the scheme.
Low level input use: There is very little use of inputs by the farmers and when inputs are used the levels are well below the recommended levels. This has resulted in reduced yields and incomes. Farmers do not have the capital to buy inputs. AFC is unwilling to offer credit because of outstanding arrears the farmers have which they acquired while still practicing dryland farming.
Marketing: Farmers lack the necessary marketing skills. They have been cheated twice by unscrupulous dealers, who collected their crops and promised to come back and pay. The dealers never came back and the farmers lost out.
While the scheme is performing badly, there are a number of strengths that work in favour of it. These factors can actually make the scheme viable if the technical problems are corrected. The strengths are:
* Strong group cohesion as evidenced by group marketing of green maize and beans.
* Irrigation is valued. The scheme is located in Natural Region IV, where rainfall for agriculture is erratic and unreliable. Farmers have realized that irrigation is critical in the area if they are to successfully grow crops.
* There are no land disputes in the scheme.
* The IMC is effective and enforces the scheme bye-laws.
The interventions needed for Mambanjeni scheme to perform well are more of a technical nature. There is need to rehabilitate the whole system. Reliable pumps should be installed. Clarification of repair and maintenance responsibility is important. If possible the scheme should be handed over to the farmers after full rehabilitation.
