<title>Consultant Facilitator. Supporting aquaculture development in Africa: Research Network on Integration </title>
<section>1</section>
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Establishment of a Research Network on the Integration of
Aquaculture and Irrigation
THE IDENTIFICATION MISSION
As a follow-up to the Study on International Fisheries Research (SIFR, 1989-91), FAO, in collaboration with the Economic Commission for Africa and the European Union, launched in 1992 a regional study on aquaculture development and research in sub-Saharan Africa. The resulting synthesis of the information presented in 12 national reviews on development and research needs, provided the basis for proposing an indicative Action Plan for Aquaculture Research in sub-Saharan Africa in 1994. Eight priority research programmes were identified among which "Aquaculture in irrigation schemes" and "Small water body fisheries enhancement" were included. These programmes would operate as networks and would be supported by an Aquatic Systems Information Network already proposed in 1997.
Since 1995, the FAO Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS) is gradually being implemented in several African countries. It includes an irrigation component which should develop and demonstrate appropriate irrigation technologies which can be effectively sustained by small-scale farmers. The SPFS also includes a diversification component including rural aquaculture. Small-scale aquaculture could be successfully integrated with irrigation whenever local conditions permit, resulting in a number of varied benefits from practical, social, economical and agricultural points of views.
In the context of sub-Saharan Africa, small-water bodies (SWB) are generally defined as small man-made impoundments of water built primarily for domestic use, livestock watering, and/or irrigation, where fish production is usually a secondary use. SWB fisheries differ significantly from natural lake fisheries and are susceptible to enhancement. Seasonally variable water levels and the resulting magnification of environmental variation, artificial assemblages of mainly riverine fish species in a lacustrine environment, and relatively small surface areas are all characteristics which may be exploited through improved management and aquaculture techniques to increase fish production.
Aware of such potential developments, the Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service of the FAO Fisheries Department organized in October 1997 an identification mission in sub-Saharan Africa with the following objectives:
* to visit some of the existing research institutions previously identified as potential contributors to a research network for the integration of aquaculture and irrigation, including fisheries enhancement in small irrigation reservoirs;
* to evaluate the resources available in each of these institutions to contribute to such a network;
* to ascertain existing interest and willingness to do so;
* to briefly review the status of aquaculture and irrigation development in each country visited;
* to identify possible ways for integration and related constraints;
* to identify potential founder-members of this new research network;
* to identify a possible way for the initial establishment of such a network.
From 22 October to 21 November 1997, the mission visited various institutions concerned with fisheries and irrigation research and/or development in Ghana, Burkina Faso, Mali, Zambia and Zimbabwe. In each of them, it evaluated the potential participation of the visited country into a research network for the integration of aquaculture and irrigation on the basis of existing infrastructure and resources available to support research and development in the fields of aquaculture, small water bodies fishery enhancement and irrigation. Past experience in the integration of aquaculture into irrigation schemes was also reviewed.
Africa2.GIF (23669 bytes)
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS
Aquaculture Research
Except in Ghana and in Zambia where aquaculture research infrastructure is being completed with external assistance, it is still rather rudimentary in the other three countries visited. Staff and financial resources are very limited in most countries, although in Zambia this situation could improve in the near future as a result of the training component of a new UNDP aquaculture project. In Ghana, aquaculture research will most probably receive increased attention following its integration within the Water Research Institute and the recent change in Government policy.
Aquaculture Development
In general, government resources (infrastructure, staff, finances) are rather limited, particularly in Burkina Faso, Mali and Zimbabwe. Although some private initiatives exist in Mali (stocking of small reservoirs) and in Ghana, they are particularly developed in Zambia (fish farms and small reservoirs). Extension services have been reorganized in most countries where the "training and visit" system is applied by polyvalent extensionists (unified system).
In all countries, juvenile fish production cannot cope with the demand. Wild juveniles of tilapias and African catfish are captured from reservoirs, floodplains and rivers by local fishermen mostly to stock small reservoirs. Annual aquaculture productions are relatively low (80-150 t), except in Ghana and in Zambia.
Small Water Bodies and their Fishery Enhancement
Fisheries enhancement in small water bodies (SWB) through stocking has been and/or is still being carried out in all the visited countries. In this last instance, private initiatives are mostly responsible, either at village level (Mali and Ghana) or at farm level (Zambia and Zimbabwe). The current situation in the countries visited is as follows:
Country
Fisheries enhancement in small water bodies
Burkina Faso More than 2 000 reservoirs, not all permanent
Renewed interest in their fisheries enhancement
Very little resources
New project for 250 reservoirs under discussion
Mali Numerous small reservoirs, floodplain depressions and earth-borrowing pits, generally seasonal
Renewed interest in their fisheries enhancement
Private initiatives especially
Ghana Numerous small reservoirs and dugouts in northern regions
Water Users Associations for their management
Dam rehabilitation projects (past, present and future)
Zambia Mostly in Eastern and Southern Provinces, where experience with community management exists; private initiatives on large commercial farms
Zimbabwe Many private initiatives on commercial farms
Some activity in communal lands for local community management promotion
During the past five years in Zambia and Zimbabwe, the FAO Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme (ALCOM) has tested and developed, methodologies for the rapid evaluation of SWB fishery potential and for community-based enhancement/management of SWB fish resources. Guidelines are now being prepared which should prove useful for other countries.
Irrigation Potential and Development
Surface irrigation with full or partial water control which offers the best possibilities for integrating aquaculture, in particular in large-scale irrigation schemes, is mostly developed in Mali. Zambia and Zimbabwe have each more than 20000ha available, much more than Burkina Faso and Ghana. In this last country, the actually irrigated area is only 61percent of the equipped area, although great efforts are now made to rehabilitate old schemes.
Overhead irrigation
by sprinklers is particularly well developed in Zimbabwe and even in Zambia. Actual tendency is to prefer this irrigation system which uses available water resources much more efficiently. For the same reason, micro-irrigation (drip) is being increasingly used in southern Africa.
Wetlands and/or inland bottom valleys are particularly extended in Zambia where these dambos are traditionally irrigated by hand and where the SPFS is actually concentrating its efforts. It has been shown that several possibilities exist to integrate small-scale fish farming in such areas. Burkina Faso and Zimbabwe (as well as Ghana probably) have also relatively extended wetlands used by smallholders. In Mali, such areas are limited to the south western part of the country.
Flood-dependent irrigation is practiced in Mali in the Niger River valley over a large area. Results have been disappointing in recent years following the reduced river peak flood level. Little potential for integrating aquaculture exists in such type of irrigation schemes.
Irrigation potential is huge in Ghana and nearly four times greater than the potential in Mali and Zambia, the next countries with good potential. Smallest potential is found in Burkina Faso.
Integration of Aquaculture and Irrigation
All kinds of integration of aquaculture in large irrigation schemes have been tried in Mali a few years ago and further trials have been proposed more recently. Good experience is also present in Ghana where an integration policy exists for a long time. Even if several proposals have been made in Burkina Faso at the Sourou irrigation scheme in the past, none have been implemented, although the enhancement of SWB fisheries has been practiced throughout the country for several years.
As far as informal irrigation in wetlands is concerned, the Zambia SPFS is actively carrying out the most recent trials on small-scale fish farming integration into small-holder irrigation.
Special Programme for Food Security (FAO)
Integration of aquaculture into the SPFS irrigation component is well ahead in Zambia where it is has been supported by a full time aquaculturist, with technical assistance from a consultant and ALCOM. In the other countries, aquaculture is under consideration, but the SPFS has still to get fully underway.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE INITIAL ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NETWORK
Identification of National Institutions to Become Involved in the Research Network for the Integration of Aquaculture and Irrigation - Phase 1
National institutions apt to become initially members of the new research network have been identified in each of the countries visited, except in Zimbabwe where a regional development project has been proposed.
The recommended institutions are as follows:
Country/town
Selected institutions
Remarks
Burkina Faso
Bobo-Dioulasso
Institut de Développement Rural (IDR) University structure responsible for training/research in agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Mali
Bamako
Institut d'Economie Rurale (IER) Responsible for agricultural research, including forestry and fisheries; development structures to be closely associated with IER
Ghana
Accra
Water Research Institute (WRI) Water and water-resources related research are integrated. Aquaculture Research and Development Centre at Akosombo
Zambia
Chilanga/Lusaka
Mount Makulu Regional Agricultural Research Centre
* to be closely assoc.with Dept.Fisheries (Research)
* part of Nat. Agricult. Research Network, in same Ministry as DOF
* hosts SPFS and FARMESA Prog.
Zimbabwe
Harare
ALCOM Regional Programme (SADC)
* to be closely assoc.with nat. Research structures (irrig/fish)
* developing SADC water resources database
* good experience with networking in Info Service and SWB Unit
* regional authority on small-scale aquacult. and SWB enhancement
Coordination with Existing African Networks
The new research network for aquaculture integration into irrigation schemes should become closely associated with other networks active in Africa and specialized in irrigation, regional development or fisheries.
Future collaboration with these networks will be particularly useful for the organization of seminars/workshops, for group training and for dissemination of information through existing channels such as newsletters and publications.
Establishment of the New Network
It is proposed that the following steps be successively taken to initially establish the new network:
(i) An official invitation should be addressed by FAO to the Director of the selected institutions to participate in the Seminar proposed below.
ii) Author's contracts should be issued for the preparation of national reviews/syntheses according to a standard framework by each of the institutions having expressed an interest to participate in the Seminar, with or without support from other institutions according to needs.
iii) A Seminar to be organized with the objectives of:
* reviewing the development and research constraints existing in the participating countries, in particular following the outline agreed for the national reviews;
* discussing the future organization responsibilities and functioning of the new network, in particular from the point of view of using two languages, English and French;
* agreeing on applied research priorities and a research programme for the new network to support the development of the integration of aquaculture and irrigation;
* recommending how such research could be carried out in the field in each of the involved countries, with particular attention to the human and financial resources to be mobilized to this effect; and
* recommending how best close links could be established with other existing African networks of interest.
Participants in such seminar should include representatives from the selected countries, directly involved in research and/or development of irrigation, aquaculture and SWB fisheries. Representatives of other existing networks should also be invited to share their past experiences with networking and to stimulate future collaborative activities.
Potential Research Subjects for the New Network
A series of research topics are suggested, addressing both general and particular aspects of aquaculture integrated into irrigation schemes. Specialized research should be considered for:
* undrainable fish farming structures;
* ponds with an unusually high water exchange rate;
* ponds built in waterlogged areas, in terrain depressions or in borrowing pits;
* fish farming in paddy fields;
* fish production in irrigation canals, either in pens or in floating cages;
* culture-based fisheries either in irrigation canals or in small irrigation reservoirs.
<section>2</section>
CHAPTER 1 : INTRODUCTION
CONTENTS
LIST OF ACRONYMS
1.1 Origin, Organization and Objectives of the Mission
1.2 FAO Special Programme for Food Security
1.3 Positive Aspects of Aquaculture-Irrigation Integration
1.4 Constraints to Aquaculture-Irrigation Integration
1.5 Small-water Body Fisheries in Africa
LIST OF ACRONYMS
AGAP Animal Production Service (FAO)
AGLW Water Resources, Development and Management Service (FAO)
CIFA Committee for Inland Fisheries of Africa (FAO/RAF)
FAO UN Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome
FIRI Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FAO)
RAF Regional Office for Africa, Accra (FAO)
SIDA Swedish International Development Authority, Stockholm
SIFR Study on International Fisheries Research, 1989-91
SPFS Special Programme for Food Security (FAO)
SWB Small-water bodies
TCI Investment Centre Division (FAO)
1.1 Origin, Organization and Objectives of the Mission
As a follow-up to the Study on International Fisheries Research (SIFR, 1989-91), FAO, in collaboration with the Economic Commission for Africa and the European Union, launched in 1992 a regional study on aquaculture development and research in sub-Saharan Africa.
The resulting synthesis of the information presented in 12 national reviews on development and research needs provided the basis for proposing an indicative Action Plan for Aquaculture Research in sub-Saharan Africa (Coche, Haight and Vincke, 1994; Coche, 1994).
Eight priority research programmes were identified among which "Aquaculture in irrigation schemes" and "Small water body fisheries enhancement", to be supported by an Aquatic Systems Information Network (Coche and Collins, 1997).
Since 1995, the FAO Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS, Section 1.2) is gradually being implemented in several African countries. It usually includes an irrigation component into which small-scale aquaculture can be integrated successfully.
In July 1997, a seminar on the "Contribution of Fisheries in Man-made Lakes and Irrigation Dams to Food Security in the Sahelian Zone" was organized by the FAO Regional Office for Africa within the framework of the Sahel sub-committee of the Committee for Inland Fisheries of Africa (CIFA). Among its recommendations to Member Governments, the seminar stressed that:
* there should be an increase in the number of dams to harvest available water resources;
* reservoir management should include watershed management for its strategies to be successful;
* when designing/planning any new dam, fisheries aspects should be considered from the onset;
* inter-regional networking should be initiated to exchange information and avoid duplication of efforts;
* aquacultural development should focus on improved management of and output from reservoirs through stocking and improved harvesting techniques.
The seminar also recommended that FAO should facilitate inter-regional networking and information exchange.
As follow-up to these activities and using the Partnership Programme Scheme, the Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service of the FAO Fisheries Department organized in October 1997 an identification mission in sub-Saharan Africa with the following objectives:
* to visit some of the existing research institutions previously identified as potential contributors to a research network on the integration of aquaculture and irrigation, including fisheries enhancement in small irrigation reservoirs;
* to evaluate the resources available in each of these institutions to contribute to such a network;
* to ascertain existing interest and willingness to do so;
* to briefly review the status of aquaculture and irrigation development in each country visited;
* to identify possible ways for integration and related constraints;
* to identify potential founder-members of this new research network;
* to identify a possible way for the initial establishment of such a multidisciplinary network at sub-Saharan African level.
Before being fielded, the mission was briefed on aquaculture, irrigation and SPFS subjects in FAO Headquarters, Rome, as follows:
* Agriculture Department
* Land and Water Development Division,
Water Resources, Development and Management Service (AGLW)
* Kandiah, A. (Zimbabwe)
* Faures, J.-M. (Burkina Faso)
* Florin, R. (Mali)
* Smith, M. (Ghana, Zambia)
* Animal Production and Health Division,
Animal Production Service (AGAP)
* Branckaert, R.D.S. (francophone Africa)
* Technical Cooperation Department
* Investment Centre Division (TCI)
* Strebelle, J. (Mali)
* Clement, D. (SPFS/Mali)
* Fisheries Department
* Fishery Resources Division,
Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service (FIRI)
* Pedini, M. (Aquaculture and overall coordination of the mission)
The identification mission visited various institutions in Sahelian, western and southern Africa between 22 October and 21 November 1997, as follows:
* from 22 to 27 October, Ghana;
* from 29 October to 4 November, Burkina Faso;
* from 5 to 12 November, Mali;
* from 13 to 17 November, Zambia;
* from 18 to 21 November, Zimbabwe.
A more detailed schedule of the mission together with names of institutions/projects visited are provided as an Annex.
Each country visited is the subject of a separate Chapter (Chapters 2 to 6) where a list of persons met, generalities about aquaculture and irrigation, details about visited institutions/projects (research or development oriented) and literature consulted, are successively given.
1.2 FAO Special Programme for Food Security
The Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS) was launched by FAO in September 1994. Its objectives are:
* to sustainably increase food production and productivity through widespread dissemination of improved technologies and management practices in areas with high potential;
* to create an economic and social environment conducive to food production.
SPFS is guided by the following basic principles:
* national ownership, through direct government involvement;
* focus on areas and foods with a high potential, primarily staple food crops (cereals, roots, tubers), with possible integration of others, such as vegetables, poultry, livestock and fish;
* participatory approach;
* environmental awareness/sensitivity;
* regard for women's role, particularly important in food crop production.
SPFS strategy
includes:
* food security through irrigation and intensification;
* diversification (e.g., aquaculture).
Implementation is in two phases:
* a pilot phase including on-farm trials and demonstrations of improved technologies and management practices, full participation of the local community in their evaluation and in the identification of adoption constraints/practical ways to remove them, as well as water management (conservation and storage to ensure a reliable water supply);
* an expansion phase.
The SPFS irrigation component should develop and demonstrate appropriate irrigation technologies which can be effectively sustained by small-scale farmers.
The SPFS aquaculture component should be preferably fully integrated with the irrigation component and, as far as possible, with the animal husbandry component if present.
1.3 Positive Aspects of Aquaculture-Irrigation Integration
The integration of aquaculture and irrigation can result, for the smallholder farmer in particular, in a number of varied benefits.
From a practical point of view, the presence of a water storage facility:
* improves domestic water use (closer supply, time saving);
* allows livestock watering;
* allows crop irrigation;
* allows fish farming.
From the social point of view, integrated fish farming:
* improves the household nutritional situation; animal proteins are often lacking in the diet of smallholders, in particular for growing children and child-bearing or breast-feeding women;
* provides fish which can be easily harvested, as required by the household;
* directly improves household food security; farmers with access to irrigation and producing a variety of cash crops generally sell a great part of their horticultural crops and use the largest part of their fish production for home consumption (van der Mheen, 1996);
* contributes to production diversification and risk avoidance.
From the economical point of view, integrated fish farming:
* requires a small investment, mostly for juvenile fish if they are not on-farm produced;
* produces fresh fish, usually a high-value cash crop;
* gives the opportunity for additional income;
* can give fast returns on investment if the production cycle is kept relatively short;
* may be economically more profitable than irrigated crop farming, as observed in southern Africa (van der Mheen, 1996);
* may provide a way to produce a positive economic return in irrigation networks where soil salinization has reduced economic returns of crops below acceptable levels;
* produces a crop with greater marketing flexibility than most other crops, fish being easily stored alive in ponds for as long as necessary.
From the irrigation point of view, integrated pond fish farming:
* optimizes the use of water, its consumption being limited to evaporation and seepage losses from reduced surfaces;
* may allow an irrigation schedule much more flexible and better adapted to the real needs of the crop if irrigation water is obtained from an individual storage pond;
* may allow farmers to use an improved irrigation system, such as overhead or micro-irrigation, if irrigation water is stored at a higher elevation in a pond;
* may assist in regulating periodic excessive water flow or in greatly reducing losses of unused water through intermediate pond storage;
* in irrigation schemes where salt accumulation reduces crop production, fish farming can assist in rehabilitating salinized areas within a few years and on an economical basis;
* is adopted by farmers used to irrigation practices more easily than by dryland farmers as demonstrated in Madagascar, Mozambique and Tanzania (van der Mheen, 1996).
From the farming system point of view, integrated fish farming:
* improves the use of on-farm resources, such as water, inputs and labour;
* allows a more effective recycling of the farm/garden by-products and wastes;
* enhances the overall management and production of smallholder farms;
* contributes to an increased sustainability.
1.4 Constraints to Aquaculture-Irrigation Integration
Integration of aquaculture and irrigation is not always feasible and numerous previous attempts have failed for not taking into consideration the following:
* it is possible only if there is a reliable source of water and suitable soils;
* it should be socially acceptable to the farmer concerned;
* it does not interfere with the existing irrigation system;
* it does not excessively compete with the existing elements of the farming system for scarce land and/or water, or for on-farm produced organic wastes and by-products preferably allocated to agricultural crops and animal husbandry respectively (van der Mheen, 1997).
1.5 Small-water Body Fisheries in Africa
In the context of sub-Saharan Africa, small-water bodies (SWB) are generally defined as small man-made impoundments of water built primarily for domestic use, livestock watering, and/or irrigation, where fish production is usually a secondary use, but can nevertheless produce an important amount of fish for consumption and sale by the local community. They are particularly numerous in northern and southern subtropical African countries.
SWB fisheries differ significantly from natural lake fisheries and are susceptible to enhancement (Section 8.1.3). Seasonally variable water levels and the resulting magnification of environmental variation, artificial assemblages of mainly riverine fish species in a lacustrine environment, and relatively small surface areas are all characteristics which could be exploited through improved management and aquaculture techniques to increase fish production.
Management and enhancement of small water body fisheries has been intensively studied at the SIDA/Belgium/FAO Programme on "Aquatic Resources Management for Local Communities" (Chapter 6, Section 4.1).
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 2 : GHANA
GENERAL BACKGROUND DATA
Area of the country 1994
km^2
Cultivable land 1990
km^2
Cultivated land 1990
km^2
Total population 1994
inh.
Population density 1994
inh/km^2
Rural population 1990
percent
Fishery production, coastal 1996
t
Fishery production, inland 1995
t
Aquaculture production 1995
t
Full or partial control irrigation, equipped 1994
ha
Surface irrigation 1994
ha
Percentage actual irrigation 1994
percent
Total water managed area 1994
ha
Irrigation potential 1994
ha
Irrigation water from reservoirs 1994
percent
River pumping 1994
percent
Large irrigation schemes (> 100 ha) 1994
ha
Small schemes (< 100 ha) 1994
ha
CONTENTS
LIST OF ACRONYMS
1. PERSONS MET
2. IRRIGATED AGRICULTURE AND FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT: GOVERNMENT POLICIES AND STRATEGIES
2.1 Decentralization Policy
2.2 Reorganization of Agricultural Extension Services
2.3 Irrigated Agriculture Development
2.4 Privatization of Development
2.5 Ponds, Dugouts and Reservoirs
2.6 Integrated Pest Management
3. INSTITUTIONS OF INTEREST MAINLY INVOLVED IN RESEARCH AND/ORTRAINING
3.1 Water Research Institute
3.2 Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research
3.3 Irrigation Company for the Upper Regions
3.4 Research and Training in Fisheries and Related Sciences
4. INSTITUTIONS AND PROJECTS OF INTEREST MAINLY INVOLVED IN DEVELOPMEN
4.1 Department of Fisheries
4.2 Irrigation Development Authority
4.3 Irrigation Company for the Upper Regions
4.4 Project for the Development of Support Structure for Irrigated Agriculture
4.5 FAO Special Programme for Food Security
5. CONCLUSIONS
5.1 Positive Factors
5.2 Existing Constraints
5.3 Recommended Research Institution
6. LITERATURE CONSULTED
LIST OF ACRONYMS
ADCP Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (UNDP/FAO)
AfDB African Development Bank
ARDEC Aquaculture Research/Development Centre (WRI)
ARID Regional Association for Irrigation and Drainage
ASIP Agricultural Services Investment Project (WB)
CISR Council for Industrial and Scientific Research
EU European Union
GOG Government of Ghana
IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency
ICLARM International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management
ICOUR Irrigation Company for the Upper Regions
IDA Irrigation Development Authority
IDC Irrigation Development Centre (IDA)
IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development
IOC Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (Unesco)
IPM Integrated Pest Management
ISSER Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research
JICA Japanese International Cooperation Agency
MOFA Ministry of Food and Agriculture
SPFS Special Programme for Food Security
TCP Technical Cooperation Programme (FAO)
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
Unesco United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
WB World Bank
WRI Water Research Institute
1. PERSONS MET
* FAO Offices (RAFR/FAOR)
Dada, B. F. ADG/Regional Representative (Africa)
Eckebil. J.-P. Deputy Regional Representative/FAO Representative in Ghana
West, W. Q-B. Senior Regional Fisheries Officer
Sonou, M. Senior Regional Water Resources Development/Management Officer and President of ARID
* Water Research Institute (WRI)
Abban, E.K. Acting Director/Head, Fisheries Division
Ofori, J.K. Head, Aquaculture Section (Akosombo)
* Department of Fisheries
Anyani, G.H. Director
Lomo, Adjei Dep. Director/Head, Inland Fisheries Division
Oyih, M. Aquaculture Technician
* Irrigation Development Authority (IDA)
Torgbor, H. Director, Department of Project Development
Forson, S. Irrigation Agronomist/Coord. TCP/GHA/6613
* Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research (ISSER)
Gyekye, O. L. Head, Social Division
* Agricultural Sector Investment Project (ASIP)
Mensa-Bonsu, A. Technical Head
2. IRRIGATED AGRICULTURE AND FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT: GOVERNMENT POLICIES AND STRATEGIES
2.1 Decentralization Policy
Since 1988, the Government of Ghana (GOG) has introduced decentralization, establishing within the existing 10 administrative Regions (Figure 1) 110 Districts to become focal points for local development. Since then, considerable legislative power has been given to the District Assemblies which have become the second highest legislative body in the country. Assembly decisions are to be executed by the district administration and 22 decentralized government departments.
Each year, 10 per cent of the national budget is attributed to the District Assemblies to support local development, the agriculture sector (incl. fisheries) receiving 20 per cent of this allocation
2.2 Reorganization of Agricultural Extension Services
The Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) is being completely restructured with assistance from the Agricultural Services Investment Project (ASIP) financed by the World Bank (WB). The latter also finances the National Agricultural Extension Project (NAEP) responsible for reorganizing and reinforcing the MOFA Department of Agricultural Extension Services (DAES). Main activities involve:
* the establishment of a unified extension system in which agriculture extensionists (Frontline Staff - FLS) are polyvalent and responsible for delivering to the rural population messages related to all disciplines relevant to development, such as crops, animal husbandry, human health, capture fisheries and fish farming. Subject Matter Specialists (SMS) should be available at Region and District levels to support the FLS.
* the training of FLS and SMS at Region/District levels
* the establishment of Research - Extension Linkage Committees responsible for the two-way flow of information between farmers, extension staff and researchers.
2.3 Irrigated Agriculture Development
Irrigated agriculture development has been given high priority by GOG for some years. Such priority has been reiterated in the Medium-Term Agricultural Development Plan (1991 - 2000), which also specifies the strategy to be applied for sustainable irrigation agriculture. It includes:
* reduction of operating costs;
* completion of the development of existing irrigation schemes;
* focus on small-scale (less than 100 ha) and micro-scale (a few ha) irrigation schemes;
* giving priority to schemes, mainly rice, with water control in seasonally inundated areas and valley bottoms;
* favouring management of small-scale irrigation schemes by the farmers themselves through the establishment of Cooperative Societies or Farmers Associations;
* promoting expansion of rice growing areas and intensification to meet increasing local demand.
2.4 Privatization of Development
It is envisaged to support only a limited number of small-scale farmers nuclei (training, transferred technology, inputs...).
Each of these nuclei would then become responsible for supporting the development of neighbouring farmers at reasonable costs, transferring technology, providing inputs and support services, and assisting them to market their production.
2.5 Ponds, Dugouts and Reservoirs
According to long standing GOG policy, each irrigation scheme should allocate at least five percent of the irrigable land area to fish ponds. Such policy has resulted in the construction of several, relatively large fish farms which are managed by the Department of Fisheries (Section 4.1) and/or by the agency managing the irrigation scheme, such as ICOUR for example (Section 3.3).
In the Northern part of Ghana where long dry seasons and single unreliable rainy seasons prevail, a programme of construction of dugouts and small reservoirs (dams) has been implemented over the past years to provide reliable water supplies to the local rural communities. These surface water collection systems are now widespread throughout the Upper East, Upper West and Northern Regions where they have become a vital part of the infrastructure of the local communities.
Until recently access to the stored water and to its resources such as fish has been free. Now, members of each local community who use the dugout or small reservoir for example for domestic needs, livestock watering, crop irrigation or fishing, have been regrouped into a Water Users Association. Non-members of this association have to pay a fee to have access to the water/fish resources.
2.6 Integrated Pest Management
Integrated pest management (IPM) has been declared a national policy for protecting crops, in particular irrigated rice in paddy fields.
Recent rice-cum-fish culture experiments in the Tono Irrigation Scheme by ICOUR (Section 3.3) and the Institute of Aquatic Biology (now part of WRI, Section 3.1) have shown how rice production is greatly increased if lateral water filled trenches are present to control rats (Kumah et al., 1996). From previous experience, it is also known that the presence of fish in paddy fields contributes to the control of rice stem-borers and other pests, including malaria mosquitoes and possibly snails (schistosomiasis hosts).
3. INSTITUTIONS OF INTEREST MAINLY INVOLVED IN RESEARCH AND/OR TRAINING
3.1 Water Research Institute
Head Office
: P. O. Box 38, Achimota - Tel. (21) 775351 - Fax (21) 777170 email: wri@ghastinet.gn.apc.org
Field Stations
: Tamale Field Station, P.O. Box 695, Tamale - Tel. 071-23448. Aquaculture Research/Development Centre: P.O. Box 139, Akosombo - Tel. 0251-305
Establishment
: The Water Research Institute (WRI) was established by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) in July 1996. It was created by merging two of its former institutes, the Institute of Aquatic Biology (IAB) and the Water Resources Research Institute (WRRI), to further integrate water and water-resources related research.
Organization
: as shown in Figure 2. The Fishery Research Division is made of the Capture Fisheries Section (lagoons, reservoirs, wetlands and rivers) and the Aquaculture Section (see below).
Mandate/Functions
: To undertake research into all aspects of water resources in order to provide scientific and technical information services needed for the sustainable development, utilization and management of the resources in support of the socio-economic development for all sectors of the country, including Agriculture/Fisheries, Health, Industry, Energy, Transportation, Education and Tourism.
Examples of WRI functions of interest:
* carry out and coordinate research in all aspects of water resources development;
* assess research needs in the water sector and prioritize them;
* study/monitor ecological factors and productivity of reservoirs;
* develop the scientific basis for aquaculture practices.
Current research programmes
* Water resources policy, planning and management;
* Studies on inland water systems;
* Culture fisheries and aquaculture development:
* Establishment of locally adaptable technical base for increased fish culture production;
* Fish seed production (Oreochromis niloticus and Clarias gariepinus);
* Integration of aquaculture and irrigation:
* fish farming in paddy fields (rizipisciculture and rotation);
* valley bottoms development (fish in rice and vegetables on pond dykes above water table);
* collaboration with the Crop Research Institute, Kumasi University, and with the Department of Fisheries (Afife Irrigation Scheme: rice and ponds rented to farmers);
Culture potential of Macrobrachium vollenhoveni;
Development of fish feed from local agricultural products and by-products;
Tilapia genetic resources for their future conservation and management (in coll. ICLARM/Hamburg University/GTZ).
Affiliation
WRI is affiliated to a number of international organizations:
* WHO Centre for screening microbial agents for biological control and Specialist Training Centre for West African Scientists in Hydrobiology and Fisheries;
* FAO/IOC/IAEA/UNEP Supported Centre for Monitoring Marine and Coastal Pollution;
* African Centre for ICLARM Fishbase;
WRI also hosts the Secretariats of:
* Ghana National Committee for International Hydrology and Water Resources Programmes;
* Ghana National Commission for IOC/UNESCO.
Aquaculture facilities/staff
The Aquaculture Research and Development Centre (ARDEC) is located at Akosombo, next to Lake Volta Dam, about 100 km north-east of Accra. Actual facilities include a training centre (dormitory, classes, etc., to be completed in 1998), a research centre (earthern ponds, concrete tanks, library, to be completed in 1998), a production hatchery, residences and offices. Staff include six professionals, four technicians and support staff. E-mail connection should become available soon.
WRI Research Library and Documentation Centre
: in-house database and network database GAINS (Ghana Agricultural Information Network Systems). Aquaculture resources to be transferred to ARDEC in 1998 after construction of its own library.
3.2 Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research
The Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research (ISSER) is the research arm of the Faculty of Social Studies, University of Ghana (Legon near Accra), where its professional staff also lectures.
Its main activities are:
* to serve as the centre for comprehensive and sustained fundamental and applied research in the field of the social sciences, to establish the basic information essential for effective socio-economic development;
* to coordinate and integrate the many fields of research in the social sciences;
* to disseminate research findings and other forms of pertinent knowledge to practitioners in the field of social/economic development.
It is organized into five Divisions for Statistics, Social, Economics, Planning and Demography fields of research.
Funding by GOG is limited to the salaries (12 professionals and some support staff) and to operating expenses. Research is mostly funded by national and international agencies. Research contracts and consultancies also greatly contribute to support it.
3.3 Irrigation Company for the Upper Regions
The Irrigation Company for the Upper Regions (ICOUR) is mostly involved in agricultural development and somewhat in fishery/aquaculture development as described in details in Section 4.3.
But at Tono, Upper East Region, ICOUR has also a well-managed and well-designed fish farming research station (Vincke and Awity, 1990) with a total of nine ponds of 1000m^2 each. Nile tilapia fingerlings are regularly produced and sold to farmers. It is in collaboration with this research station that rizipisciculture trials have been carried out recently (Kumah et al., 1996) by ARDEC/WRI (Section 3.1).
3.4 Research and Training in Fisheries and Related Sciences
Until now three universities have been involved in research and training in fishery biology, aquaculture, sociology, economics, etc.:
* University of Ghana, in Legon near Accra;
* University of Science and Technology, in Kumasi;
* Cape Coast University.
A new university has been created recently in Tamale (Northern Region) as the University of Development Studies to focus on agricultural, social and economic aspects of development.
4. INSTITUTIONS AND PROJECTS OF INTEREST MAINLY INVOLVED IN DEVELOPMENT
4.1 Department of Fisheries
4.1.1 Organization
The Department of Fisheries belongs to the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA). During the past five years, its importance has steadily increased following recognition by government that it had a role to play in improving people's nutrition and in alleviating poverty in rural areas. As fish landings from artisanal marine fisheries are rather limited (about 400 000 t/year), the development of inland fisheries, in particular culture-based fisheries and aquaculture, is now considered to be vital.
There are five Divisions: Marine Fisheries, Marine Fisheries Research, Inland Fisheries, Monitoring/Control and Administration. To support inland fisheries development, there is at least one professional staff in each region, assisted by technical officers. Following the MOFA reorganization (Section 2.2), Subject Matter Specialists for culture-based fisheries and/or for aquaculture will be needed at district level. Front line agriculture staff will have to be trained in these subjects also.
4.1.2 Aquaculture development
The 1990 survey of government/parastatal fish farms associated with irrigation schemes (Section 2.5) showed that most of this infrastructure was either abandoned or hardly used, due to faulty site selection/design or bad management by incompetent personnel (Vincke and Awity, 1990).
Today, there are five active government/parastal fish farms which produce fingerlings, mostly Nile tilapias and some African catfishes. These are the fish farms integrated into the irrigation schemes at Tono, Vea, Bontanga, Afife and Dalwhenya (Figure 1).
On several of these farms, ponds are rented to local small-scale irrigation farmers who have access to credit for the necessary aquaculture inputs and obtain support services from fisheries staff or parastatal agency staff (for example, ICOUR, Section 4.3).
Lately, fish farming development has been reactivated in some irrigation schemes, particularly in the Greater Accra Region at Afife and Dawhenya. Both paddy fields (rizipisciculture or fish/rice in rotation) and fish ponds are being used by some farmers for fish production . Although they are located close to the artisanal coastal fishery, there is no problem to market the fish produced which are generally sold on farm.
4.1.3 Culture-based fisheries
As seen previously (Section 2.5), one of the major problems in Northern Ghana is scarcity of water. Various technical solutions have been implemented such as boreholes, hand-dug wells, dugouts and small reservoirs (dams). But high construction costs of surface water collection systems for domestic purposes can only be economically justified if multiple use of the water is ensured, including dry-season gardening, improved livestock management, agro-forestry, fish production and even, indirectly, aforestation of catchment areas.
The 1990 survey has identified 1443 ha of water bodies smaller than 4 ha each, of which 1 022 ha in the Northern Region alone (MacPherson et al., 1990). Among the IDA-monitored reservoirs/dugouts in the same region, permanent water is present in all large reservoirs (12), in 88 percent of the medium reservoirs (24), in 59 percent of the small reservoirs (115) and in 25 percent of the dugouts (12). Where these water bodies serve as sole source of drinking water, regular fishing is usually not permitted (24 percent of the Northern Region water bodies). An organized general fish-out takes place just before all water disappears in 56 percent of the water bodies.
As the Northern Region rural communities are amongst the poorest in Ghana, they can gain considerable additional income and/or nutritional benefits from fishing in dugouts and reservoirs.
Now that Water Users Associations (Section 2.5) are responsible for the management of their water bodies, some have started buying fingerlings for stocking, mostly from government/parastatal fish farms, to enhance their fisheries.
4.1.4 Coordination fisheries - irrigation
As already clearly stated a few years ago (MacPherson et al., 1990), coordination between the Department of Fisheries and other GOG institutions, in particular those involved in the development/management of irrigation schemes and in fishery research, appears to be lacking.
In the past, this absence of involvement of the Department of Fisheries in the development of irrigation schemes from the planning stage has greatly handicapped the development of valuable fish farms (see above). On some other occasions, this has led dam-design engineers to neglect fishery development potential completely.
4.2 Irrigation Development Authority
The Irrigation Development Authority (IDA) is the parastatal entity of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture actually responsible for :
* the management of 22 irrigation schemes of which two (Tono and Vea) are managed by ICOUR (Section 3.3) and one has been handed over to the Dawhenya Cooperative Food Farming Society;
* the rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes, for example 44 dams (500 ha irrigated) in the Upper East Region;
* the preliminary studies (surveys/designs) and the construction supervision for new schemes, including now Kpong (3089 ha, AfDB), Aframso (IFAD) and Esubonpao (IFAD);
* the studies to develop small-scale irrigation projects (e.g., 2800 ha in the north and 1600 ha in the south) and valley bottom projects (e.g. Western Region, EU);
* research (esp. water management) and training (extensionists/farmers), through its Irrigation Development Centre (IDC) located at Ashiaman (ab. 30 km NE Accra) and financially assisted by JICA.
The developed area totals 6374 ha of which 3100 ha (wet season), 2800 ha (dry season) and 1700 ha (wet/dry seasons) are cultivated, involving about 9300 farmers.
The present organigram of IDA (de Nooy, 1996) is shown in Figure 3. Two of the senior engineers were trained at the FAO/ADCP Training Course in Aquaculture Engineering (Budapest, 1983). There is a need for more junior engineers to be specialized in fish farm design/construction in view to be able to better assist the Department of Fisheries to integrate fisheries into future irrigation schemes.
Present IDA regulations for the management of irrigation schemes and the involvement of farmers are being reviewed to allow stronger representation and participation of the farmers and their associations, in line with the new GOG policy.
Studies have just been completed for AfDB for a series of 50 to 200 ha irrigation schemes. The main development for the next 10 years will most probably consist of two 2000-ha phases of five years each to be financed by AfDB. Apart from such new development, most of the activities in the near future should be directed at the rehabilitation of existing schemes with JICA funds.
4.3 Irrigation Company for the Upper Regions
The Irrigation Company for the Upper Regions (ICOUR) has been established by GOG to promote the production of food crops by small-scale farmers within organized and managed irrigation schemes, with the objectives of improving food security and increasing incomes.
ICOUR is an autonomous company wholly owned by GOG, with IDA as its representative, and directly financed by the Ministry of Finance. Its present organigram (de Nooy, 1996) is shown in Figure 4.
Currently, ICOUR operates projects at Tono (reservoir max. 1860 ha and 2490 ha irrigated) and at Vea (reservoir max 405 ha and 850 ha irrigated) irrigation schemes, in the Upper Eastern Region. Activities at these two projects involve:
* training and developing village-community farmers (ab. 6000) to play an increasing role in the operation of the projects;
* technical advisory services for crops, livestock, forestry and fisheries development;
* providing tractor hire services, irrigation water and farm inputs (including fish fingerlings);
* carrying out trials for testing practices new to the region (for example see Kumah et al., 1996);
* assisting in the organization of credit and marketing for small-scale farmers;
* providing/maintaining the necessary infrastructure.
Sixteen Village Committees have been formed and developed to become responsible for land allocation to small-scale farmers and to become involved in the distribution/control of irrigation water at field level. Each farmer is allocated a 0.2 to 0.6 ha plot . Crops include rice (2 crops/year), vegetables (tomatoes, onions), soyabeans, millet, sorghum, maize, cowpeas and groundnuts. Farmers have to contribute to the costs of services and maintenance by payment of a Project Levy (rains cropping season) and an Irrigation Levy (dry season). Credit is available for farm inputs such as fertilizers, feeds and fingerlings.
ICOUR has gained substantial experience in the fields of water management, agricultural improvement, strengthening of Water Users Associations (Section 3.1.3) and training of field staff/farmers using audio-visual methods.
ICOUR Fisheries Unit
assists fishermen and fish farmers:
* A capture fishery has developed at the two large irrigation reservoirs. A Lake Management Committee has been formed for each of them. ICOUR provides fishing inputs (boats, nets, etc.) and training in construction/maintenance of fishing boats. Monitored average yield (1994) was 73kg/ha for a total of 165 t.
* Ponds have been integrated into the irrigation scheme at both projects, totalling 4.8 ha (8 ponds) at Tono and 3.8 ha (16 ponds) at Vea. These ponds can be rented by farmers to grow rice and/or fish but it appears that very little interest is actually shown by the farmers to do this (Kumah et al.,1990).
4.4 Project for the Development of Support Structure for Irrigated Agriculture
This FAO Project (TCP/GHA/6613) started in October 1996 and is due to terminate in April 1998 (de Nooy, 1996). Its objectives are:
* to assist in the development of a suitable approach and methodology to establish effective irrigation extension services to assist small-scale farmers in taking responsibility for the management of irrigation schemes;
* to develop a training programme and train key staff in the departments of irrigation, agricultural production and extension to effectively assist farmers in a viable and sustainable irrigated farming system;
* to provide recommendations that will help GOG in formulating sound policies to promote the transfer of irrigation management responsiblities to farmers.
A Steering Committee representing the main agencies involved in irrigation development (IDA, various MOFA departments/services, Ministries of Finance/Planning, FAO Regional Irrigation Officer) has been set up for providing guidance and coordination between these various agencies. It meets once a month.
By now, six irrigation schemes (two per agro-ecological zone, North/Central/Coastal) have been selected as pilot projects, as shown in the table below (see also Figure 1 for location of projects).
4.5 FAO Special Programme for Food Security
The implementation of an FAO Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS) has been agreed by GOG. The National Programme is now under preparation and should be finalized in December 1997 (J.P. Eckebil, pers. comm.).
Region
Irrigation Scheme
Scale^a/
Potential area (ha)
Developed area (ha)
Irrigation system^b/
Irrigation area (ha)
No. farmers
Main crop
Dry season
Wet season
Upper East. Tono 
L
D/G
Rice
Northern Bontanga
M
D/G
Rice
Br. Ahafo Tanoso 
S
R/P/S
Vegetables
Ashanti Sata 
S
R/G
Vegetables
Gr. Accra Weija 
M
R/P/S
Vegetables
Gr. Accra Dawhenya
M
D/P
Rice
a/ Scale: L - large scale (> 500 ha); M - medium scale (100-500 ha); S - small scale (< 100 ha)
b/ R - run of river/weir; D - from reservoir; G - by gravity; P - with pump; S - sprinkler irrigation
Ref.: de Nooy, 1996 and S. Forson (pers. comm.)
5. CONCLUSIONS
Potential participation of Ghana into the African Research Network for the Integration of Aquaculture and Irrigation.
5.1 Positive Factors
Positive factors favouring Ghana participation into the proposed Research Network are numerous, as described in the preceeding sections. They consist of well-developed administrative infrastructure/human resources and production infrastructure, briefly summarized as follows.
Administrative infrastructure and human resources
* Policies/strategies: high priority given to
+ irrigation development
+ rice production
+ fish production in inland waters
+ development of small- and micro-scale schemes
+ development of floodplains and valley bottoms
+ integrated pest management
* Development focal points
+ District Assemblies (annual funds for fisheries development)
+ Water Users Associations (dugouts/dams)
+ Farmers Associations/Cooperatives
* Improved agricultural extension services
+ Unified extension system
+ Research Extension Linkage Committees
+ TCP/GHA/6613 in six irrigation schemes
* Special Programme for Food Security has been initiated but it is still to be formulated, giving a chance to fisheries (esp. fish farming) to be included for diversification purpose.
* Department of Fisheries: renewed interest for integration of aquaculture and irrigation (two sites); past experience with stocking of water bodies; fingerlings production
* Research institutions (fisheries, sociology, economic and development sectors) include:
* Universities (Accra, Kumasi, Tamale)
* WRI (water resources, national network, databases)
* ARDEC/WRI (past experience with integration research and with culture-based fisheries)
* ICOUR Fisheries Unit (substantial experience with Water Users Associations, training, water management)
* Possibly IDC/IDA (research/training)
Production infrastructure
* Irrigation schemes
+ great number/diversity of existing schemes
+ geographical location varied (north/central/coastal)
+ all sizes (large, medium, small, micro-scale)
+ topographical location varied (dry/floodplains, valleys)
* Culture-based fisheries
+ numerous dugouts and reservoirs of various sizes, especially in the Northern Region where poorest rural communities are found
+ some experience with fishery enhancement through stocking
* Aquaculture
+ five functional GOG fish farms integrated in irrigation schemes
+ ICOUR fish farming research station
Local and international communication systems function well. A reliable e-mail and Internet server is available. Major computer firms are well represented on the local market.
5.2 Existing Constraints
Existing constraints will have to be removed and in particular the following:
* absence of socio-economic studies on the integration of fisheries and irrigated agriculture;
* weakness of the Department of Fisheries to provide support to interested farmers and to manage existing fish farms for adequate fingerling production (lack of well trained field staff at all level);
* lack of coordination Fisheries/Irrigation.
5.3 Recommended Research Institution
The research institution particularly well suited to host the new research network for the integration of aquaculture and irrigation would be the Water Research Institute, in Accra (Section 3.1).
6. LITERATURE CONSULTED
de Nooy, E.J.P., 1996. Development of support structure for irrigated agriculture. Report of the first mission during preparatory phase. Rome, FAO, AGLW: TCP/GHA/6613, 48 p.
FAO/AGLW, 1997. Ghana. pp. 141-145 In: Irrigation in Africa in Figures. Water Reports, (7):336 p.
ICOUR, 1995. Information handbook. Accra, Ghana, 10 p.
Kumah, D., D. Bagbara, and J.K. Ofori, 1996. Rice-fish culture experiments in the Tono irrigation scheme. pp. 42-47. In: M. Prein, J.K. Ofori and C. Lightfoot (eds.), Research for the future development of aquaculture in Ghana. ICLARM Conf. Proc., (42):94 p.
MacPherson, N.J. et al., 1990. A synthesis report on technical assistance and investment framework for aquaculture and culture-based fisheries in Ghana. Rome, FAO, FI: TCP/GHA/0051 Field Document, 32 p.
The Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research, 1993. Medium term research programme 1993-1997. Sustained growth and development. Legon, University of Ghana, 52 p.
Vincke, M.M.J. and L.K.A Awity, 1990. Description and assessment of fish farms in Ghana. Rome, FAO, FI: TCP/GHA/0051, Field Work.Pap., (10): 28 p.
Water Research Institute, 1997. Annual Report 1996. Ghana, Achimota, 45 p.
Figure 1. Ghana: administrative regions and major irrigation schemes
Ghana.GIF (40310 bytes)
Figure 2. General organization of the Water Research Institute
Orga2.GIF (16111 bytes)
Figure 3. Organigram of the Irrigation Development Authority
Orga1.GIF (16873 bytes)
Figure 4. Organigram of the Irrigation Company for the Upper Regions (ICOUR)
Image49.gif (4765 bytes)
<section>4</section>
CHAPTER 3 : BURKINA FASO
GENERAL BACKGROUND DATA
Area of the country 
km^2
Cultivable land 
km^2
Cultivated land 
km^2
Total population 
inh
Population density 
inh/km^2
Rural population 
percent
Fishery production, inland 
t
Aquaculture production 
t
Full or partial control irrigation, eqpd.
ha *
Surface irrigation 
ha
Percentage actual irrigation 
percent
Equipped wetland/inl. valley bottoms 
ha
Other cultivated wetlands/IVB 
ha
Total Water managed area 
ha
Irrigation potential 
ha
Large irrigation schemes (>100 ha) 
ha
Small schemes (<100 ha) 
ha
* Note: Bagre irrigation scheme (total 30 000 ha of which 35 ha in 1996 to be 1 600 ha by 1998) and Sourou recent development not included
CONTENTS
LIST OF ACRONYMS
1. PERSONS MET
2. INTRODUCTION
3. INSTITUTIONS OF INTEREST MAINLY INVOLVED IN RESEARCH AND/ORTRAINING
3.1 Ecole Inter-Etats d'Ingénieurs de l'Equipement Rural
3.2 Ecole Inter-Etats des Techniciens Supérieurs de l'Hydraulique et de l'Equipement Rural
3.3 Institut de Développement Rural
3.4 Institut National de l'Environnement et de Recherches Agricoles
3.5 Centre Régional pour l'Eau Potable et l'Assainissement à Faible Coût
4. INSTITUTIONS AND PROJECTS OF INTEREST MAINLY INVOLVED IN DEVELOPMENT
4.1 Direction des Pêches
4.2 FAO Special Programme for Food Security
4.3 Maîtrise d'Ouvrage de Bagre (MOB)
4.4 Autorité de Mise en Valeur de la Vallée du Sourou
4.5 Office National des Barrages et des Aménagements Hydro-agricoles
5. CONCLUSIONS
5.1 Positive Factors
5.2 Constraints
5.3 Recommended Research Institution
6. LITERATURE CONSULTED
LIST OF ACRONYMS
AfDB African Development Bank
AMVS Autorité de Mise en Valeur de la Vallée du Sourou
ARID Association Régionale pour l'Irrigation et le Drainage/Regional Association for Irrigation and Drainage
CNRST Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique et Technologique
CREPA Centre Régional pour l'Eau Potable et l'Assainissement à Faible Coût
DREE Direction Régionale de l'Environnement et de l'Eau/Regional Directorate of Environment and Water
EDF European Development Fund
EIER Ecole Inter-Etats d'Ingénieurs de l'Equipement rural
ETSHER Ecole Inter-Etats des Techniciens Supérieurs de l'Hydraulique et de l'Equipement Rural
IDR Institut du Développement Rural
INERA Institut National de l'Environnement et de Recherches Agricoles
IRSAT Institut de la Recherche Scientifique Appliquée et Tropicale (from September 1997)
MEE Ministère de l'Environnement et de l'Eau/Ministry of Environment and Water
MOB Maîtrise d'Ouvrage de Bagré
NGO Non-governmental Organization
ONBAH Office National des Barrages et des Aménagements Hydro-agricoles
SDEE Service Départemental de l'Environnement et de l'Eau
SPEE Service Provincial de l'Environnement et de l'Eau
SPFS Special Programme for Food Security (FAO)
1. PERSONS MET
* FAO Office (FAOR)
Ibrahim, A.T. FAO Representative in Burkina Faso
Bamba, K. Assistant au Programme
Belem, C. National Coordinator, Special Programme for Food Security
* Ecole Inter-Etats d'Ingénieurs de l'Equipement Rural (EIER)
Varet, J. Director/General Secretary ARID
* Ecole Inter-Etats des Techniciens Supérieurs de l'Hydraulique et de l'Equipement Rural (ETSHER)
Djegui, M.J. Director, Training/Research
* Institut du Développement Rural (IDR)
Lemoine, J.-Cl. Director, Practical Training/Employment
Kabre, A.T. Chief, Waters/Forests Department
* Direction des Pêches (DP)
Kabore, H. (Md.) Director
Zigani, N. Assistant Director
Coulibaly, N.D. Ichtyopathologist
* Centre Régional pour l'Eau Potable et l'Assainissement à Faible Coût (CREPA)
Tounkara, M. Director, Research/Engineering
* Institut National de l'Environnement et de Recherches Agricoles (INERA)
Sereme, P. Director
Hien, V. Assistant Director in-charge of Programmes
* Maîtrise d'Ouvrage de Bagré (MOB)
Ouedraogo, M. Fisheries/Environment Department
* Autorité de Mise en Valeur de la Vallée du Sourou (AMVS)
Guissou, O.P. Technical Director
* Office National des Barrages et des Aménagements Hydro-agricoles (ONBAH)
Naze, C. Director, Department Studies/Programmes
2. INTRODUCTION
Most of Burkina Faso belongs to the Sahelian region whose southern boundary roughly coincides with the 1000mm isohyete (mean annual rainfall), see Figure 1. South of this isohyete, in the south western part of the country, annual rainfall regularly increases to reach slightly above 1200mm at the most. This is the region where rice culture is concentrated, except for the Sourou development in the north west, entirely dependent on Mouhoun River water.
Because of such dry climatic conditions more than 2000 reservoirs of all sizes have been built over the past years, many of them being seasonal. Most permanent reservoirs are concentrated in the central part of Burkina Faso. On average, it is estimated that a reservoir to remain permanent should have at least a 200 000 cu. m water capacity. Ideally, it should have a 50-100 ha minimum water area at the end of the dry season which roughly corresponds to a maximum water area of 150 to 300 ha at full capacity and a minimum volume of 500 000 cu. m (Ouedraogo, pers. comm.).
These reservoirs are used for domestic supply, hydro-electricity production (for example, Bagre and Kompienga reservoirs) and/or irrigation, sometimes both upstream and downstream from the reservoir. Four large irrigation schemes either have been developed (Kou and Comoe) or are being developed (Bagre and Sourou). The main crop is rice (sometimes maize also) produced at the rate of two crops per year (120-day cycles).
In the southern part of the country, numerous inland valley bottoms (bas-fonds) are also found, where a relatively high and well supplied water table allows agricultural development. Various NGO are present to support the integrated development of rural communities. The FAO Special Programme has also initiated activities for intensifying and diversifying existing cultural systems (Section 4.2).
Still in this southern part of the country, fishery development activities are implemented by GTZ from Bobo-Dioulasso. A previous EDF project (Valorisation du potentiel halieutique, VPH, from 1986 to 1991) has concentrated throughout Burkina-Faso on the fishery enhancement of small reservoirs (max. 50 ha) through stocking of young Nile tilapias (Traoré and Baijot, 1988). Some good results have been obtained, major constraints being identified as economic viability and sociological aspects (for example, fishing rights and water rights). All support activities, in particular the supply of juvenile fish, have stopped with the completion of the project.
Reorganization of scientific and technical research
* All research institutions (in particular CMRST/INERA and University/IDR, Sections 3.3 and 3.4) have been recently regrouped under the umbrella of the Institute for Tropical Scientific and Technical Research (IRSAT).
* At Ouagadougou University, the Laboratoire d'Ecologie is specialized in hydrobiological research
* A new five-year National Plan for Scientific and Technical Research has been prepared. Rizipisciculture and fishery research have been included and budgeted for (A.T. Kabre, pers. comm.).
Information services
* At Ouagadougou University, the French Government is financing a connection to all information centres through Internet, as the "Système d'Information Francophone pour le Développement" (SIFED).
* France is also financing the "Centre d'Information pour le Développement" (CID) in Ouagadougou, as a specialized library holding technical serials and monographs. The AGRIDOC database is also available.
3. INSTITUTIONS OF INTEREST MAINLY INVOLVED IN RESEARCH AND/OR TRAINING
3.1 Ecole Inter-Etats d'Ingénieurs de l'Equipement Rural
The Interstate School for Rural Equipment Engineers (EIER) is an international francophone training centre involving fourteen African nations (Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Côte d'Ivoire, Congo (PR), Gabon, Guinea, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, Chad and Togo). In three years of study, for candidates having already a baccalaureat and two years of advanced studies, it produces engineers specialized in the design, construction, initial operation, follow-up, management and maintenance of infrastructures and equipment necessary for rural and peri-urban development. It provides also specialized 9.5 months training in sanitary engineering, energetic/industrial refrigeration engineering, agricultural hydraulics, water resources mobilization and computerization applied to water sciences. EIER is located on the Ouagadougou University campus.
Support to development is provided through a Professional Training Cell (CFPI), laboratories for civil and sanitary engineering, and applied research. Past research subjects have included:
* water treatment by lagooning;
* reutilization of waste water;
* lake eutrophication;
* solar drying;
* hydro-agricultural schemes;
* irrigation management;
* geographic information systems applied to environmental studies and to water resources management.
In spite of the interest shown for water resources utilization and management in general, it was noted that fisheries received practically no attention (even at training level) and that aquaculture in particular was completely ignored.
The general secretariat of the ARID network (Regional association for irrigation and drainage, see section 7.1) is automatically attributed to the EIER Director.
3.2 Ecole Inter-Etats des Techniciens Supérieurs de l'Hydraulique et de l'Equipement Rural
The Interstate School for Hydraulics and Rural Equipment Senior Technicians (ETSHER) is an international francophone training centre involving fourteen African nations similar to EIER (Section 3.1). In two years of study, it produces senior technicians (baccalaureat + 2 years of study) specialized in civil engineering, hydro-agricultural development and water resources utilization /sanitation. It provides also (in coll. EIER, Section 3.1) one to four weeks specialized training in subjects such as study of environmental impact, diagnosis/development of valley bottoms, management/maintenance of pumping stations and direction/control of civil works. Major financial partners are France, Denmark, the Netherlands, Switzerland and the European Union. The centre is located next to a small reservoir at Kamboinse, 10 km north of Ouagadougou, next to INERA Animal Production Department and INERA Research/ Training Centre (Section 3.4).
ETSHER includes a Documentation/Information Centre for Hydraulics and Rural Equipment to be soon connected to Internet.
Support to development is provided through a Professional Training Cell. (CFPI) and laboratories for civil and sanitary engineering, common to EIER (Section 3.1) and ETSHER. Applied research is now centred in six themes addressed to waste water treatment by infiltration, alternative sanitation techniques for peri-urban areas, local materials development (e.g., geo-concrete bricks), inland valley bottoms development, watershed management and a technical manual for private irrigation development.
ETSHER has been selected by FAO to host the new regional project GCP/RAF/340/JPN (Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger) to research on existing possibilities to recharge water tables from small reservoirs.
3.3 Institut de Développement Rural
The Rural Development Institute (IDR) is, within the Ouagadougou University, the institution responsible for the production of Rural Development Engineers (baccalaureat + 2 + 3 years). Since 1995, it has been transferred from Ouagadougou to a new site located 15 km from Bobo-Dioulasso where it is progressively being redeveloped.
IDR has three specialized Departments:
* Agronomy, including an experimental station still in Ouagadougou;
* Animal husbandry, including an experimental station still in Ouagadougou;
* Waters and Forests.
On average, 30 to 40 R&D engineers graduate each year, of which 10 to 15 percent are foreigners.
Fisheries and aquaculture
(incl. fish diseases ) are taught during the second year of study (introduction for all students) and during the third and fourth years of study, within the "Waters and Forests" specialization. Since 1989, no practical training periods (in particular during the last year of specialization) has involved aquaculture and only in three cases has fishery technology been involved. In these last instances, unusual problems of post schooling employment have been encountered which do not encourage further involvement in such direction, in particular as all recruitment for public services has been frozen until further notice.
IDR has a library with more than 4500 books and 1300 reports/memoirs/theses.
Cooperation agreements and/or contracts have been established with several universities such as Georgia (US), CNEARC Montpellier (France), Toulouse (France), F.A. Gembloux (Belgium), Wageningen (Netherlands), Copenhagen (Denmark) and EPF Lausanne (Switzerland).
Research is carried out by each of the IDR Departments. One of the research themes of the Waters and Forest Department is the dynamics and exploitation of Burkina Faso artisanal fisheries, in collaboration with a local NGO.
Two research projects with Belgian support involve aquaculture aspects:
* fish farming station rehabilitation at Bazéga is operational since 1996 as a collaboration between universities, to become a research centre for doctorate theses. Research subjects include local feeds, rizipisciculture and tilapia fry production for stocking;
Azolla/fish cultures in Sourou rice fields is under discussion since June 1997 and should be approved soon (Prof. Micha and Van Hoeve). Doctorate theses on Azolla in particular would then be initiated.
Further research at Sourou and Kou irrigation schemes on rizipisciculture and capture fisheries have recently been included in the new five-year National Plan for Scientific and Technical Research (Section 2).
3.4 Institut National de l'Environnement et de Recherches Agricoles
The National Institute for the Environment and Agricultural Research (INERA) has been created in 1994 from the fusion of the National Institute for Agricultural Studies/Research (INERA) and the Research Institute for Tropical Ecology and Biology (IRBET).
The old INERA has been involved for many years with agriculture, animal husbandry and forestry research. The new INERA has acquired a fourth department responsible for the management of natural resources which will soon include new staff/facilities for fishery research. Aquaculture is also to be considered. Rizipisciculture in the Sourou irrigation scheme is of particular interest, combined with Azolla culture for atmospheric nitrogen fixation, weed control and fish feed (collaboration with Louvain University in Belgium). Close collaboration with the IDR Water and Forests Department (Section 3.3), with the Department of Fisheries (Section 4.1) and with the FAO Special Programme for Food Security (Section 4.2) are also planned.
There are five Environmental /agricultural research centres dispersed throughout the country:
* northern region : at Dori;
* western region : at Di, near the Sourou irrigation scheme;
* central region : near Koudougou;
* western central region : near Bobo-Dioulasso;
* eastern region : at Katchari.
A Research/training centre
including a documentation unit, is located at Kamboinsé near Ouagadougou and next to ETSHER (Section 3.2).
3.5 Centre Régional pour l'Eau Potable et l'Assainissement à Faible Coût
The Regional Centre for Drinking Water and Sanitation at Low Cost (CREPA) is one of the five African centres of the International Training Network (ITN) for Water and Wastes Management established by the World Bank:
* in Central/West francophone AfricaCREPA since 1988 (Burkina Faso)
* in West anglophone AfricaTREND since 1989 (Ghana)
* in East AfricaNETWAS since 1987 (Kenya)
* in Southern AfricaIWSD since 1988 (Zimbabwe)
* in South AfricaNCWSTI since 1996 (RSA)
In Burkina Faso, CREPA works closely with EIER (Section 3.1) and ETSHER (Section 3.2). Active national representations of CREPA, mostly made of NGO and associative or private structures, have by now been established in eight of the 15 member countries to disseminate strategies and appropriate technologies.
The actual third phase (1995-1999) of the CREPA programme of activities is financed by Switzerland, Denmark (DANIDA) and its own provision of services. The objectives are now to consolidate results obtained during the two previous phases through training, applied research and information.
Training activities
are particularly aimed at introducing NGO, associations and private firms to the use of participatory approaches in hygiene planning, implementation, follow-up, evaluation and training. A la carte training sessions are also organized.
Applied research
has been decentralized in favour of the national representations, through the RAGEDE programme (research applied to water, wastes and environment management). Selected researchers are financed locally for one year. Result are presented at an annual joint seminar where they are evaluated. Prolongation is agreed on the basis of such evaluation. The socio-economic aspects of CREPA activities are also considered.
Information
diffusion is one of CREPA priority activities:
* research results are presented on various audio-visual supports such as filmstrips (diapos), video films, manuals and pamphlets;
* a quarterly newsletter "Info CREPA" is produced;
* a documentation centre is open in Ouagadougou to the public. It is the depository of World Bank publications. A computerized database is being established.
On average, CREPA has a staff of 25 technicians. Competence includes engineering, sanitary engineering, rural structures, management, sociology, economic, rural development and extension.
4.INSTITUTIONS AND PROJECTS OF INTEREST MAINLY INVOLVED IN DEVELOPMENT
4.1 Direction des Pêches
The Directorate of Fisheries is part of the new Environment and Water Ministry (MEE), which includes also Regional Directorates (DREE) as well as Provincial (SPEE) and Departmental (SDEE) Services for Environment /Water. Most field activities take place at these decentralized levels.
It is made of three Services: Fisheries, Research and Equipment. It would appear that a renewed government interest in fishery development is gradually increasing. Due mostly to a steadily demand for fish and the CFA franc devaluation, fish prices have greatly increased, improving the economic viability of culture-based fisheries and possibly fish farming.
Since 1996, the Bazéga fish farming station (90 km from Ouagadougou) has been rehabilitated after several years of abandon. Nile tilapia fry are produced at the rate of 200000 per year, to be made available for stocking small reservoirs (ref. EDF project 1986-1991).
The development of fish farming is not actually envisaged but rizipisciculture might be introduced in collaboration with Belgian assistance (Section 3.4).
4.2 FAO Special Programme for Food Security
On the basis of SPFS criteria for pilot projects, sites have been selected south of the 800-mm isohyete (mean annual rainfall) and in the western/southwestern region of the country for high potential rice and maize production. In addition, large irrigation schemes have been also included.
As a result, the following project sites have been given priority for the SPFS pilot phase (Figure 1):
(a) Sites with total water control (irrigation schemes)
* Kou Valley, west of Bobo-Dioulasso
* Banzon, between Bobo-Dioulasso and Orodara
* Sourou Valley, in the north western region (Section 4.4)
(b) Inland valley bottoms, IVB (high water table)
* Comoe Valley, in the south-western region
(c) Pluvial cultures (rainfall only): various sites.
Activities have started at IVB sites where shallow wells (less than 7m deep) and treadle pumps will assist to intensify the cultural systems for pluvial rice followed in counter seasons by vegetables. An inventory of IVB is being prepared to enable the development of the selected IVB at lower costs.
Diversification is envisaged by introducing animal husbandry (chicken, pigs and cattle) and fish farming (large irrigation schemes and downstream from dams). For the latter, cooperation with Morocco is being planned.
Agreements for contractual services will be made with INERA (Section 3.4), if this institution has the necessary expertise for the subject considered.
4.3 Maîtrise d'Ouvrage de Bagre (MOB)
This is the public institution responsible for the implementation of the hydroelectric and hydroagricultural project of Bagre which includes:
* a dam and reservoir (max 25 500 ha; min. 8 500 ha) since 1992 on the Nakambé River (ex White Volta) 150 km south east of Ouagadougou;
* a hydroelectric power station (16 MW) since 1994;
* a potential downstream irrigation scheme of 21 000 ha (7 400 ha by gravity and 13 600 ha by pumping);
* a potential upstream irrigation scheme of 9 000 ha (pumping)
The development of a first 1 000 ha irrigated perimeter on the right bank of the river started in November 1995 with assistance from Taiwan Province of China. A 35-ha perimeter has been achieved in June 1996 and plots attributed to small farmers for rice production (two crops/year). It is planned that by end of 1998, 515 ha will have been added as well as 600 ha of the 2 100 ha perimeter on the left bank.
MOB sub-contracts research to national and foreign institutions, according to their competences. Subjects of particular interest are:
* study of Bagre reservoir fishery potential and its development/management has started since October 1997 by a French consulting firm, with Dr J. Moreau as the main consultant;
* a future study concerning the fishery development potential of the downstream area is contemplated with fish farming as a possibility. Rizipisciculture in paddy fields at subsistence level appears to be the preferred option.
4.4 Autorité de Mise en Valeur de la Vallée du Sourou
The Sourou Valley Development Authority (AMVS) is a public institution depending technically from the Ministry of Environment and Water. The potential irrigation development is about 24 000 ha which represents 15 percent of the nation potential.
It has been established with the following objectives:
* to locate, mobilize, put in place and manage financial supports;
* to do or subcontract studies necessary for the development of the Sourou Valley and the Upper Mouhoun Valley;
* to build or subcontract the infrastructures necessary for the exploitation of these land areas and the annexed equipment;
* to promote interventions benefitting hydroagricultural development.
Development of a first 50 ha pilot irrigation perimeter started in October 1985 at Débé on the Sourou River, financed by the European Development Fund (EDF). This was followed in later years by the successive development of other irrigated perimeters which today extend over more than 2 000 ha.
AMVS consists of three Directorates:
* Technical, responsible for preliminary studies and construction of necessary infrastructures;
* Administrative/financial: accounting, financial management of development projects, equipments;
* Development, to promote locally interventions benefitting the development of irrigated perimeters.
This last Directorate is on-site at Niassan, where INERA (Section 3.4) has a research station. The main development objective is for local farmers' cooperatives to become independent and responsible for all aspects of production, management and direct agricultural extension. AMVS support to farmers is particularly intensive during the first five years after land plot (1-2 ha) allocation. Later, it gradually decreases and concentrates on the cooperatives for which it becomes advisor and offers services at cost, on request. Today, there are two totally autonomous farmers' cooperatives and three others are at the precooperative stage. Sociological studies are regularly made by AMVS sociologists.
Rice (two crops/year) and maize are the two main crops, complemented in counter season by vegetables. A rice processing plant (cap. 1.5 t/h) is operational in Gouran (Sourou) but its management on a commercial basis is still being discussed.
An artisanal fishery has developed at the Lery reservoir (max. 10 000 ha). In the irrigation scheme itself, it is planned to start research on rizipisciculture in collaboration with IDR (Section 3.3). AMVS has stated to this last institution its interest to develop such technology as far as possible. Farmers' interest is said to be positive.
4.5 Office National des Barrages et des Aménagements Hydro-agricoles
The National Office for Dams and Hydro-agricultural Schemes (ONBAH) is a state enterprise financially autonomous since 1984.
Its objectives are:
* to control surface water resources to the benefit of agriculture, animal husbandry, fishery and human development, and
* conservation of soil and water resources.
It is essentially a multidisciplinary consulting firm specialized in civil engineering (dams and irrigation schemes) with additional competences in agronomy, sociology, environmental studies and extension services. It bids for implementing projects not only in Burkina Faso but also in other African countries. It executes regularly contracts for UNDP and the UN Equipment Fund.
Discussions with AfDB are presently held for the selection of 250 permanent reservoirs from a 1000-reservoir database and for their valorization, fishery development included.
5.CONCLUSIONS
Potential participation of Burkina Faso into the African Research Network for the Integration of Aquaculture and Irrigation.
5.1 Positive Factors
Positive factors
include:
* vast potential for irrigated agriculture of which, both in large schemes and in inland valley bottoms, more than 46 000 ha have already been developed;
* priority for irrigated rice production;
* large number of permanent or quasi-permanent small (less than 200 ha) reservoirs associated with downstream irrigation;
* past experience with small reservoir fishery enhancement (stocking, community development, harvesting, marketing);
* reorganization of research on a sound basis, with better coordination and clearly identified responsibilities;
* new five-year national plan for research approved, including rizipisciculture and fishery enhancement;
* existence, within the Ouagadougou university structure, of the Rural Development Institute (IDR) where a dynamic team is being formed to become part of the new Burkinabe research pool (IDR/INERA) for fishery/aquaculture;
* development institutions responsible for large scale irrigation such as AMVS and MOB already aware of the integrated fish-rice production potential and agreeable to support research;
* FAO SPFS initiated, with interest in diversification through aquaculture.
5.2 Constraints
Constraints
include:
* lack of experience both in the Department of Fisheries and in research institutions concerning aquaculture in general and rizipisciculture in particular;
* generalized lack of cultured tilapia juveniles;
* great competition with animal husbandry for feed ingredients, except on irrigation scheme itself, if a rice processing plant is present and functional;
* e-mail and Internet connections not yet fully operational/generalized.
5.3 Recommended Research Institution
The Rural Development Institute (IDR) in Bobo Dioulasso appears to be the institution which could represent Burkina-Faso in the proposed research network. It is interested in animal husbandry and waters/forests. Sociological aspects and economics are also part of its interests.
6. LITERATURE CONSULTED
Autorité de Mise en Valeur de la Vallée du Sourou, 1997. Présentation de l'AMVS et de ses activités. Ouagadougou, AMVS, 8p.
Breuil, C., 1995. Burkina Faso. FAO Circulaire sur les Pêches, (888): 31 p.
EIER, 1996. Ecole Inter-Etats d'Ingénieurs de l'Equipement Rural. Brochure de présentation, 9p.
ETSHER, 1996. Ecole Inter-Etats des Techniciens Supérieurs de l'Hydraulique et de l'Equipement Rural. Brochure de présentation, 20p.
FAO/AGLW, 1995. Burkina Faso. pp. 71-76. En: L'irrigation en Afrique en chiffres. Rapports sur l'Eau, (7):336 p.
Maîtrise d'Ouvrage de Bagre, 1996. Note d'information sur le projet Bagré. Ouagadougou, MOB, 4p.
Micha, J.C., J. Moehl et A.C. Traoré, 1989. Rapport de mission de formulation, Projet de développement de la pisciculture rurale dans la zone du Sourou. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/BKF/87/053, 36p.
Traoré, J.C. et Baijot, E. 1988. L'aménagement piscicole de petites retenues d'eau par la pisciculture villageoise. Bulletin (Commission européene, Coopération Pêche), 1(1):13-5
Université de Ouagadougou, 1994. Institut de Développement Rural, IDR. Brochure de présentation, 20p.
Figure 1. Burkina Faso: major irrigation schemes and SPFS sites of particular interest
Burkinaf.GIF (24523 bytes)
<section>5</section>
CHAPTER 4: MALI
GENERAL BACKGROUND DATA
Area of the country 1994
km^2
Cultivable land 1992
km^2
Cultivated land 1996
km^2
Total population 1994
inh.
Population density 1994
inh/km^2
Rural population 1991
percent
Fishery production, inland 1995
t
Aquaculture production 1995
t
Full or partial control irrigation, equipped 1996
ha
Surface irrigation 1996
ha
Irrigation by submersion (flood) 1996
ha
Equipped wetland/inland valley bottoms 1996
ha
Other cultivated wetland/inl.valley bottoms
Small dams and others
ha
ha
Total water managed area 1996
ha
Irrigation potential 1997
ha
...to be developed economically 
ha
Large irrigation schemes (>100 ha) 1996
ha
Total water control
ha
Controlled submersion
ha
Inland bottom valleys
ha
Small irrigation schemes (<100 ha) 1996
ha
Total water control
ha
Controlled submersion
ha
Inland bottom valleys
ha
CONTENTS
LIST OF ACRONYMS
1. PERSONS MET
2. INTRODUCTION
2.1 Reorganization of Public Administration
2.2 Agricultural Development Strategy
2.3 Agricultural Support Services
2.4 Status of Aquaculture
2.5 Status of Irrigation Development
3. INSTITUTIONS OF INTEREST INVOLVED MAINLY IN RESEARCH AND/ORTRAINING
3.1 Institut d'Economie Rurale
3.2 Institut de formation et de recherche appliquée
4. INSTITUTIONS OF INTEREST INVOLVED MAINLY IN DEVELOPMENT
4.1 Direction Nationale de l'Aménagement et de l'Equipement Rural
4.2 Direction Nationale de l'Appui au Monde Rural
4.3 Projet de réhabilitation du périmètre hydro-agricole de Baguinéda
4.4 Chambers of Agriculture and their Permanent Assembly
4.5 FAO Special Programme for Food Security
5. CONCLUSIONS
6. LITERATURE CONSULTED
LIST OF ACRONYMS
AfDB African Development Bank
AFVP Association française des volontaires du progrès
APCAM Assemblée permanente des Chambres d'Agriculture du Mali/Permanent Assembly fo the Agricultural Chambers of Mali
AVB Agent vulgarisateur de base/Grass-root extensionist
CMDT Compagnie malienne de développement des textiles/Malian textile development company
CNRA Commission nationale pour la recherche agronomique/National Commission for Agricultural Research
COPAKA Concertation paysanne de Kayes/Farmers' Group of Kayes
CPS Cellule de planification et statistiques/Planning and Statistics Unit
CRA Chambre régionale d'Agriculture/Regional Chamber of Agriculture
CRCR Comité régional de concertation des ruraux/Regional Advisory Committee of Rural Producers
CRRA Centre régional de recherche agronomique
CRU Commission régionale des utilisateurs/Regional Commission of Beneficiaries (Research)
CTD Collectivités territoriales décentralisées/Decentralized Territorial Communities
DGRC Direction générale de la réglementation et du contrôle
DNAER Direction nationale de l'aménagement et de l'équipement rural
DNAMR Direction nationale de l'appui au monde rural
IER Institut d'Economie Rurale
IFRA Institut de formation et de recherche appliquée/Institute for Training and Applied Research
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency
MDRE Ministère du développement rural et de l'environnement/Ministry of Rural Development and Environment
ODRS Office de développement rural de Sélingué
ON Office du Niger
OPA Organisation professionelle agricole/Professional Agricultural Organization
OPM Opération pêche Mopti
PAMOS Programme d'appui à la mise en oeuvre du Schéma Directeur du développement rural/Support Programme for the Implementation of Rural Development Action Plan
PNVA Programme national de vulgarisation agricole/National Agricultural Extension Programme
PPIV Petit périmètre irrigué villageois/Small Village Irrigation Scheme
PRB Projet de réhabilitation du périmètre hydro-agricole de Baguinéda/Project for the Rehabilitation of the Baguineda Irrigation Scheme
SPFS Special Programme for Food Security (FAO)
SWB Small Water Body
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
USAID United States Agency for International Development
1. PERSONS MET
* FAO Office (FAOR)
Bathily, C.B. Resident Representative a.i.
Fayinke, T. National Coordinator, SPFS
Beernaerts, I. (Ms) Associate Professional Officer, SPFS
* Cellule de Planification et de Statistiques (CPS)
Kone, A. Director
* Direction Nationale de l'Aménagement et de l'Equipement Rural (DNAER)
Berthe, Y. Director General
Samake, S. Assistant Director General
Traoré, A. Division Etudes/Planification
Traoré, N. Division Aménagement/Gestion des Ressources Naturelles
Coulibaly, S. Section Amén./Gestion des Ressources Halieutiques
* Institut d'Economie Rurale (IER)
N'Diaye, M. Director General, a.i.; Scient. coord. Animal Sciences
N'Diaye, I. Scient. Coordinator Forestry/Fishery Productions
Kassambara, I. Director, Reg. Centre Agric. Research, Mopti
* Direction Nationale de l'Appui au Monde Rural (DNAMR)
Coulibaly, M. Director General
* Institut de Formation et de Recherche Appliquée (IFRA)
Namaly, N'Tio Lecturer, Rural Engineering/Waters and Forests
* Projet de réhabilitation du périmètre hydro-agricole de Baguinéda (PRB)
Bouare, D. Director General
Korté, M. Chief, Agricultural Extension Division
Dembélé, L. Responsable for Environment
* Assemblée permanente des Chambres d'Agriculture du Mali (APCAM)
Keita, M. Secretary General
Kienta, M. Technical Adviser/Communication (Fisheries/Aquaculture/Forestry)
2. INTRODUCTION
2.1 Reorganization of Public Administration
A general reorganization of the public administration has recently been decided and is still being implemented. Main points of interest are as follows:
2.1.1 Decentralization
Definition of "Collectivités territoriales décentralisées"(CTD - Decentralized territorial communities).
Decentralization at three levels:
* Region (seven regions - Figure 1 - plus Bamako)
* Cercle (a group of communes)
* Commune (still to be created as group of villages)
Rem.
"Arrondissement" (level between "Cercle" and "Commune") still existing but to be eliminated.
2.1.2 Reorganization of rural development institutions
Within the Ministry of Rural Development and Environment (MDRE), rural development institutions have been completely reorganized according to the "Schema Directeur" (MDRE, 1992) and the follow-up Action Plan (1993). This reorganization based on production systems instead of production categories (crops, animals, forest, fish...) was officially accepted in September 1996 and implemented immediately afterwards (MDRE, 1997c) as follows:
* at national level, establishment of three national Directorates for:
(i) rural development and equipment (DNAER)
(ii) support to rural communities (DNAMR)
(iii) legislation, regulation and control (DNLRC)
* at regional level, establishment of a similar administrative structure (DRAER, DRAMR and DRLRC)
* most institutions previously attached to MDRE to be maintained such as the Rural Economics Institute (IER, Section 3.1) and various offices (for ex. Office du Niger, Office Riz Ségou, Office Riz Mopti, Office de développement rural de Sélingué).
2.1.3 Transfer
Transfer of projects/programmes management to the regional level.
2.1.4 Reorganization of rural development support services
* DNAER to work directly with CTDs for infrastructures, animation, training and support;
* DNAMR to work directly with socio-professional farmers' associations (Section 2.1.6);
* Agricultural extension reorganized (Section 2.3.1);
* Agricultural research reorganized (Section 2.3.2).
2.1.5 Creation of a Planning and Statistics Unit
In 1992, the "Cellule de planification et statistiques" (CPS) was established and directly attached to MDRE Minister's Cabinet:
* to follow-up on financing requests;
* to ensure formulation, follow-up and evaluation of MDRE programmes and projects.
2.1.6 Producers organizations
New producers organizations have emerged, such as syndicates, cooperatives, village associations, etc.
Recently, these organizations have started regrouping themselves on a local or regional basis, particularly either as in the Kayes (COPAKA) and Sikasso (CRCR) regions, or in a network of Chambers of Agriculture (Section 4.4), or as the coordination of rice producers at Office du Niger, or as the Mopti cooperatives of fishermen, vegetable producers, cattle breeders, etc.
2.2 Agricultural Development Strategy
Food security has been chosen as the central theme of the new agricultural development strategy (MDRE, 1992). This strategy includes:
* improved management of natural resources for sustainable growth;
* creation of a favourable economic environment;
* privatization of selected public responsibilities (for example, production activities and part of support activities) in favour of the private sector and existing farmers' organizations;
* reorganization of the public sector (Section 2.1) to increase efficiency and credibility.
A typical example is the reorganization of the "Office du Niger" (ON) and the reorientation of its responsibilities towards water management and maintenance of the main hydraulic structures, accompanied by the progressive transfer of other responsibilities to farmer's associations with strong government support.
2.3 Agricultural Support Services
2.3.1 Agricultural extension
In all regions except in the southern areas where the Malian Textile Development Company (CMDT, mostly cotton culture) operates, the National Programme for Agricultural extension (PNVA, funded by the World Bank) has been implemented since 1992, after a three-year pilot phase for adopting the "training and visit" programme to Malian conditions (MDRE, 1997a).
This programme is characterized by:
* increased decentralization of extension services at regional level (regional Evaluation and Programme);
* polyvalent extensionists (agents vulgarisateurs de base, AVB) who support farmers simultaneously for vegetal, animal, forestry and environment productions;
* each locally elected contact farmer to transfer weekly/biweekly messages to a voluntary contact group of 10 to 15 farmers;
* contact groups to transfer messages to all other farmers of the village;
* technical supervisors to support and supervise groups of AVB and to train them for messages to be delivered, at biweekly intervals.
At present and on average, each AVB supports 16 to 24 contact groups composed of 30 to 40 farmers.
The PNVA responsibilities therefore include:
* extension services: demonstrations for crops, animal husbandry and environment are run with contact farmers. Possibly, they are repeated with contact groups;
* liaison research-extension-farmers: it is ensured by on-farm trials and monthly workshops to review specific technological subjects as well as farmers' visits to research stations and trials;
* training: it is performed through regional and national workshops (diagnosis, evaluation, planning), biweekly training of AVB, farmers' training, exchange of experience through visits to other farmers and through radio/TV messages;
* promotion of women involvement in production activities;
* alphabetization and organization of farmers;
* follow-up and evaluation of development.
2.3.2 Agricultural research
As mentioned later, the Rural Economics Institute (IER) is responsible for all aspects of agricultural research (Section 3.1).
In contrast with past practices, research evaluation and programming are closely related to producers problems as follows:
* regional commissions of research beneficiaries (CRU) have been created;
* annual meetings take place to control research efforts and to ensure that they address pragmatically rural producers' preoccupations, with the participation of representatives of the CRU, extension services and regional IER research centre (Section 3.1);
* defined regional research programmes are then approved at national level by the Scientific Commission of the National Committee for Agricultural Research (CNRA);
* final approval of the national research programme is then granted by the Administrative Council of IER to be implemented by this research institution.
2.4 Status of Aquaculture
Aquaculture activities are relatively new in Mali where they initiated in 1979 when USAID built the first fry production station within a CMDT irrigation scheme, near San. But continuous problems with water supply lead to the closure of the station in the 1980s.
In 1986, the Organization for African Unity (OAU), provided a grant to promote rural aquaculture development in the ON zone, where the Kourouma fry production station was also built. This was followed in 1987-92 by the AFVP volunteers (France) project to integrate aquaculture into the large ON rice irrigation scheme at Niono. Although these efforts resulted in the construction of more than 200 ponds by the early 1990s, aquaculture both in ponds and in artificial small water bodies remained a low priority for local farmers. Collective exploitation was a total failure and very little interest was shown in on-farm fry production. Problems with land and water management were also numerous. Further socio-economic studies could not be implemented to better direct the aquaculture development.
From 1987 to 1992, a UNDP/FAO project (MLI/86/001) was implemented with some success:
* the National Aquaculture Training Centre was built and operated at Molodo, near Niono. Fish fry production of Nile tilapia and African catfish was established;
* the Kourouma station was improved and fry production initiated;
* a fry production station was built within the Sélingué rice irrigation scheme;
* fish farming trials with various production systems were run within this irrigation scheme;
* fish fry distributions were regularly organized to benefit pond farmers and to stock small water bodies for fishery enhancement;
* senior and medium level MDRE staff were trained in aquaculture technologies and extension practices.
Most project activities were suspended in 1993 after closure of the project.
Today, renewed interest of Government, farmers and fishermen in pond farming development (from extensive to semi-intensive) is shown in areas where:
* wild captured fish are relatively rare and expensive, for example, in the Mopti area from where most fish are exported daily towards major Bamako market;
* natural conditions of topography, soil, water resources, etc., are favourable, for example, close to or within large irrigation schemes;
* past extension efforts of the local administration have been successful.
Reasons for such renewed interest are production diversification, nutrition improvement and/or additional income.
In addition, in several areas such as Mopti, Segou, San, Sikasso and Dogon country (Figure 1), farmers and fishermen are annually stocking wild juvenile fish into seasonal small water bodies, such as small reservoirs, floodplain depressions (or "mares"), borrowing pits for earthen structures construction and banco or clay bricks making (respectively locally known as "emprunts", "bancottières" and "briquettières"). The production system is mostly extensive, although in some cases agricultural by-products and/or cattle manure may be used to increase fish production. Wild tilapias and African catfish juveniles caught from local water bodies are preferred for stocking.
Competition for fish feed ingredients would exist if aquaculture developed well. Nutritionally balanced fish feed can be obtained on request from an animal feed mill (HUICOMA, in Koulikoro, at 50 FCFA/kg). Unfortunately, until now no pelleting machine is available.
An AfDB project is being considered for the development of rice culture and fish production in water-filled depressions, in the San-Bla area.
Until recently, fishery/aquaculture administration has been represented at central level by the Fishery Division and its Aquaculture Development Section, within the Waters and Forests Department. Unfortunately, this previous administration has been, unfortunately, characterized by a general lack of technical, human, financial and logistic means (MDRE, 1997c).
The 1997 MDRE reorganization (Section 2.1) attempts to remove past constraints and to improve support services (Section 2.3) available to farmers/fishermen. But the general situation of aquaculture support in particular is still precarious, especially because of lack of trained personnel. In most regions, specialized aquaculture personnel are still to be recruited. Even within the various offices to be primarily involved with aquaculture development (ON, ORM, etc.), there is no staff properly trained in aquaculture.
Productions of tilapia and catfish juveniles in public stations are still relatively low, although simple technology exists and has been demonstrated on site. The National Training Centre at Molodo still functions, but at reduced level. The Mopti "Operation Pêche" (OPM) and IER research centre (Section 3.1) support extensive aquaculture in floodplain depressions and borrowing pits with limited means.
There is no aquaculture development project for the moment. Recently, the Support programme for implementation of the rural development action plan (PAMOS - UNDP/FAO) proposed an action programme for fishery and aquaculture development (DNAER, 1997). This programme includes project ideas for:
* the development of the various potential aquaculture production systems (definition of social/economic viability criteria, privatization of juvenile fish production, increased research/extension/training capacity at Molodo Centre and SWB enhancement through stocking);
* the training (management, technology, project development/evaluation, etc.) of government staff and farmers' organization members involved in aquaculture development;
* support to aquaculture research, to improve liaison between research and development, and to better define aquaculture technologies best adapted to local conditions.
2.5 Status of Irrigation Development
Irrigation development in Mali (MDRE, 1997a) consists of:
* one large irrigation scheme with total water control (ON): 50000ha are equipped, of which 22000ha have been rehabilitated (1996); rehabilitation still progresses at the rate of 2000ha/year;
* medium and small irrigation schemes with total water control, in Kayes, Mopti, Tombouctou and Gao regions;
* irrigation schemes with natural or controlled submersion, in Segou and Mopti regions, as well as in the lake region situated between Mopti and Tombouctou;
* inland valley bottom (IVB) schemes, essentially found in southern Mali.
Potential areas for irrigation and areas of the various types of irrigation schemes are given in the tables below (MDRE, 1997a).
As mentioned earlier, Mali participates in the regional FAO project, GCP/RAF/340/JPN, with Niger and Burkina Faso where it has its headquarters (see Chapter 3, Section 3.2).
Irrigation potential in Mali^a/
Hydrological Region
Gross Area (ha)
Senegal Valley
Térékolé-Kolimbiné
Floodplains and
terraces
IVB
Upper Niger Valley 
Floodplains and terraces
IVB
Niger Office (ON) 
250 000^b/
Old alluvium
Segou 
Floodplains
San-Mopti Central Niger Delta 
800 000 ha alluvium (floodplain) and 100 000 ha old alluvium
Southern Mali 
Inundated valleys and IVB
Lakes region 
of which 100 000 ha of interdunal plains
Gao - Niger loop 
30 000 ha of valleys and 80 000 ha alluviums (floodplains)
Miscellaneous/Dogon country 
Absence of geographical identification
TOTAL
2 200 000^c/
a/ According to SCET-AGRI/GERSAR study in 1985
b/ Earlier studies propose a 960 000-ha area
c/ If one takes into account easily mobilized water resources only, the total irrigation potential is reduced to about 1 600 000 ha
Inventory of hydro-agricultural schemes by type (in ha)
Total water control
Controlled submersion
Inland Valley Bottoms
Small dams and others
Total area irrigated
Region
LIS
SIS
LIS
SIS
LIS
SIS
Kayes 
Koulikoro 
Sikasso 
Ségou 
Mopti 
Tombouctou 
Gao 
Total, partial
Total, type 
Rem
. LIS - large irrigation scheme (more than 100 ha); SIS - small irrigation scheme (<100 ha)
3. INSTITUTIONS OF INTEREST INVOLVED MAINLY IN RESEARCH AND/OR TRAINING
3.1 Institut d'Economie Rurale
The Rural Economics Institute (IER) is a public institution with financial autonomy, part of the Ministry of Rural Development and Environment (Institut d'Economie Rurale, 1997a). In Mali, it is responsible for all aspects of agricultural research (vegetal, animal, forestry and fishery productions; natural resources management; socio-economic aspects of production systems).
Bamako headquarters houses the Direction Générale which includes, among others:
* Direction du Service d'Appui Technique (technical support);
* Direction des Ressources Financières (financial resources);
* Direction Scientifique, including:
+ Scientific Coordinator, Forestry and Fishery Productions;
+ Chief, Central Laboratory (soil, water, plants);
+ Chief, Central Laboratory (animal nutrition);
+ Documentation/Information/Publication Service;
+ Genetic Resources Unit;
+ Chief, Research Programme (fishery resources).
There are six Regional Centres for Agricultural Research located throughout the country, of which two are of particular interest:
* the Niono Centre, specialized in irrigated rice research;
* the Mopti Centre, specialized in fishery/aquaculture research.
Research is also carried out on-farm and with rural development institutions, with the involvement of the Hydrobiological Laboratory in Mopti also.
The 1995-2005 Strategic Plan for Agricultural Research in Mali (Institut d'Economie Rurale, 1997b) includes research on fishery resources, but only capture fisheries in the Central Niger Delta and in Selingue Reservoir are mentioned.
Research activities concerning aquaculture have been until now limited to:
* stocking of banco pits filled with rainwater;
* artificial reproduction of Clarias anguillaris;
* feeding/rearing wild tilapia and catfish juveniles.
Small-scale farmers have requested IER assistance to initiate rizipisciculture.
A seven-year World Bank project (Banque mondiale, 1995) started in late 1994 to assist Mali in implementing the first six-year phase of the Strategic Plan for the Rural Economics Institute (IER). It consists of the following components:
* institutional development (CNRA and IER);
* technological transfer and research users' participation (participatory research activities);
* implementation/management of research programmes (planning/follow-up/evaluation and information capacity; documentation centre);
* development and management of resources (research station management, human resources, rehabilitation of infrastructure, scientific/communication/information equipment).
3.2 Institut de formation et de recherche appliquée
The Institute for Training and Applied Research (IFRA) depends on the Ministry of Secondary, Higher Education and Scientific Research. Part of the University of Mali, IFRA is located in Katibougou near Koulikoro, 60km east of Bamako. It includes 380ha of land extending along River Niger.
One of the oldest agricultural training centres in Africa (1897), it took its actual name in 1996. Its missions are:
* to produce agricultural engineers (baccalaureat+2+3 years), specialized either in agro-economy or animal husbandry or waters/forests;
* to produce senior technicians (baccalaureat+2 years), specialized as above;
* to train staff involved in rural development;
* to provide training to rural communities;
* to promote scientific and technological research.
A quota of 25 percent of the total number of students is reserved for foreigners.
Fishery and aquaculture sciences are part of the IFRA curriculum for the Waters and Forests specialization. A small pond farm exists, water-fed by pumping from River Niger, but non-functional at the time of the visit. Study of local tilapia species is planned on a limited scale by one of the lecturers specialized in fisheries (formerly at the IER Mopti research centre).
4. INSTITUTIONS OF INTEREST INVOLVED MAINLY IN DEVELOPMENT
4.1 Direction Nationale de l'Aménagement et de l'Equipement Rural
The National Directorate for Rural Development and Equipment (DNAER) is responsible for natural resources development planning, elaboration of methodologies and management systems, study for and follow-up of the implementation of investment projects/programmes directed at rural development and equipment.
The Division for development/management of natural resources supports regional structures and territorial communities to reinforce their capacities in managing fishery and aquaculture resources, through its Section for development/management of fishery resources.
At regional level, a Regional Directorate for rural development and equipment takes over, with a similar administrative structure.
Most efforts are oriented towards capture fisheries development in the Central Niger Delta and in the large Selingue (409 km^2)^ and Manantali (about 500 km^2) reservoirs from which up to 120 000 t of fresh fish are captured annually.
DNAER manages three fry production stations (Nile tilapia and Clarias) at Sélingué, Kourouma and Molodo/Niono (also National Training Centre). All together these stations can produce 250 000 juveniles annually.
Past experience includes fish farming in the Sélingué irrigated scheme, with UNDP/FAO Project MLI/86/001, but all activities have ceased since project closure. More experience exists with the stocking of small depressions annually filled during the rainy season, such as clay pits and floodplain depressions in the Mopti, Ségou and San regions. Stocking material mostly consists of wild fry (tilapia/catfish) captured by local fishermen.
4.2 Direction Nationale de l'Appui au Monde Rural
The mission of the National Directorate for Support of Rural Communities (DNAMR) consists in agricultural extension, training, information and communication, as well as in the organization and animation of rural communities.
At regional level, a Regional Directorate for support of rural communities takes over.
Again, most efforts are directed today towards capture fishery development, in particular through the Operation Pêche Mopti (OPM) in the Central Niger Delta.
A five-year National Programme for Agricultural Extension, supported by the World Bank, is to be evaluated in November 1997 and possibly extended. One contact farmer per village is weekly visited/advised by a polyvalent extensionist; this contact farmer provides advice to ten other selected farmers in the village. Little experience with fish exists.
Since mostly cereals are produced, diversification into small animal husbandry and aquaculture is considered to be of great interest for future development.
4.3 Projet de réhabilitation du périmètre hydro-agricole de Baguinéda
The project for the Rehabilitation of the Baguinéda Irrigation Scheme (PRB) is located 30km south of Bamako. Administratively, it depends on the DNAMR (Section 4.2). Created in 1989, it is responsible for rural development in an old "Office du Niger" polder, water-fed since 1929 by gravity from River Niger through a 44-km primary irrigation canal, downstream from a hydro-electric plant. Part of a potentially irrigated area of 4000ha, the actual third phase of the project is developing 2536ha with financial support from AfDB and the Mali Government. An additional non-irrigated area of 17819ha exists, of which 2623ha are now exploited (PRB, 1997).
In total, 21 villages (18060 inhabitants) are involved in the development activities, with the support of 19 AVB and two technicians. PRB activities include:
* to ensure exploitation/maintenance of primary irrigation infrastructures;
* to train farmers in appropriate technologies to obtain high production rates for all crops involved (in winter: rice, maize, millet, sorgho and peanuts; in counter season: vegetables);
* to support development, in particular through extension services organized according to the national model (Section 2.3.1);
* to manage the PRB developed land area;
* to support farmers' organizations and to progressively transfer to them project management responsibilities, such as maintenance of secondary and tertiary irrigation infrastructures, rational irrigation water management, soil conservation practices, functional alphabetization, credit and marketing; of the 24 existing farmers' organizations, 19 are now independent and have their own technical teams;
* to develop regional agricultural industries, such as paddy processing plants, mills, tomato processing factory and fresh horticultural products conditioning.
The project consists of two technical divisions (agricultural extension; exploitation/maintenance), one Administrative/Financial Bureau and a Planning/Statistics Unit. It has a total of 64 staff.
Major constraints which are being faced are:
* primary canal very old and to be rehabilitated, particularly to enable increasing the irrigated area in counter-season;
* electrification of Bagninéda town incompleted;
* financing project expansion over 1000ha downstream;
* high input prices for farmers;
* limited markets for some vegetables and fruit.
Some farmers/fishermen are present on the project, capturing fish from River Niger as a secondary activity. One proposal to develop a fish farm has been filed by one of them at the National Bank for Agricultural Development (BNDA) without success.
Because of the relatively high demographic pressure, it is planned to intensify and to diversify production systems. It is believed that aquaculture has a role to play, wild juvenile fish being easily available locally from River Niger and its floodplain.
4.4 Chambers of Agriculture and their Permanent Assembly
The Mali Chambers of Agriculture (CAM) were created in 1993, following the approval of the new Action Plan for rural development (MDRE, 1992). At all administrative levels they represent: agriculture, animal husbandry, forestry and fishery (including aquaculture) producers. The latter are automatically "Ressortissants" of their local Chamber of Agriculture at village/town level, public servants not being accepted into such structure.
The general CAM organization varies according to the administrative level at which they operate:
* at village level, four producers are selected by all local producers to represent them at the next level;
* at `arrondissement' level (future communes), four of the village representatives are selected by all these representatives to participate in the next level of debates/activities;
* at `cercle' level (4 to 8 arrondissements), three of the arrondissement representatives are elected (secret ballot) to represent each "cercle"at the regional level;
* at region level, the Regional Chamber of Agriculture (CRA) is made of:
* a Consular Assembly to debate problems/programmes, consisting of three representatives at "cercle" level and five representatives of the Professional agricultural organizations (OPA) present in the region (for example, cooperatives, syndicates, mutualities, etc.); all representatives are elected by secret ballot;
* a Bureau in charge of management, consisting of one President and four vice-presidents (all elected);
* a General Secretariat: services staffed by permanent employees in charge of CRA administrations;
* working commissions according to needs.
* at national level, CRA's activities are coordinated by the Permanent Assembly of the Mali Chambers of Agriculture (APCAM) consisting of:
* a Consular Assembly consisting of the nine CRA Bureau Presidents (8 regions plus Bamako), two members of each CRA Consular Assembly and five members of OPA regional representatives, all elected. Five resource persons (of which three are women) also participate in the Assembly activities;
* a Bureau in charge of APCAM management, consisting of one President and eight vice-presidents, all elected;
* a General Secretariat to administer APCAM, with various specialized services staffed by permanent employees.
CRA and APCAM are independent public institutions with financial autonomy. Their functions are specifically:
* to professionally represent agriculture, animal husbandry, forestry and fishery producers' interests and to ensure that their professional concerns be known at national and international levels;
* to guarantee a permanent two-way liaison between producers and government institutions, including research via the PNVA (Section 2.3.1) and the regional CRUs (Section 2.3.2);
* to train elected/selected representatives of producers' communities in the administration of chambers of agriculture, projects elaboration, entrepreneurial development, communication (radio/TV), sensibilization, organization of agricultural shows/fairs, etc.;
* to be the communication/information pole for rural producers;
* to play a catalytic role and to support individual and collective initiatives in rural communities;
* to participate in the elaboration and implementation of rural development policies/strategies, together with decentralized collectivities and with the Government;
* to support the establishment of development projects, such as wheat processing mill operation, management of a public agricultural centre by a local organization for the production of one-day old chicken, if necessary with the direct assistance of bilateral/multilateral partners; this APCAM function is particularly encouraged by the actual government policy to disengage itself from production activities and to concentrate them into the hands of private entrepreneurs or local producers' associations.
Financing of CRAs and APCAM originates from public funds and from foreign partners such as Belgium, Canada, Japan, UNDP and the Franche-Comté region in France, with which APCAM can negotiate directly. It is planned that, in the long term, government funds be replaced by taxation ensuring the perennity of these institutions.
PAMOS (UNDP/FAO) has been assisting APCAM for the last four years with, for example, a national expert, institutional support, equipment and publication of a quarterly newsletter (Paysan aujourd'hui).
Twenty-one private radio stations broadcast APCAM and producers' messages one hour a month, throughout the country. The national television is also called in to record special CRA/APCAM events, such as agricultural fairs, field visits and World Days activities (rural women, food, etc.).
APCAM has been showing great interest in integrating aquaculture into agricultural development whenever water is present. Various initiatives have been taken:
* a well-trained technical adviser highly specialized in capture fishery and in aquaculture development (formerly involved with UNDP/FAO project MLI/86/001) has been recruited;
* Japanese assistance has been secured to review the aquaculture status in Mali, starting in March 1998; future development activities might then be financed;
* discussions are being held with the Government for the privatization of the Kourouma and Molodo fish culture stations in favour of local OPA, in line with Government policy; these stations would then give the necessary support to aquaculture development in these regions.
For these reasons, APCAM is most interested in becoming involved in a research network which could effectively support the future aquaculture activities of the Chambers of Agriculture.
4.5 FAO Special Programme for Food Security
Interest to participate in an FAO Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS) was confirmed by Government in early 1996. A national coordinator was nominated and formulation of the SPFS Pilot/preparatory Phase was initiated in May 1996 with financial support of the Netherlands (NL). A Coordination Committee was formed. Formulation was finalized by a Mali/NL/China/FAO joint mission in November 1996 for a three-year (1997-99) pilot phase (MDRE, 1997a and b).
The main objectives of this pilot phase are:
* to demonstrate the technical, economical and social validity of selected improved technologies;
* to identify and to correct constraints related to increased production.
The main components of the programme are:
* low cost irrigation, priority being given to small irrigation schemes with total water control and to inland valley bottoms (IVB);
* improvement of agricultural production, priority being given to rice and maize; potential area for rice production is estimated at 1100000ha of which 70000ha are equipped for total water control;
* analysis of existing constraints.
Recently, production diversification has been added:
i. a mission has already defined small animal husbandry potential contribution to the programme;
ii. seasonal small water bodies enhancement through fish stocking and other aquaculture systems should be considered soon.
The main activities of the pilot phase should be:
* preparatory activities (participatory socio-economic surveys, training, sensibilization...);
* limited rehabilitation of small irrigation schemes;
* establishment and implementation of demonstrations (water management, intensive crop production);
* identification and analysis of constraints, including specific aspects related to gender issues;
* preparation of the SPFS Expansion Phase (workshops, etc.) during which it is planned to initiate activities in the "Office du Niger" (ON) zone, a large irrigation scheme where high-cost hydro-agricultural development is involved (about 5 million FCFA per ha).
Preparatory activities are progressing primarily aimed at the selection of SPFS pilot sites. Because of their high potential, these sites have been selected in three regions: Mopti, Koulikoro and Kayes (Figure 1). Participatory socio-economic surveys have then been carried out and, within each of these regions, a few potential pilot sites have been selected based on the following fundamental criteria:
* existing farmers' organizations (in particular women), well structured, for example for water management;
* existing economic and social infrastructure, relatively well developed for marketing of additional productions;
* presence of experienced support services (public or NGOs);
* presence of other development projects with which SPFS could interact positively.
Finally, two to three village communities have been selected in each region as pilot sites, as shown in the table below. Farmers' organizations to be involved in the SPFS pilot phase have been identified in each community. In total, the pilot area extends over 700ha exploited by 600 producers among a population of 9000 inhabitants.
Selected sites for the SPFS pilot phase in Mali
Region
Arrondissement/Cercle
Villages
Site size (ha)
Main crop
Irrigation system^a/
Mopti (Central Niger Delta) 39000 ha equipped for irrigation Arrond. Konna; Cercle Mopti Gnimitongo
Dagowomina
Koubi II
Rice PPIV (floodplain)
Koulikoro
16 000 ha eq. for irrigation
Cercle Kangaba Kéniégué
Koblani
Rice
Maize
Floodplain
Kayes
497 ha eq. for
irrigation
Cercle Kita Founia-Moribougou
Kodialan
Rice
Maize
IVB
a/ PPIV: small irrigation village scheme, with water pumping;
IVB: irrigation from small reservoirs/wells, with pumping, in inland valley bottoms
5. CONCLUSIONS
Mali is a typical Sahelian country where most agricultural production depends on the wise use of available water resources, mostly surface water, to fight drought for a good part of the year. Agricultural irrigation schemes of all types and sizes are well developed contributing to a vast national programme for water security down to the level of the populations themselves. A great number of small reservoirs, natural depressions and earth-borrowing pits exist, but water presence is generally seasonal and limited to the rainy season. Exceptionally, a few of these are permanently under water, either by design or with the assistance of a solar pump, and mostly for livestock watering.
Aquaculture development has been overwhelmingly neglected in the past, even if since the 1980s some sporadic efforts have demonstrated the potential positive impacts of some well adapted practices. As a result, trained man-power is practically inexistent and research programmes of limited value to support future aquaculture development.
Following the recent reorganization of the public administration responsible for agriculture, forestry and fishery development and the increased decentralization in favour of rural producers, a renewed interest in multiple use of water resources, including fish production, is progressively emerging from the rural communities themselves. Local government entities should gradually recognize that whenever water is present, some form of aquaculture can be envisaged to improve rural food security, nutrition and income at reduced additional costs.
This explains the interest shown in our proposed research network, not only by the Special Programme for Food Security, but also by all people directly involved in rural development, in particular APCAM.
Therefore, it is suggested that not only the Institute of Rural Economics (IER) be involved in the proposed network as the institution responsible in Mali for all agricultural research and the design of technological packages, but that development structures be also closely associated to support IER, in particular:
* APCAM with its well-trained and experienced technical adviser, who has already initiated activities to promote integrated aquaculture development;
* DNAER for all development and equipment aspects;
* DNAMR, directly involved through its reorganized extension service with rural development.
Local and international communication systems are functioning rather well, but are relatively expensive to use. Electronic mail is available. Access to Internet is still under discussion, but should become available soon, for a relatively high monthly fee.
6. LITERATURE CONSULTED
Banque mondiale, 1995. Programme de la coopération Mali-Banque mondiale 1995. Bamako, Banque mondiale, 145 p.
DNAER, 1997. Mali. Schéma directeur de développement de la pêche et de la pisciculture. Bamako, DNAER/MDRE, 61 p.
Institut d'Economie Rurale, 1997a. Présentation. Bamako, IER/Serv. Documentation, Information, Publication, 12 p.
Institut d'Economie Rurale, 1997b. Plan Stratégique de la Recherche Agronomique au Mali. Objectifs quantifiés 1995-2005. Bamako, IER/Serv. Doc. Info. Publ., 14 p.
MDRE, 1992. Schéma directeur du secteur développement rural. Bamako, MDRE, 3 vol.
Vol.1 - Stratégie générale, 45 p.
Vol.2 - Stratégie de développement, 223 p. + tabl.
Vol.3 - Plan d'action, 40 p.
MDRE, 1997a. Programme Spécial pour la production vivrière en appui à la sécurité alimentaire (PSSA). Programme spécial national (Document 1). FAO/Centre Investissement, Rome, 48 p. + tabl.
MDRE, 1997b. Programme Spécial pour la production vivrière en appui à la sécurité alimentaire (PSSA). Plan d'opérations de la phase préparatoire (Document 2). FAO/Centre Investissement, Rome, 27 p. + tabl./ann.
MDRE, 1997c. Plan d'Action du MDRE. Document de présentation des nouvelles structures du MDRE. Bamako, MDRE/CAMOPA, 25 p.
PRB, 1997. Note de présentation du PRB. Baguinéda, PRB, 5 p.
Figure 1. Mali: administrative regions and selected SPFS pilot sites
Mali.GIF (24427 bytes)
<section>6</section>
CHAPTER 5: ZAMBIA
GENERAL BACKGROUND DATA
Area of the country 1994
km^2
Cultivable land 1994
km^2
Cultivated land 1994
km^2
Total population 1994
inh.
Population density 1994
inh/km^2
Rural population 1994
percent
Fishery production, inland 1995
t
Aquaculture production 1995
t
Full or partial control irrigation equipped 1997
ha
Surface irrigation 1992
ha
Percentage actual irrigation 1992
percent
Cultivated wetland/dambos, non-equipped (traditional irrigation) 1992
ha
Total water managed area 1997
ha
Irrigation potential
...... to be developed economically
ha
ha
Full/partial control irrigation management: 
Former parastatal/semi-parastatal 1997
ha
Commercial farms 1997
ha
Smallholder 1997
ha
Medium irrig. schemes (500-1000 ha) 1997
ha
Large irrigation schemes (> 1000 ha) 1997
ha
CONTENTS
LIST OF ACRONYMS
1. PERSONS MET
2. INTRODUCTION
2.1 Agricultural Development Policy and Strategy
2.2 Irrigation Sub-sector
2.3 Aquaculture Sub-sector
3. INSTITUTIONS OF INTEREST MAINLY INVOLVED IN RESEARCH AND/ORTRAINING
3.1 National Agricultural Research Network
3.2 University of Zambia
3.3 Institute of Economic and Social Research
3.4 Zambia Association for Research and Development
4. INSTITUTIONS AND PROJECTS OF INTEREST MAINLY INVOLVED IN DEVELOPMENT
4.1 FAO Special Programme for Food Security
4.2 ASIP Fisheries Sub-programme
4.3 Zambia National Farmers' Union
4.4 International Development Enterprises
5. CONCLUSIONS
6. LITERATURE CONSULTED
LIST OF ACRONYMS
ALCOM Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme (FAO)
ASIP Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (WB)
DOF Department of Fisheries (MAFF)
DOI Department of Irrigation (MAFF)
GRZ Government of the Republic of Zambia
GTZ German International Development Agency
IDE International Development Enterprises
IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development
INESOR Institute for Economic and Social Research
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency
MAFF Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
NARDC National Aquaculture Research Development Centre
NGO Non-governmental Organization
NIRS National Irrigation Research Station
NORAD Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation
PCV Peace Corps Volunteers (US)
SAFR Southern and Eastern Africa Sub-Regional FAO Office (Harare)
SARO Senior Agricultural Research Officer
SIDA Swedish International Development Agency
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNV United Nations Volunteers
UNZA University of Zambia
USAID United States Agency for International Development
WB World Bank
ZARD Zambia Association for Research and Development
ZNFU Zambia National Farmers' Union
1. PERSONS MET
* FAO Office
Mburathi, G.K FAO Representative
* Special Programme for Food Security and Mount Makulu Regional Aquaculture Research Centre
Ndiyoi, C. SPFS National Coordinator/Farming Systems
Blehle, C. (Ms) Associate Professional Officer/ALCOM (Aquaculture)
* United Nations Development Programme
Musonda, W. (Ms) National Programme Officer
* MAFF Irrigation Branch
Sikuleka, G.W. Acting Chief
* International Development Enterprises (IDE)
Elkind, Peter Country Director
Daka, A.E. Dep. Director (former SARO Irrigation)
* UNZA School of Agricultural Sciences
Banda, D. (Ms) Head, Dept. Agricultural Economics
Karangwa, A. Aquaculture Specialist, Dept. Animal Sciences
* UNZA Institute of Economic and Social Research (INESOR)
Njobru, C.A. Coord., Agriculture/Rural Dev. Research Progr.
* Conservation Farming Unit
Gibson, D. Deputy Director
* Zambia National Farmers' Union (ZNFU)
Mwanakasale, A. Economist
* Zambia Association for Research Development (ZARD)
Ginwalla, S. (Ms) Project Officer
Banda, G.P.A. Chairman, Programme Committee
* MAFF Department of Fisheries
Maguswi, C. Assistant Director (Aquaculture)
2. INTRODUCTION
2.1 Agricultural Development Policy and Strategy
Government of Zambia (GRZ) policy and strategy for development of the food production sector have been clearly defined in 1992 by the Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries (MAFF) and presented in a 1993 document entitled "Framework for agricultural policies to the year 2000 and beyond". Five objectives were established, in order of priority as follows (Sikana et al., 1997):
i. to ensure national and regional food security;
ii. to generate income and employment through full utilization of local resources and realization of domestic/export market potential;
iii. to ensure that the existing agricultural resource base is maintained and improved upon;
iv. to contribute to sustainable industrial development;
v. to significantly expand the sector's contribution to the national balance of payments.
Ten development strategies were identified and classified into three priority categories. The high priority strategies included:
* liberalization of markets
* diversification of crop production
* emphasis on provision of support services to small-scale farmers
These three high priority strategies have been implemented since, in part through the structural adjustment programme.
A new approach to agricultural development has developed, mostly through the implementation since March 1996 of the Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (ASIP, World Bank), within the framework of which the ASIP Fisheries sub-programme (Section 4.2) and the GRZ/FAO Special Programme for Food Security (Section 4.1) are being implemented.
Agriculture extension services have been reorganized on a similar model as the one previously described for Mali (Chapter 4, Section 2.3.1). Camp Extension Officers (CEO) are supervised by Block Extension Officers (BEO) and supported by Subject Matter Specialists (SMS). CEO provide extension services to farmers on all aspects of agriculture (multidisciplinary approach). At national level extension and irrigation development responsibilities are still separate but at provincial level they become unified. The Department of Fisheries (Section 4.2) has still its own aquaculture extension staff but gradually aquaculture extension is becoming integrated into the agriculture extension service, aquaculture technicians becoming SMS. Extension services should become coordinated at district level, with multidisciplinary teams operating from the districts.
Extension priorities have changed from the previously emphasis on maize to a broad coverage of all priority crops and/or livestock in each agro-ecological region.
Agricultural research (crops, livestock, fisheries sub-sectors) has been reorganized (Section 3.1) It also incorporates an agroecological approach to research planning, on the basis of annual rainfall, and research extension linkages have been improved.
2.2 Irrigation Sub-sector
Informal irrigation
has been traditionally practiced in Zambia by rural small-scale farmers in wetland areas such as dambos and seasonally inundated floodplains. Local food crops and some cash crops (such as vegetables, sugar cane, rice and bananas) are produced in the dry season to complement rainfed crops production and income. Irrigation has been traditionally manual with buckets. Gradually, low-cost irrigation technology is being introduced by various NGO (for example International Development Enterprises, Section 4.4) and by the FAO Special Programme for Food Security (Section 4.1).
Significant commercial and organized irrigation development started only after independence in 1964, mostly in the form of government small holder schemes, parastatal/semi-parastatal schemes and private commercial schemes. Small-scale farmers also started to produce a variety of crops in irrigated plots (mainly cash crops such as vegetables and fruit in plots smaller that 2 ha), using either gravity irrigation or a combination of motorised pumping with surface irrigation.
Recent developments have been marked by:
* the recent series of disastrous years of drought which has led to an increasingly fast development of small-scale and private commercial irrigation schemes;
* the progressive privatisation of government and parastatal irrigation schemes.
Total formal irrigation potential has been estimated at 410 000 ha. A detailed survey of irrigated areas is being completed. They are estimated to cover about 60000 ha consisting mostly of medium (500 to 1 000 ha) and large (over 1 000 ha) irrigation schemes developed in the past by private commercial and/or quasi-government organisations, as shown in the following table (Sikuleka, pers. comm). In addition, it is estimated that about 100 000 ha are under informal/traditional irrigation.
Estimated current total areas under formal irrigation (in ha)
Commercial farms 
Former quasi-governmental schemes
Smallholder schemes 
Medium schemes (former GRZ) 
Large schemes (former GRZ) 
Total area 
Briefly, the various types of schemes are characterised as follows (Akayombokwa, 1997):
* Private commercial farms have developed purely on economic lines with high value commercial crops for export and local consumption. Most of them use overhead irrigation.
* Former quasi-governmental schemes: except for the Nakambala Sugar Estate (100 000 ha, Tate and Lyle Co.), they have been developed by government for the production of specific crops such as coffee, bananas, tea, etc. Handed over to parastatal or semi-parastatal organizations in the late 1970s and early 1980s these schemes have since been privatised.
* Smallholder schemes: they were developed and managed by government for various reasons:
* to compensate small-scale farmers for land lost through national projects (for example, resettlement following construction of Kariba Dam);
* to produce specific crops for local communities such as vegetables and pineapple;
* to introduce irrigated agriculture.
Total irrigable area is slightly over 3 000 ha but only about 300 ha are currently under production. Individual scheme size ranges from 5 to 30 ha, each individual farmer plot varying from 0.2 to 1 ha. Production is made of vegetables, bananas and other horticultural crops. Actual government irrigation development strategy consists in:
* completion of the construction of existing schemes (IFAD project, on 3 285 ha for 770 farmers);
* rehabilitation of existing schemes (IFAD project, on 259 ha for 1 382 farmers);
* participation of farmers in the operation and management of these schemes.
The new UNDP five-year "Smallholder Diversification System" Programme has just been approved. It contains an irrigation component, in addition to an aquaculture component (Section 2.3).
A list of currently identified irrigation schemes in Zambia is given in the table below (Sikuleka, pers. comm.).
PROVINCE PROJECT NAME
Ha
CROPS
Southern Siatwiinda
Buleya Malima
Chiyabi
Kaleya Outgrowers
Nakambala Estates
Nkandabwe
Banana & citrus
Banana & citrus
Rice & vegetables
Sugar
Sugar
Banana & citrus
Northern Chamfula settlement
Chintu farm block
Kateshi coffee
Kabuta settlement
Lubu settlement
Lukulu North
Lukupa Nalole
Mbala seed potatoes
Ngoli coffee
Maize & groundnuts
Maize
Coffee
Maize
Maize & groundnuts
Vegetables
Vegetables
Potatoes
Coffee
Luapula Kawambwa Tea Scheme
Mununshi Banana Scheme
Tea
Banana
Copperbelt Ipafu irrigation scheme
Mpongwe wheat scheme
Chapula irrigation scheme
Vegetables
Wheat
Citrus & vegetables
Lusaka Chanyanya scheme
Chipapa
Kaunga
Chiawa Banana
Masstock Africa Ltd.
Rice
Vegetables
Vegetables
Banana
Marigold, cotton, paprika
Western Sefula scheme 200 Rice
Northwestern Mwinilunga Pineapple 350 Pineapples
Eastern
Makugwa
Lukuzye
Lusowe
Vuu
Vegetables
Vegetables
Vegetables
Vegetables
Total 24 331
Note: data on private commercial farms are still being collected
2.3 Aquaculture Sub-sector
Responsibility for aquaculture development and research lies with the Department of Fisheries (DOF) which administratively belongs to two different MAFF Departments:
* Department of Field Services for Extension/Management/Training
* Capture Fisheries
* Aquaculture
+ National level (Chief and three staff)
+ Provincial level (Provincial Aquaculturists): nine Provinces (Figure 1)
+ District level (Aquaculture Specialists)
+ Extension staff within agriculture unified extension system (Section 2.1)
SPFS activities (Section 4.1) and other ALCOM activities (pond farming and SWB fishery development) are part of this administration.
* Department of Research and Specialist Services (Figure 2) for Fisheries Research under which falls Aquaculture Research (chief and three staff at headquarters).
DOF headquarters are at Chilanga, near Lusaka and close by the Mount Makulu Regional Agricultural Research Centre (Section 3.1) which hosts the SPFS.
Aquaculture Research
is concentrated in two research stations, at Chilanga (Lusaka) and Mwekera (Copperbelt).
* Chilanga Research Station (15 km southwest of Lusaka) was rehabilitated under the UNDP/FAO/GRZ Fish culture Development Project (1980 - 91). Currently, because of deficient water supply, fingerlings are produced in the C-pond group only, to be distributed to farmers. Duckling production is still taking place at a reduced level, to be also sold to farmers. Research is planned for the development of smallholder fish farming technology based on three-spotted tilapia farming. It should support the SPFS programme.
* Mwekera Research Station (near Kitwe) was built by the UNDP/FAO/GRZ Fish Culture Development Project in the mid 80s. It has a good water supply throughout the year. It is now being developed with JICA assistance into a National Aquaculture Research and Development Centre (NARDC). A fish breeding station (including hatchery) has been constructed and equipped. A genetic bank of carp and tilapia broodstock has been established and is being maintained.
Most aquaculture research is now concentrated here such as:
* hatchery intensive seed production of common and Chinese (silver/grass) carps, with JICA assistance;
* pond seed production of three-spotted and Nile tilapias, to support regional development;
* development of commercial fish farming technology;
* feed formulation with local ingredients;
* comparative study of the performances of three-spotted and Nile tilapias under local conditions;
* pond manuring, mostly with chicken manure.
A training centre is also very active and supports the reorganised extension services. Peace corps Volunteers receive their in-country training here.
Aquaculture development
takes place at a fast rate and the following components are noteworthy:
* ALCOM Programme (GRZ/FAO/SIDA) has been active in the Eastern, Luapula and Central Provinces since 1987 to develop adapted extension packages for small-scale farmers;
* In the Southern Province, ALCOM Programme (GRZ/FAO/Belgium) has also developed methodologies for the fishery enhancement of small water bodies at local community level;
* Since 1996, US Peace Corps volunteers are part of the five-year Integrated Rural Family Aquaculture Project (GRZ/USAID) in the Northern, North Western and Luapula Provinces (Agricultural Region I). Extension of the PCV technology developed in central Africa and based on Nile tilapia is carried out at village level directly. Actually, five PCV are fielded and 22 PCV are undergoing in-country training at Mwekera training centre;
* Both NORAD (Northern Province since 1987) and IFAD (North-Western Province) are supporting GRZ agriculture extension and an aquaculture component has been introduced mostly for nutrition improvement. The NORAD project in particular has rehabilitated and upgraded the Misamfu Fish Culture Station (Kasama), established fish culture stations in the Northern Province and trained fish farmers. These stations are to be linked to the National Aquaculture Research and Development Centre now being developed with JICA at Mwekera (see above).
* The Aquaculture component of the new four-year UNDP umbrella programme "Smallholder Diversification System" has just been signed,. It is to be implemented by government with consultant assistance whenever necessary. Its main objective is to support smallholder fish farming in Agricultural Region I (as Peace Corps) and in the Copperbelt and Central Provinces (with UNV). There is a small allocation for adaptive research,
As far as existing initiatives including integrated irrigation/aquaculture are concerned, the following are of particular interest:
* at the Nakambala Sugar Estate, near Mazabuka, a private commercial fish farm producing Nile tilapia has been developed;
* in Kafue, the Nanga Farm specialized in commercial vegetables production has integrated pig and fish productions on a commercial basis, using the three-spotted tilapia;
* the SPFS is actively engaged in the integration of smallholder fish farming at pilot sites (Section 4.1);
* The Zambian FAO/FARMESA Programme (Chapter 6, Section 4.4) is considering supporting some aquaculture activities in Siavonga and Chibombo Districts through DOF or NGOs; the coordinator (Mr. Musanya) belongs to the Farming Systems Team at Mount Makulu Regional Research Centre (Section 3.1) and collaboration with the SPFS has been initiated. Demonstration sites will be selected in the Southern and Central Provinces for the integration of irrigation, horticulture and fish farming;
* the Soil Conservation and Agroforestry (SCAFE) Programme operates in the Eastern and Southern Provinces where multidisciplinary teams are planning land utilization at watershed basin level, for water/soil conservation purposes.
3. INSTITUTIONS OF INTEREST MAINLY INVOLVED IN RESEARCH AND/OR TRAINING
3.1 National Agricultural Research Network
The organization of the Zambia National Agricultural Research Network is presented in the bottom half of Figure 2 (Ndiyoi, pers. comm.) Together with Animal Health/Production and Fisheries Research Branches, the Soils and Crops Research Branch of the MAFF Department of Research and Specialist Services consists of:
* Four Divisions of which Soils/Water Management and Farming Systems/ Economics/Social Sciences Divisions are of particular interest;
* Central Services including library, documentation and training services;
* a National Irrigation Research Station (NIRS), located in Mazabuka, where basic and applied research is being carried out in order to create a database of basic information required in planning/design of irrigation systems and structures. Research areas include (NIRS, 1997):
* agronomy
* technical/economic assessment of existing irrigation schemes
* appropriate technologies for water lifting devices
* irrigation environmental impact
* use of dambos for crop production
Three Regional Research Centres, at
* Mount Makulu, Chilanga near Lusaka
* Mochipapa, near Kasama
* Misamfu, near Choma
A network of Research Stations (RS) and Technology Assessment Sites (TAS) throughout the country.
This National Agricultural Research Network is supported by GRZ and several bilateral/mulitlateral donors such as IFAD, SIDA, NORAD, the Netherlands, GTZ and JICA.
The FAO Special Programme for Food Security (Section 4.1) is headquartered at the Mount Makulu Regional Research Centre where the Farming Systems Research Team (FSRT) is the head agency responsible of management and supervision of the pilot phase operations through a full-time FSR National Coordinator.
3.2 University of Zambia
The University of Zambia (UNZA) includes nine schools. Of particular interest are the following:
* School of Agricultural Sciences
+ Animal Sciences Department has offered an aquaculture course (3 h theory and 3 h practicals for one semester) for the last two years, sub-contracting DOF staff. From January 1998, such course will be given by a new UNZA full time staff (Rwandese refugee); the course will make ample use of FAO publications on this subject;
+ Agriculture Economics Department proposes a five-year programme leading to bachelor degrees in agricultural extension, rural sociology, administration/ organization of agriculture and environment/development. Sociological research has been carried out under contracts, for example for FAO.
* School of Veterinary Medicine: a Fish Pathology Laboratory has been established in 1995 and lectures/practicals on the subject are available.
* Library: a computerized cataloguing system (Machine Readable Catalogue) has been installed. A campus-wide computer network has started to function, giving access to Internet through a local server, ZAMNET Communication System Ltd.
3.3 Institute of Economic and Social Research
The Institute of Economic and Social Research (INESOR) is a research wing of UNZA since 1965, to carry out both basic and applied studies. Research can either be self initiated or commissioned by GRZ, an international organization, NGO or individuals. Consultancy services are also carried out, including facilitating the organization of workshops, seminars and conferences. Collaborative research between INESOR and other interested parties is encouraged.
Priority research programmes
for the next three years include:
* Economic and business programme in the following areas:
* sector studies
* marketing
* labour and employment
* environmental considerations
Agricultural and rural development programme, in areas such as:
* agricultural policy and planning
* agricultural training and extension
* products marketing/distribution
* drought and food security
* community participation
* environmental considerations
Health promotion programme
Urban development programme
Governance programme
Social-cultural programme
Documentation and information units
provide technical back-up services and facilitates INESOR's data control, information system and publication. A library headed by a documentalist specializes in the collection of "grey literature". Its collection is computerized (over 10 000 records) using Micro CDS/ISIS.
3.4 Zambia Association for Research and Development
The Zambia Association for Research and Development (ZARD) is a non-profit NGO with the main goal of encouraging research aimed at uplifting the status and living standards of women in the Zambian society.
Specific ZARD objectives include:
* to encourage an innovative approach to research so that it is centred on development problems;
* to evaluate research priorities and methodology;
* to encourage and sponsor specific research projects, acting as an intermediary in forwarding selected proposals to appropriate donor agencies;
* to promote communication channels between research and development in Zambia;
* to collect/disseminate research findings and other information concerning research, through seminars and workshops;
* to provide training for girls' and women's development and empowerment, in collaboration with a pool of experts and UNZA staff.
ZARD is mainly funded by the Dutch Humanistic Institute for Cooperation with Developing Countries (HIVOS). Other donors contribute also, such as NORAD, SIDA, UNDP, UNICEF, the Netherlands and Great Britain. There are over 500 ZARD members contributing a small annual fee.
ZARD offers various services to its members such as:
* documentation/information: a computerised Women's Resource Centre houses a collection of over 5000 references;
* networking using electronic mail (zard@zamnet.zm) and Internet, together with necessary training and technical assistance;
* desk-top publishing facilities with publishing/editorial advices, design and production aspects;
* training courses in research methodologies, gender analysis and computer skills;
* research consultancies;
* organization of conferences/seminars/workshops;
* publication of a quarterly newsletter;
* a database/directory of its members.
4. INSTITUTIONS AND PROJECTS OF INTEREST MAINLY INVOLVED IN DEVELOPMENT
4.1 FAO Special Programme for Food Security
The pilot phase of the MAFF/FAO Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS) became operational in August 1995, on time to prepare the first season demonstrations. This pilot phase should end in October 1998 after covering three production years. It is now planned to start the expansion phase in early 1998, following a delay in the funding of the IFAD Irrigation Project (Section 2.2) which should represent the first component of this phase.
The major activities of the SPFS pilot phase should be:
* demonstration by selected farmers of improved technologies;
* assessment of constraints to widespread adoption;
* removal of identified constraints at local level;
* analysis of policy measures and investments needed to overcome remaining constraints;
* formulation of the expansion phase.
The Zambian SPFS is made up of several components of which Water control and land development (irrigation) and Sustainable diversification of food production (aquaculture) are of particular interest.
The SPFS irrigation component
was initiated in 1996, introducing improved low-cost irrigation technologies in 15 pilot sites representing four Districts in three Provinces. In 1997, additional 30 pilot sites located in the previous Districts and in new Districts have expanded the activities into two new Provinces and seven new Districts (see Table below). Various types of treadle pumps have been supplied to pilot farmers. Intensive training has been provided to local manufacturers of such pumps, to provincial staff, district agricultural engineers, field extension staff and farmers.
Selected SPFS pilot schemes for the irrigation component
PROVINCE
DISTRICT
CAMPS
Central
Mkushi
Chibombo
Mumbwa
Lusaka
Kafue
Chongwe
Southern
Kalomo
Choma
Eastern
Chipata N
Lundazi
Western
Kaoma
Mongo
The IFAD Smallholder Irrigation Programme (SIWUP, Section 2.2) will be provided technical assistance by FAO to promote simple irrigation technologies, to carry out small dams rehabilitation and to transfer GRZ smallholder irrigation schemes to Water Users Associations. This programme will now be integrated into the ongoing SPFS training and development programme.
The SPFS aquaculture component
was initiated in November 1996 with an ALCOM mission to study the feasibility for integrating aquaculture and irrigation at selected pilot sites (van der Mheen, 1996). Six sites were visited in the Mkushi, Chibombo and Kalomo Districts. Five different integration options were identified and discussed.
On 1 July 1997, one ALCOM Associate Professional Officer was transferred as advisor to the new ALCOM/SPFS aquaculture component, to concentrate her activities in Lusaka and Central Provinces. Activities in the Southern Province should become integrated into the ALCOM Small Water Bodies Project. The DOF Assistant Director (Aquaculture) has been assigned as counterpart and a close collaboration with DOF has been initiated.
Major activities
in 1997 (Blehle, 1997 a and b; van der Mheen, 1997) have been as follows:
* training seminars in Southern Province (Choma), Lusaka Province (Chilanga) and Central Province (Mkushi) with assistance from ALCOM and SAFR;
* site selection: in each Province, three to five sites have been selected on the basis of soil quality and water/fingerlings availability. Potential integration techniques have been identified, emphasis being placed on pond operation being independent from water pumping, as shown in the table below:
Integration techniques at selected sites
Integration
technique
Southern Province
Lusaka Province
Central Province
Water logged area
Sipatunyana
Mudobo
Musofu
Irumi
Ponds below gardens on a slope
Sipatunyana
Kanchele
Siachitema
Ngwerere
Musofu
Chalata
Irumi
Ponds above gardens on a slope
Dimbwe
Mwembeshi
Shantumbu
Chipapa
Chalata
Irumi
* farmers group meetings to introduce integrated fish farming, together with DOF/DOI staff and local field extension staff, in Lusaka and Central Provinces;
* individual site visits to evaluate potential for fish farming where water source was mostly springs or streams (64 percent) or surface water table (29 percent); plots unsuitable for gardening were preferred by farmers for fish farming;
* sustainable fingerling resources for all selected pilot sites have been identified;
* marketing surveys have been carried out in the two Provinces showing that fresh fish marketing is to be preferred and that, compared to common local vegetables, fish can be classified as a high value crop, in particular in the Central Province;
* networking meeting with bilateral assistance agencies and NGOs to define possible areas of collaboration and to initiate such collaboration;
* regular visits to Kalimina Farm, located near Lusaka and assisted by FAO/TCP to become a demonstration site for an integrated approach to food production, including vegetables, crops, ducks and fish. Several ponds and a duck house have been built. Fingerlings of tilapia and common carp as well as ducklings have been provided to stock ponds and duck house. By now, seven ponds are under production, being stocked with three-spotted tilapias (6) and common carps (1) from the Chilanga GRZ fish farming station. Ducklings have been bought from the same former FAO project station. The farm supplies tilapia fingerlings to neighbouring small-scale farmers;
* a review of past/present aquaculture activities in Zambia has been prepared and DOF comments are awaited before finalization;
* a database on individual fish farmers has been created, to be regularly updated.
4.2 ASIP Fisheries Sub-programme
The five-year ASIP Fisheries sub-programme (GRZ/MAFF, 1995) is managed by the Director of DOF who is responsible for general management, supervision, coordination and implementation at national level. This programme has the following major components:
* establishment of a National Aquaculture Research and Development Centre (NARDC) in the Copperbelt Province at Mwekera, Kitwe (Section 2.3);
* development of fish feeds, especially for commercial farmers;
* studies for rearing and mass production of fish juveniles of endangered species for re-stocking depleted water bodies;
* development of methods to handle local fish diseases in pond environments;
* training DOF staff in specialized aquaculture disciplines (4 MSc + 4 BSc + 30 Diploma courses);
* assessment of the national potential of fish culture/fish ranching and updating information on the status of aquaculture;
* improving the aquaculture extension service;
* assisting the establishment of private sector fish farms for the production of fish juveniles;
* establishing a system for collection, analysis and dissemination of aquaculture statistics;
* strengthening DOF through upgrading aquaculture stations and establishing new ones in areas of high aquaculture potential;
* encouraging the development of fish farming for ornamental purposes.
The main thrust of this fisheries sub-programme is to identify and promote appropriate aquaculture technologies for pond construction, fish feeding and economic juveniles production, to allow a rapid and sustainable expansion of aquaculture enterprises relevant for smallholder farm households. Three main activities are planned:
* development of a private sector for fish juveniles production;
* development of appropriate small-farm feeding systems;
* aquaculture extension (Section 2.1).
4.3 Zambia National Farmers' Union
The Zambia National Farmers' Union (ZNFU) represents the common interests of commercial farmers at national level.
It is made of:
* a central coordination office in Lusaka, with permanent staff, including an economist;
* 37 Farmers' Associations distributed throughout the country;
* a series of specialized associations regrouping farmers according to their major interest such as tobacco, cattle, seeds, etc.; there is also a Women association.
ZNFU is now in the process of developing a network of Outreach Offices for small-scale farmers, with the assistance of the Swedish Cooperative Centre.
4.4 International Development Enterprises
International Development Enterprises (IDE) is a non-governmental organization supported by various donors such as USAID, Canada, Norway and the European Union. It has recently opened an office in Lusaka with permanent technical staff.
Its objective is to promote the establishment and development of small-scale manufacturers specialized in the construction of simple water pumps such as the treadle pump, to promote the use of such pumps for small-scale irrigation, to organize a distribution/marketing network and to train people to install/maintain/use these pumps.
It is in this context that IDE is assisting the SPFS (Section 4.1):
* to train manufacturers and users of treadle pumps;
* to ensure quality control of the local-made pumps;
* to promote the use of pumps by small scale farmers;
* to organize a marketing network in Zambia.
An IDE irrigation specialist is also available to assist with simple irrigation technologies and to liaise with the National Irrigation Research Station (Section 3.1) for technology transfer.
5.CONCLUSIONS
Within the GRZ/MAFF Department of Fisheries, aquaculture research resources are being greatly expanded with JICA (Section 2.3) and World Bank (Section 4.2) technical and financial assistance. Senior and junior staff are to be trained and research facilities should be completed soon. A National Aquaculture Research and Development Center (NARDC) is to be established at Mwekera near Kitwe (Copperbelt Province) where research programmes should be carried out at a faster pace in the medium term. Although GRZ will most probably remain involved in juvenile fish production to support aquaculture development, the gradual development of a private sector should greatly improve the actual situation in this crucial area.
The gradual improvement of the traditional irrigation technology is a priority for several NGOs and the GRZ/FAO Special Programme (Section 4.1) Simultaneously, such improved technology should result in the increase of the cultivated areas. On the other hand, the development of small-scale and private commercial irrigation schemes has been increasingly fast in recent years, although a large potential still remains untapped.
Integration of aquaculture and irrigation has already well started under the SPFS (Section 4.1) with technical assistance from ALCOM and financial assistance from FAO/SAFR. A full-time aquaculture ALCOM staff has been included in the SPFS team which should contribute to the successful implementation of the pilot programme. Apart from these SPFS activities, there are very few other attempts at the direct integration of aquaculture and irrigation. On the contrary, the use of small reservoirs to produce fish is much more developed.
Local and international communication systems function well. A very reliable e-mail and Internet server (ZAMNET-UNZA) is available at reasonable cost (ab. USD 30 monthly). Major computer firms are well represented on the local market.
The research institution particularly well suited to host a research network for the integration of aquaculture and irrigation would be the Mount Makulu Regional Research Centre located in Chilanga, for several reasons:
* it is part of the National Agricultural Research Network (Section 3.1) which also includes the National Irrigation Research Station in Mazabuka;
* it depends on the same Ministry (MAFF) as the Department of Fisheries;
* it is located next to this Department of Fisheries headquarters, also in Chilanga;
* it hosts the SPFS, its National Coordinator being a member of its Farming Systems Research Team (FSRT);
* it hosts the Zambian FARMESA National Coordinator (Chapter 6, Section 4.4), also a member of its FSRT;
An active and close collaboration with DOF Aquaculture Research - which belongs to the same MAFF Department of Research and Specialist Services - should be developed to plan/carry out common research programmes to support the future development of integrated irrigation-aquaculture.
6.LITERATURE CONSULTED
Akayombokwa, I. M., 1997. Brief on irrigation sub-programme (IFAD). Lusaka, Dept. Agriculture, 16p.
Blehle, C., 1997a. Quarterly report July to September 1997 (Aquaculture component of SPFS). Lusaka, FAO/ALCOM memo, 5p.
Blehle, C., 1997b. Progress report (15 Nov. 1997) : Aquaculture component of the Special Programme for Food Security. Lusaka, FAO/ALCOM memo, 3p. (draft).
FAO/AGLW, 1995. Zambia. pp. 323-28. In Irrigation in Africa in figures. Water Reports, (7):336p.
GRZ/MAFF, 1995. Agricultural Sector Investment Programme, ASIP: a new approach to agriculture in Zambia. Fisheries sub-programme. Lusaka, GRZ/MAFF/ASIP, 45p.
Institute of Economic and Social Research, 1997. Research programmes (pamphlet). Lusaka, INESOR, 6p.
National Irrigation Research Station, 1997. Irrigation Research Team 1996 Annual Coordination Report. Mazabuka, NIRS, 25p.
Sikana, P. et al., 1997. Special Programme for Food Security: agricultural constraints analysis. A post-season evaluation of the SPFS on-farm demonstrations. Lusaka, SPFS, 73p.
SPFS, 1997. Special Programme for Food Security. Information sheet. Lusaka, SPFS, 6p.
University of Zambia, 1996. Annual Report 1995. Lusaka, UNZA, 27p.
van der Mheen, H., 1996. Mission report. Feasibility study for integrating aquaculture and irrigation at the pilot sites of the Special Programme for Food Security in Zambia. Harare, FAO/ALCOM, 24p.
van der Mheen, H., 1997. Integrated small-scale irrigation and aquaculture. Mission report. Harare, FAO/ALCOM, 54p.
Zambia Association for Research and Development, 1997. Presentation pamphlet. Lusaka, ZARD, 6p.
Figure 1. Zambia: major administrative divisions, towns, rivers/lakes
Zambia.GIF (26661 bytes)
Figure 2. Organization of the MAFF Soils and Crops Research Branch
<section>7</section>
CHAPTER 6: ZIMBABWE
GENERAL BACKGROUND DATA
Area of the country
km^2
Cultivated land
km^2
* large-scale commercial farms (priv.)
percent
* parastatal government farms
percent
* resettlement area farms
percent
* small-scale commercial farms
percent
* communal area farms
percent
Total population
inh
Population density
inh/km^2
Rural population
percent
Fishery production, artisanal
t
Fish. production, rivers/small reservoirs
t
Aquaculture production, fish
t
Full or partial control irrigation, eqpd.
ha
* surface irrigation
percent
* sprinkler irrigation
percent
* micro-irrigation (drip)
percent
Wetland/informal irrigation
ha
Total water managed area
ha
Irrigation potential
ha
Full or partial control irrigation, eqpd.
* large-scale commercial farms
ha
* parastatal government farms (ARDA)
ha
* settler farming
(small-scale commercial)
ha
* small holder farming
(communal/ resettlement)
ha
CONTENTS
LIST OF ACRONYMS
1. PERSONS MET
2. INTRODUCTION
2.1 Zimbabwe Sub-divisions
2.2 Agricultural Sector
2.3 Irrigated Agriculture
2.4 Aquaculture Development
3. INSTITUTIONS OF INTEREST INVOLVED IN RESEARCH
3.1 Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management
3.2 Department of Research and Specialist Services
4. INSTITUTIONS AND PROJECTS OF INTEREST INVOLVED IN DEVELOPMENT
4.1 Aquatic Resources Management for Local Communities Programme
4.2 Department of Agricultural, Technical and Extension Services
4.3 FAO Special Programme for Food Security
4.4 FARMESA Programme
4.5 SADC Food, Agriculture and Natural Resources Sector
5. CONCLUSIONS
6. LITERATURE CONSULTED
LIST OF ACRONYMS
AGRITEX Department of Agricultural, Technical and Extension Services (MLA)
ALCOM Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme (FAO)
ARDA Agricultural and Rural Development Authority
ASIP Agricultural Sector Investment Project (World Bank)
BADC Belgian Agency for Development Cooperation
DANIDA Danish International Development Agency
DNPWM Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management (MMET)
DRSS Department of Research and Specialist Services (MLA)
EU European Union
FANR Food, Agriculture and Natural Resources Sector (SADC Regional Food Security Programme)
FARMESA Farm-level Applied Research Methods for East and Southern Africa
GOZ Government of Zimbabwe
MLA Ministry of Lands and Agriculture
MMET Ministry of Mines, Environment and Tourism
NAP/ITTA National Action Programme on Irrigation Technology, Transfer and Adoption
NAP/WASAD National Action Programme on Water and Sustainable Agricultural Development
NGO Non-governmental Organization
SADC Southern African Development Community
SAFR Southern and Eastern Africa Sub-regional FAO Office
SIDA Swedish International Development Authority
SPFS Special Programme for Food Security (GOZ/FAO)
SWB Small Water Body
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
<1. PERSONS MET 1. PERSONS MET
* FAO/SAFR Office
Ssentongo, G. Regional Fisheries Officer
Savva, A. Regional Irrigation Officer
Bitanihirwe, T.Y.F. Investment Officer/SPFS Programming
* FARMESA Programme
Dickson, J. Programme Leader
* ALCOM Programme
Moehl, J. Programme Leader
Verheust, L. Small Reservoir Fishery Specialist
van der Mheen, H. Aquaculture/Extension Consultant (ALCOM/SAFR)
* Agricultural Research Centre/Agronomy Institute
Murata, M. (Ms) Principal Agronomist, Oilseeds Research Programme
* Belgian Agency for Development Cooperation
De Keyser, S.T.C.M. Agronomist, Regional Cooperation Section SADC
* University of Zimbabwe/Biological Sciences Department
Moyo, N.A.G. Lecturer/Researcher
* AGRITEX
Chitsiko, R.J. Deputy Director and Chief, Irrigation Development Branch
Nobbs, C.A. Chief, Animal Production Branch
Benali, W. Integrated Livestock/Aquaculture Specialists
Chimowa, M. Fisheries Specialist
* Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management
Machena, C. Assistant Director Research
Gurure, R. Senior Ecologist/Head, Henderson Fish Culture Research Station
* SADC/FANR
Buckland, R.W. Technical Adviser/Regional Food Security Programme
2. INTRODUCTION
2.1 Zimbabwe Sub-divisions
2.1.1 Administrative sub-divisions
From the administrative point of view, Zimbabwe is made of eight Provinces (Figure1). Each Province is itself divided into six or more Districts.
2.1.2 Physiographic regions
There are four physiographic regions determined primarily on the basis of altitude:
* highveld:1 200 m to 1 700 m (25 percent of total)
* middleveld:600 m to 1 200 m (40 percent of total)
* lowveld:300 m to 600 m (33 percent of total)
* highlands:a narrow north-south mountain range stretching along most of the eastern border
There are three main river basins: Zambezi (in northwest and north); Limpopo (in south), and Save (in east and southeast) (Figure 1).
2.1.3 Agro-ecological regions
Agricultural development is basically related to the subdivision of the country into five agro-ecological regions (I to V) primarily defined according to rainfall characteristics (Figure2) as shown in the table below:
Agro-ecological regions (AER) in Zimbabwe
AER
Percent total area
Average annual rainfall
Rainfall characteristics
I
>1 000 mm
Well distributed throughout year
II
700-1 000 mm
Confined to summer
III
650-800 mm
Infrequent/heavy; seasonal drought
IV
450-600 mm
Erratic: frequent seasonal drought
V
<450 mm
Very erratic: drought prone
Unsuitable for any form of agricultural use
Agricultural development greatly varies from one region to the other as follows:
* AER I:
forestry, fruit, intensive livestock; smallholders <20 percent;
* AER II:
intensive farming, some cash crops and livestock; irrigation for winter wheat; smallholders 21 percent;
* AER III:
semi-intensive farming, extensive beef ranching; smallholders 39 percent; important role of irrigation (periodic seasonal droughts, prolonged mid-season droughts, rain starting date unreliable);
* AER IV and V:
communal lands too dry for successful crop production without irrigation; millet/sorghum and some cash crops; smallholders respectively 50 and 46 percent.
2.2 Agricultural Sector
Agriculture is a dominant sector of the Zimbabwe economy. Being heavily dependent on rainfall, years of drought result in increased food shortages, hunger and malnutrition, an adverse balance of payment and inflation (as exports decrease) as well as a reduction in economic growth.
This impact of drought on agricultural production and the national economy in general has been recognized by the government, particularly after a series of five dry years during the period 1981-92. The importance of irrigation to achieve sustainable agricultural development has been clearly underlined (FAO, 1993). As a result, the Second National Development Plan (1991-95) focused its attention to irrigation development in particular in communal and resettlement areas (Section 2.3).
Concurrently, the Economic Structural Adjustment Programme was launched in 1991 with the assistance from IMF/World Bank.
There are two major agricultural sub-groups, according to individual farm size, location, production objectives and support institutions: small scale and large scale farming groups (Bitanihirwe, 1977) as shown in the table below:
Small scale
Large scale
Farmers 
Area, million ha
Location drier, lower agricultural economic zones high agricultural and economic potential zones
Land tenure no security ownership
The relative importance of the small-scale group has steadily increased over the last ten years, their key crop production (maize, cotton) having now overtaken that of the large-scale group.
The small-scale group being itself made up of four different types of farms, one generally recognizes five agricultural sub-sectors in Zimbabwe (Bitanihirwe, 1997):
1. large-scale commercial farms;
2. parastatal governmental farms;
3. resettlement area farms (families)
4. small-scale commercial farms;
5. communal smallholder farms.
Their characteristics are summarized in the next table:
Characteristics of the agricultural sub-sectors (data for 1993-94)
Agric. sub-sector
No. farms
Area (million ha)
Irrigated area (ha)
Avg. farm size (ha)
Farm arable land (ha)
Located mostly in AE regions
var.
II > III/IV/V
var.
V > III
III > IV > V > II
IV > III > II
IV > V > III
Institutional responsibility for the agricultural sector rests with the Ministry of Lands and Agriculture (MLA). This Ministry has been strengthened during the past years through the World Bank "Agricultural Sector Management Project" (ASMP) which is now under appraisal. One of its objectives has been to formulate the "Agricultural Sector Investment Programme" (ASIP) to been implemented soon.
Agricultural research (Section 3.2) and agricultural extension services (Section 4.2) are both part of this Ministry.
2.3 Irrigated Agriculture
The Zimbabwe remarkable development of irrigation in both the large- and small-scale sectors has been brought about by climatic constraints, including periodic mid-season drought and recurrent seasonal droughts, which make dryland cultivation a risky venture even in AE Regions II and III (Bitanihirwe, 1997). Irrigation is considered essential for wheat and sugarcane. It is preferred for coffee, tea and cotton. Recently, it has also been used for high value crops, such as tobacco and horticulture.
2.3.1 Current status of irrigation development and potential
Currently, the five agricultural sub-sectors defined above (Section 2.2) are involved in formal irrigation as shown in the following table (FAO, 1993; Bitanihirwe, 1997).
Current formal irrigation developments in Zimbabwe
Agricultural sub-sector
Area developed (ha)
1. Large-scale commercial
2. Parastatal 
3. Settler (outgrowers) 
4. Small-scale commercial
(insignificant)
5. Communal smallholder 
Total 
In addition, informal/traditional irrigation is practised in an estimated 20000ha of wetlands/inland valley bottoms (dambos) and small gardens by many rural families. Vegetables are produced during the wet and dry seasons. Usually, irrigation is done with buckets/cans from handdug shallow wells. It is planned to introduce water lifting devices, within the SPFS Programme (Section 4.3).
The potential area which could still be developed according to available potential water resources under formal irrigation (full or partial water control) is estimated to be 240000ha, of which 90000ha for smallholder irrigation (GOZ, 1997). Water availability is considered to be the limiting factor for future irrigation developments. Available surface water will have to be stored in large, medium and small reservoirs to regulate surface flows.
2.3.2 Irrigation methods
About 75 percent of the formal irrigation area is under sprinkler/overhead irrigation, most of the remaining area (18 percent) being under surface irrigation. Micro-irrigation (drip) is used in only 7percent of the total area.
But in the specific case of settlers and smallholders, up to 90percent of the 10000ha formal irrigation area is under surface irrigation, water being drawn from rivers, storage reservoirs or deep boreholes (Bitanihirwe, 1997). The remaining 10percent is under sprinkler irrigation.
The actual tendency is to promote irrigation systems which use more efficiently limited water resources, such as sprinklers and micro-irrigation (drip). This last system will be tested/demonstrated by SPFS (Section 4.3).
2.3.3 Large-scale commercial irrigation (FAO, 1993)
To minimize the effects of drought and to improve returns on investments with high-value crops, the private sector has given a high priority to water resources development since the 1940s, particularly to reservoir construction. Currently, this agricultural sub-sector owns more than 6000 small to medium dams. Water from large government reservoirs is also used. Some of the characteristics of this sub-sector are:
* average annual growth rate is about 2000 ha;
* main financial support from the National Farm Irrigation Fund;
* operation of farms virtually independent of public support;
* mostly overhead semi-portable irrigation system in highveld region;
* mostly surface irrigation in lowveld region;
* main crops are sugarcane, wheat, soybeans and cotton;
* biggest irrigation potential in lowveld region, but potential water sources are generally located far away;
* development constraints: escalating costs of reservoir developments, increasing cost of water, higher interest rates.
2.3.4 Parastatal irrigation (FAO, 1993)
The original role of this sub-sector was to develop and initially operate/manage core estates with settlers/outgrowers (Section 2.3.5) and eventually handover the scheme to these smallholders. Such incorporation of the outgrowers has been limited until recently, the priority objective of the schemes having been switched to food and strategic commodities production.
Today, most of the schemes are still operated and managed by the parastatal Agricultural and Rural Development Authority (ARDA). The main characteristics of these schemes are:
* main irrigated crops are cotton, groundnuts and wheat;
* diversification programme underway (sugarcane, tobacco, fruit, vegetables...);
* performance of the estates varies considerably;
* most water is supplied from large rivers and public dams;
* mostly overhead (about 75 percent of area) and surface irrigation are practised;
* ample potential for new development and expansion, especially in lowveld region;
* constraints: lack of funds, lack of trained manpower.
2.3.5 Settler/outgrower irrigation (FAO, 1993)
This sub-sector has mainly developed:
* around ARDA estates (six), on 1 421 ha;
* around main sugar estates, on about 2 000 ha.
Farmers are settled on plots (from 0.8 ha to 10 ha) around core estates so that they can benefit, at cost, from local support services.
Most of the ARDA settler schemes are located in communal lands where a 99-year lease arrangement is the most common land tenure practice.
ARDA plans to divide parts of some of their estates into small units to be allocated to new settlers.
2.3.6 Smallholder irrigation (FAO, 1993)
Since Independence in 1980, the potential role of irrigation for smallholder development has been increasingly recognized (Bitanihirwe, 1997), particularly because of:
* drought proneness of the communal lands, 75 percent of which are located in AE regions IV and V (less than 650 mm rainfall per year);
* devastating effects of the recent five drought years (period 1981-92).
Although smallholder irrigation development is still at a rudimentary stage (total 6000ha), the post-Independence newly developed schemes have been better designed than older schemes:
* production of cash crops according to major market outlets has been added to food self-sufficiency;
* about 20 sprinkler irrigation schemes (800 ha) have been developed according to local topography and soils, instead of concentrating on surface irrigation only;
* drip irrigation is to be tested by the SPFS Programme (Section 4.3).
Today the tendency is for GOZ to provide all the capital development costs, including in-field works. All smallholder irrigation developments are coordinated by AGRITEX Irrigation Branch (Section 4.2), with financial/technical assistance from EU, DANIDA, UNDP/FAO (Section 2.3.7) and various bilateral donors. Many smaller projects are still developed/financed in isolation by other organizations (for example, churches, missions, NGOs). Potential for further developments is very good as demonstrated by several recent surveys.
The management of smallholder irrigation schemes differs: of the 180 developed schemes, 18 percent are still GOZ managed, 48 percent are farmer managed and 34 percent are under joint management. Government policy is now to gradually extend to all smallholder schemes the farmer management system.
2.3.7 UNDP/FAO support to smallholder irrigation
Since 1986, substantial support from UNDP/FAO has been provided to smallholder irrigation (Bitanihirwe, 1997):
* to develop a core of more than 40 planners/designers of small-scale irrigation schemes;
* to develop about 30 such schemes;
* to introduce new development methodologies, involving farmers' participation and water conservation technologies, such as adapted sprinkler irrigation;
* to establish the Zimbabwe Irrigation Technology Centre;
* to prepare a National Action Programme on Water and Sustainable Agricultural Development (NAP-WASAD): a framework for optimum land and water resources utilization to achieve sustainable agricultural development, in particular food security and rural development (FAO, 1993);
* to develop the National Irrigation Policy - Strategy;
* to prepare a National Action Programme on Irrigation Technology Transfer and Adoption, NAP-ITTA (GOZ, 1997), see Section 2.3.8;
* to test and demonstrate new technologies/methodologies to improve food security through the SPFS Programme (Section 4.3);
* to formulate an irrigation master plan for the Save River Basin (new TCP proposal).
2.3.8 NAP on Irrigation Technology Transfer and Adoption
Recently, the NAP/ITTA has been formulated consisting of four interrelated and interdependent components (GOZ, 1997):
* C1.Policy, strategy and legislation;
* C2.Promotion of affordable/water efficient technologies;
* C3.Enhancing access to cheap/dependable water sources;
* C4.National capacity building in smallholder irrigation.
Each component consists of one or more projects with clearly defined objectives, outputs, inputs, budget and timeframe for its implementation.
Each project is to be implemented by a designated lead agency, but within the institutional and operational framework of NAP-WASAD, whose duration is four years. Whenever feasible, the integration of aquaculture with the irrigation project will be considered.
2.4 Aquaculture Development
Fisheries in general is a minor sector of the national economy. Most important is the Lake Kariba artisanal fishery for kapenta (19 000 t/y) which accounts for about 70 percent of the total annual fish production (about 27 000 t). Aquaculture annual production is limited to 150t of fish and 15t of crustaceans (FAO, 1997). About 50 percent of this production is commercial.
The potential for aquaculture development is particularly important in the existing reservoirs (over 11 000), either through fishery enhancement in small ones or through intensive cage culture in larger ones (initiated in Kariba). Small-scale irrigation schemes have also a good potential through integrated fish farming. The demand for fresh fish is still high, in particular in remote areas, in spite of increased imports of frozen mackerel from Namibia.
Institutionally, aquaculture belongs to two different Ministries (Figure 3):
* aquaculture research belongs both to the Ministry of Lands and Agriculture (Department of Research/Specialist Services, Section 3.2) and to the Ministry of Mines, Environment and Tourism (Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management, Section 3.1);
* aquaculture extension services are provided in the Ministry of Lands and Agriculture by the Department of Agricultural, Technical and Extension Services (AGRITEX, Section 4.2), where aquaculture extension is integrated into the overall agricultural extension services. A specialized Fisheries Section within the Animal Production Branch provides aquaculture training and information for extension staff. At provincial and district levels, aquaculture is dealt with by a Subject Matter Specialist, together with livestock.
Major constraints exists in Zimbabwe which may affect aquaculture development, such as:
* limited water availability in most areas;
* low water temperature in winter, especially in AE Region I;
* high cost of commercial fish feeds;
* slow growth of local tilapia species;
* prevalent illegal fishing in small reservoirs and poaching in fish ponds;
* fragmented fisheries administration;
* limited GOZ funds for research and extension support.
ALCOM has been supporting aquaculture in Zimbabwe for nearly a decade, mostly through the development of new methodologies for small-scale pond farming development and for fishery enhancement in small reservoirs (Section 4.1). Assistance is also being provided to support the integration of aquaculture into smallholder irrigation through the SPFS Programme (Section 4.3).
3. INSTITUTIONS OF INTEREST INVOLVED IN RESEARCH
3.1 Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management
The Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management (DNPWM) belongs to the Ministry of Mines, Environment and Tourism (MMET). Its new organizational structure has just been approved by the Public Service Commission for staffing at headquarters, provincial and station levels (Figure 3).
At Harare headquarters, two units of the new "Conservation and Research" Service have responsibilities for aquatic research:
* Fisheries Development: on-station research at and field research from a series of specialized research stations for aquaculture and fisheries;
* Dam Development and Fisheries Surveys: field research/surveys at small reservoirs for fishery development (mostly through enhancement) and for rural community participatory development.
Recently, two DNPWM teams have been fielded under the CAMFIRE Project to survey about 20 small reservoirs according to the new ALCOM-developed methodology. Results will be added to the ALCOM database for SADC aquatic systems (Section 4.1).
Research efforts have been hampered in the past by financial constraints and lack of adequately trained staff. Genuine efforts are being made to alleviate these constraints.
The well-stocked library is now supervised by a newly recruited librarian. Its computerized database is being linked to ALCOM information database (Section 4.1).
3.2 Department of Research and Specialist Services
Research on the majority of crops, livestock and pastures is carried out by the public sector, mainly through the Department of Research and Specialist Services (DRSS), in the Ministry of Lands and Agriculture (Figure 3).
Within DRSS, the Agricultural Research Centre includes a Crops Research Unit made up of:
* the Agronomy Institute, responsible for research on rainfed crops in AE Regions I to IV;
* the Lowveld Research Station in Chiredzi, responsible for agricultural research in AE Region V, including irrigated crops. Experimental stations involved in irrigation research exist also in Chisumbanji and Meadow Save, Masvingo Province.
DRSS has also one staff (MSc Aquaculture, Stirling) stationed at Henderson Fish Culture Research Station (Section 3.1). She has been involved in on-farm research at Murewa on the use of available organic fertilizers and on the performance of local tilapia species.
Agricultural research is also carried out by others:
* Department of Veterinary Surveys (animal health);
* parastatal bodies, such as the Pig Industry Board and the Forestry Commission;
* private sector, for example, for seed production, horticulture or general research (Agricultural Research Trust, including irrigation);
* besides its development mandate, AGRITEX (Section 4.2) is also involved in research related to irrigation development such as hydraulic control of waterborne diseases and women participation, as well as on-farm trials on water requirements and water demand.
Major constraints for agricultural research are the lack of coordination between the various groups, financial constraints (public sector) and lack of qualified staff mostly due to low salaries (Bitanihirwe, 1997).
4. INSTITUTIONS AND PROJECTS OF INTEREST INVOLVED IN DEVELOPMENT
4.1 Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme
The Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme (ALCOM) is a regional programme based in Harare from where it collaborates with SADC member countries. Originally funded by SIDA (aquaculture component) and BADC (small water bodies component), it is executed by FAO since late 1986. It is now reaching the end of its third phase (1995-97).
ALCOM's objective is to enhance outputs from smallholder farming systems and economies through improved management of aquatic resources. To attain such objective, ALCOM implements four action programmes:
* methodology development for agricultural extension;
* utilization of small water bodies, in particular small storage reservoirs for drought relief;
* integration of fish farming into smallholder farming systems;
* information service to collect, catalogue and disseminate information related to the above programmes, through computerized databases accessible to organizations and departments of the sub-region.
Training activities
are also an important part of ALCOM's work to ensure future sustainability.
Some of the achievements of the programme of particular interest to this mission are the following:
* the integration of small-scale fish farming into smallholder irrigation systems has been tested and demonstrated in Manica Province (Mozambique), in Morogoro Region (Tanzania) and in Eastern Province (Zambia);
* technical assistance has been provided to SPFS Zambia (Chapter 5, Section 4.1) to select pilot sites to test/demonstrate integrated fish farming-irrigation and to define potential technologies applicable at each selected site (van der Mheen, 1997);
* training for fishery/aquaculture and irrigation staff, as well as for extension staff, has been provided in Zambia, in relation to the diversification (aquaculture) and irrigation components of the SPFS programme (van der Mheen, 1997);
* the methodology for fishery enhancement through stocking of small reservoirs has been developed and guidelines are being prepared;
* the methodologies for studying small-reservoir environment (physico-chemical, biological and socio-economic aspects) have been developed and tested in several SADC countries, in Zimbabwe in particular. Protocols and guidelines for these various studies are available or are under preparation.
* community-based management of small reservoir fisheries has been tested and various useful alternatives defined for reservoirs smaller than 50 ha;
* the legal context at national level for small-scale fisheries has been studied and inputs provided to improve legislations in Malawi and Zambia;
* a southern African computerized database for reservoirs has been established and is regularly updated by integrating databases available in SADC countries and information collected from all available sources;
* technical assistance has been recently provided to South African institutions to structure their database similarly to the ALCOM reservoir database, integrating information available from various institutions, for the National Aquatic Ecosystems Biomonitoring Programme (NAEBP) and the National Aquatic Conservation Committee (NACC);
* a map showing the main watersheds in the SADC region has been computer-produced and should soon become available;
* the production of a CD-ROM featuring the Water Resources of the SADC Region (12 countries) is planned.
A fourth phase of the ALCOM Programme (1998-2001) is under discussion with BADC. It includes four priority action programmes:
* small water bodies: implementation of improved management strategies by stakeholders at pilot projects, integrating fishery, watershed and water management aspects;
* aquatic farming systems: small-scale fish farming and integrated irrigation techniques aimed at incorporating fish production into traditional farming systems while conserving water resources;
* extension and outreach methodologies through both formal and informal communication channels, to transfer technologies identified in the two previous programmes;
* water resources database for SADC countries linking geographic and biological data to bibliographic information to provide a holistic service to regional users; a number of modules will be integrated into a common database:
* small water body data;
* watershed data;
* data on aquatic species distribution (in collaboration with fish taxonomists);
* fisheries (experimental/commercial) time series data;
* physico-chemical time series data;
* socio-economic data on aquatic resources;
* bibliographic references;
* graphical data on water resource use, fish and fisheries.
4.2 Department of Agricultural, Technical and Extension Services
The Department of Agricultural, Technical and Extension Services (AGRITEX) of the Ministry of Lands and Agriculture, is the Government Department which has overall responsibility for most of the extension services (agriculture/fisheries/aquaculture) at national level.
The main objective of AGRITEX is to transform drought prone communal and resettlement areas into productive lands through the introduction of smallholder irrigation, grazing and fishery development (Bitanihirwe, 1997). Services concentrate on small-scale farmers, large-scale commercial farmers being served on request only.
Of particular interest are the Animal Production Branch and the Irrigation Branch:
* the Animal Production Branch includes a specialized Fisheries Unit based in Harare. Staff consists in a Fishery Specialist (fishery development in small reservoirs) and an Integrated Livestock/Aquaculture Specialist. Specialized training and information are provided to extension staff. Feasibility studies and technical assistance have also been carried out for NGOs involved in the use of wetlands for pond farming and in fish farming development downstream from small reservoirs. After the series of drought years, AGRITEX has restocked with fish 830 small reservoirs since 1992, initially with FAO assistance;
* the Irrigation Branch has the mandate for irrigation development. It participates in the identification of potential irrigable land for planned national reservoirs. It assesses the feasibility of agricultural components of these projects. It is directly involved with the planning, design and operation of most smallholder irrigation schemes. It also coordinates and directs donor participation in irrigation development. It provides extension services mostly to irrigation smallholders. In the past, AGRITEX has first concentrated on the rehabilitation of old irrigation schemes and then, on the creation of new schemes in communal and resettlement areas. Now it concentrates more on irrigation research (Section 3.2) and development. It will become greatly involved in the implementation of the future SPFS Programme (Section 4.3).
AGRITEX has polyvalent agricultural extension workers based in the field, to provide technical advice to smallholder farmers. These extensionists are supported by agricultural supervisors and district officers. District and provincial subject specialists provide specialized technical support to the general extension staff. Aquaculture support, in particular, is locally provided by livestock officers and it is fully integrated into the overall agricultural extension service.
4.3 FAO Special Programme for Food Security
The GOZ/FAO-SPFS National Programme for the pilot phase is being now finalized (Bitanihirwe, 1997). The Zimbabwe organization responsible for overall implementation and management will be AGRITEX (Section 4.2). Day-to-day implementation of SPFS activities will be ensured/monitored by a National Management Team led by a National Coordinator (an AGRITEX senior staff) assisted by an agronomist, an agro-economist, a sociologist, an irrigation engineer and a TCDC/FAO international expert in drip irrigation. Specialized consultants (for example, for the aquaculture component) will also be involved, as required.
Pilot sites have already been selected (table below) within four smallholder irrigation schemes (IS) and one communal area (CL), located in AE Regions III, IV and V where the majority of smallholder farmers live and where food security problems are most acute.
Selected pilot sites for SPFS pilot phase
Province
District
Irrigation scheme/
Communal lands
Mashonaland East Mutoko Nyadare 4 IS
Midlands Mvuma Hama-Mavhaire IS
Masvingo Masvingo Longdale B IS
Matabeleland North Lupane Tshongokwe IS
Mashonaland East Harare Domboshwa CL
Production efforts will concentrate on vegetables and some high value cash crops, such as paprika, dry beans, baby corn and citrus, even for export.
Various technological options will be tested and demonstrated, including the following:
* drip irrigation and water lifting devices;
* irrigation scheduling;
* intensification through fertilization, pest control, etc.
* diversification into poultry, new crops, fish production;
* local processing, for example, tomatoes, vegetables, milk;
* aquaculture, for better use of water resources, the recycling of crop wastes, an increased revenue base and for spreading risks.
The SPFS pilot phase will have four components:
* water control
* introduction/demonstration of low-cost irrigation systems (drip irrigation) in four pilot areas;
* demonstration of the treadle pump (one site) for 20 farmers using dambos;
* transfer of scheme management to farmers;
* demonstration of improved water management and agronomic practices to increase food production.
* intensification of crop production in four pilot areas;
* diversification: poultry, high value crops and fish productions. As far as this last aspect is concerned, a recent visit by a consultant to the proposed pilot site (Nyadire 4 irrigation scheme) has revealed that there is no real potential for integrating fish farming into the irrigation scheme. But at the special request of local farmers one small demonstration pond is to be constructed in a waterlogged area (van der Mheen, 1997);
* constraints to food security: identification and proposals for their removal.
4.4 FARMESA Programme
The "Farm-level applied research methods for East and Southern Africa" (FARMESA) Programme is a sub-regional SIDA-financed field project executed by FAO (GCP/RAF/334/SWE) since July 1996 and for a first phase of four years.
Its objective is to search for alternative ways to work with resource-poor farmers, using a participatory approach for sustainable agriculture development. It primarily focuses on:
* development of methodologies and tools that allow field workers, researchers and policy makers to work with smallholder farmers and improve their living standards;
* human and institutional capacity strengthening to more fully assess issues faced by resource-poor farmers;
* information dissemination about participatory farming approaches and experiences (networking, improved communications, publications). Existing information and networking systems within the sub-region to be strengthened.
Participating countries are of two kinds:
* core countries where field site activities are present include Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe;
* associated countries participate only in the information and experience exchange (five other countries within the sub-region).
In each of the core countries, an interdisciplinary National Coordinating Committee (NCC) assisted by a National Facilitator, decides on activities to be prioritized. Proposals are vetted by a Regional Coordinating Committee (RCC) which takes the decision on which field site activities to sponsor. National host institutions are mostly research institutions, except in Zimbabwe where it is AGRITEX (Section 4.2).
A Coordinating Unit is based in Harare. It ensures that the experiences from the different countries are shared. It is staffed by a Project Coordinator, a Methods Specialist and a Communications/Information Specialist.
All crops (including fish) are being considered and diversification is to be promoted by FARMESA. By principle, irrigation has been excluded, the target groups being the poorest dryland smallholder farmers. Two exceptions however have been accepted:
* in Zambia, irrigation, horticulture and fish are being integrated on field sites (Chapter 5, Section 2.3);
* in Zimbabwe, for the privatization of small, government irrigation schemes.
Close collaboration with ALCOM (Section 4.1) is to be developed, primarily concerning development methodology (small water bodies and pond farming), participatory monitoring and community development.
The FARMESA Project Coordinator has expressed his interest in the African Aquaculture Information Network, as well as in the African network for aquaculture-irrigation integration. Concerning this last network, the Zambia National Facilitator, in particular, could become involved in future activities.
4.5 SADC Food, Agriculture and Natural Resources Sector
The SADC Sector for "Food, Agriculture and Natural Resources" (FANR) is located in Harare. It is responsible for the overall coordination of the SADC sub-sectors related to food production and food security. It is an umbrella institution which covers a cluster of related subjects, such as agricultural research, crop production, livestock production, animal disease control, marine fisheries, inland fisheries (including aquaculture), forestry and wildlife. It also coordinates a Regional Food Security Programme, part of the SADC Food Security sub-sector for which Zimbabwe has full responsibility.
It is planned that UNDP/FAO assistance will become available in 1998 to establish a general SADC database linking several modules such as:
* physical data;
* socio-economic data;
* Geographic Information System (GIS) data;
* environmental data;
* data on fisheries development (in collaboration with ALCOM databases), wildlife, etc.
SADC/FANR has expressed interest in the planned African Aquaculture Information Network with which it wishes to become associated. ALCOM Information Service could assist with this process.
5. CONCLUSIONS
The development of the agricultural sector being seriously constrained by periodic dry spells, the government has long recognized the important role of irrigation in food security, income generation, export earnings, employment creation and economic development (Bitanihirwe, 1997). A remarkable development of the irrigation sector, both at large-scale commercial and at smallholder levels has taken place, priority being first given to the rehabilitation of old schemes and to the establishment of new schemes. It is only recently that the development strategy has switched to research and development. Overhead irrigation is well developed and it is being increasingly preferred because of its more efficient use of existing water resources. Micro-irrigation is now also being considered for similar reasons.
In spite of the existence of more than 11 000 reservoirs and three large rivers, fishe-ries development is rather limited. It is a minor sector of the economy. Available human, infrastructure and financial resources are poor.
Although crop, livestock and veterinary research carried out in Zimbabwe has received international recognition, both irrigation and fishery research have not yet reached such good quality level. Research institutions in these fields are weak and their resources are very limited. There is little coordination between the various groups involved and linkages with development are few.
The SPFS Programme has not yet been implemented. In the drafted National Programme for the pilot phase, integrated fish farming has relatively little importance.
The ALCOM regional programme has gained a good experience for the integration of smallholder fish farming with irrigation in Mozambique, Tanzania and Zambia. It has also implemented a vast programme on small-water body fishery development (enhancement, management, monitoring, legislation, socio-economics, computerized database, etc.). Networking is a daily experience both in the Information Service and in the SWB Unit where the SADC Water Resources database has been developed.
It is therefore concluded that at this moment Zimbabwe does not have sufficiently strong specialized institutions to host the future network on aquaculture-irrigation integration.
It is recommended that responsibility for this network in Zimbabwe be limited to ALCOM (if a next implementation phase is approved) through which close collaboration with national institutions/projects could be established during a transition phase.
6. LITERATURE CONSULTED
Bitanihirwe, T.Y.F., 1997. Zimbabwe: Special Programme on Food Security. National Programme Document. Harare, FAO, 44p. (draft)
FAO, 1993. National Action Programme. Zimbabwe. Rome, FAO/NAP-WASAD, 56 p.
FAO, 1997. Aquaculture production statistics 1986-1995. FAO Fish.Circ., (815, Rev.9):195p.
Government of Zimbabwe, 1997. National Action Programme on Irrigation Technology Transfer and Adoption. Rome, FAO/IPTRID, var.pag.
van der Mheen, H. 1997. Integrated small-scale irrigation and aquaculture. Mission report. Harare, FAO, 54 p.
Figure 1. Zimbabwe: administrative provinces and major towns
Zimbabwe.GIF (24399 bytes)
Figure 2. Zimbabwe agro-ecological regions
Zimbabw1.GIF (38822 bytes)
Figure 3. Organigrams of the Ministries responsible for aquaculture and irrigation research/development
Organ.GIF (21936 bytes)
<section>8</section>
CHAPTER 7
AFRICAN NETWORKS INTERESTED IN IRRIGATION
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
7.1 Association Régionale pour l'Irrigation et le Drainage
The Regional Association for Irrigation and Drainage (ARID) was created in July 1996 with the financial support of France and FAO, with the following objectives:
* to promote irrigation development in countries where such technology presents a valuable alternative;
* to stimulate the creation of Irrigation/Drainage National Associations;
* to facilitate the progressive participation of these National Associations to the activities of the International Commission for Irrigation/Drainage;
* to create a network for technical exchanges concerning irrigation/drainage among ARID members;
* to organize seminars and working groups;
* to issue specialized publications;
* to organize the continuous training of ARID members;
* to offer all complementary services according to needs expressed by ARID members;
* to create and maintain a computerized database including professional data on all its members, for the reciprocal benefit of employees and employers.
The actual Provisional Executive Bureau is comprised of :
* President: Moïse Sonou, FAO Senior Regional Irrigation Officer, Accra, Ghana;
* Vice-president: Aliou Koure, Direction Génie rural, Niamey, Niger;
* Public relations: A. Abdou Moulaye, Small Private Irrigation Project, Niger;
* General Secretary: J. Varet, EIER Director, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso;
* Assistant Gen. Secretary: Laurent Compaore, EIER Lecturer, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso
The First Ordinary General Assembly is due to take place in Accra in January 1998, when the membership of the Executive Bureau will be decided.
It is planned to associate ARID members from 23 countries in western and central Africa. A first ARID Newsletter was published in July 1997 at EIER, Ouagadougou (Section 2.1). It is hoped that some financial support will become available in the future from the World Bank.
7.2 Wetland Development and Management
The Wetland Development and Management (WEDEM) network covers the sub-Saharan African countries.
Supported by FAO, it aims at promoting the development and management of inland valley bottoms, dambos, lake banks and other types of wetlands.
7.3 Consortium des Bas-Fonds
The Inland Valley Bottoms Consortium has its headquarters in the West-African Rice Development Association (WARDA) at Bouaké, Côte d'Ivoire, a member of CGIAR.
It provides support to small research projects involving inland valley bottoms in various countries (for example, Ghana, Burkina Faso) where the network has a national correspondent.
<section>9</section>
CHAPTER 8
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS
CONTENTS
LIST OF ACRONYMS
8.1 Aquaculture Research and Development
8.1.1 Aquaculture research
8.1.2 Aquaculture development
8.1.3 Small water bodies and their fishery enhancement
8.1.4 Integration of aquaculture and irrigation
8.2 Irrigation Potential and Development
8.3 Status of the FAO Special Programme for Food Security
8.4 Review of Possible Integrated Systems
8.4.1 Fish farming in irrigated rice schemes
8.4.2 Fish farming in large-scale irrigation networks
8.4.3 Fish farming in smallholder schemes
LIST OF ACRONYMS
AfDB African Development Bank
AGRITEX Department of Agricultural, Technical and Extension Services (Zimbabwe)
ALCOM Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme (FAO)
APO Associate Professional Officer (FAO)
ASIP Agricultural Sector Investment Programme (World Bank)
DNAER Direction nationale de l'aménagement et de l'équipement rural (Mali)
DNPWM Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management (Zimbabwe)
DRSS Department of Research and Special Services (Zimbabwe)
EDF European Development Fund
GOG Government of Ghana
GOZ Government of Zimbabwe
GRZ/DOF Government of the Republic of Zambia, Department of Fisheries
IDR Institut du Développement Rural (Burkina Faso)
IER Institut d'Economie Rurale (Mali)
IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development
INERA Institut National de l'Environnement et de Recherches Agricoles (Burkina Faso)
JICA Japanese International Cooperation Agency
NORAD Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation
ONBAH Office National des Barrages et des Aménagements Hydro-agricoles (Burkina Faso)
PCV Peace Corps Volunteers (USAID)
SAFR Southern and Eastern Africa Sub-regional FAO Office (FAO)
SPFS Special Programme for Food Security (FAO)
SWB Small Water Body
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
USAID United States Agency for International Development
WB World Bank
WRI/ARDEC Water Research Institute, Aquaculture Research/Development Centre (Ghana)
8.1 Aquaculture Research and Development
8.1.1 Aquaculture research
Except in Ghana and in Zambia where aquaculture research infrastructure is being completed with external assistance, it is still rather rudimentary in the other three countries. Staff and financial resources are also very limited in most countries, although in Zambia this situation could improve in the near future as a result of the training component of the UNDP aquaculture project. Even in Ghana, aquaculture research will most probably receive increased attention following its integration within the Water Research Institute and the change in Government policy.
Responsible institution(s) and research stations in each of the visited countries are as follows:
Country
Responsibility^a/
Research station^b/
Remarks
Burkina Faso INERA + IDR (Bazenga) Institutional reorganization at national level
Mali IER + DNAER Molodo World Bank support for reorganization
Ghana WRI/ARDEC Akosombo Infrastructures to be completed in 1998
Zambia GRZ/DOF Mwekera (Chilanga) Infrastructure and support from JICA and UNDP
Zimbabwe DNPWM + DRSS (Henderson) Very limited resources (staff, infrastructure, finances)
a/ See List of Acronyms at beginning of this Chapter
b/ In parentheses: station non or partly functional
8.1.2 Aquaculture development
A summary of the status and constraints of aquaculture development in the countries visited is given in the table below.
In general, government resources (infrastructure, staff, finances) are rather limited, particularly in Burkina Faso, Mali and Zimbabwe. Although some private initiatives exist in Mali (stocking of small reservoirs) and in Ghana, they are particularly developed in Zambia (fish farms and small reservoirs).
Extension services have been reorganized in most countries where the "training and visit" system is applied by polyvalent extensionists (unified system).
In all countries, juvenile fish production cannot cope with the demand. Wild juveniles of tilapias and African catfish are captured from reservoirs, floodplains and rivers by local fishermen mostly to stock small reservoirs.
Annual aquaculture productions are relatively low (80-150 t), except in Ghana and in Zambia, this last country being one of the largest cultured-fish producers in sub-Saharan Africa.
Country
Aquaculture development
Extension services
Juvenile fish production^a/
1995 fish prod. (t)
Burkina Faso Development quasi nil. Very limited resources. Interest only in SWB and somewhat in integrated aquaculture-irrigation (Bazéga)
Wild
80^b/
Mali Renewed interest. Development limited. Very limited resources Some private initiatives Reorganized Unified System (ASIP) Kourouma
Molodo Sélingué
Wild
100^b/
Ghana Renewed interest. Five active GOG farms. Mostly private develop-ment. Lack of trained staff Reorganized Unified System (ASIP) Akosombo
Privates
Wild
(GOG farms)
Zambia Fast rate of develop-ment with important assistance (UNDP, USAID, NORAD, WB...). Commercial farms. Limited GRZ resources Reorganized Unified System (ASIP)
Assistance
* UNDP
* 27 PCV
Mwekera
(Chipata)
(Chilanga)
(GRZ stations)
Privates
Wild
Zimbabwe A few commercial farms. Very limited resources Unified System (AGRITEX) Privates
Wild
(GOZ stations)
a/ In parentheses, non or partly functional stations
b/ Mostly from culture-based fisheries in small reservoirs
8.1.3 Small water bodies and their fishery enhancement
Fisheries enhancement in small water bodies (SWB) through stocking has been and/or is still being carried out in all the visited countries. In this last instance, private initiatives are mostly responsible, either at village level in Mali and Ghana or at farm level in Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The fisheries of small storage reservoirs located upstream from irrigation schemes may be enhanced by the following:
* improved fishing techniques (gears, boats, methods);
* improved management (access control, closed season, fishing pressure, zoning, etc.);
* introduction of new fish species to improve the use of natural productivity (available ecological niche);
* regular and periodic stocking of juvenile fish to replenish existing stocks (culture-based fishery);
* use of artificial aggregation structures such as brushparks.
During the past five years, the ALCOM Programme has tested and developed, in Zambia and Zimbabwe, methodologies for the rapid evaluation of SWB fishery potential and for community-based enhancement/management of SWB fish resources. Guidelines are now being prepared.
The current situation in the countries visited is as follows:
Country
Fisheries enhancement in small water bodies
Burkina Faso More than 2 000 reservoirs, not all permanent
Renewed interest in their fisheries enhancement
Very little resources
New project for 250 reservoirs under discussion (AfDB/ONBAH)
Mali Numerous small reservoirs, floodplain depressions and earth-borrowing pits, generally seasonal
Renewed interest in their fisheries enhancement
Private initiatives especially
Ghana Numerous small reservoirs and dugouts in northern regions
Water Users Associations for their management
Dam rehabilitation projects (IFAD, EU...)
Zambia Mostly in Eastern and Southern Provinces, where experience with community management exists (ALCOM); private initiatives on large commercial farms
Zimbabwe More than 11 000 reservoirs totalling 121 000 ha
Many private initiatives on commercial farms
AGRITEX/ALCOM active in communal lands for local community management promotion
8.1.4 Integration of aquaculture and irrigation
Existing past and present experience in integrating aquaculture and irrigation in the visited countries is summarized in the table below.
All types of integration of aquaculture in large irrigation schemes have been tried in Mali a few years ago and further trials have been proposed more recently (Coche and Müller-Fall, 1993). Good experience is also present in Ghana where an integration policy exists for a long time. Even if several proposals have been made in Burkina Faso (Sourou irrigation scheme) in the past, none has been implemented, except for the enhancement of SWB fisheries (EDF Project 1986-91).
As far as informal irrigation in wetlands is concerned, the Zambia SPFS is actively carrying out the most recent trials on small-scale fish farming integration (van der Mheen, 1997).
Existing experience and proposals in integrating aquaculture and irrigation^b/
Type of integration^a/
Burkina Faso 
EDF Project (1986-91)
Mali 
FAO
ON
FAO
FAO
ON
FAO
FAO
Privates
Ghana 
WRI
GOG
GOG
GOG
Privates
Zambia 
SPFS
Privates
ALCOM/FAO
Privates
Zimbabwe 
Government
Privates
ALCOM/FAO
Notes 
a/
1 Rice-cum-fish
2 Paddy field as pond
3 Irrigation/drainage canals
4 Earth borrowing pits
5 Integrated fish farm/ponds
6 Small irrigation reservoirs (fishery enhancement/management)
b/
(· ) Proposal under consideration
· Past proposal w/o follow-up
FAO Past trials by FAO Project
ON Past trials by Office du Niger
GOG Past trials by Government of Ghana
WRI Past trials by Water Research Institute
For further details on types of integration of aquaculture and irrigation see Section 8.4.
8.2 Irrigation Potential and Development
As shown in the table below, surface irrigation with full or partial water control which offers the best possibilities for integrating aquaculture in particular in large-scale irrigation schemes is mostly developed in Mali. Zambia and Zimbabwe have each more than 20000ha available, much more than Burkina Faso and especially Ghana with only about 6000ha. In this last country, the actually irrigated area is only 61 percent of the equipped area, although great efforts are now made to rehabilitate old schemes.
Overhead irrigation
by sprinklers is particularly well developed in Zimbabwe and even in Zambia. Actual tendency is to prefer this irrigation system which uses available water resources much more efficiently. For the same reason, micro-irrigation (drip) is being increasingly used in southern Africa.
Wetlands and/or inland bottom valleys are particularly extended in Zambia where these dambos are traditionally irrigated by hand and where the SPFS is actually concentrating its efforts. It has been shown that several possibilities exist to integrate small-scale fish farming in such areas. Burkina Faso and Zimbabwe (as well as Ghana probably) have also relatively extended wetlands used by smallholders. In Mali, such areas are limited to the south western part of the country.
Flood-dependent irrigation is practised in Mali in the Niger River valley over a large area. Results have been disappointing in recent years following the reduced peak flood level. Little potential for integrating aquaculture exists in such irrigation schemes.
Irrigation potential is huge in Ghana and nearly four times greater than the potential in Mali and Zambia, the next countries with good potential. Smallest potential is found in Burkina Faso.
Irrigation in the visited countries (FAO/AGLW, 1995)
Type of irrigation
Francophone (in ha)
Anglophone (in ha)
BKF
MLI
GHA
ZAM
ZIM
1. Full/partial water control, equipped
* Surface irrigation
* Sprinkler irrigation
* Micro-irrigation
* Total
* Actually irrigated (percent)
2. Wetlands/Inland Bottom Valleys
* Equipped
* Others cultivated
3. Flood recession cropping
4. Total water-managed
Potential for irrigation
Full/partial water control, equipped
* Large-scale irrigation schemes (>100 ha)
* Small-scale irrigation schemes (<100 ha)
8.3 Status of the FAO Special Programme for Food Security
As of November 1997, the implementation of the pilot phase of the FAO Special Programme for Food Security had reached the following stage:
Zambia Well ahead; aquaculture component planned by consultant; full time FAO aquaculture specialist on site.
Burkina Faso Trials initiated in inland valley bottoms; aquaculture under consideration.
Mali Trials not yet initiated; aquaculture involvement still to be decided.
Zimbabwe National Programme being finalized.
Ghana Initial programmation planned for December 1997
Integration of aquaculture into the SPFS irrigation component is well ahead in Zambia where it has been strongly supported by a full time FAO/APO aquaculturist, with technical assistance from a SAFR consultant and ALCOM.
In the other countries, aquaculture is under consideration, but the SPFS has still to get fully underway.
8.4 Review of Possible Integrated Systems
The integration of aquaculture and irrigation may be implemented in various ways, according to the farming system locally used and the type of irrigation scheme present. In addition, such integration, although much less direct, can also take place in small irrigation storage reservoirs (SWB) through the enhancement of its fishery.
Integrated systems which have been tried in the past in Africa, generally on a limited scale, are briefly mentioned in the next sections for information.
8.4.1 Fish farming in irrigated rice schemes
In large-scale schemes, water is usually available during the rice production cycle only, and then sometimes not even on a continuous basis. When crop diversification is promoted, as for example in Mali (Office du Niger and Sélingue rice schemes) certain areas are specifically designed for horticultural production. Irrigation water is then available throughout the year which allows the integration of aquaculture easily.
The following integrated systems have been tried:
* ponds are built upstream of the irrigated plots;
* irrigated plots are used as fish ponds on a rotational basis, either between two successive crop cycles or in alternance at longer intervals to improve soil fertility;
* a few irrigated plots are transformed into permanent ponds;
* rice and fish are farmed together after adapting the paddy field to accommodate fish.
8.4.2 Fish farming in large-scale irrigation networks
Water originates from a stream diversion, a large reservoir or a pumping station. It is fed to the irrigated plots through a network of canals (primary, secondary, tertiary...). In such cases, integration of aquaculture can be realized either as described above for the particular case of irrigated paddy fields or as follows:
* in ponds used as intermediate water storage structures located between the main water intake and the irrigated plots;
* in ponds located in the irrigated plots, preferably upstream from the plots used for crop production, generally vegetables;
* in ponds located next to a surelevated irrigation canal permanently underwater (generally primary or secondary canals), usually outside the crop production areas;
* in fenced areas (pens) built in an irrigation canal;
* in cages floating in an irrigation canal;
* in ponds created by enlarging/deepening natural draining channels, streambeds or terrain depressions;
* in ponds created from clay-borrowing pits (bricks/banco) next to villages;
* in earth borrowing pits (road/dykes) preferably designed at the initial construction stage;
* in irrigation canals as a culture-based fishery;
* in the reservoir, either as culture-based fisheries or in cages.
8.4.3 Fish farming in smallholder schemes
Several possibilities for small-scale fish farming integration exist which have been well described by H. van der Mheen (1996, 1997) based on his recent surveys in Zambia, Tanzania and Zimbabwe. The following possibilities have been identified:
* improved use of high water discharge from a reservoir (gate valve or siphon), a spring or a diversion canal through intermediate storage ponds built along the main irrigation canal;
* improved use of irregular water supply shared by several farmers on a rotational basis: intermediate storage ponds for individuals or small groups of farmers;
* improved use of a constant water flow from a spring not continuously used for irrigation (for example, at night): intermediate night storage reservoirs along the irrigation canals;
* ponds built in waterlogged areas, such as in the lower areas of inland valley bottoms (wetlands/dambos) where a high water table is present throughout the year:
* in flat areas, surelevated wide banks may be used for crop farming;
* in sloped areas, cut-and-fill ponds can be designed to be drained by gravity.
ponds as enlarged irrigation shallow wells with sloping sides;
ponds not directly integrated into the irrigation water system, water-fed directly and independently from an irrigation canal.
<title>Consultant Facilitator. Supporting aquaculture development in Africa: Research Network on Integration </title>
CHAPTER 9
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE AFRICAN RESEARCH NETWORK FOR THE INTEGRATION OF AQUACULTURE AND IRRIGATION
CONTENTS
LIST OF ACRONYMS
9.1 Identification of National Institutions to Become Involved in the African Research Network for the Integration of Aquaculture and Irrigation - Phase1
9.2 Coordination with Existing African Networks
9.3 Future Actions to be Taken for the Establishment of the New Network
9.3.1 Official invitation
9.3.2 Preparation of a national review/synthesis
9.3.3 Seminar
9.4 Potential Research Subjects for the New Network
9.4.1 General research subjects
9.4.2 Undrainable fish farming structures
9.4.3 Ponds with a high to very high water exchange
9.4.4 Ponds in waterlogged areas
9.4.5 Ponds in terrain depressions or borrowing pits
9.4.6 Rice-cum-fish culture
9.4.7 Fish pen culture in irrigation canals
9.4.8 Fish cage culture in irrigation canals
9.4.9 Culture-based fishery in irrigation canals
9.4.10 Small reservoir fishery
LIST OF ACRONYMS
AGRITEX Department of Agricultural, Technical and Extension Services (Zimbabwe)
ALCOM Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme (Zimbabwe)
APCAM Assemblée permanente des Chambers d'Agriculture du Mali/Permanent Assembly for the Agricultural Chambers of Mali
ARID Association Régionale pour l'Irrigation et le Drainage/Regional Association for Irrigation and Drainage
DNAER Direction nationale de l'aménagement et de l'équipement rural (Mali)
DNAMR Direction nationale de l'appui au monde rural (Mali)
DNPWM Department of National Parks and Wildlife Management (Zimbabwe)
DRSS Department of Research and Specialist Services (Zimbabwe)
DOF Department of Fisheries
FANR Food, Agriculture and Natural Resources Sector (SADC Regional Food Security Programme)
FARMESA Farm-level Applied Research Methods for East and Southern Africa Programme
IER Institut d'Economie Rurale (Mali)
MAFF Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries (Zambia)
SADC Southern African Development Community
SPFS Special Programme for Food Security (FAO)
SWB Small Water Body
9.1 Identification of National Institutions to Become Involved in the African Research Network for the Integration of Aquaculture and Irrigation - Phase 1
During the mission national institutions apt to become initially members of the new research network have been identified in each of the countries visited, except in Zimbabwe where a regional development programme (hopefully to be institutionalized within SADC in the medium term) has been proposed.
The recommended institutions are the following:
Country/town
Selected institutions
Remarks
Burkina Faso
Bobo-Dioulasso
Institut de Développement Rural (IDR) University structure responsible for training/research in agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Mali
Bamako
Institut d'Economie Rurale with support from APCAM/DNAER/DNAMR Development structures to be closely associated with IER responsible for agricultural research, including forestry and fisheries
Ghana
Accra
Water Research Institute (WRI) Water and water-resources related research are integrated. Aquaculture research at Aquaculture Research and Development Centre, Akosombo
Zambia
Chilanga/Lusaka
Mount Makulu Regional Research Centre with support from MAFF Dept. of Fisheries (research)
* part of National Agric. Res. Network
* located next to DOF headquarters
* in same Ministry as DOF
* hosts SPFS and FARMESA Progr.
Zimbabwe
Harare
ALCOM Programme with support from AGRITEX (irrigation), DNPWM and DRSS
* FAO executed project
* develops SADC water resources database
* good experience with networking in Information Service and SWB Unit
* regional authority on small-scale aquaculture and SWB enhancement
9.2 Coordination with Existing African Networks
As mentioned earlier, some networks already exist or are being initiated in Africa, specialized in irrigation, regional development or fisheries.
The new research network for aquaculture integration into irrigation schemes should become closely associated with these networks and in particular with the:
* ARID (irrigation/drainage) network (Chapter 7, Section 7.1);
* FARMESA network (Chapter 6, Section 4.4);
* SADC/FANR network (Chapter 6, Section 4.5);
* ALCOM/SWB network (Chapter 6, Section 4.1);
* FAO aquatic farming systems information network to be soon initiated (Coche and Collins, 1997).
Future closer collaboration with these networks might be useful for the organization of seminars/workshops, for group training and for dissemination of information through existing channels such as newsletters and publications.
9.3 Future Actions to be Taken for the Establishment of the New Network
From discussions during the mission with people directly interested in participating in the new network, it appears that the following strategy could be adopted for the establishment of this network:
9.3.1 Official invitation
An official invitation should be addressed by FAO to the Director of the selected institutions to participate in the Seminar indicated below.
9.3.2 Preparation of a national review/synthesis
Author's contracts should be issued (max. six weeks WAE within a period of three months) in 1998 for the preparation of national reviews/syntheses according to a standard framework by each of the institutions having expressed an interest to participate in the Seminar, with or without support from other institutions. Such synthesis should review/analyse/comment on past and present experiences and results with aquaculture, irrigation (research/development) and their integration, considering technological, sociological and economic aspects as well as existing constraints for research and development.
9.3.3 Seminar
Seminar to be organized either in Ghana, Accra (FAO Regional Office) or in Zimbabwe (FAO Sub-regional Office and networking experience in ALCOM), with the objectives of:
* reviewing the development/research constraints existing in the participating countries in particular following the outline agreed for the national reviews, and on such basis:
* to discuss the future organization responsibilities and functioning of the new network, in particular from the point of view of using two languages, English and French;
* to agree on applied research priorities and a research programme for the new network to support the development of the integration of aquaculture and irrigation;
* to recommend how such research could be carried out in the field in each of the involved countries, with particular attention to the human and financial resources to be mobilized to this effect;
* to recommend how best close links could be established with other existing African networks of interest.
Participants in this seminar should include representatives from the countries involved, directly involved in research and/or development of irrigation, aquaculture and SWB fisheries. Representatives of other existing networks should also be invited to attend to share their past experiences with networking.
9.4 Potential Research Subjects for the New Network
9.4.1 General research subjects
* sociology: evaluation of adoption constraints and potential benefits of integration;
* economics: evaluation of potential benefits of integration;
* availability of juvenile fish, either captured from the wild or locally produced (technologies for capture/production/transport; seasonality; economics);
* recycling of locally available wastes/by-products (technologies for composting/processing/ utilization as pond fertilizer or fish feed);
* control of fish thefts, especially in irrigated plots and ponds;
* protection against predation (birds, etc.);
* protection of fish farming structures against damages by livestock and soil erosion;
* participatory design of integrated system;
* appropriate extension methodology;
* appropriate pond management options, adapted to integrated fish farming and irrigation (greater water level fluctuations, fish reproduction, production level, inputs application, physico-chemical water quality, etc.);
* effects of fish farming on vectors of waterborne diseases (especially snails/schistosomiasis and mosquito larvae/malaria).
9.4.2 Undrainable fish farming structures
(Table below)
* fish harvesting techniques;
* water lifting devices for draining ponds;
* fish population dynamics.
9.4.3 Ponds with a high to very high water exchange
(Table below)
* water physico-chemical characteristics;
* intensification of organic fertilization;
* fish feeds and feeding aspects;
* appropriate fish species, feeding on macrophytes, bottom fauna and/or detritus rather than plankton.
Drainage and water exchange characteristics of fish farming structures
Fish farming structure
Gravity drainage
Water exchange rate
(refer to Section 8.4)
Yes
Partly
No
Nil Low
High
Very high
1. Paddy field (with rice or not)
2. Pond
* upstream from irrig. plots
* former irrigated plot
* in irrigated plot
* next to surelevated canal
* in terrain depression
* in borrowing pit
* as intermed. water storage
* in waterlogged area
* as enlarged well
* directly fed from irrig. canal
3. Pens (fenced canal areas)
4. Cages (floating/removable)
5. Irrigation canal
6. Small irrigation reservoir
Rem
.: (·) possibility exists but should be avoided if possible;
use of pumping necessary.
9.4.4 Ponds in waterlogged areas
* water physico-chemical characteristics;
* seasonal water table fluctuations.
9.4.5 Ponds in terrain depressions or borrowing pits
* design of water control structures;
* design of pond;
* water physico-chemical characteristics.
9.4.6 Rice-cum-fish culture
* minimum water depth tolerated by farmed fish;
* biological control of weeds by farmed fish;
* potential of Azolla pinata (small floating fern) to control weeds, to fix atmospheric nitrogen in soil and to be used as fish food; effect on water dissolved oxygen content);
* technology for pesticide application to rice plants with limited effect on fish;
* effects of used pesticides on fish health and fish quality for human consumption;
* rice plot design for fish farming (trenches/sump);
* harvesting techniques;
* effects of fish farming on rice health and production, including Integrated Pest Management (IPM) aspects.
9.4.7 Fish pen culture in irrigation canals
* end-barriers design to guarantee minimum required flow at all times;
* construction materials for screens;
* legal implications (potential conflicts due to reduced water flow);
* social implications;
* fish harvesting technology;
* effect of fish pen on downstream water quality;
* effect of fish pen on hydraulic characteristics of canal (e.g., siltation and water discharge capacity);
* effect of fish pen on aquatic weeds.
Further discussion on this subject is included in Redding and Midlen, 1991.
9.4.8 Fish cage culture in irrigation canals
* design of floating fish cages;
* construction materials (rigid plastic or synthetic netting);
* legal implications (downstream water users);
* social implications;
* effect of fish cages on downstream water quality;
* effect of fish cages on hydraulic characteristics of canal (e.g., siltation and water discharge capacity).
Further discussion on this subject is included in Redding and Midlen, 1991
9.4.9 Culture-based fishery in irrigation canals
* harvesting techniques;
* fish population dynamics;
* fish migrations in irrigation canals;
* fishery enhancement techniques;
* supplementary feeding potential;
* controlled ranching with imprinted fish;
* legal implications (ownership of fish, etc.)
* effect on weeds.
Further discussion on this subject is included in Redding and Midlen, 1991
9.4.10 Small reservoir fishery
* methodology to estimate potential sustainable yield based on key indicators which are readily measurable (adapted ALCOM methodology);
* community-based management methods (adapted ALCOM guidelines);
* methods for fishery enhancement through introduction of new species, periodic stocking of existing species, fertilization and/or feeding;
* selective harvesting techniques;
* culture-based fish breeding structures and methods for SWB.
<title>Consultant Facilitator. Supporting aquaculture development in Africa: Research Network on Integration </title>
<section>1</section>
GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY
Coche, A.G. (ed./rev.), 1994. Aquaculture development and research in sub-Saharan Africa. National reviews/Développement et recherche aquacoles en Afrique subsaharienne. Revues nationales. CIFA Tech.Pap./Doc.tech.CPCA, (23 Suppl.):397p.
Coche, A.G. and J. Collins, 1997. Supporting aquaculture development in Africa: aquatic farming systems information network. A report prepared for the Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service of the FAO Fisheries Department. CIFA Occ.Pap., (22):72p.
Coche, A.G., and A. Müller-Fall, 1993. Propositions de développement piscicole en zone Office Riz Ségou et en zone Office du Niger-Macina. Ségou, Mali, Doc. Travail, Progr. Réhabilitation des grands aménagements hydro-agricoles de l'Office du Niger et de l'Office Riz Ségou, Carl Bro Intern./Agristudio, Projet FED 6100.32.37.027, 62p. + 8 ann.
Coche, A.G., B.A. Haight and M.M.J. Vincke, 1994. Aquaculture development and research in sub-Saharan Africa. Synthesis of national reviews and indicative action plan for research. CIFA Tech.Pap., (23):151p.
FAO, 1995. The Special Programme for Food Security. Rome, FAO, SPFS/DOC/12, 13p.
FAO/AGLW, 1995a. Irrigation in Africa in figures/L'irrigation en Afrique en chiffres. Water Reports/Rapports sur l'eau, (7):336p.
FAO/AGLW, 1995b. Water resources of African countries: a review. Rome, FAO, 35p.
FAO/FIDI, 1997. Aquaculture production statistics 1986-1995. FAO Fish.Circ., (815, Rev.9):195p.
Redding, T.A. and A.B. Midlen, 1991. Fish production in irrigation canals. A review. FAO Fish.Tech.Pap., (317):111p.
van der Mheen, H., 1996. Mission report. Feasibility study for integrating aquaculture and irrigation at the pilot sites of the Special Programme for Food Security in Zambia. Harare, FAO/ALCOM, 24p.
van der Mheen, H., 1997. Integrated small-scale irrigation and aquaculture. Mission report. Harare, FAO, 54p.
<section>2</section>
ANNEX
SCHEDULE OF MISSION ACTIVITIES
(Lists of persons met are provided in each of Chapters 2 to 6)
13-20 October 1997 Briefing in FAO Headquarters on countries to be visited (AGLW, AGAP, TCI, FIRI)
21 October Travel Rome-Accra, Ghana
22 October
* RAFR and FAOR offices
* Coordinator of TCP/GHA/6613 "Development of Support Structure for Irrigated Agriculture"
* Water Research Institute: briefing of Acting Director and discussion with Senior Scientific Officer (Aquaculture Research/Development Centre, Akosombo)
* Department of Fisheries: briefing/discussion with Director and Deputy Director
23 October
* RAFR, Water Resources Development and Management
* RAFR, Fisheries
* Irrigation Development Authority: briefing/discussion with Director, Dept. Project Development
* Irrigation Company for the Upper Regions
* Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research: briefing/discussion with Head, Social Division
24 October RAFR, Water Resources Development/Management: briefing/discussion with Senior Regional Officer
25 October Report writing
27 October
* Agricultural Sector Investment Project: briefing/discussion with Technical Head
* RAFR and FAOR debriefing
* Travel Accra - Abidjan (transit)
28 October Travel Abidjan - Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso
29 October
* FAOR briefing (Programme)
* Ecole Inter-Etats d'Ingénieurs de l'Equipement Rural
* Institut du Développement Rural (Université)
* Department of Fisheries: briefing and discussion with Director and staff
30 October
* FAOR briefing (Resident Representative)
* Special Programme for Food Security
* Centre Régional pour l'Eau Potable et l'Assainisement à Faible Coût
31 October
* Institut National de l'Environnement et de Recherches Agricoles
* Maîtrise d'Ouvrage de Bagre
* Ecole Inter-Etats des Techniciens Supérieurs de l'Hydraulique et de l'Equipement Rural
1-2 November Report writing
3 November
* Autorité de Mise en Valeur de la Vallée du Sourou
* Office National des Barrages et des Aménagements Hydro-agricoles
* Institut du Développement Rural-Pêche/Pisciculture
* Maîtrise d'Ouvrage de Bagre-Pêche/Pisciculture
4 November FAOR office: debriefing
Travel Ouagadougou-Bamako, Mali
5 November
* FAOR office: briefing and programme
* Cellule de Planification et de Statistique
* Special Programme for Food Security
* Direction Nationale de l'Aménagement et de l'Equipement Rural (DNAER technicians)
6 November
* Institut d'Economie Rurale
* DNAER, Director General
* Direction Nationale de l'Appui au Monde Rural
7 November
* Institut de formation et de recherche appliquée
* Projet de réhabilitation du périmètre hydro-agricole de Baguineda
8-9 November Report writing
10 November FAOR office/Air Afrique and report writing
11 November
* Assemblée permanente des Chambres d'Agriculture du Mali
* FAOR debriefing
12 November Travel Bamako-Johannesburg (transit)
13 November
* Travel Johannesburg-Lusaka (Zambia)
* FAOR office: briefing and programme
* Ministry of Agriculture/Food/Fisheries, Irrigation Branch
* International Development Enterprises
14 November
* University of Zambia, School of Agricultural Sciences
* Institute of Economic and Social Research
* Zambia National Farmers'Union
* Conservation Farming Unit
* Zambia Association for Research and Development
* Mount Makulu Agricultural Research Station
* Special Programme for Food Security: coordinator
15-16 November Report writing
17 November
* UNDP
* Department of Fisheries: assistant director (aquaculture)
* Travel Lusaka-Harare (Zimbabwe)
18 November
* FAO/SAFR office (Irrigation/Fisheries/Programme)
* FARMESA Programme
* ALCOM Programme
19 November
* Agricultural Research Centre/Agronomy Institute
* Belgian Agency for Development Cooperation
* University of Zimbabwe, Dept. Biological Sciences
* ALCOM Programme
20 November
* Dept. Agricultural, Technical and Extension Services
* Animal Production Branch (Fisheries/Aquaculture)
* Irrigation Branch
* Dept. National Parks and Wildlife Management
* Dept. Research and Specialist Services
* ALCOM Small-water bodies unit
21 November
* Special Programme for Food Security
* SADC Food, Agriculture and Natural Resources Sector
* ALCOM Programme: debriefing
22-27 November
* Report writing on Zimbabwe
* Finalization of first draft (including conclusions and recommendations)
28-29 November Travel Harare-Johannesburg-Rome
