<title>Labor-intensive harvesting of tree plantations in the southern Philippines </title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
This publication is one in a series initiated by FAO to promote forest harvesting systems, techniques, and methods that are environmentally, socially, and economically sound. The aim is to encourage systems that are appropriate for local conditions, make the best use of local technologies, and emphasize harmony between people and their environment.
Many foresters and development officials share common misconceptions that simple, labor-intensive timber harvesting and wood transport systems are outdated, inefficient, and costly. This is far from true. Recent experience has demonstrated that traditional indigenous or modified systems of timber harvesting and transport are often more efficient and less environmentally destructive than so-called "modern" systems. This is particularly true in areas where there is excess labor capacity and where labor costs are low. Moreover, traditional systems can often be modified or improved to further reduce waste and improve efficiency and performance.
This publication presents the experiences of simple, labor-intensive harvesting of timber from tree plantations in the southern Philippines. The case study clearly illustrates the potential for supplying large volumes of industrial wood to modern processing mills using simple tools and techniques in a cost-efficient and environmentally sound manner. In the process, jobs are provided for thousands of people, helping to satisfy social objectives in areas of few alternative livelihood opportunities.
It is hoped that, by increasing awareness of the experiences in the southern Philippines, foresters and development officials in other areas will recognize the potential of simple, labor-intensive systems as viable options for timber harvesting and job creation.
FAO is grateful to Mike Jurvlius for compiling this case study, based on his many years of work in the southern Philippines.
Soetatwo Hadiwigeno
Assistant Director-General and
Regional Representative for
Asia and the Pacific
<section>2</section>
List of abbreviations
ADB
Asian Development Bank
BFD
Bureau of Forest Development
DBP
Development Bank of the Philippines
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization
FMB
Forest Management Bureau
FORI
Forest Research Institute
FTP
Forestry Training Programme
ILO
International Labour Organisation
LGU
Local government unit
MIRDC
Metal Industries and Research Development Center
NGO
Non-governmental Organization
NPA
New Peoples Army
PICOP
Paper Industries Corporation of the Philippines
PO
People's organization
TLA
Timber License Agreement
UNIDO
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
UPBL
University of the Philippines at Los Baños
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
WEP
World Employment Programme
WFP
World Food Programme
<section>3</section>
Introduction
Before the Second World War, the Philippines had more than 20 million hectares (ha) of dipterocarp forests, commercially known as "Philippine mahogany." During and shortly after the war, the forests were heavily exploited and agriculture expanded significantly, reducing the forest to only 12 million ha.
The man considered to be the "Father of Philippine Forestry," Mr. Florencio Tamesis, received his Masters of Forestry in the United States of America in 1923. After his return to the Philippines, he developed forest management systems for dipterocarp forests. In the late 1940s, he began to worry about the future of the indigenous tropical forests in the Philippines. Large North American forestry enterprises were already heavily engaged in the exploitation of the rich dipterocarp forests in the Philippines. By this time, the traditional technologies, that used hand tools for felling and crosscutting, and water buffaloes (carabaos) to transport logs, were gradually being replaced by chainsaws and cable yarding systems.
After seeing those wasteful new technologies in operation, Tamesis seriously began to consider the establishment of large-scale tree plantations. He selected a site for fast-growing trees on the eastern side of the southern island of Mindanao. The plantation site lay along the Agusan River, which had already become one of the main centers for wood processing and export in the Philippines.
The very first plantations had been established in the Philippines at the turn of the century, when teak (Tectona grandis) and mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla) were planted in Luzon and the Visayas. Trials using potted seedlings were carried out as early as 1928. Unfortunately, all data and research results from these early plantations were destroyed during the Second World War. Thus, when the new plantation era started in the mid-1950s, no data on the previous plantation work in the country were available. The same applied to genetic data and data on seed sources. Therefore, the whole process of plantation establishment had to be based on new biological research.
The first of these new trial tree plantations was established in a place called Tuñgao, on patches of former "kaingin," or shifting cultivation areas, which had previously been logged over. The viability of the new plantation scheme was based on five years of research work that started in 1954. By 1961, large-scale plantation establishment was initiated, and by 1968 more than 5,000 ha containing 85 species had been established.
One of the main incentives for starting the plantation work in eastern Mindanao was the almost total absence of typhoons. While most of the Philippines is affected by an average of 12-16 typhoons per year, the frequency of strong typhoons in eastern Mindanao is only about once every 40 years. This was important because the fast-growing tree species that were chosen for planting were not very storm resistant, whereas the indigenous species generally tolerate typhoons quite well (as evidenced during the 1981 typhoon when the east coast of Mindanao was hit by 180 km/h gale-force winds).
In the early 1960s, the experiments with tree plantations spread from Agusan del Norte to Agusan del Sur, through the activities of a large foreign company. Soon after, the trials spread further south to Surigao del Sur, and finally to the Bislig Bay area, where a large integrated industrial wood complex, the Paper Industries Corporation of the Philippines (PICOP), was operating.
The wood industries in the Bislig Bay area had, in the meantime, expanded into pulp and paper manufacturing. PICOP was the first company in the world to use mixed tropical hardwoods as raw material in making paper. Nonetheless, in anticipation of raw material scarcity from natural forests, PICOP also started a plantation program in its forest concession area.
Despite widespread development of forest plantations in the Philippines in the 1960s, little thought was given to the harvesting of these plantations. The tree-growing schemes were primarily pursued because of government requirements to reforest areas that had been severely damaged in the process of logging the dipterocarp forest rather than because of any conscious strategy for future utilization of plantation-grown wood. Gradually, however, as the extent of the plantations increased, the future potential could clearly be seen.
<section>4</section>
Tree farming and large-scale plantations
The Philippines has the dubious distinction of being one of the first tropical countries to have its forest area severely reduced in large part by modern logging technologies and agricultural expansion. The mechanization of the logging industry closely mirrored North American operations, with heavy, powerful and expensive logging equipment. Another system called the "Bataan," or winch-lorry system, was based on surplus US-military trucks left in the Philippines after the Second World War. The use of hand tools and water buffaloes declined dramatically after 1945.
Philippine exports of tropical hardwoods grew at an incredible rate after the Second World War. This resulted in logging operations steadily expanding into less accessible areas. To reach such areas, heavier and more powerful equipment was employed, largely at the expense of environmental concerns.
The combined effects of opening up forest areas with powerful equipment, over-harvesting of timber, and aggressive agricultural expansion subsequently reduced the country's forests to 10 million ha, and then gradually to 8 million ha. Some foresighted foresters, including some from the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Food Programme (WFP), the World Employment Programme (WEP), the International Labour Organization (ILO), and the World Bank, who visited the Philippines in the mid-1960s, were already warning about the unsustainability of Philippine forestry. With the realization that the Philippine forests were not inexhaustible, the government slowly started to reduce the number of forest concessions - Timber License Agreements (TLAs) - in the country.
It is likely that due to this outside pressure, what is one of the world's first and most efficient local community programs in forestry was launched. The program came into being in 1967, and was called simply "tree farming." The idea was to encourage local people to plant a portion of their farms with trees, in addition to their traditional agri-livestock activities, in order to supplement their livelihood.
The idea of "private" tree farming was well received, since it was generally recognized that government forests could not be adequately protected even by well-armed guards. It was hoped that private forest ownership would solve the problem of denudation. The only remaining problem was how to secure the livelihood of the people before trees could be harvested. In those early days, no private farmers had funds available for the very uncertain tree-growing business, which required waiting eight years for the final harvest and income.
By 1972, the World Bank was convinced of the feasibility of the tree farming scheme and allocated US$2 million to support the program. The loan scheme set up to finance the farmers' tree-growing activities was called a "Tree Plantation Lease Agreement," and was carried out under the Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP). The WFP and the WEP also assisted the Philippines in its efforts to curb future food shortages and unemployment through this tree farming scheme.
To better assess the actual potential of this tree farming scheme, ILO sent a team of experts under the WEP to look into the employment potential in Philippine forestry. Already, one could foresee that the primary employment opportunities in forestry were related to plantation forestry, as the semi-mechanized dipterocarp-based forestry was showing signs of decline. Thus, these activities no longer had the potential of employing additional people. The WEP study tried to develop ways and means of replacing machines in plantation operations with manual harvesting systems.
Meanwhile, some of the large TLA holders in the southern Philippines had been continuously expanding their plantation areas. They realized that the exploitation of the natural forests was being carried out on "borrowed time." Therefore, the plantations expanded very fast and large amounts of plantation-grown wood were further processed by the industry. By 1980, sawn timber and fiberboard were produced from three-year old thinnings of plantation-grown wood.
Private landowners, who became known as tree farmers, also intensified their tree growing activities. The first few pilot tree farmers who had started their operations in the early 1970s had already harvested one rotation of Paraserianthes falcataria. They were now visibly spending their new "fortunes" in the local communities, thus encouraging many more farmers to become involved in tree farming.
Because of the strong support from the international community for the pilot tree farmers, many more farmers became interested in growing trees. The number of farmers grew from an initial 20 families in 1976 to more than 300 families in 1981. The plantation area increased from 20 ha to more than 4,000 ha.
Unfortunately, an unexpected typhoon hit the east coast of Mindanao in 1981. No one was prepared for the onslaught which caused many casualties. The plantation forests of PICOP and surrounding farmers were essentially wiped out, with 1.5 million m^3 of wood on the ground. In addition, news spread that PICOP would not buy any windthrown trees less than five years of age. Many tree farmers lost their entire fortune. Under very hazardous working conditions, many lives were lost while trying to harvest what was left of the plantations within three months after the typhoon, before the wood started to decay, became fungi-infected, or was rendered useless through insect attacks.
The wood industry busily engaged in trying to salvage as much wood as possible. North American-made equipment, suitable for tree-length harvesting, was sent, including giant 50-ton portable tower yarders (mobile spars), 120-ton Kenworth trucks and large truck-mounted grapple loaders. However, the plantation trees were soon found to be far too brittle to be handled by the mechanized equipment designed to handle single, large-diameter logs. Landings, and indeed entire forests, were full of small pieces of wood measuring from 30 to 300 cm in size. The logs at the landings were generally damaged and only good for pulp.
The small-scale tree farms were hardly any better off. Outside contractors moved in with their own chainsaw crews and winch-lorries to drag the logs to the roadside. Their technology was very functional, but costly to operate. After paying off the contractors, most tree farmers were left with very little or no profit from the sale of their wood.
Basically, only the farmers who had harvested and sold their crops prior to the typhoon managed to get through this ordeal successfully. Very few farmers were able to continue their operations, and these more by chance, because they went on harvesting their farms with only axes, machetes and water buffaloes. In the end, only a small number of farmers continued planting trees, and the entire area went into large-scale coffee growing. From a financial point of view, the first large-scale tree farming initiative was a disaster.
The years between 1982-1986 were the last years of the Marcos administration, and much of the national budget was spent on political events. With negative economic growth for many years, the economy of the country was in ruins, and likewise most of the forestry businesses. By 1987, however, a slow recovery started to take place under the Aquino administration. Along with the recovery, a new optimism slowly started to spread, and new tree farms were established.
Today, tree farming is an accepted alternative to traditional agriculture in the provinces of Agusan del Norte, Agusan del Sur, Davao del Norte, Surigao del Norte, Surigao del Sur, Misamis Occidental, and Cotabato. In these provinces there are now more than 100,000 ha of forest plantations. For the most part, it is fair to say that this area is both the last bastion and the last frontier of forestry in the Philippines.
Plantations are financially attractive, produce much needed wood for industry, and create a considerable number of jobs (Table 1). If plantation growth averages 25 m^3 of wood per year, then 100,000 ha produce 2.5 million m^3 per year. The value of this plantation-grown wood ranges from US$10-40 per m^3. Assuming that the average price is US$20 per m^3, a revenue of US$50 million per year is generated. If the wood is further processed for export, then the benefits are much greater.
Table 1. Labor Inputs for Plantation Establishment and Management
Activity
Labor input in person-days/ha^1
Clearing and land preparation
Raising and transporting seedlings
Planting
Weeding and maintenance
Harvesting (250 m^3)
Manual loading
Total^2
1 A person-day has approximately eight hours
^2 Wood loaded on to a truck
11-year old Paraserianthes falcataria before the 1981 typhoon
The same forest after the typhoon
Treefarm with coffee and Acacia mangium
<section>5</section>
Evolution of harvesting methods
Traditionally, timber harvesting operations in the Philippines were based on a system of manual felling and bucking, with the use of water buffalo or gravity for land transport, and water transport for longer distances. These practices were mostly based on shortwood methods, where trees were cut into lengths which could then be handled by man or animal power. Such practices were used all over Southeast Asia for centuries. Tree felling was mostly done with axes, machetes, or jungle knifes. These techniques were normally environmentally sound, and caused only minor damage to residual stands and soils and minimal disturbance of biodiversity.
In the 1920s, two-man raker tooth saws replaced axes in felling and crosscutting operations. In the early 1960s, crosscut saws were in turn replaced by power chainsaws, and a new era in safety and ergonomics began. The problems of noise pollution and vibration became a concern.
Cable harvesting systems were originally introduced to the Philippines from North America. Under these systems, trees are delimbed and topped, after which the stem is dragged to the road by cable. Normally tree-length logs are transported, but in the case of very large trees, the stem is crosscut into two or more logs, depending of the diameter of the trunk.
A main objective of cable systems is to reduce the need for road construction. By using this method, it is also possible to minimize soil erosion associated with roads. The usual technique in cable harvesting is to lift one end of the log in the air and drag it from the felling site to the road or landing.
The cable harvesting systems introduced in the Philippines after 1945 were the so-called "highlead" type. These systems lift only one end of the log into the air, while the major part of the stem is dragged along the ground. These harvesting systems were originally developed and adapted for the temperate and boreal northern forest soils with only moderate rainfall, and ground surfaces which are often frozen or snow-covered. In introducing these systems to the Philippines, little thought was given to their suitability in areas of high rainfall and soft soil.
The Philippine forests were harvested by these technologies for more than 35 years. With the drastic reduction of natural forests, however, the highlead systems became unacceptable. The adverse environmental impacts were finally recognized as very severe. Damage to the forests could be seen everywhere. After logging, the badly torn forest landscape threatened not only the biodiversity of plants and animals, but also the livelihood of forest dwellers. In 1980, due to the obvious damage in the logged-over forests, legislation was passed reducing the maximum horse power allowed in cable harvesting operations in natural forests.
By 1980, the government plantations in the Philippines should have been quite extensive, since between 50,000 and 100,000 ha had been planted annually for many years. However, many of these plantations had been destroyed or severely damaged. The government therefore was discouraged from developing harvesting technologies for plantations since few of the remaining government plantations required thinning or harvesting.
Fortunately, the efforts of ILO, FAO, the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and USAID in promoting plantation forestry resulted in a budding interest within the private sector for developing appropriate technologies for plantation-grown wood. The southern, and particularly the southeastern, part of the Philippines thereafter became the main focus in the development of plantation forestry, with a large number of people growing trees on their own land.
In 1976 and 1977, an ILO/Finland project, implemented in cooperation with the Bureau of Forest Development (BFD), sought to develop appropriate technologies for manual harvesting of plantation trees in the southern Philippines. The core project had two sites, one in Tuñgao and the other in the Bislig Bay area, extending in a radius of approximately 120 km from each of the two towns. Primarily, the project covered the provinces of Agusan, Surigao and small portions of Davao and Misamis.
By the end of Phase I of the ILO/Finland project, it was clear that interest in manual harvesting technologies was limited and technology dissemination and transfer had been unsuccessful. There were numerous reasons for this lack of success. For example, by 1977, not a single study related to forest harvesting technology had been carried out by the Philippine Forest Research Institute (FORI). Most attention was directed at silvicultural problems and expertise was focused on natural forests. In addition, weak coordination between FORI and BFD often resulted in research that was considered impractical and irrelevant for field application. Moreover, it was commonly argued by senior staff of FORI and the University of the Philippines at Los Baños (UPLB) that new tools and more efficient harvesting techniques and methods might have a negative impact on the remaining dipterocarp forests. It was reasoned that the estimated 200,000 (in 1976) upland families practicing shifting
cultivation might adopt these new technologies to cut more timber and expand their fields. The new tools, techniques and methods introduced by the ILO/Finland project were thus deemed to be inappropriate at that time by mainstream forestry organizations.
Interestingly, however, the results were taken up by several international organizations, among them FAO, which started to disseminate the findings from the first phase of the project in several other tropical countries. Based on their successes, a second phase of the project in the Philippines was then conducted between 1980-1982. An important lesson learned from the first phase was the need to manufacture the improved implements and tools for manual and animal-based harvesting locally.
Slowly, during the second phase, more Filipino foresters started to favor the idea of developing technologies appropriate for harvesting plantation-grown forests. At the same time, more ordinary people and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) supported expanded efforts to shift wood production away from the depleted natural forests by increasing plantation forests.
However, strong opposition still existed within the government itself, vis-à-vis the utilization of these plantations of fast-growing tree species. One major obstacle lay in the forestry legislation of the Philippines, which at that time strictly prohibited the use of manual and animal-based forest harvesting technologies, the use of circular sawmills, etc. Still, with the support of a few younger foresters in high positions in the BFD, by then renamed the Forest Management Bureau (FMB), the process of reformulating and amending the country's forestry legislation began in 1981. This gradual change in thinking and legislation paved the way for subsequent introduction and adoption of manual and animal-based harvesting technologies.
<section>6</section>
Appropriate technologies
"Appropriate technology" can best be defined as fulfilling two essential criteria: 1) it must be sustainable; and 2) it must be locally accepted and adapted. Sustainability implies that whatever implement, tool or machine is added to a system to improve efficiency should be locally available, or can be produced locally. Sustainability also refers to the possible damage to, or disturbance of, the environment (e.g., to biodiversity).
The traditional forest harvesting technologies used in the Philippines were generally environmentally sound but they were inefficient. Many accidents occurred using these technologies and they led to an enormous amount of wood waste. In the natural forest, the felling and crosscutting losses were often more than one cubic meter per tree felled - a financial loss of between US$500 and US$1,500 per ha at today's market values. The wood waste in plantation forests was equal to US$20 per ha - as much as the price of a new two-man handsaw for each hectare harvested.
The problems and deficiencies of using water buffaloes and traditional sleds are easy to overcome by replacing the sleds with animal sulkies (small log arch) or animal-drawn log trailers. The trailers may be equipped with a mechanical loading crane, or even with a hydraulic knuckle-boom loader powered by a chainsaw engine or a similar small petrol or diesel engine.
In the Philippines, improvements in technology and efficiency proved difficult to achieve. The traditional ways of doing things, and faith in "Filipino ingenuity," hindered attempts to change things between the years 1976 and 1992.
Tree farmers, especially those of the older generations, seem to have difficulty understanding the concepts of "depreciation" and "cost-efficiency." Thus, they only tend to look at the speed with which chainsaws cut wood. They do not fully consider the time and cost of going to the nearest town to buy fuel and lubricants for their chainsaws. When the farmers are questioned about this, they say that the chainsaws give them a good excuse to go to town for other shopping or diversions. The repair and down time of the chainsaws are often not of great concern.
Under the ILO/Finland project, felling operations were developed to become as efficient as possible, without the use of chainsaws. Early research showed that chainsaws were three times more costly to use (per cubic meter harvested) compared with manual saws. This ratio has not changed since the initial studies were made 20 years ago. Yet farmers still have difficulties believing that chainsaws, which cut wood three to five times faster than handsaws, are two to three times more expensive to use per cubic meter. If economic efficiency is a main concern, then farmers should not be using chainsaws. However, this message is a difficult one for farmers to accept.
If properly trained, both manual-saw and chainsaw operators can work safely in the forest. The chainsaw is a dangerous tool if misused, but the ax can also be extremely dangerous. To ensure the safety of fellers and to minimize damage to residual trees, appropriate felling operations are required, particularly directional felling. This means that the actual felling procedure is but one small part of a well-planned operation, where the routes for the land transport of wood are carefully planned during pre-felling operations. Successful operations therefore require that all trees in the stand be felled in a pre-determined direction, without being tangled up with, or damaging, other trees, agricultural crops, or other objects. The skills involved in directional felling are very important on tree farms, since many other agricultural crops are growing under and among the trees. Farmers are quickly discouraged from planting more trees if their coffee bushes and other crops are
damaged during tree felling activities.
This is where the importance of quality training comes in. It is necessary to know how to change the center of gravity of trees to be felled. This is done by removing a portion of the tree at its base, called the "felling sink," "notch," or "front cut." After this, the "felling cut" or "back cut" is started from the opposite side of the trunk, slightly above the level of notch. The difference ratio depends on the diameter of the tree (e.g., for a 20 cm tree - 2 cm above; for a 70 cm tree - 7 cm above, etc.). The felling cut continues exactly opposite from the desired felling direction, until an even, uncut portion of wood remains in the center. This "hinge" of uncut wood is intentionally left in the center, and is the cutter's life insurance! If this hinge is damaged in the cutting process, then the tree may fall in any direction, and the cutter's life could be in danger.
Trees seldom grow uniformly, nor is the ground in the forest always level. Therefore, additional tools are often necessary to achieve the desired felling direction. The most simple, inexpensive and reliable of all helping tools is the felling wedge. The cheapest manual saw is the two-man crosscut saw, which is very durable. Its use is now quickly spreading into all plantation forests in the southern Philippines. New two-man crosscut saws are different from the old two-man raker tooth saws, in that they are of the so-called "peg-tooth" or "triangular tooth" type. This newer version is much easier to maintain compared to the older model.
Crosscutting with a bow saw
The bow saw (shaped like a reversed bow) with a thin blade would be the most efficient harvesting tool, but high-quality bow saws are no longer available. The small hobby saws, common in most developing countries, have frames that are too weak for professional felling or crosscutting of trees. The tension of the blade is not sufficient for stems larger than 10 cm in diameter. The professional bow saw has to be able to maintain a tension of 200 kg; the small hobby saw can only manage 40-70 kg.
For felling leaning trees, or trees growing at the edge of riverbanks, gullies, steep slopes, or near electrical installations or houses, a special tool, the "felling tongs," is recommended. The tongs can be attached to a long wooden pole, which then is clamped onto the stem 6-8 m^3 above the ground. The tongs are spring loaded and are attached to the tree while being anchored to the ground. A rope, 1.5 times the length of the tree (35-45 m^3), is attached to the tongs. When a team of people pull the rope, the tree can easily be maneuvered against its lean. The tongs provide up to two tons of pulling force. They are particularly effective for felling trees away from coffee and fruit trees grown under timber trees.
Another harvesting operation is debarking. This activity depends very much on the end-use of the wood. The most important reasons for debarking are to allow easy assessment of the quality of the wood and to minimize the risk of insect damage. In pulp and paper manufacturing, the bark is not desired. In the southern Philippines, more than half of all plantation-grown wood is debarked. If, however, the bark is to be used as fuel for boilers or for wood fibers, then the bark is not removed until the wood reaches the mill. The same applies to veneer or peeler logs, which are protected by the bark during transport.
Tree felling with a bow saw
Traditionally, debarking was done with a machete. Although very cheap, the machete has one big disadvantage in that it is not designed for debarking. It forces its user to "work on four legs," an ergonomically very uncomfortable position. Limited by the short handle, the wielder is forced to work with his back bent. Likewise, the jungle knife, used for turning the logs, also forces the worker to debark in difficult positions, with the blade often pointing toward the body or leg, causing frequent injuries.
The improved tool is called the debarking "spud" or "spade." It consists of a blade shaped like a spade, attached to a long handle. Also attached to the side of the blade is small hook for turning the logs. The additional weight of the handle, in combination with the upright working position, allows for a more comfortable working condition compared to the machete. The correct debarking sequence also minimizes the incidence of accidents since the log, placed in front of the worker, diverts the tool away from workers' legs. Nevertheless, it is obvious that efficient training in the use of the debarking spud and all other tools is essential.
Traditional debarking by boys using machetes
Training farmers in the use of debarking spuds
In transporting logs overland, the felled trees or crosscut logs are conveyed to the nearest road, landing or waterway. In the southern Philippines, this job has traditionally been carried out by water buffalo, also known as carabao. A major limiting factor for using carabao, however, is the availability of water in the harvesting area. The carabao, or swamp-water buffalo, is different from the common water buffalo found elsewhere in Asia. This animal has to bathe every two hours or so, to cool down its body. It lacks pores in the skin to control excessive heat through sweating. Therefore, the water buffalo may suffer from sun stroke unless it can cool its skin.
During muddy conditions after rains, the hoof of the carabao spreads like a snowshoe, allowing this stocky animal to walk across soft mud, whereas most other animals would sink. However, during dry spells, the carabao is much less effective. Studies in the southeastern Philippines indicate that Brahman oxen fare much better than carabaos when the soil has hardened (as soon as 2-4 hours after rain). Farmers therefore have begun to switch from carabaos to white Brahman oxen for domestic transport, including that of wood. Brahman oxen are not sensitive to heat, and have no problems surviving dry working conditions. In fact, the use of Brahman oxen is spreading throughout the Philippines.
The main problem, whether using carabaos or Brahman oxen for wood transport, is that the pulling and loading device, or the skidding sled consumes too much of the animal's pulling energy. In 1992, a research team measured the required pulling force for skidding timber. It was found that under average soil conditions, the maximum pulling force of a carabao with traditional yoke and sled is 150 kg. Out of this, 35-50 kg is the weight of the sled alone. Accordingly, the net load pulling force is only around 100 kg. In practical terms this means that the maximum load in flat terrain can not exceed 200 kg, since the resistance of the log with one end uplifted is half the total weight of the log.
Carabao with traditional yoke and 4-wheeled trailer
Table 2. Dragging Resistance in Relation to Soil Moisture and Skidding Implements
Skidding (Pulling a log along the ground)
Soil Moisture (percent)
Dragging Resistance Coefficient
Rope
Rope
Carabao Sledge
average
Wheeled Implement
The maximum pulling capacity of a prime carabao bull ranges between 150 and 450 kg, depending on the weight of the animal itself. The maximum continuous pulling power of the carabao/sled combination is 100-120 kg. In comparison, a carabao with a harness/four-wheel trailer can average 250 kg (measured max. 350 kg). The best solution for wood transport in southeastern Philippines therefore appears to be a combination of full harness for the carabao together with a four-wheeled or six-wheeled log trailer.
The resistance for a log trailer is only between 10-28 percent of its total weight, depending on how many wheels it has. If the harness, thill shafts, and trailer are weighed together, their weight is between 120-280 kg, depending on the operator's seat, mesh protection and the number of wheels. The fully loaded trailer described above would require a pulling force of 100-300 kg.
Imported 6-wheeled carabao trailer and full harness
Semi-mechanized loading of freshly cut wood onto a carabao trailer
Table 3. Study Results of Carabao Skidding Alternatives
Skidding alternatives
Average load size (m^3)
Skidding Distance
100 m
500 m
Daily production (m^3)
Yoke and traditional wooden sledge
Yoke and local wooden two-wheel cart (car axle/tires)
Harness and imported four-wheel log trailer of steel
The data indicate that, on average, one carabao pulling a four-wheel log trailer can transport 11 to 15.5 m^3 of Paraserianthes falcataria during a full work day (a work day consists of 9½ hours with 6 hours of work and 3½ hours of resting periods), depending on the distance and conditions of the terrain over which the wood is hauled. With the traditional sled, this level of work is impossible.
Production can also be increased with the use of other equipment such as a sulky. The use of the sulky, or "logging arch," was abandoned in Europe around 1920. Originally, sulkies were drawn by horses to transport tree-length logs over flat terrain. These arches were too heavy for manual use, and the narrow tires with rubber treads limited their carrying capacity.
An arch suitable for manual use was developed in Tanzania in the early 1970s. It resembled the sulky used in horse racing, and thus was named the "logging sulky." This sulky was initially only intended for pulling down trees that lodged among the conifers grown in plantations, but it was soon discovered that it could also be used to manual skid small logs over short distances of up to 50 m.
Releasing a lodged log using a sulky
Transporting wood with the help of a sulky
While logging sulkies seemed promising for log skidding, actual adoption was disappointing. The early sulkies made from water-pipes were too heavy, and the wooden bearings were not strong enough. In 1980, logging sulkies were also tested in the southern Philippines, but were unsuccessful. One of the drawbacks encountered was that the 2-wheel sulky had very low carrying capacity on soft soil. Likewise, the sudden twisting motion of the sulky handle added an unnecessary strain to the people pulling the sulky.
The Forestry Training Programme (FTP) of Finland made a final attempt to develop a more appropriate sulky in the early 1990s. The new design, equipped with two bogies and four wheels, called the "new Bogie-Sulky," became a success in the southern Philippines by 1992. This version, also known as the "U-model," has a carrying capacity of 300 kg and the logs (or bundle of pulpwood or fence posts) are lifted completely off the ground for conveyance to the road. Since the logs are not dragged along the ground, much less effort is needed to pull and push the sulky by the three-person work team.
A final sulky model, named the "H-sulky," after the shape of its frame, was also developed. Although this sulky is capable of carrying a 1,050 kg load, a 500 kg load size is recommended for continuous work. Studies indicate that production rates using the H-sulky range from 1.2 to 2.8 m^3/hr, depending on distance, terrain, and conditions under which wood is being transported (up to a maximum of 250 m).
The entire procedure of harvesting plantation-grown wood requires extensive training and numerous high-quality tools. Table 4 shows the most common tools and equipment required. The list and number of items needed will depend on the financial resources of the farmer or tree grower, and on the scale of operation. It is obvious that a harvest of only 100 m^3 (½ ha) does not justify a high initial investment, whereas 2,000 m^3 (10 ha) can warrant a larger investment.
Parts of a sulky
Table 4. Animals, Tools and Implements Used in Harvesting Plantation-grown Wood
Description of Animal, Tool or Implement
Purpose of Animal, Tool or Implement
Estimated Price (US$)
Water buffalo (Carabao)
Transport of wood
Wooden sled, yoke and rope
Transport of wood
4-wheel sulky, of bogie type
Manual or animal transport of wood
Imported 4-wheel log trailer
Animal transport of wood
Imported full buffalo harness
Attachment of log trailer
2-man crosscut saw (5-6')
Wood cutting
Professional bow saw, 36" imported
Wood cutting
Logging ax, imported
Cutting of wood
Whetstone (carborundum)
Metal sharpening
Machete (bolo)
Clearing of biomass
Wooden jointer
Equalizing of saw teeth
Setting iron
Setting the saw teeth
Setting cat
Measuring gauge for saw teeth
Pulpwood pick
Lifting and stacking of wood
Debarking spud
Debarking of wood
Two-man tong
Dragging and loading of wood
Felling tongs and 50 m's of rope
Forced felling of leaning trees
Felling wedge
Felling and bucking of trees
Cant hook
Turning of logs
Debarking spike
Keeping log in place while debarking
Metal file, 6-10"
Saw and other sharpening
Safety helmet
Head protection
Steel toed safety boots
Leg and feet protection
First aid kit
First aid
Pair of working gloves
Protection of hands
New technologies are appropriate only if they are locally available at reasonable prices. However, this alone is not sufficient to sustain their adoption and continuous use. The quality of the tools and implements has to be guaranteed - at a standard not less than 80 percent of an equivalent well-made imported tool. Fortunately, the Philippines has a multitude of skilled local inventors, designers and technicians. The modification of thousands of old military vehicles into passenger "jeepneys" after the Second World War has earned the country a solid reputation for ingenuity. The necessary skills for auto-engineering are therefore available in the country. However, a basic problem lies in the appreciation and valuation of goods or products made in the Philippines, many of which are of inferior quality. One reason is that the raw materials that are used are often already "worn out" (e.g., steel is "tired" or full of micro-cracks). Another factor is the local system of bidding
or canvassing, where less concern is placed on the quality of the product than on the cost. Fortunately, in forestry, this attitude is changing, chiefly because of the strenuous and dangerous nature of work, for which quality tools are clearly advantageous.
In the Philippines, tool manufacturing was started in three locations, all with long traditions of local blacksmith technology. Many people were interested in participating in trial tool manufacturing, but few were willing to invest in additional quality raw materials. Numerous workshops and small factories tried to fabricate copies of the imported tools and implements, but the generally poor quality of the tools resulted in failure.
It was not until 1981 that the first promising signs emerged. Of some 50 workshops involved in the trials, one in particular realized that the required quality could only be obtained by correcting the prevailing haphazard heat treatment in the manufacturing process. This manufacturer (Vergsons Industries, located in San Fernando, Pampanga) was brought to the UNIDO-supported Metal Industries and Research Development Center (MIRDC) in Taguig, Rizal. The owner of Vergsons Industries discovered his mistakes in heat treating the tools without proper furnaces and temperature gauges. With help from MIRDC, he managed to solve these problems, finally resulting in the local production of consistently high-quality tools.
The development of appropriate technologies involves numerous challenges. One challenge is to establish local manufacturing capabilities for high-quality tools. To motivate manufacturers to produce high-quality tools locally, a market for the tools is needed. But to develop a sizable local market, a critical mass of people who accept and value the new product or technology must exist. In practical terms, this viscous circle means that between the time a new technology is introduced and it is widely accepted, 10-20 years may sometimes elapse. This was the case in the Philippines.
An additional factor needed to encourage acceptance and application of new technologies is that there has to be a local distributor of the tools and technologies in the major areas where potential users are located. To accelerate adoption, there should also be local credit facilities to enable farmers to buy tools before harvesting trees. Thus, when farmers receive their harvest payments, the price of the tools can be deducted from their proceeds. If this arrangement is not possible, then farmers may be forced to contract harvesting services, leading to a situation where they may finally stop planting trees altogether because of the low financial returns. Until 1992, this was often what happened in the plantation forests throughout the southern Philippines.
By overcoming these constraints and providing adequate incentives and support for the adoption of high-quality tools for forestry, technological innovations eventually made their mark in the Philippines. No less than 18,000 pieces of high-quality tools were produced and distributed (many of them free of charge) in the southern Philippines by 1992. Another 25,500 high-quality tools were exported to Fiji, Indonesia, Mozambique, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe.
Local tool manufacturing
<section>7</section>
Forestry education and training
The exact reasons for the increasing interest in, and expansion of, forest plantations in the southern Philippines are unclear. Undoubtedly, however, a contributing factor was the extensive forestry education and training program conducted by various organizations.
During the 1980s, FAO, with assistance from Finland, carried out an "International Survey of Forest Harvesting Training Needs" in 29 countries in Latin America, Africa, and Asia (including the Philippines). Finland also collaborated with the Government of the Philippines in developing the country's Forestry Master Plan. The Master Plan called for major changes in the orientation and focus of forestry in the Philippines.
The new forest management strategy for the Philippines was strongly influenced by up-to-date information on the status of the country's forests. By 1990, when the new inventory data became available, it was very clear that the future demand for raw materials for the wood industry in the Philippines would have to be supplied by plantation forests. The country's natural forests had shrunk to only five million ha, with a mere 800,000 ha of "virgin" forest remaining. The inventory showed that nearly all previous efforts to protect the forest had failed. The Forestry Master Plan recommended that large portions of the government's remaining natural forest should be handed over to local communities.
New forestry legislation followed soon after the release of the Forestry Master Plan, supporting the proposed reorientation of forestry. Heavy equipment and high-lead cable technologies were banned in an effort to reduce the negative impacts on remaining forests. Most Timber License Agreements previously awarded to large private logging companies were canceled or drastically curtailed. Low-impact harvesting technologies, such as those developed for Philippine conditions under the old ILO projects were mandated. Serious consideration was given by the Philippine Senate to banning the use of chainsaws altogether.
These changes in policy and re-orientation of forestry in the Philippines pointed toward the need for a massive forestry education and training program. In 1991, supported by the results of the FAO/Finland survey of forest harvesting training needs, a new training program was launched. It was aimed at educating government and private sector forestry officials, field workers, and farmers in tree growing and harvesting practices. It was recognized that farmers living in upland forest areas, who by the early 1980s numbered more than 8 million, would have to play a key role in conserving the remaining natural dipterocarp forests.
On the southern Philippines island of Mindanao, the education and training program focused on tree growing and harvesting technologies. Finland's Forestry Training Programme (FTP), in collaboration with the Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch of FAO, took on the task of implementing a five-year training program in Mindanao. Government foresters, wood industries, local government units (LGUs), NGOs, and people's organizations (e.g., cooperatives, women's organizations) actively participated in the program.
In the early 1980s, as dramatically illustrated following the 1981 typhoon, no appropriate technologies for harvesting small-sized timber or plantation-grown timber existed in the southern Philippines. Ten years later, the situation was little improved. Although technologies had been developed, they were largely unaccepted by local people. The basic knowledge was available, but few people knew how to apply it or constructively use the technologies. The forest training program sought to change this situation using the "training-of-trainers" approach. Instructors were taught to demonstrate as well as teach labor-intensive techniques. The training of harvesting instructors was divided into three separate sectors of specialization, and the responsibility was shared among many parties within the international community. In the southern Philippines, with its large plantation forests, three organizations played major training roles: FTP/Finland, FAO, and USAID. Their areas of
specialization were as follows:
FAO: development of lightweight cableways, and training in their use for environmentally sound forest harvesting.
FTP: development of manual- and animal-based harvesting technologies, including the manufacturing and testing of tools and implements; development and application of the pedagogical tools and materials for labor-intensive plantation forestry operations.
USAID: development of appropriate training facilities for instructors and farmer training.
New central-European light cableway technologies (adapted and introduced by FAO) proved to be very efficient in areas of up-hill yarding where the application of man- and animal-based technologies were inadequate. In the southern Philippines, 15-25 percent of the terrain requires up-hill yarding; the rest can be handled by labor-intensive man- and animal-based methods. For up-hill yarding, lightweight cable equipment with 80-150 horsepower engines, proved to be an environmentally sound solution. The biggest disadvantage of these systems is the relatively high cost of transporting wood, which is 2-3 times higher than the cost of man- and animal-based systems. Considerable training is also required to develop cable system operators capable of effectively rigging and operating the systems.
One aspect of the FTP training program involved sending key personnel to Finland for a five-month teachers' training course on harvesting and sawmilling technologies. Each course was attended by 14 teachers from around the world. By the end of the course, participants were well versed in the harvesting technologies applied in Scandinavia, where 80 percent of all wood is harvested by machines. They also learned to appreciate the extremely high capital requirements for infrastructure, training and salaries demanded by the Scandinavian and central European technologies. By the time the Filipinos returned home, they were convinced that manual- and animal-based harvesting methods were more viable and practical than capital-intensive systems under the socio-economic conditions in the southern Philippines.
In the early 1990s, the efforts of the previous 17 years to develop, test and apply labor-intensive, environmentally-benign harvesting technologies finally began to bear fruit. Earlier efforts were given a necessary combined push by increased concern that the country's forests were severely over-exploited, policy and legislative reorientation in favor of plantation forests and community forestry, and intensified international donor support for training and education.
Training Tree Farmers in Directional Felling
<section>8</section>
The start of large-scale, labor-intensive harvesting
The southern Philippines is one of the most productive locations in the world for growing trees. This productive advantage, coupled with global concern over the continuing loss of natural forests and the desire for sustainably produced wood, drew increased attention to Mindanao in the early 1990s. Foreign investors from China, India, Korea, Malaysia, Taiwan and Thailand were drawn to the southern Philippines, and in particular, to the potential for plantation forestry.
A 1993 World Bank report entitled "Tropical Hardwood Marketing Strategies for Southeast Asia" lent added support to plantation development in the southern Philippines. The report predicted increased demand for "sustainably grown" wood, and advocated investments in processes for producing "medium- and high-quality plywood in order to meet standards and win premiums available in high-value markets." It also advised the development of a progressive "Sustainability of Origin" certification system aimed at satisfying consumer demands for wood produced with a minimum of negative environmental impacts.
The southern Philippines was considered an ideal area to implement such a certification scheme, since the majority of the wood in the area was already derived, or was soon to come, from plantation forests. In addition, both the natural forests and the plantations in the southern Philippines had already been harvested once or twice (unique for Southeast Asia), arguably putting these forests on a track toward sustainability.
While the productive potential of forests in the southern Philippines was well recognized, additional efforts were needed to demonstrate that forests were being managed and harvested in an environmentally sound manner. With the emphasis on sustainability, new demands were placed on forestry such as:
· low-impact harvesting
· improved forest policy and management
· improved recovery of wood
· improved concession management and rent capture
· restructuring of production capacity
· improved marketing strategies
One opportunity gradually recognized and accepted by the top-management echelon of private companies and political leaders was to shift forestry practices from capital-intensive to labor-intensive approaches. At about the same time, politicians and development officials also became aware of the vast potential for employment in the forestry sector, particularly if labor-intensive practices were emphasized. Research on the harvesting of plantation forests received a substantial boost, and soon it became evident that the "bio-mechanical" (man-animal) methods were more cost-effective than the conventional operations of the wood industries. In fact, the results showed that mechanized harvesting of plantations was twice as expensive as bio-mechanical harvesting, locally called "mammal" methods.
The first attempt at large-scale, labor-intensive harvesting of plantation-grown wood in the southern Philippines suffered from poor planning and coordination. The "manimal" methods^1 proved to be so efficient that as much 100,000 m^3 of wood was delivered to mills so rapidly they were unable to handle it. Tens of thousands of cubic meters of wood lay decaying in the logyards because the mills were unable to process it fast enough. Despite the problems encountered in this first large-scale trial, top managers of PICOP and other wood industries became convinced of the superiority of the "manimal" methods, which had originally been developed more than 15 years earlier. The trial had successfully dispelled the notion that large volumes of wood could not be harvested and transported using labor-intensive methods. Moreover, in addition to successfully transporting large volumes of wood, the trial using "manimal" methods also recovered small pieces of wood from the forest that
would have been left behind had conventional systems been used. Thus, recovery rates per hectare were significantly increased.
^1 Actually, the first trials were not entirely manual as chainsaws were used to improve coppicing. This later proved to be unnecessary, because the hand-sawn stumps coppiced equally well.
Encouraged by the success of the first trials to harvest and transport large amounts of wood using low-cost, labor-intensive methods, industry officials and private farmers quickly seized on its potential. Thus, by 1994, appropriate harvesting practices had spread to an area of several thousand sq km. The technologies were now well established, and interest in growing trees was rapidly expanding. The formation of women forestry groups also served to "spread the gospel," and tree growing was taken up as much as 400 km away from the initial core trial area established in 1976.
The area of tree plantations surrounding PICOP provide an indication of the extent of plantations in just one location of eastern Mindanao:
· PICOP plantations: 36,000 ha
· Tree farms: 15,000 ha (located nearby PICOP's millsite)
· Other tree growers: 29,000 ha (estimated area of plantations located further away, but selling wood to PICOP)
A wide variety of species is grown in plantations in southern Mindanao (Table 5). Species planted by PICOP include Paraserianthes falcataria (11,970 ha), Eucalyptus deglupta (13,600 ha), Acacia mangium (5,560 ha), Gmelina arborea (300 ha), Pinus spp. (820 ha), and various dipterocarps (6,650 ha).
Table 5. Main Species Grown in Plantations in the Southern Philippines
Species
Origin and Year Planting Began
Paraserianthes falcataria
Indonesia; since 1970s
Gmelina arborea
Latin America; since 1970s
Eucalyptus deglupta
Indigenous to the Philippines
Acacia mangium
Malaysia; grown in the southern Philippines since 1992
Dipterocarpus spp.
Indigenous to the Philippines; large plantations since 1992
Reacting to favorable plantation trials using apitong (Dipterocarpus grandiflorus) and other indigenous species, farmers in the southern Philippines are increasingly planting indigenous climax species in tree plantations. Although these species are slower growing than many exotic species, they are better adapted to the climate, including the occasional typhoons experienced in the area.
The eastern side of Mindanao has at least eight large potential wood buyers, in addition to large banana plantations which still require large numbers of wooden poles to support the banana stems. Although labor-intensive "mammal" harvesting and transport practices are being adopted in many areas in the southern Philippines, the farmers and wood suppliers around PICOP in eastern Mindanao have progressed most rapidly using these approaches. The harvest volumes of PICOP are substantial (Table 6), averaging recently more than 400,000 m^3 of plantation-grown wood per year.
The experience of PICOP in recent years clearly shatters the myth that small suppliers using labor-intensive methods are incapable of providing large volumes of wood to industries on a continuous and reliable basis. Of the more than 400,000 m^3 of plantation-grown wood supplied to PICOP each year, nearly half is harvested with simple hand tools rather than chainsaws (Table 7). Sixty percent of the wood is skidded with carabao or oxen, while most of the other forty percent is transported to landings by cable systems. About 80 percent of the plantation-grown wood supplied to PICOP is manually loaded onto trucks, while only about 20 percent is loaded by mechanized loaders.
Table 6. Harvesting Volumes of Plantation-grown Wood (PICOP's procurement)
Year
PICOP Plantations (m^3)
Tree Farms (m^3)
Falcata
Eucalyptus
Gmelina
Others
Falcata
Dipterocarps
No harvesting
No harvesting
No harvesting
No harvesting
No data
No data
No data
No data
No data
No data
No data
(Planned)
There are about 50 contractors presently involved in harvesting wood for PICOP. Each contractor employs about 50 persons in teams and uses different equipment and techniques. To ensure environmentally sound harvesting, PICOP stipulates that each contractor team must include one or more people trained in harvesting courses organized by PICOP. Furthermore, to promote efficient wood recovery, PICOP stopped buying wood cut with axes in 1994; only wood cut with saws is accepted.
PICOP signboard promoting "mammal" operations
Table 7. Harvesting Methods Used by PICOP Contractors and Tree Farmers
Operation
Harvesting methods and percentage of wood from each
Felling & crosscutting
saws, axes, machetes (40 percent)
chainsaws (60 percent)
Debarking
spuds (60 percent)
machetes (40 percent)
Skidding & forwarding
carabao skidding (60 percent)
cable systems (40 percent)
Loading
manual/pulpwood pick (80 percent)
mechanized loaders (20 percent)
Road transport
trucks on contract (90 percent)
company trucks (10 percent)
In addition to proving that labor-intensive, manual- and animal-based systems can provide large volumes of wood to industries, the PICOP experience verifies that these methods are cost competitive, at least when low-cost labor is readily available such as in most parts of the southern Philippines. Harvesting and transport costs (including US$ 3.20 to US$ 5.20 for transporting wood by truck from the forest to the mill site) at PICOP vary from US$ 20 to US$ 40 per cubic meter, depending on the way wood is harvested and transported, the distance from the mill, and the category of harvestor (Table 8). It is readily apparent, however, that tree farmers and contractors (largely using "manimal" techniques) are able to supply PICOP with wood at costs substantially below the costs incurred by company harvestors (who tend to use more mechanized systems).
Table 8. Cost of Supplying Wood to PICOP, 1995/96
Harvester
PICOP forest (US$ per/m^3)
Tree farms (US$ per/m^3)
Company
Contractor
Tree farmer
<section>9</section>
Conclusions and summary
Philippine forestry has evolved from an era of seemingly limitless timber supplies to the present period of highly depleted natural forests and subsequent focus on rehabilitation and reforestation. Increasing emphasis is being given to plantation forestry, particularly in the southern Philippines where growing conditions and available land make this prospect more feasible.
Traditional forest harvesting practices in the Philippines were simple and environmentally sound, but relatively inefficient. Following the Second World War, the Philippine forests became the target of massive over-exploitation, largely based on introduced mechanized technologies. These technologies were often inappropriate for Philippine conditions and eventually proved to be highly destructive and damaging to the country's forests.
Although considerable efforts were made to develop and promote appropriate wood harvesting and transport technologies in the Philippines (starting as early as the mid-1970s), it was not until the 1990s that such technologies gained widespread acceptance. This required careful efforts to ensure that technologies that were developed were in fact appropriate, that relevant training and education programs to promote awareness and adoption were offered, that credit was readily available to tree farmers, and that a favorable policy and market environment was maintained.
For years, many people believed it was not possible to supply the large volumes of wood required by modern forest industries using labor-intensive manual- and animal-based systems. Others discriminated against such technologies, assuming them to be "backward" and inappropriate for modern forestry operations. The recent experience in the southern Philippines, however, has caused a reassessment of such thinking. The PICOP experience in harvesting and transporting large volumes (as much as 250,000 cubic meters per year) of plantation-grown wood clearly demonstrates the potential advantages of labor-intensive methods and systems under certain socio-economic conditions. In addition to being technically feasible, these methods are often less costly and less damaging to the environment than more mechanized harvesting and transport technologies. Moreover, they provide employment for large numbers of people and are less dependent on fossil fuels.
The greatest benefit of developing appropriate technologies for tree harvesting in the Philippines has been the resulting resurgence of tree growing by local people and the subsequent improvements in their livelihoods. After the 1981 typhoon disaster, many people felt that they had been cheated by the "market economy" or by the government. Many joined the underground military movement called the "New Peoples Army" (NPA), and large areas of previous tree farms became strongholds for dissidents. In 1990, when interest in tree farming renewed, the NPA started losing its local supporters. By 1994, large tracts of tree farming communities were supplied with electricity and a new economic era was underway, thanks in part to the prosperity derived from private tree farming.
Progress in the southern Philippines continues. In 1995, many political activities favoring tree growing communities took place. Several of the original tree farm instructors and women tree farmers rose to the level of Barangay Captain or Municipal Chairperson - highly influential positions in Philippine society - in local elections. Credit became increasingly available to local tree farmers through new community cooperative arrangements. Legislation and government policies continue to be formulated with a view toward encouraging private sector tree farming, plantation development, community forestry, and low-impact forest harvesting.
Forestry development in the southern Philippines has drawn considerable attention over the years. Mindanao was the source of huge volumes of logs and timber products for many years following the Second World War. Many innovative technologies, such as the process of making paper from mixed tropical hardwoods, emerged from the southern Philippines. In the 1970s and 1980s, Mindanao received unwanted critical attention for having seriously overexploited its natural forests. In recent years, the southern Philippines has become recognized as an area of significant potential for large-scale plantation development. With the recent successes in implementing large-scale, labor-intensive forest harvesting and transport of wood, it may well be that the southern Philippines will continue to attract the attention of the world forestry community while providing valuable lessons for forestry development in other areas.
<section>a</section>
Reference literature
APPRODEV, 1995. Reference Manual for Harvesting, Parts 1...3. The Forestry Training Programme (FTP), Helsinki.
FAO, 1990. Introduction to Ergonomics in Forestry. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
FAO, 1987. Appropriate Wood Harvesting in Plantation Forests No. 78. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
FAO/FTP/FINNIDA, 1988. Appropriate Forest Operations, Proceedings of an International FAO/Finland Training Course in the Philippines. Helsinki.
FAO, 1996. FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
ILO, 1982. Implementation of Appropriate Technology in Philippine Forestry (WEP), Part II. International Labour Organisation, Manila.
ILO/FAO, 1987. The Transfer of Basic Forest Technology from the EEC Region to Other Regions. International Labour Organisation, Geneva.
ILO, 1990. Fitting of the Job to the Forest Worker - An Illustrated Training Manual on Ergonomics. International Labour Organisation, Geneva.
Jonsson, T., and P. Lindgren. 1990. Logging Technology for Tropical Forests - For or Against? Skogsarbeten (The Forest Operations Institute, Sweden), Stockholm.
Kantola, M., and K. Virtanen, 1986. Handbook on Appropriate Technology for Forestry Operations -Part 1. Clearing of Forest Plantations and Tree Felling and Conversion. FTP/FINNIDA, Helsinki.
Kantola, M., and P. Hairstyle, 1989. Handbook on Appropriate Technology for Forestry Operations -Part 2. On Wood Transport and Road Construction. FTP/FINNIDA, Helsinki.
Kivikkokangas-Sandgrén, R., M. Kinnunen, M. Hares, and L. Kiili, 1995. Agroforestry and Treeplanting in the New Rainforest Economy in Mindanao, the Philippines. University of Helsinki, Department of Geography/FTP/FINNIDA, Helsinki.
Laarman, J., K. Virtanen, and M. Jurvélius, 1981, 1988. Choice of Technology in Forestry: A Philippine Case Study. International Labour Organisation, Manila.
PICOP, 1976. Man-made forests at PICOP. Paper Industries Corporation of the Philippines, Bislig.
Saarilahti, M., and P. Isoaho, 1992. Handbook for Ox Skidding Researches. The Finnish Forest Research Institute (FFRI)/FTP and IRDC-Uppsala, Sweden, Helsinki.
Skogsarbeten/SIDA, 1983. Swedish Forestry Techniques with Possible Applications in the Third World. Oskarshamn.
Tamesis, F., 1968. The Woodsman: Forest Plantation Development in Agusan del Sur. Manila.
