<title>ADCP/REP/76/2 - Aquaculture Planning in Asia. Aquaculture planning in Asia Report of the Regional Workshop on Aquaculture </title>
<section>1</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
Aquaculture is an age-old industry in Asia and about 80 percent of current world production through aquaculture comes from this region. However, the industry has suffered from inadequate recognition and support for a long time and it is only in recent years that the governments have begun to devote attention to this important means of food production. Increased fishing pressure on natural fish stocks and the reduced yield from some of the conventional fisheries, together with expected changes in the Law of the Sea have served to focus special attention on aquaculture as a means of meeting fish production requirements in most countries of the region. Preliminary analyses of supply and demand for fishery products have shown that aquaculture is an effective means of filling the gaps in current and future supplies of many of the favoured aquafoods. The role of aquaculture in integrated rural development has also been recognized and the development of rural communities dependent
on aquaculture as the main economic activity has received active consideration. The culture of species with export potential, like shrimps and prawns, is being attempted in a number of countries of the region. Thus large-scale development of aquaculture is being considered and included in many national development plans. However, it was deemed necessary to examine the current programmes in the light of medium- and long-term food production and economic development requirements in different countries and the basic requirements for sound development of the industry. The Second Regional Workshop on Aquaculture Planning was therefore organized by the FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme in Bangkok, 1-17 October 1975 in cooperation with the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Far East and the Government of Thailand, to cover the Asian region. As in the case of the First Regional Workshop held in Accra, Ghana, 2-17 July 1975, the objectives of the Workshop
were to:
(a) discuss the basic data required for the formulation of sound aquaculture development plans;
(b) consider the levels of aquaculture development suited to different socio-economic and ecological situations;
(c) evaluate organizational, financial and technological requirements for the implementation of development programmes, with special reference to the production and distribution of inputs, training of manpower and building of extension services;
(d) consider ways and means of overcoming legal and environmental constraints on aqua-culture development;
(e) formulate and discuss phased outline development plans for each of the participating countries; and
(f) identify external assistance required for the implementation of aquaculture development in each of the participating countries and discuss the national, regional and inter-regional elements of the required assistance.
It was held in the FAO Regional Office, Bangkok, and was attended by participants from ten selected countries of the region (see Annex I). The agenda followed is given in Annex II.
The Workshop was opened by Mr. S.H. Prakoso, Deputy Regional Representative for Asia and the Far East in Bangkok. He emphasized that "from the environmental, social, economic and technological points of view Asia is well suited to maintain and enhance its leadership" in the aquaculture field. Better scientific understanding of traditional Asian practices can lay the foundations for new technologies as has been exemplified by the rediscovery of culture systems such as polyculture and cage culture of fish, combination of fish farming with agriculture and animal husbandry, etc., in other parts of the world. He pointed out that greater national efforts supported and fostered through regional and inter-regional cooperation are required to facilitate the improvement and transfer of such technologies. Although aquaculture can be developed in different ways and at different levels, integration of aquaculture with rural development has special importance in Asia with its large
population of small farmers and small fishermen living in rural areas seriously affected by unemployment and underemployment. He emphasized the need for cooperation between national governments and agencies concerned with rural development and the coordination of current and future activities in this sector.
As in the case of the First Workshop, this one was also organized in two stages. Stage I was attended by all the participants, who discussed the following basic considerations with a view to clarifying national policies and development strategies in the participating countries:
(i) Basic data required for aquaculture planning
(ii) Levels and patterns of aquaculture development
(iii) Role of public and private sectors in aquaculture development
(iv) Organization of aquaculture services for small- and industrial-scale development of aquaculture
(v) Research support and extension services for aquaculture development
(vi) Manpower requirements and training of personnel
(vii) Market surveys for aquaculture planning
(viii) Handling and marketing of aquaculture products
(ix) Development of auxiliary or supporting industries
(x) Financing and credit for aquaculture development
(xi) Legal and environmental aspects of aquaculture development
(xii) Incentives for aquaculture development
(xiii) Bilateral and multilateral assistance for aquaculture development
(xiv) Regional and inter-regional cooperation in aquaculture.
In Stage II of the Workshop, draft outlines of national aquaculture development plans for the participating countries were prepared (Annex III) and discussed. The national development plans set a targeted production of about 3.0 million tons in a period of ten years as follows:
Country
Tons
Bangladesh
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Nepal
Philippines
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Total
<section>2</section>
2. PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS OF AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT IN ASIA
According to the estimates made on the basis of data collected in 1971-72 the total aqua-culture production in Asia and the Far East region is about 4.0 million tons. But the bulk of this production comes from three or four countries and in others it still remains relatively low. Much of the aquaculture at present is practised on a small scale, often at a subsistence level, and it may continue to be so for some time to come. However, in a number of countries larger commercial-scale culture operations are being promoted.
Increase in aquaculture production is being attempted through both the expansion of areas under culture and the intensification of existing practices. Extensive areas of wastelands appear to be available for aquaculture in most countries of the region, except in Singapore and Hong Kong. According to rough estimates the area under culture has increased about 25 percent in the last three years. The available area for future expansion is estimated to be around 20 million hectares. Detailed site surveys, including studies of alternate uses of such areas, are required to determine whether all these can be used and are available for aquaculture purposes.
Significant advances have been made in some of the countries in developing more intensive and high density culture systems. For example, techniques have been developed to increase production in pond culture of milkfish from an average of 600 kg/ha to 2 000 kg/ha. Similarly, polyculture methods have been devised to increase production of carp ponds from an average 900 kg/ha to 8 000 kg/ha. But the application of these techniques in the field has not kept pace or contributed substantially to increased production. Well organized extension services and provision of inputs and credit were considered the major constraints. The availability of trained technicians varies considerably between countries, but in almost all there is an urgent need for field personnel with adequate practical experience and ability to establish and manage aquaculture enterprises. Fish farmers in some of the countries of the region have shown their receptiveness to new technologies and have even brought
about innovations of their own to suit local conditions. On the other hand, in some countries the farmers have been reluctant and slow to change the traditional methods and adopt improved techniques, particularly when additional inputs are required. This attitude is not always because the economic viability of the operations has not been demonstrated. In countries like Thailand it has been shown that the average income of a fish farmer is about six times more than that of an agricultural farmer and substantially higher than that of a coastal small-scale fisherman. This fact has to be given better publicity, particularly because most countries of the region wish to develop aqua-culture as a means of generating employment for the unemployed and underemployed people in the rural sector or as a means of employment for people who have to be relocated or rehabilitated, e.g., coastal fishermen losing employment due to changes in the fishing industry or people displaced due to river
basin or industrial development projects.
The most significant constraint to expansion or intensification of aquaculture in the region is the production and distribution of seed. Most countries experience difficulties in even maintaining the present level of seed production, and still depend to a large extent on collection of wild seed even where methods of artificial propagation have been developed. Suitable organization of fish breeding, larval rearing, transport and distribution need high-priority attention in most countries of the region. Technical assistance and cooperation between countries in the exchange of expertise, pituitary material for breeding fish, brood fish and even fry, were measures considered by the Workshop to be -important in solving this problem.
Many government stations are engaged in seed production and distribution and this has come to be accepted as a major activity of most aquaculture units. The question whether government stations can, and should, undertake large-scale production and distribution of seed to meet the future needs of the industry was discussed by the Workshop in some detail. The existence of successful seed trade in the private sector in some of the countries was cited, and the fact that many private hatcheries employing relatively complex techniques have recently been established successfully in some countries was noted. The general consensus was that government agencies should initiate seed production and distribution, and where feasible, attract private producers to establish seed production and distribution industries. It will be the responsibility of research institutions to develop technologies that can be adopted by private producers.
<section>3</section>
3. BASIC DATA RELEVANT TO AQUACULTURE PLANNING
A number of countries in the region have short-term programmes underway for aquaculture development as part of their fishery development plans. However, the medium- and long-term requirements of the industry and the policies to be adopted for fulfilling these need to be examined in detail. Further, measures to achieve higher production than targeted and in shorter time than originally envisaged need to be considered. An analysis of the projected future demand for fishery products based on the rate of increase of population and income, the required increase in per caput consumption of fishery products to meet nutritional needs, and the possible expansion of capture fisheries, clearly show that large-scale development of aquaculture is essential to meet the expected deficit in fish products. There is also considerable interest in increased production of prawns, shrimps and eels for export.
The economic as well as social benefits of aquaculture need to be taken into account in formulating plans Though the economic profitability is known among aquaculturists, this has not been sufficiently well-documented and publicized with the result that questions are often raised regarding the economics of operation. As 'bankable project' economic criteria may not sometimes be fully applicable in aquaculture ventures, attempts should be made to quantify the social benefits to facilitate proper evaluation of projects by planning authorities. Financial support for aquaculture has suffered from lack of appropriate feasibility studies and project analyses by competent teams of specialists. In this connexion, participants from many countries adversely commented on the long time lag and multiplicity of missions undertaken by international and regional bank groups and the small number of loans that materialize from these. All the countries would benefit if the services of a
multidisciplinary team of specialists could be made available to undertake coordinated feasibility studies and prepare bankable projects.
The availability of seed has been recognized as one of the most crucial factors in the expansion and intensification of aquaculture and so detailed estimates of the seed requirements on an annual basis have to be made.
Many systems of culture are adopted in the region, but large-scale production in the short and medium term may need to be based on the systems that have proved to be highly productive and profitable. New and improved systems of culture can be expected to be developed as a result of research. Adequate provision has to be made in development plans for pilot-scale operations to test the technical and economic feasibility of such systems before they are utilized for large-scale production.
Considering the species suited for culture, the Workshop recognized the special importance and value of species with short food chains from the point of view of economy and efficiency of food utilization. It was also pointed out that mollusc culture remains an under-utilized source of food production in most of the Asian countries. Greater efforts need to be provided for in the plans to investigate the feasibility of this form of culture. In fact, coastal aquaculture presents greater opportunities for large commercial-scale aquaculture in the region.
In reviewing the data on the availability of sites for aquaculture, the Workshop discussed the problems related to the present practice of using existing water areas, particularly village ponds and multipurpose community-owned water bodies. While the reduced capital investment needed is a major advantage, the management of such areas presents problems and there is a need for more critical examination of the cost and benefits of such practices.
The Workshop recognized that there are major deficiencies in the available basic data for aquaculture planning and that plans have to be formulated on the basis of a number of assumptions. A system of data collection and analysis directed toward refinement and periodic revision of planned targets and production procedures has therefore to be established. Expertise in aqua-culture planning has to be developed for this purpose in fisheries administrations.
<section>4</section>
4. PATTERNS AND LEVELS OF AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
Subsistence-level and small commercial-scale aquaculture currently dominates the industry in most countries of the region. With the emphasis now laid by governments and international agencies on the development of the rural sector, the integration of aquaculture in rural development is receiving greater attention. As mentioned earlier, some of the countries, for example Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia, are considering aquaculture as an alternative form of employment for the excess manpower in the coastal fishing industry. Considering these factors, future development is likely to be based to a greater extent on small-scale enterprises.
Strict classification into small- and large-scale enterprises is often difficult and there are many intermediate categories. Production can be organized through small farmers, with a large company directly undertaking purchase of harvest, processing and marketing. The concept of a fish pond estate, a small holding to improve the standard of living of rural people, similar in character to a land reform programme, is under investigation in the Philippines. Fish culture has also been successfully integrated in community development programmes at the 'village' and 'block' levels in India.
In aquaculture development plans in Indonesia, the culture programmes have been classified into commercial and non-commercial and implemented accordingly. Export-oriented aquaculture in all the countries is commercial in nature and generally has to be organized on a large scale.
Large-scale culture operations have certain inherent advantages such as possible vertical integration, but it will ordinarily need large areas for culture and more capital and management skills. Due to the need for diversification, large companies that were in no way concerned with fisheries till recently are becoming involved in aquaculture production and marketing. Some government corporations are also already undertaking, or plan to start, such operations. The cooperative form of aquaculture development has been tried with a certain amount of success in some countries.
Fish seed production lends itself very well to large-scale development, although in countries like Indonesia a fish seed industry based on small subsistence-level operations exists. In fact, seed production has often been demonstrated as even more profitable than the production of table fish under certain circumstances.
The Workshop discussed in some detail the role of public and private sectors in aquaculture production, provision of support services and the development of auxiliary industries. Heavy involvement of the public sector in the organization of infrastructure and support services was considered essential for rapid development of the industry in all the countries. Auxiliary industries such as manufacture of feeds and aquaculture equipment and supplies may in most cases develop in the private sector, but governments have to provide the necessary incentives and research support, for example in the formulation of feeds and the design of equipment.
In the production phase of the industry, public, private and cooperative sectors can play major roles in the region. In the existing and future plans of development for most countries the public sector assumes a dominant role in the production and distribution of seed. As mentioned earlier, private and cooperative sectors will eventually become responsible for large-scale production, but even then government institutions will have the significant role of improving or maintaining the genetic quality of the seed and ensuring freedom from communicable diseases. Many of the countries in the region have established public sector corporations for fishery development and these corporations have many distinct advantages in undertaking large-scale culture, including joint ventures with the local or foreign companies. Successful state farms in China and East European countries indicate the level and pattern of operations possible in such enterprises.
The small farmer will continue to be the backbone of the aquaculture industry in the private sector and, as the cooperative movement becomes successfully established, the cooperative sector will become increasingly important. In this context the Workshop recognized the crucial importance of managerial skills in medium- and large-scale aquaculture ventures.
The possibilities for integrating aquaculture with agriculture and animal husbandry have special importance in this region as the majority of aquaculturists are also part-time farmers. Duck-cum-fish farming introduced in Nepal has yielded very encouraging results. The traditional practices of combining livestock rearing or rice cultivation with fish farming, which are on the decline, need to be revived and redesigned to suit modern culture requirements. It is estimated that there are about 10 million ha of deepwater rice in the region, most of which may be suited for fish culture as a combined culture or rotation crop. The heavy use of pesticides that is responsible for the decline of ricefield fish culture may cease to be a major constraint if stricter anti-pollution regulations are enforced.
As mentioned earlier, large private companies are getting interested in aquaculture and in a few countries small companies have been established for the culture of export-oriented crops. Government policies support the formation of such companies in most countries and the land reforms and land consolidation programmes mostly favour the establishment of such companies for aquaculture purposes.
The Workshop took note of the many opportunities for joint ventures in the aquaculture industry. The possibilities of joint ventures with private companies abroad are mainly for exportable products. The need for careful negotiations with foreign partners in order to protect the interests of the home country was stressed.
<section>5</section>
5. SUPPORTING SERVICES
The Workshop discussed in some detail the different types of supporting services required for aquaculture development in the region. In view of the fact that the bulk of production will be on a small scale, the importance of such services becomes specially significant.
As discussed earlier, effective extension services are of the highest priority. The backbone of such services is the extension worker who needs special training in extension techniques, besides adequate training and practical experience in aquaculture techniques.
Some of the countries have tried to utilize agricultural extension personnel for aqua-culture extension work, but the experience so far indicates that specialized staff at an appropriate level are essential if aquaculture has to be developed rapidly.
Certain countries have established specialized training programmes for extension staff, but these programmes need strengthening. In countries where training facilities do not exist, new training centres have to be created. Taking into account the educational background and language proficiency of the candidates to be trained and the specific local conditions in which they have to work, it was considered essential to organize the training of extension personnel on a national basis.
The discussions in the Workshop clearly showed that so far inadequate attention has been devoted to the current and future manpower requirements of the industry. Assessment of the needs of trained manpower of different categories is an essential step in development planning. This would show whether ad hoc or permanent training facilities have to be provided in the country, and whether group country or regional training programmes are required. The Workshop noted that there are as yet no suitably staffed and equipped training centres in the region offering specialized multidisciplinary training in all aspects of aquaculture. Besides facilities for theoretical instruction, such a centre will have to provide adequate opportunities for the trainees to carry out practical farming operations in order to acquire the necessary knowledge and experience for initiating and managing aquaculture enterprises. The establishment of such centres is expensive and the hiring of suitable
training staff on a national basis may prove extremely difficult. In the circumstances there is a need to consider the establishment of subregional or regional training facilities offering a well rounded specialized training in aquaculture. There are many obvious advantages in organizing such a training programme in conjunction with a research centre.
The role of research in aquaculture development has received considerable attention in the region and almost all the countries have fish culture research stations. However, many of the stations are poorly equipped and inadequately staffed with the result that they function primarily as demonstration or seed production centres. Through streamlining the many diffuse efforts, strengthening of facilities and the adoption of realistic research programmes, scientific support for aquaculture development can be substantially improved. A "systems approach" in research directed toward the solution of all the inter-dependent problems hindering increased aquaculture production would more effectively serve the needs of the industry.
The provision of necessary inputs in adequate quantities at appropriate times is an essential requisite for expanded aquaculture. Among the many inputs, highest priority was given to seed as mentioned on page 3. The need to develop seed production as a separate auxiliary industry in the public or private sector was repeatedly emphasized by the Workshop. Fish feed is another input which needs special attention. The existing animal feed industry can possibly cater to the needs of aquaculture if suitable feed formulations can be recommended and the necessary incentives to compensate for the small initial demand can be offered. If simple feed preparation techniques can be adopted, it should be possible to develop the industry also on a cottage-industry basis.
As regards other inputs like fertilizer and chemicals, when internal supplies in a country are inadequate, it may often be necessary for the government to allocate the necessary quantities for the needs of aquaculture. In the initial stages governments should also provide incentives to develop the manufacture of various types of equipment required in aquaculture installations.
<section>6</section>
6. MARKETING ARRANGEMENTS
The Workshop reviewed the principal aspects of marketing and utilization of aquaculture production and discussed in detail the salient features to be incorporated in the individual country plans for aquaculture development. There was a general consensus that the demand for fish in Asia was very strong, that it exceeded supplies, and that there were no constraints for aquaculture development from this angle, in particular because capture fisheries could not be expected to yield enough to match projected future demands. However, in countries planning a significant increase of aquaculture production such as India, Indonesia, Philippines and Thailand, it was deemed necessary to take due account of the marketing structure and logistics required. These may differ according to the production systems involved and the markets supplied (whether rural areas, urban centres or export markets).
Fish marketing organizations or other government agencies involved in fish marketing exist in several countries of the Asian region and it should be possible for these to undertake the marketing of farmed fish and shellfish. This particularly applies to India, Malaysia and Sri Lanka. In the other countries the existing trade channels were reported to be adequate to handle increased production through aquaculture. Some instances of localized overproduction, such as of catfish in Thailand, have been overcome through the relocation and streamlining of production.
The consumer acceptance of aquaculture products has been greatly enhanced by their steady availability in the fresh or cured state. It was pointed out that specific consumer education and promotion programmes may not always be required, but availability and effective marketing may largely reduce consumer resistance, if there is any.
In certain areas in the Asian region the bulk of aquaculture production for domestic consumption would mainly be destined for the lower income market segment, hence production and marketing costs have to be kept at conforming low levels. Specific information relating to the operations and costs of processing and marketing of aquaculture products would be of considerable value in this connexion.
The Workshop was of the view that marketing of aquaculture products could be organized within the existing fish marketing systems in the countries of the region. However, as output increase becomes substantial, expansion of capacities and extension of operations would become necessary. With increasing magnitude of the aquaculture sector, marketing of seed, feed and other inputs could also warrant Specific arrangements.
In some of the countries of the region, aquaculture production for export purposes is gaining importance. The expansion of processing facilities and quality control will be of special significance in promoting this sector. Further, information on product specification, prices and markets should also be made available to the industry on a continuing basis.
<section>7</section>
7. FINANCING AND CREDIT
The ten-year national development plans prepared by the participants would require considerable financial investment for implementation. It was agreed that a good part of the financing has necessarily to be raised internally from government and commercial sources. However, because of the high profitability of certain culture systems and the significant socio-economic benefits that may be derived by small farmers and fishermen by the adoption of aqua-culture as an integral part of rural development (a priority area for financial support by the World Bank Group), there are definite possibilities for attracting external financing for aqua-culture development. As already stated in section 2, only very limited financial assistance has so far been provided for aquaculture by the World Bank Group, and one of the reasons for this is the lack of expertise and basic economic data in the countries for preparing bankable projects based on detailed feasibility studies. The need for
FAO/UNDP assistance in this regard was again emphasized in the Workshop while discussing this topic. The Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) should consult with international banking agencies and try to establish simpler and quicker means of project formulation for financing. Assistance should be offered by the ADCP and other FAO/UNDP projects in formulating suitable project proposals and to obtain aid from bilateral and multilateral agencies. It was also suggested that greater use should be made of the FAO Bankers Group for financing large-scale farming. The Workshop noted that greater difficulties are experienced in obtaining finance for the farming of aquafoods for domestic consumption, compared to that for export.
Ways and means of distributing credit to farmers were discussed in some detail. Although credit is available, credit costs are in many cases prohibitive to prospective fish farmers. Other difficulties arise from a lack of appreciation of the aquaculture problems on the part of bankers, requirements for collateral securities, insufficient duration of lease of aqua-culture sites granted to farmers and the fact that bankable project criteria are sometimes applicable to aquaculture ventures only on a limited scale.
In several countries insecurity of land tenure and ownership of water bodies are detrimental to a wider use of credit facilities. The Workshop was informed that in Indonesia national banks would accept feasibility and prospects of a project in lieu of collateral and that in the Philippines long lease of sites would be similarly accepted. In Nepal the government stands surety for loans taken by new graduates who enter fish farming.
In order to integrate aquaculture fully into the rural sector, the implication of the present institutional framework and the difficulties of cooperative organizations need to be considered. Credit programmes for fish farming in rural areas are being implemented in Indonesia and the Philippines, with cooperation from the government and banks. Experience so far shows the importance of linking credit for aquaculture development with technical assistance and extension work among farmers, as in the case of agricultural credit.
The Workshop discussed in some detail the advantages and disadvantages of joint ventures with foreign partners. While appreciating the opportunity offered to attract financial resources and managerial expertise, reservations were expressed because of the vested interests that are at times involved. Successful joint ventures, as in the case of eel culture in Thailand, have shown the benefits that can be derived from joint venture arrangements if the interests of all the partners are suitably safeguarded.
In order to overcome the difficulties that aquaculture development faces in the Asian region in respect of credit and financing, the Workshop agreed on the need for external assistance for undertaking feasibility studies and developing the necessary understanding of aqua-cultural requirements among credit-providing institutions as well as for training staff in fund and credit management. In this connexion the need for development of crop insurance schemes was stressed, which again would require the formulation of operational standards to be used for determining the risks involved.
<section>8</section>
8. LEGAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS
During discussions on almost all aspects relating to aquaculture, the Workshop underlined the need for national policies and appropriate legal framework to facilitate the establishment and management of aquaculture enterprises as well as the processing and marketing of aqua-culture products. Land reform and land consolidation acts introduced in some of the countries in the region have proved mostly beneficial to aquaculture development. Limits imposed on land holdings generally do not extend to water bodies. Where the existing laws limit the area of land that can be owned by a farmer, it is necessary to examine the limitations against the minimum size of aquafarms for economic production. If the permissible area falls short of minimum requirements and exemptions cannot be obtained, the possibility of introducing cooperative farming will have to be considered.
Poaching and willful destruction of aquaculture stocks through use of fish poisons and pesticides are reported to be major problems in certain areas. Suitable legal measures have to be adopted to protect the ownership rights of farmers, and enforce deterrent action to protect the stocks.
For the establishment and expansion of the aquaculture industry, various types of incentives have to be offered to investors and farmers, such as subsidies, grants, tax holidays, tax exemptions, import privileges, etc. Enabling laws may be required for this purpose or existing laws extended to cover aquaculture practices as well. There is a close similarity between the requirements of agriculture and aquaculture insofar as legal provisions and incentives are concerned, and efforts should therefore be made to extend relevant clauses of laws relating to agriculture to aquaculture. If joint ventures with foreign partners have to be established, special legislative measures may be required or provisions for joint ventures in industry have to be made applicable to aquaculture, with necessary modifications.
The need for enforcing quality control on aquaculture products destined for export has already been referred to. Legal measures may be required for this purpose as well as for application of environmental protection measures.
Pesticide pollution is one of the major environmental threats to the aquaculture industry in Asia, and ricefield fish culture has been particularly affected by this problem. Also fish farms situated near ricefields have been affected by drainage from them, or through the use of common water supplies. It was noted that at least some of the countries had prohibited the use of persistent pesticides with a view to protecting fish stocks. Efforts underway in countries such as Indonesia to study the effects of pesticide pollution on fish, including their accumulation in fish tissues, were noted and the need for similar studies in other countries was emphasized. Domestic and industrial pollution is also a major concern in countries like Thailand, the Philippines and Hong Kong and urgent measures are needed to protect aquaculture from its effects.
There are undoubtedly other possible uses for aquaculture sites and decision-making insofar as their use is concerned should be based on economic, social and environmental considerations. The reclamation of mangrove swamps for coastal aquaculture has received some attention in this regard and the Workshop noted with interest that the forthcoming Workshop on Mangrove Ecology organized by the Thai National Research Council with the support of Unesco in Phuket, Thailand, 1-6 December 1975, would discuss among other things the ecological effects of using mangrove swamps for aquaculture purposes. It is hoped that the alleged dependence of shrimp fisheries on mangroves, which has not so far been substantiated, will be critically examined by this seminar.
<section>9</section>
9. REGIONAL COOPERATION AND EXTERNAL ASSISTANCE
The discussions in the Workshop clearly showed that the countries in the region are at different levels of development so far as aquaculture is concerned. In some there is a long tradition of fish farming and through research and experimentation, improvements have been effected in the existing technology and new techniques have been evolved. In others, aqua-culture is in its early stages of development. The availability of trained technicians and scientific expertise also differs considerably between the countries. It is therefore obvious that effective regional, sub-regional and bilateral cooperation can be highly beneficial in the implementation of aquaculture development plans. This is particularly so because of the common systems of culture that are adopted and the similarity of problems faced by the industry.
Limited bilateral cooperation among the countries of the region, such as between Thailand and Bangladesh and between Malaysia and Thailand, has developed in recent years. Some of the bilateral aid-giving agencies of the U.S.A., Canada (including IDRC), New Zealand, Japan and China are supporting certain specific activities, particularly research and demonstration, in selected institutions and governments. The Workshop stressed the need for greater cooperation among countries of the region practising the same or similar culture systems and the exchange of personnel among them.
Research, education and training were identified as the major fields in which sub-regional, regional or inter-regional cooperation could be most effective. The Workshop reviewed the terms of reference of the Aquaculture Department of the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center (SEAFDEC) and noted that these are sufficiently comprehensive and flexible, although priority has been given to research on shrimp and milkfish farming research. The Center serves five out of the 25 developing countries in the region. The need and possibility of the establishment of a centre to serve all the countries of the region, a sub-regional centre to serve the countries not covered by SEAFDEC and even of an international institute on the lines of the International Rice Research Institute in Los Banjos in the Philippines, was discussed in some detail, initially in a small working group and then in the plenary. As an alternative, the formation of a loose form of action-oriented "clearing
house" arrangement was also discussed by the Workshop. Though the Workshop recognized the usefulness of duplication in certain types of work, unnecessary and unproductive duplication of efforts has to be avoided, especially in view of the limited finances and expertise available at the present time.
The practical difficulties in the establishment of a regional centre were recognized. Efforts made by the Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council to organize research on high priority problems in the region through a voluntary Cooperative Programme of Research among national research centres did not yield very encouraging results. It has also not been possible to attract financial support for such a programme. There was general agreement that a regional centre to carry out multidisciplinary research of a long term nature, train higher categories of core personnel, provide assistance for the organization of pilot-scale operations, offer advisory services required by the countries of the region, assist in improving national expertise in undertaking feasibility studies, and act as a clearing house for technical and market information, would be a very effective support for the rapid development of aquaculture in the region. It was also agreed that such a regional centre need not
necessarily be a new institution and that it will be preferable to expand and improve the facilities of an existing station or stations for the purpose. The effectiveness of such a centre will naturally depend on the ability of national centres to apply the techniques developed in the regional centre and undertake research on problems of a local nature, especially in adapting techniques to local needs. For this purpose national centres will have to be strengthened and a mechanism developed for the two-way flow of expertise and information between regional and national centres. It has to be ensured that the work programme of the regional centre is based on the development requirements of the national centres and consequently of the countries. A suitable mechanism for this may have to be established, such as an advisory board consisting of the heads of regional and national agencies and representatives of other concerned agencies in the countries.
The training of higher level core personnel will have to be arranged in the regional centre, and this training programme should be designed on the basis of manpower requirements for implementing development plans of the various countries. The national centres should be adequately manned and equipped to undertake institutionalized and in-service training of extension officers and lower categories of personnel required in the countries. In the light of these considerations, the Workshop agreed that what is urgently needed in the region is a "network" of regional and national centres with close linkages as described above.
The production and distribution of seed for aquaculture was identified by the Workshop as an area in which regional cooperation would be of great advantage. The possibility of a seed exchange programme was mentioned, but in view of the enormous and unsatisfied national seed requirements for expanded aquaculture, further study of this was considered necessary. The South China Sea Fisheries Development and Coordinating Programme is undertaking such a study in the South China Sea countries and the results will be watched with interest.
Although the technique of induced breeding of fish, particularly Chinese and Indian carps, was developed many years ago, this technique has not reached wide application in the region. The main constraints appear to be the inadequate availability of suitable brood fish, pituitary material, larval rearing facilities and expertise. Using the donation of two governments, the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme is hoping to establish a pituitary bank shortly. If the "Regional Network" as proposed is established, the provision of technical assistance to needy countries for the establishment of fish breeding and larval rearing facilities and also for demonstrating the techniques and training local personnel, could form a part of its major functions. Provision of such assistance on an ad hoc basis pending the establishment of the "network" also needs to be considered.
Although diseases have not formed a major problem of regional importance until recently, with the wider adoption of high density culture and increasing intra-regional imports of fish seed, the dangers of the spread of different types of fish and shellfish diseases have become serious. There is an urgent need for greater efforts in the diagnosis, treatment and control of spread of communicable diseases for proper management of aquaculture stocks, and also to enable the region to effectively participate in the international convention for the control of fish diseases which is under the consideration of FAO Member Governments. If the "Regional Network" as proposed comes into being, a disease wing will have to be developed in the regional centre to undertake the necessary studies and provide assistance to the countries of the region as required.
The Workshop discussed the urgent need for studies on nutritional requirements of species used in the major aquaculture systems, and the formulation of feeds using inexpensive ingredients available locally. Regional cooperation was considered necessary in this field of work and the Regional Network, when established, should include this as a high-priority area of its work programme.
As a result of the worldwide interest in aquaculture and the great potential for expansion of the industry in Asia, many bilateral and multilateral aid-giving agencies are showing interest in supporting aquaculture in the region. A number of aid programmes are underway or are about to be started. Considering the massive support required to upgrade the aquaculture industry, and the limitations of expertise and funding available from different sources, there is very little likelihood of there being any surplus of aid in the region for a long time to come. But appropriate coordination of activities is essential to obtain the maximum benefit from them. Such coordination should start with the planning of activities and should be oriented to the concept of working together to implement a unified programme. The Workshop considered such overall coordination a major responsibility of the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP).
As described earlier, the Workshop stressed the need for the assistance of a multidisciplinary team for feasibility studies and the preparation of projects for financial and technical assistance. ADCP should give priority to this in its programme of work. As stated earlier, it should also develop a means of working more closely with the World Bank, Regional Banks, the FAO Bankers Group and ESCAP in order to facilitate and expedite financing of bankable aquaculture projects.
The major sources of assistance for aquaculture development in the region are expected to continue to be the UNDP, World Bank and Regional Banks. Almost all the national plans prepared during the Workshop indicate the need for increased UNDP assistance. As the country programming for the period 1977-81 has already started, the Fishery Departments have to take immediate action for the formulation of suitable projects. The existing UNDP/FAO national and regional projects could assist in the preparation of such projects. Additional assistance, where required, should be made available through ADCP. The needs of the Least Developed Countries (LDC) and particularly landlocked countries should receive particular attention and the special provision available in UNDP for funding projects in these countries should be fully utilized.
<section>a</section>
10. FOLLOW-UP ACTION
The more important recommendations arising from the Workshop discussions that require follow-up action are summarized below:
(a) The national ten-year development plans prepared by the participants should be suitably incorporated in the national economic/fishery development plans of the countries. Early internal consultations with appropriate government authorities may be needed for this purpose.
(b) Based on the requirements identified in the national plans, requests for aid from bilateral and multilateral sources should be formulated. Assistance should be provided by the existing aid projects, especially FAO/UNDP projects, to formulate such project proposals in consultation with local representatives of UNDP and other aid-giving agencies.
(c) The Workshop clearly indicated the need for aquaculture planning expertise in Fishery Administrations of the participating countries. Essential basic data have to be collected and analysed for appropriate refinement and revision of plan targets and strategy. Governments should therefore consider the possibility of establishing planning cells for aquaculture in the appropriate national agencies.
(d) The participating governments should take action to facilitate easy exchange of personnel and information between countries in the region. ADCP, in cooperation with RAFE and the South China Sea Fisheries Development and Coordinating Programme, should develop some suitable means of assisting such exchanges.
(e) ADCP should give high priority to the development of a multidisciplinary team of experts to assist governments in the region to undertake feasibility studies and in the preparation of bankable project proposals.
(f) ADCP should undertake consultations with the World Bank Group, FAO Bankers Group and other financing agencies with a view to devising simpler and quicker means of project formulation and financing of aquaculture enterprises.
(g) ADCP, in cooperation with interested agencies, should formulate detailed proposals for the "establishment" of a "Regional Network" consisting of regional and national, centres as described on page 10 and submit them for financing by appropriate funding agencies. A survey of the facilities of existing national centres for selecting those to participate in the network and consultations with governments in the region to establish the regional centre may be required. This should be done as soon as the project idea is accepted in principle by the funding agencies. Efforts should be made to establish the network as soon as possible.
(h) ADCP should convene a meeting of the representatives of agencies and regional projects involved and interested in providing assistance in the field of aquaculture in the region, for the purpose of discussing their current and future programmes. This should lead to effective coordination of future work as described on page 11.
(i) Regional assistance in project planning and feasibility studies, fish breeding, feed formulation and disease control can be incorporated in the work programme of the regional centre in the "Regional Network". These are also capable of being initiated separately if undue delays occur in the establishment of the network.
<section>b</section>
Annex I - List of participants
SECOND REGIONAL WORKSHOP ON AQUACULTURE PLANNING
Bangkok, Thailand - 1-17 October 1975
Bangladesh
Haq, S.
Director of Fisheries
81 Kakrail
Dacca
Hong Kong
Chan, W.L.
Senior Research Officer
Agriculture and Fisheries Department
Canton Road Government Offices
393 Canton Road, 12th Floor
Kowloon
India
George, P.C.
Joint Commissioner (Fisheries)
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Krishi Bhavan
New Delhi - 1
Sinha, V.R.P.
Project Coordinator, Composite Fish Culture and Fish Seed Production
Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute
Barrackpore via Calcutta
West Bengal
Indonesia
Hadi Atmowasono
Director of Planning
Directorate General of Fisheries
Ministry of Agriculture
J1. Salemba Raya No. 16
Jakarta
Poernomo, A.
Co-Manager, Brackishwater Shrimp & Milkfish Culture Project
Taman Kantini
P.O. Box 1
Jepara
Slamet Prayitno, R.
Director for Production Development
Directorate General of Fisheries
Ministry of Agriculture
J1. Salemba Raya No. 16
Jakarta
Malaysia
Pathansali, D.
Director, Fisheries Research
Fisheries Research Institute
Glugor, Penang
Zainol, S.
Fishery Officer
Fisheries Division
Ministry of Agriculture & Rural Development
Swettenham Road
Kuala Lumpur 10-02
Nepal
Rajbanshi, K.G.
Fisheries Development Officer
Fisheries Development Section
Department of Agriculture
Harihar Bhawan
Pulchowk, Lalitpur
Kathmandu
Rana, P.J.B.
Deputy Director General
Department of Agriculture
Harihar Bhawan
Pulchowk, Lalitpur
Kathmandu
Philippines
Acosta, P.A.
Officer in Charge
Fish Propagation Division
Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
Intramuros, Manila 2801
Macalincag, Miss N.G.
Chief, Planning and Management Staff
Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
Intramuros, Manila 2801
Singapore
Ng Chee Kien
Senior Primary Production Officer
Primary Production Department
Ministry of National Development
National Development Building
7th Floor, Maxwell Road
Singapore 2
Lim, Miss R.
Senior Primary Production Officer
Primary Production Department
Ministry of National Development
National Development Building
7th Floor, Maxwell Road
Singapore 2
Sri Lanka
Fernando, P.C.
Deputy Director - Planning
Ministry of Planning & Economic Affairs
7th Floor, Central Bank Bldg
Colombo 1
Goonewardene, E.G.
Secretary to the Ministry of Fisheries
P.O. Box 1707
Galle Face
Colombo 3
Mendis, A.S.
Deputy Director (Research)
Ministry of Fisheries
P.O. Box 1707
Colombo 3
Thailand
Ariya Sidthimunka
Director of Freshwater Fisheries Division
Department of Fisheries
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
Arporna Sribhibhadh
Secretary General
Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center
P.O. Box 4
Phrapradaeng, Samutprakarn
Deb Menasveta
Director, Marine Fisheries Division
Department of Fisheries
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
Umpol Pongsuwano
Director of Brackishwater Fisheries
Department of Fisheries
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
Tuanthai Bamrajarinpai
Director-General
Department of Fisheries
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
United Nations Development Programme
Ripley, Wm. Ellis
Fisheries Advisor
Division of Global and Interregional Programs
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Alikunhi, K.H.
Project Manager
Brackishwater Shrimp and Milkfish Culture Project
P.O. Box 2338
Jakarta, Indonesia
Appleyard, W.P.
Chief, Fishery Industries Development Service
Department of Fisheries
de Morsella, G.C.
Agricultural Economist
RAFE/ESCAP
Maliwan Mansion
Phra Atit Road
Bangkok 2, Thailand
Pillay, T.V.R.
Programme Leader
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
Department of Fisheries
Rabanal, H.R.
Fishery Officer (Aquaculture Development)
South China Sea Fisheries Development and Coordinating Programme
P.O. Box 1184
MCC Makati, Rizal
Philippines
Ruckes, E.
Consultant in Fisheries Economics
Institut fr Sozialkonomie der Agrarentwicklung
Technical University of Berlin
Podbielskiallee 64
D 1000 Berlin 33, Germany
Tang, Y.A.
Fishery Resources Officer
Aquatic Resources Improvement and Environment Service
Department of Fisheries
Tapiador, D.D.
Regional Fisheries Officer
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Far East
Maliwan Mansion
Phra Atit Road
Bangkok 2, Thailand
<section>c</section>
Annex II - Agenda
SECOND REGIONAL WORKSHOP ON AQUACULTURE PLANNING
Bangkok, Thailand - 1-17 October 1975
Stage I
1 October 1975 (Wednesday)
Registration.
Opening.
Problems and prospects of aquaculture development in Asia.
2 October 1975 (Thursday)
Basic data required for aquaculture planning.
Levels and patterns of aquaculture development.
3 October 1975 (Friday)
Role of public and private sectors in aquaculture.
Organization of aquaculture services for small- and industrial-scale development.
Research, support and extension services.
Manpower requirements and training of personnel.
4 October 1975 (Saturday)
Market surveys for aquaculture planning.
Handling and marketing of aquaculture products.
Development of auxiliary industries.
Financing and credit for aquaculture development.
5 October 1975 (Sunday)
Visit to Fish Culture Station of the Department of Fisheries at Kasetsart University and fish farms in Supanburi Province.
6 October 1975 (Monday)
Legal and environmental aspects of aquaculture development.
Incentives for aquaculture development.
Bilateral and multilateral assistance for aquaculture development.
Regional and inter-regional cooperation in aquaculture development.
7 October 1975 (Tuesday)
National policies, objectives of overall economic development strategy with particular reference to food production, guidelines for aquaculture development in participating countries.
Stage II
8 October 1975 (Wednesday)
Working Group discussions:
Working Group I
Bangladesh
India
Nepal
Sri Lanka
Working Group II
Hong Kong
Malaysia
Singapore
Working Group III
Indonesia
Philippines
Thailand
9 October 1975 (Thursday)
Working Group discussions.
10 October 1975 (Friday)
Working Group discussions.
11 October 1975 (Saturday)
Working Group discussions.
12 October 1975 (Sunday)
FREE
13 October 1975 (Monday)
Drafting of national development plans.
14 October 1975 (Tuesday)
Drafting of national development plans.
15 October 1975 (Wednesday)
Drafting of national development plans.
16 October 1975 (Thursday)
Drafting of national development plans.
17 October 1975 (Friday)
Finalization of draft plans.
Adoption of the report.
Departure of participants.
<section>d</section>
NATIONAL PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AQUACULTURE IN BANGLADESH^1/
^1/ Prepared by S. Haq, Director of Fisheries, Dacca
1. BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
Fish plays a vital role in the diet of the Bangalees, who have a traditional preference for fish. According to a nutrition survey conducted in 1962-64, the intake of animal protein of a Bangalee is only about 7.9 g per caput per day or 32 percent of the normal requirement of 25 g per day for an adult, resulting in malnutrition due to protein deficiency. However, out of the 7.9 g, a total of 6.4 g comes from fish.
The ratio of population to arable land in Bangladesh is already a staggering 3.5:1, meaning that every acre of cultivable land must provide all the requirements of life for 3.5 persons. There is hardly any room for horizontal expansion of agriculture. On the other hand, population increase results in decrease in acreage of cultivable land, with arable land being converted into residential areas with their related facilities, and urbanization and industrial growth also infringe on agricultural land. Therefore, the potential for meeting the animal protein deficiency by increasing production of beef and poultry is very limited because of the lack of necessary grazing and feeding areas.
The population density in Bangladesh is one of the highest in the world with 1 400 people per square mile, and it has been projected that by 1985 the population in Bangladesh will rise to about 120 million. The additional production required to just maintain the present fish consumption level of 6.4 g/day per caput will be about 250 000 tons by 1984. To meet the anticipated protein gap, Bangladesh will have to depend on her abundant water resources. The country is fortunate in having one of the highest ratios of water acreage per caput of population (1:7), with inland and territorial waters covering an estimated area of 5.6-6.0 million ha (14-15 million acres). It is estimated that about 6 million people (8 percent of the population) depend for their livelihood directly or indirectly on fisheries and fishing in these waters. The country has extensive inland water areas covering an aggregate of 1 473 101 ha (3 640 200 acres), comprising:
(ha)
(a) Rivers, streams and canals
(b) Estuaries and other brackish waters
(c) Ponds and tanks
(d) Natural depressions and ox-bows
(e) Hydro-electric reservoir (Kornafully Reservoir)
In addition to these inland water bodies, there are about 2 888 000 ha of paddy-fields which are inundated by flood waters for 4-6 months of the year. These flooded fields provide rich feeding and breeding grounds for various species of freshwater fishes and prawns. The total area of inland waters in Bangladesh amounts to about 4.3 million ha and there are 3-4 million acres (1.2-1.6 ha) of territorial waters in the Bay of Bengal.
According to estimates, total fish production in Bangladesh was 810 000 tons in 1969-70. Of this, 727 000 tons came from the inland waters (of which roughly 10 percent was from aqua-culture production) and some 83 000 tons from the sea. UNDP/FAO investigations during the 1960-69 decade have indicated a limited potential for extending present fishing operations into the deeper waters of the Bay of Bengal. A rapid increase in fish production should, therefore, be sought from inland waters.
The natural fisheries in the inland waters are faced with problems of overfishing due to population explosion causing an ever-increasing demand for fish. In addition, developmental activity in the fields of agriculture and industry in reclamation of land, use of pesticides, erection of flood control dams and construction of industrial plants that release harmful chemical wastes in natural waters are adversely affecting the production of fish in natural waters. The Government is very much aware of this situation, and has been directing its efforts toward protecting and conserving the natural fisheries through a well coordinated development programme in these fields. However, a long-term programme will be needed to increase fish production from these waters and the Government has been formulating policy and programme accordingly. The Water Pollution Control Board, the Technical Committee on the use of Pesticides, etc., have been constituted as a result of these Government
activities.
To meet the acute shortage of animal protein in the country, it is essential that substantial effort be directed toward development of aquaculture to achieve a significant increase in fish production within a reasonably short period.
In the national policy, food production has been receiving the highest priority. As such, fisheries development with emphasis on aquaculture has also been given adequate priority in the national five-year development plan and the production target at the end of fiscal year 1978-79 (terminal year) has been set at 1 029 000 tons. Based on the limited data available, it is projected that about 51 714 tons can be produced through aquaculture during the period 1974-79 (Table 6).
Besides increasing fish production, the objectives of the national development plan in the fisheries sector include
(i) raising the social, cultural and economic standards of the fishermen,
(ii) creation of employment opportunities in fishing and fisheries industries,
(iii) increase in export of fish to 20 000 tons by 1977-78, against 6 500 tons in 1973-74 of which shrimp made up 6 000 tons.
2. OBJECTIVES AND GOALS OF AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
2.1 Objectives
Bangladesh has about 155 200 ha of impounded inland waters which are readily available for intensive fish culture. Although fish culture is an age-old practice in this country, the scientific level is low, and extensive areas of impounded waters need to be partially reclaimed before these could be brought into regular production.
The Government has embarked on a short-term, labour-intensive programme to develop a total area of 25 000 ha of ponds and lakes for fish production by the end of the fiscal year 1978-79, which should yield over 22 482 tons of fish. When this objective is attained, further areas will be developed for fish production. In the past, 86 fish seed farms, each 4 ha in area, with an initial target capacity of 0.25 million fish fry, have been established and 15 more farms of this type are being constructed. Fingerlings produced in these farms are supplied for stocking Government as well as private impoundments.
UNICEF is assisting the fish-seed production programme by providing expert services to train the managers of these farms and supplying essential equipment to increase seed production. These seed production farms would form the basic facilities for large-scale production of fish seed (up to 10 million per centre by 1983) envisaged under the ten-year plan. UNICEF's programme also includes their participation in the development of aquaculture in impounded waters.
A Fresh Water Fisheries Research Station, a Fisheries Training Institute and a Fish Technological Laboratory were established in the early sixties as necessary infrastructure for fisheries development. These are being expanded to accommodate additional facilities. Programmes are underway to establish an aquaculture experimental station where all aspects of aquaculture research and development will be undertaken. UNDP and DANIDA have proposed assistance for establishing the above aquaculture complex. Programmes for establishment of hatchery complexes, a shrimp culture project and the development of intensive fish culture in the ox-bows and ponds with assistance from the World Bank are also being formulated. The World Bank has also assured financing of an integrated rural development programme including fisheries development in some areas of the country.
Labour-intensive programmes (food for work) in reclamation of derelict water bodies in the rural areas are included in the immediate and short-term objectives of the fisheries development plan. In this labour-oriented programme, it is proposed that Government-owned impounded waters be assigned after development to cooperatives formed by landless labour or subsistence level farmers in the locality. This programme of forming cooperatives is gaining momentum and will help expand aquaculture in the country.
The area proposed for aquaculture production during the period 1974-84 is shown in Table 1.
2.2 Production Targets
In fertilized ponds a production of approximately 1 625 kg/ha/year has been obtained, while in unfertilized ponds production generally does not exceed 600 kg/ha/year. The present level of total aquaculture production is 72 700 tons, which is only about 9 percent of the total fish production. By 1979 it is proposed that this be increased to 95 182 tons and by 1984, 182 745 tons (Table 2). During this period of development, it is estimated that a total of 383 665 tons of fish will be produced (Table 6). Total fish seed requirements for attaining the above production level are summarized in Tables 2 and 3. While collection from natural sources will continue to increase, by 1983 approximately 40 percent of the fish seed requirements are expected to be met by production from induced breeding. The 100 fish seed production centres already established will play a vital role in this connexion. Expertise in induced breeding is limited in the country and this is identified as an area
where external technical and material assistance is required to achieve the seed production targets.
2.3 Cultivated Species and Production Systems
There are over 255 species of brackishwater and freshwater fish and 21 species of prawns and shrimp inhabiting natural waters in the country. Carps form the most important economic group. The most common culture systems now in use are the following:
2.3.1 Carp culture in ponds and tanks
This is by far the most important aquaculture activity in the country, where several species are traditionally cultivated together in the same pond. Major commercial species include Catla catla, Labeo rohita, Cirrhina mrigala and Labeo calbasu. The bulk of stocking material is collected from flooded rivers. Production of seed through induced breeding by hypophysation is being progressively increased.
2.3.2 Fish culture in ox-bow lakes
Some sectors of rivers provide extensive areas for fish culture in ox-bow lakes. While natural stocking of fish seed takes place in these water bodies during monsoon months, supplementing natural stock with pond-reared fingerlings is necessary to augment production. Predatory species such as Notopterus chitals, Wallago attu, Channa marulius, Ompok bimaculatus, etc., together with smaller species of carps like Cirrhina reba and Labeo bata are common besides major carps in these waters.
2.3.3 Culture of air-breathing fishes
Freshwater catfishes, Clarias batrachus and Heteropneustes fossilis, are cultivated on a limited scale in small impoundments which are difficult to clear for carp culture. Technology for controlled breeding and seed production is still not developed in the country.
2.3.4 Culture of exotic species of pond fishes
Tilapia nilotica, Cyprinus carpio, Ctenopharyngodon idella and Hypophthalmichthys molitrix have been introduced into the country and culture practices are being developed for these species alone or in combination with major carps.
2,3.5 Culture of freshwater prawns
Macrobrachium rosenbergii and M. malcolmsoni are available and are being cultivated in ponds to a limited extent, adopting traditional practices. Controlled breeding and seed production have yet to be developed to expand culture of these species effectively.
2.3.6 Culture of brackishwater prawns and fish
Species of marine prawns are commercially important for export markets. Culture of these species (Penaeus indicus, P. semisulcatus, Metapenaeus spp.) is being practised to a limited extent by trapping juveniles coming in with the high tide in embankments, and allowing them to grow for a period of 4-6 months. However, construction of permanent salinity dams is destroying these "bherry" fisheries. Controlled breeding and hatchery rearing of seed have to be developed to better organize shrimp culture, and external assistance in this area is required to stimulate brackishwater fish culture. Juveniles of brackishwater food fishes like Chanos chanos, Mugil spp., Lates calcarifer, etc., also enter the "bherris" and culture of these species could be established through scientific improvement of traditional "bherry" culture methods.
2.3.7 Shrimp culture
Research on shrimp culture is being carried out at the Freshwater Fisheries Research Centre, Chandpur and it is hoped that by 1979 brackishwater shrimp could be cultured in large numbers. By 1980, 5 500 ha of brackish water would be utilized for shrimp culture (Table 1).
2.3.8 Frog farming
In the coldwater areas of the country, there is some scope for development of fish culture. There are a large number of frogs with different qualities, and an industry for frog's legs can be developed through scientific culture of frogs.
2.3.9 Pearl culture
There is also scope for pearl culture in Bangladesh. It has already been started on an experimental basis and the results so far have been quite satisfactory. Sufficient technical and financial assistance can help in developing this industry.
3. ESTABLISHMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension Service
The Directorate of Fisheries also provides the extension organization for development of aquaculture along with other aspects of fishery development. Extension personnel in the administrative divisions, district and thana levels are responsible for disseminating fish culture information to the fish culturists. They also inspect private ponds periodically and offer advice to improve culture practices. Publication of extension literature and provision of audio-visual aids through radio and television are also being undertaken. A bigger organization has been proposed for the extension service, and is awaiting government approval. This will help to meet the requirements of extension workers down to the lowest thana/union administrative level within the plan period.
3.2 Training of Core Personnel
The Government established a Fisheries Training Institute in the early sixties to train fisheries manpower in the country. After establishing the Fisheries Faculty, the Institute is solely engaged in in-service training of fisheries personnel. The university will be producing 15-20 fisheries graduates and a few post-graduates with Masters' degrees in fisheries science. The Institute is now undergoing expansion. A project has been drawn up for UNDP assistance to equip the Institute adequately for training of fisheries personnel, particularly those engaged in the extension service. In addition, short-term training of fish culturists ' on the methods of culturing Tilapia nilotica has been organized as a coordinated project between the Government and UNICEF.
3.3 Fellowships
Continued research is essential for development of fisheries in Bangladesh, but research requires specialized knowledge on various aspects of fish culture. Bangladesh does not have sufficient qualified people in this respect. Therefore, if a number of fellowships and training facilities are made available through aid-giving agencies, development of fisheries would be accelerated.
3.4 Organization and Research
The first research organization, the Freshwater Fisheries Research Station (FFRS) was established in the early sixties. Broad divisions of the research organization include (i) fishery biology, (ii) pond development and fish culture, (iii) fish taxonomy, (iv) fish parasites and disease, (v) malacology, (vi) Hilsa biology, (vii) algology, (viii) studies on prawn and shrimp, (ix) limnology and lake studies, (x) water pollution, (xi) preservation and processing of fish, (xii) studies on fish oils, and (xiii) fishing gear, etc. A sub-station of the FFRS has been established, and another is expected soon.
As already mentioned, a project for an aquaculture complex to be built in an area of about 25 ha with assistance from DANIDA and UNDP is now in progress. With the establishment of this complex, much of the applied research and demonstration activities in aquaculture will become possible. Besides, this station will provide facilities for training groups of extension personnel and fish farmers.
4. PRODUCTION PROGRAMMES
4.1 Financing and Credit
Development projects in the public sector are financed through government grants and aid from different international agencies like the World Bank Group, FAO/UNDP and DANIDA. In the private sector, fish farmers can procure credit and loans from the Agriculture Development Bank. The private pisciculturists may also form cooperatives and obtain loans or credit from the cooperative organization. However, all these credit facilities are quite inadequate to meet the growing credit needs, particularly in the private sector where a considerable awareness for improved fish culture has already been created.
4.2 Phasing and Management of Production Programmes
In the public sector, projects have been initiated to develop approximately 25 000 ha of ponds and tanks by 1978-79 at an estimated cost of Takas 408 million^1/. These are labour intensive programmes. UNICEF has proposed to assist the programmes with materials worth Takas 55.9 million and 25 000 tons of wheat to be utilized under "food for work" programmes in these projects. Some of these areas will eventually be handed over for management to the local cooperatives, comprising mainly landless labour.
^1/ U.S.$ 1.00 = approx. Takas 14.70
Progressive expansion of aquaculture production is planned and by 1984 over 125 000 ha of ponds, tanks and baors will be under regular culture, yielding an annual production of 110 045 tons (Table 4).
The 100 fish seed farms will be adequately equipped so that each will achieve its target of production of 10 million fry annually by 1983. At present it is estimated that 15 million carp fry are produced in the public sector with an equal quantity being produced in the private sector.
The existing Fisheries Research Station needs upgrading of its activities and to undertake work on fish parasites and diseases, water pollution, fish breeding, use of fertilizer in fish ponds, etc. The proposed aquaculture complex to be built with DANIDA and UNDP assistance is expected to provide the basic research support for aquaculture development.
More trained manpower will be required to develop and manage the water bodies for fish culture. The faculty of fisheries of the Agriculture University is expected to produce the required number of fishery graduates. Science graduates will also be recruited and trained in the Fisheries Training Institute to man the aquaculture projects. Moreover, the country needs external assistance for specialized aquaculture training of core personnel.
4.3 Storage, Marketing and Export
Since fish is a perishable product it requires well organized storage, marketing and export systems. While some programmes have been initiated in these fields, more endeavours are essential to improve the present situation in these areas.
Through the assistance of the Asian Development Bank, marketing facilities throughout the country are being expanded. Since the preference of Bangalees is for inland freshwater fish rather than the marine products, marketing of the estimated aquaculture production will not pose any serious problem in the near future as these products will be consumed locally.
4.4 Budget
The annual non-development budget of the organization of the Directorate of Fisheries is an estimated Takas 7.88 million which is mainly utilized for organizing aquaculture activities. The allocation for the fishery sector during the five-year plan (1973-78) is Taka 451.48 million. Particulars of aquaculture development and allied projects included in the plan and now in progress or being processed, are given below:
Name of the project
Expected capital cost (million Takas)
Expected operating cost (million Takas)
Expected annual return (tons of fish)
Remarks
Scheme for fish culture in public ponds in the northern districts of Bangladesh
Development and management of derelict water areas for fish production
Development of fish culture, angling and rowing in the impounded waters in and around Dacca city
Expansion of Freshwater Fisheries Research Station
No direct production
Improvement of Freshwater Research Laboratory
No direct production
Scheme for expansion of Fisheries Training Institute
No direct production
Pilot scheme for freshwater fish culture in polder areas in Khulna district
Scheme for strengthening of fisheries extension in Bangladesh
Expansion of the scheme for fish seed production farms
Production of an estimated 25 million fry
Pilot project on culture of pearl-bearing mussels
An estimated 57 000 pearls will be produced
Establishment of brackishwater research station
No direct production
Scheme for aquaculture experimental station
No direct production
Technical assistance by World Bank for preparation of inland fisheries project
No direct production
Pilot scheme for development of Zeol fish (Clarias sp., Anabas sp. and Heteropneustes sp.)
Production of estimated 1 million fry and 5 tons of fish annually
Totals
Grand total
The costs involved in increased inputs for augmenting production, for collection/production and rearing of fish seed, etc., are indicated in Table 5. The total anticipated expenditure of Takas 2 149 million for the ten-year aquaculture development plan (Table 6) is expected to be funded from national resources and by bilateral and multilateral assistance.
4.5 External Assistance Requirement
Besides problems of management of waters and aquaculture development, the absence of reliable information on the resource potential has been a serious restraint to proper planning. Consequent to a rapid assessment of the country's problems and needs, the following assistance projects have been planned:
(a) Fisheries Development in Bangladesh - Project coordination
(b) Fisheries Development in Bangladesh - Marketing
(c) Fisheries Development in Bangladesh - Training and extension
(d) Fisheries Development in Bangladesh - Research and resource development
(e) Fisheries Development in Bangladesh - Aquaculture
Under these projects, provision has been made for the training of Bangladesh personnel abroad, expert services, supply of equipment and an overall survey of the fisheries resources of the country. The total external and government expenditure in these projects is expected to be in the order of Takas 2 620 million.
DANIDA has proposed assisting in the establishment of an aquaculture complex by supplying equipment, expert services and bearing a portion of the local cost. A project has been proposed for the development of fisheries including aquaculture, in an irrigation project (Chandpur irrigation and flood control project) with the assistance of the World Bank. A feasibility study has begun for the preparation of an inland fisheries project and the establishment of a hatchery complex with World Bank/IDA financial assistance. Under the latter project, studies on the prospects of shrimp culture will be undertaken.
It would appear that identification of problems and projects for the development of fisheries, particularly for aquaculture, has been accomplished. Implementation of the programmes will appreciably help the development of fisheries and aquaculture in the country. However, there are many more areas where development work cannot be undertaken with the available limited country resources. Some of these areas include a large number of embanked areas for flood control and irrigation in the inland and coastal areas, in which major capital investment is necessary to implement aquaculture development. Basic technology of aquaculture in such areas will be developed by 1983 and then organized development of those areas for fish production will have to be initiated.
Credit facilities extended to private aquaculturists by the Agricultural Development Bank are inadequate because of their limited finance capacity. International banks, viz., the World Bank, Asian Development Bank, Islamic Bank, etc., could render substantial assistance by providing funds for extension of credit facilities to private fish farmers, and thereby helping development of fish farming in this country within the shortest possible time.
TABLE 1
Additional Area (ha) Proposed for Aquaculture Development (1974-84)
Year
Total
Tank and dighi
Fresh water
Brackish water
Baor (Ox-bow lake)
Total
TABLE 2
Projection of Additional Fish Seed Requirements (1974-83)
Year
Seed production (millions)
Natural
Induced
Eggs
Fingerlings
Eggs
Fingerlings
TABLE 3
Requirements of Additional Fingerlings for Aquaculture by 1983
Type of water area
Species
Total area to be stocked (ha)
Rate of stocking (ha)
Total no. of fingerlings (million)
Ponds and dighis (intensive culture)
Carp
Baor (Ox-bow lake)
Carp
Brackish water
Shrimp
TABLE 4
Projected Increases in Aquaculture Area, Operation Costs and Production by 1979 and 1984^1/
^1/ The present total production is estimated to be 72 700 tons
Type of water area
Area (ha)
Operation costs (million Takas)
Fingerling (million)
Rate of production (kg/ha)
Production (tons)
Pond and dighis (intensive culture in fresh water)
Baor (Ox-bow lake)
Brackish water
Total
Pond and dighis (intensive culture)
Baor (Ox-bow lake)
Brackish water
Ponds and dighis
Total
TABLE 5
Projection of Additional Fish Seed Requirements and Costs for their Production (1975-83) ^1/
^1/ Nursery and rearing ponds required for nursing spawn and raising fingerlings will be 350 ha. The 100 fish breeding stations at present have about 100 ha of water area in production. Part of this will be utilized for spawn and the rest for fingerling production
Year
Nursery area to be operated (ha)
Spawn to be stocked (million)
Fingerlings (million)
Rearing expense (million Takas)^2/
Total (million Takas)
Natural
Induced breeding
Natural
Induced breeding
Natural
Induced breeding
^2/ Rearing expense for natural fingerlings estimated at Takas 42 000/million, and rearing expense of cultured fingerlings at Takas 12 500/million. Rearing expense includes transportation of spawn, equipment, fertilization and labour cost
TABLE 6
Ten-year Aquaculture Development Plan for Bangladesh (1974-84)
Total
Area (ha)
Tanks and dighi
(Fresh water)
(Brackish water)
Baor (Ox-bow lake)
Total
Development cost^1/ (million Takas)
Tanks and dighi
(Fresh water)
(Brackish water)
Baor (Ox-bow lake)
Total
Operational cost ^2/ - (million Takas)
Tanks and dighi
(Fresh water)
(Brackish water)
Baor (Ox-bow lake)
Total
Fingerlings required (million)
Tanks and dighi
(Fresh water)
(Brackish water)
Baor (Ox-bow lake)
Total
Production (tons)
Tanks and dighi
(Fresh water)
(Brackish water)
Baor (Ox-bow lake)
Total
^1/ Development cost has been calculated at (i) Tank and dighi - Takas 10 000/ha; (ii) Baor - Takas 3 000/ha
^2/ Operational cost has been calculated at (i) Tank and dighi (Fresh) - Takas 6 000/ha; (ii) Brackish - Takas 1 500/ha (iii) Baor - Takas 2 500/ha
Operational cost includes stocking, manuring, labour charge, fishing and other miscellaneous expenditure (excluding managerial cost)
Total cost: 1/ + 2/ Takas 2 149 million
Value: Takas 2 302 million at Takas 6 000/ton
<section>e</section>
NATIONAL PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AQUACULTURE IN HONG KONG^1/
^1/ Prepared by Mr. W.L. Chan, Senior Research Officer, Agriculture and Fisheries Department, Kowloon
1. BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
1.1 Supply and Demand Estimates
In considering overall development planning, Nichols (Nichols, E.H., 1974. Fisheries Development Planning in Hong Kong. Hong Kong Fish. Bull., No. 4, pp. 1-10) has given an account of the present supply of and projected future demand for fish and fishery products in Hong Kong. These estimates have been based on the sources of supply including both local production and imports, as well as the trend of per caput consumption for the 1961-73 period, during which time the population increased from 3.13 to 4.16 million at an average annual growth rate of 2.4 percent. Tables 1-3 summarize these estimates for fresh marine fish and crustacea and other products of the marine capture fisheries, and for freshwater fish production through aquaculture in Hong Kong.
If the trend of increasing demand continues at the past rate, and if population growth continues at an average annual rate of 2.4 percent, the additional demand for these three categories of products should be 131 694 tons by 1986, comprising:
(a) 66 285 tons of fresh marine fish;
(b) 17 218 tons of Crustacea and other fresh marine products; and
(c) 48 191 tons of freshwater fish.
It is difficult to assess the per caput utilization of live marine fish because of the lack of representative statistical data. The present direct production from marine fish culture has been estimated at 530 tons. It may be possible to attain a future target production of over 5 000 tons. When this is taken into consideration, the demand for fish and fisheries products could reach 136 694 tons.
1.2 Meeting Projected Additional Demand
Of this projected additional demand, the planned development of Hong Kong fisheries would in all probability bring about a total production increase of 96 472 tons or about 70 percent of the projected additional demand. The remaining 40 222 tons, or about 30 percent of the projected additional demand, would have to depend on imports.
The projected increase in supply of 96 472 tons is estimated to comprise:
(a) 57 300 tons of fresh marine fish, or 60 percent, from the marine capture sector;
(b) 839 tons of Crustacea and other fresh marine products, or 1 percent, from the marine capture sector;
(c) 33 333 tons of live freshwater fish, or 34 percent, from the aquaculture sector; and
(d) 5 000 tons of live marine fish, or 5 percent, from the aquaculture sector.
Thus, it can be seen that the aquaculture sector would play an important role in the attainment of these target increases.
Although the availability of land and other inherent limitations may limit further expansion of inland fish culture, increased production of freshwater fish could be realized through increasing production rates and gradual modernization of culture practices. Mari-culture of fish and possibly Crustacea appears to offer greater development potential, but it is at present difficult to reliably predict its real production potential.
1.3 National Policies
The optimization of local production wherever possible, and minimizing and alleviating the problems arising from an over-dependence on external food supplies, continues to be the major national policy. Concisely, the fundamental policy objectives are to achieve and establish:
(a) the highest possible production;
(b) the most efficient utilization of all available land and coastal areas;
(c) an adequate supply of technically competent personnel in all sectors of the industry;
(d) technologically advanced culture systems; and
(e) an economically viable aquaculture industry.
The primary target of these objectives is to meet the expanding demand for food, and at the same time with an increasingly affluent society, to attain product quality and acceptability. Increasing foreign exchange earning and employment are not major plan objectives.
1.4 Role of Aquaculture Development in Attaining National Policies
Despite constraints of area, water and aquatic pollution, the aquaculture sector can still play a role in the future development of Hong Kong fisheries. The objectives of inland fish culture are primarily to maintain current acreages for as long as possible against alternative usage and at the same time to increase productivity. Since it is a comparatively new sphere of fisheries development, coastal fish culture appears to have greater development potential. Its development at this stage depends on the availability of appropriate legislative measures for its protection and control. Oyster culture, on the other hand, has been on the decline as a result of the ageing of the grounds, and its future potential as a source of food production is indeed doubtful.
OBJECTIVES AND GOALS OF AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
2.1 Objectives
The objectives of aquaculture development are essentially those under section 1.3. These are long-term targets with the emphasis on maximizing production while ensuring economic viability.
To facilitate the attainment of these targets, the following lines of action are considered to be of immediate significance:
(a) introduction of aquaculture legislation for the protection and control of aquaculture investments and activities;
(b) encouraging the utilization of suitable areas for aquaculture development, paying due attention to coordination of all sectors in development planning; and
(c) assisting aquaculturists to increase their economic returns, through the provision of advice and assistance.
With these prerequisite actions, it becomes possible to attain the set objectives (section 1.3) through:
(a) the expansion of the total acreage of inland fishponds and coastal waters;
(b) increasing yield by intensive culture practices and reducing natural mortality; and
(c) ensuring acceptable production costs by:
(i) reduction of labour requirements per unit culture area;
(ii) proper selection and maintenance of materials, facilities and equipment;
(iii) introduction of economically acceptable feeds of adequate nutritive value;
(iv) maintaining a balanced supply-and-demand situation with respect to "seedlings"; and
(v) increasing yield per unit area.
It is unnecessary to phase the objectives since the attainment of set objectives to be realized by 1986 necessitates consistent administrative strategy in terms of the organization of available resources and the overall control and management of development programmes. In addition, as circumstances vary, there will be the need to periodically review situations with the object of ascertaining the adequacy of objectives/programmes in covering additional needs and new trends that are expected to arise during various phases of development.
With the exception of a few farms, small-scale, family-operated type of culture accounts for the bulk of aquaculture production. Although this traditional trend has prevailed since the introduction of fish culture, its viability in the future would have to be reassessed, particularly when the development of intensive culture is contemplated. Moreover, with the need for attaining economic production costs and for overcoming inherent aquaculture problems, this trend would probably change as medium- and large-scale financial interests from the private sector go into fish culture as an organized business investment. This latter situation may very likely happen since aquaculture products, particularly marine fishes, are luxury food items that are readily absorbed by the local market.
In considering sectoral priorities, therefore, the present small-scale commercial type of culture operations should continue to receive full assistance from and support of the Government with the object of maintaining the present level of production on one hand, and increasing the level of productivity on the other.
At the same time, medium- and large-scale investments from the private sector or from the cooperative sector, should be forthcoming as appropriate governmental control and protective measures become possible through the approval of the presently proposed aquaculture legislation. Production from such investments, particularly in mariculture, can be expected to be significant. At the same time, the gradual modernization of culture practices could be initiated through such investments. This possible new development should begin to receive equally high priority at this time.
2.2 Production Target
According to Nichols (1974), the targeted production of freshwater and euryhaline fishes by 1986 should be in the region of 33 000 tons from inland and coastal fishponds. This means a conservative estimate of a tenfold increase over the 1974 production of 3 438 tons, to be achieved as noted under section 2.1 through the expansion of the present culture area of 1 677 ha to a future maximum of 2 280 ha. At the same time, this could also be attained through increasing productivity of each of these two culture systems. The current average annual yields are 2.5 tons/ha for inland fishponds and 0.2 tons/ha for coastal fishponds. Through the introduction of new farm management that could be absorbed by the present level of skills of the average operator, these rates may be substantially increased to 8 and 6 tons/ha respectively. This means a potential annual production of 16 000 tons for inland pond culture and 1 700 tons for coastal pond culture. These would give a total of 17 700
tons. The remaining 15 300 tons may be realized by further development of swamp and agriculture lands, but this would depend on an economically viable balance of demand and supply situation.
In the marine fish culture sector, it is possible to anticipate a tenfold increase over the present production of 500 tons, or 5 000 tons by 1986. This will, however, be subject to the implementation of legislative measures to enable, control and protect culture activities and private investments.
2.3 Cultivated Species and Production Systems
2.3.1 Inland fish culture
Mostly located in the northwestern sector of the New Territories, inland fish culture essentially involves the polyculture of commercially important Chinese cyprinids and the grey mullet. In the order of their relative commercial importance, these include:
Mugil cephalus (grey mullet)
Ctenopharyngodon idella (grass carp)
Aristichthys nobilis (bighead carp)
Hypophthalmichthys molitrix (silver carp)
Cyprinus carpio (common carp)
Cirrhina molitorella (mud carp)
Carassius auratus (edible goldfish)
Of these, the grey mullet is the most important species, normally representing between 40 and 50 percent of the total annual yield from inland fishponds.
The culture system essentially conforms with traditional Chinese practices in fertilized earth ponds ranging from less than 0.3 ha to more than 1 ha each. Farm units also vary widely in size from about 1 ha to over 7 ha per unit. Due to limitations in fresh water supplies, culture operations are carried out in "closed" system, and rely heavily on precipitation as the primary source of fresh water The average yield has been estimated to be 2.5 tons/ha. This clearly shows that there is ample room for further improvement in production.
2.3.2 Coastal fish culture
This type of culture is operated in reclaimed mangrove swamps adjacent to Deep Bay in the northwestern sector of Hong Kong. The organisms cultivated include approximately 50 percent by weight of penaeid prawns, and the remaining 50 percent of the following organisms:
Scylla serrata (green crab)
Mylio latus (yellowfin seabream)
Mugil species (mullets)
Lates calcarifer (giant perch)
Lateolabrax japonica (Japanese sea perch)
This form of culture involves primarily the utilization of fish and crustacean larvae in tidal waters that are periodically allowed to flood the ponds through sluice gates. The larvae and sometimes fingerlings of these organisms are left to survive and grow. Due to dynamic daily fluctuations in ecological factors, as well as the presence of organisms typical of both the predator and omnivore food chains, substantial mortalities occur. The average yield of this culture system is, therefore, low at 0.8 tons/ha; and redevelopment of the existing 280 ha of ponds should use improved systems of production.
2.3.3 Marine fish culture
The cultivation of marine fishes is carried out in floating cages, and has only become a lucrative occupation to people of a coastal background since 1969. It is essentially a "fattening" process in which readily available fry, fingerlings and early juveniles of commercially valuable species are raised to a commercial size. The species under cultivation include a wide range of species comprising primarily the Serranidae (groupers), Lutjanidae (snappers) and Sparidae (seabreams). Of these, the more widely utilized species include:
Epinephelus akaara (red grouper)
E. brunneus (mud grouper)
E. awaora (yellow grouper)
Lutjanus argentimaculatus (mangrove snapper)
L. johnii (John's snapper)
L. russelli (Russell's snapper)
Chrysophrys major (red pargo)
Mylio berda (white seabream)
M. latus (yellowfin seabream)
Rhadosarga sarda (goldline seabream)
Low-priced fresh fish from the marine capture fisheries comprise the primary source of feed in this form of culture.
2.3.4 Oyster culture
This is carried out on the intertidal mud flats located in the southern and inner shores of Deep Bay. The traditional bottom culture method is adopted, and cement slabs and sticks, oyster shells, and rocks are used as the main substrates for the settlement and subsequent growth of the spat. The species include Crassostrea gigas and C. rivularis.
2.3.5 Development considerations
The present level of technology used in these culture systems is considered adequate insofar as the economics are concerned. However, when considering increased production per unit area, traditional practices and experiences appear to leave much room for improvement. Development in this direction must, however, take into consideration the current level of skills of producers and the possibilities of, and strategy for, the attainment of the required level of technological competence of this primary sector. At the same time, consideration should also be given to all possible factors that may affect the future economics of production. These subjects are now under active review.
The development of new technology would require a closely integrated research and extension programme on the part of the Government, and effective coordination and cooperation between Government and the industry.
The present "tembak" system of coastal fish culture is considered to be unproductive though inputs may be minimal. The current 280 ha of coastal fish ponds should, therefore, be redeveloped for the monoculture or polyculture of selected commercial euryhaline fishes. The design and construction engineering know-how, as well as a modern approach to culture management in such a redevelopment, are considered to be extremely vital to the expected improvement of this system of culture. These pre-requisites to the future development of the inland pond fish and marine fish culture systems, should also receive immediate attention. It is, therefore, essential that an integrated programme be initiated to examine all possible ways and means of solving these problems. At the same time, it is essential that the feasibility and the cost/benefit ratio of each culture system be thoroughly examined for further development planning.
3. ESTABLISHMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension Service
The Hong Kong Agriculture and Fisheries Department provides a wide range of extension services, covering all technical, socio-economic and biological aspects. To ensure the attainment of the set objectives, it is considered necessary that technical advice and assistance in the following lines should be given particular importance:
(a) increasing productivity through proper farm management, disease control and the overcoming of pollution problems;
(b) minimizing production costs through effective farm management, the introduction of better growth promoting feeds at a viable cost, and raising the average level of technical competence of the producers; and
(c) expanding the total acreage of farmed areas through legal control and protection measures, and putting aquaculture on a firm status in the overall governmental policy concerned with land and foreshore development.
Although there is a need for the training of farmers, the strategy to be adopted would have to vary under different situations. In conforming with past practices, extension services would continue to be provided through the collective efforts of various sections of the Department. Accordingly, it becomes difficult to estimate expenditure requirements for such provisions.
3.2 Training of Core Personnel
Although the training of core personnel is under review at this time, two categories of requirements can be identified. In the public sector there is the need to establish core extension staff with the necessary training in technical expertise ranging from supervisory to field operation responsibilities. This training will be provided, in normal cases, through the present in-service arrangements. On the other hand, there will also be the need for overseas/international assistance. The present aquaculture extension team provides adequate manpower requirements in coping with current needs. For the future, however, there will be the need to consider a 30-40 percent increase in manpower.
As regards the private sector, manpower requirements for both the present and the future should present no problem. The level of skills of the present operators will have to be raised and appropriately upgraded with the object of attaining a nucleus of farm managers who should be capable of controlling and supervising technical operations. The training of these core personnel could be organized in the public or private sector. Operators may be directly trained by experienced farm managers, by commercial culturists, or by the public sector technicians.
3.3 Organization of Research
The role of research in the overall aquaculture development plan is basically one of fact-finding. At the same time, the research sector will also be responsible for making recommendations arising either from research or investigation of situations which will assist in making administrative decisions in connexion with the implementation of development programmes along the lines set out under section 2.1. Subject to administrative clearance, adjustment, and/or weighting, the adopted recommendations would be implemented through the joint effort of both research and extension personnel. Research also plays, therefore, a role in extension providing the necessary scientific services that may be required.
The Fisheries Research Division of the Department has two experimental stations, one for marine fish culture research and the other for inland fish culture research. Both these stations at present required strengthening in terms of the basic accommodation and experimental facilities.
Future arrangements for long- and short-term research will depend on the technological requirements to fulfil the development objectives. Other sections of the Department will continue to collaborate with the Research Division and this will ensure the fullest use of the resources of professional expertise of the Department. Similarly, within the Research Division other research programmes are integrated with those of the aquaculture section particularly in diseases, pollution, and limnological and hydrographical research programmes.
There is a need to consider the training of research personnel insofar as updating their awareness of the ever continuing advancements made in the field of aquaculture. This generally applies to the scientific and technical cadres of staff. In addition, specific needs are expected to arise from time to time. These could either be arranged through the in-service training programmes of the Department, or through overseas/international programmes.
Recurrent research costs should probably range between U.S.$ 10 000 and U.S.$ 20 000 per year for the next ten years. This level of expenditure has not taken into consideration the possible increases in the cost of research materials, etc. At the same time, it excludes equipment costs for items costing more than U.S.$ 2 000.
4. PRODUCTION PROGRAMMES
4.1 Financing and Credit
As noted in Nichols (1974), capital for development is available within Hong Kong. The increasing trend of private interest in aquaculture can be expected to play a major role in financing further production activities. This depends, however, mainly on the outcome of the present effort of the Department in introducing aquaculture legislation. As regards credit facilities, there has already been in existence for some time a special fund to assist existing operators. The management of this fund is being entrusted to the Department, and will be directly linked with the existing extension services.
4.2 Phasing and Management of Production Programmes
Although there are approximately 600 ha of additional agricultural lands and swamps that can be developed for inland fish culture, their availability for fish culture is uncertain and subject to decision on a case by case basis. On the other hand, the total utilizable surface area of bays and inlets of the inshore environment has been estimated to be 500 ha. These waters are relatively pollution-free and more sheltered from rough weather conditions, but exclude utilizable foreshores adjacent to these selected bays and inlets. As regards oyster culture, there appear to be no acceptable sites for the expansion of the present operation, and it is, therefore, considered to have no further development potential.
The development of these additional areas would mainly depend on the interest of the private sector. It is not yet possible to control or predict the rate of development of inland fish culture because of a number of inherent social factors with respect to land rights and tenure. On the other hand, it would be possible to control the future development of marine fish culture after passing the proposed aquaculture legislation.
In the circumstances, the phasing of production programmes can at present be summarized as follows:
(a) First phase (1975-76) - Approval of aquaculture legislation. Implementation of research and extension development programmes. Coordination with the industry. Review and adjustment of all existing services.
(b) Second phase (1976-86) - Development of additional areas. Increasing productivity of existing operations. Control, regulate, protect and assist all culture activities.
The Department will continue to control, regulate and assist in the development of culture sites, and advise on the establishment of farms and facilities. Through its extension programmes, to be adjusted as and when necessary, it will also continue to provide technical advice to the operators either collectively or individually. The adoption of a cooperative approach to the procurement of inputs is considered desirable, and this subject is now under active review. Disease control and related problems will continue to be emphasized for the purpose of attaining acceptable quality of the products and at the same time indirectly increasing yield.
While harvesting is expected to be carried out individually, it is hoped that marketing of aquaculture products will be reorganized following the system presently adopted for the disposal of fresh marine fish. At the present moment, the system of marketing culture products is considered unsatisfactory in many ways.
4.3 Budget
Government costs for the implementation of production programmes would come from the annual budget of the Department, and there may be the need to increase the budget by 30-40 percent for this purpose. Investments in these programmes would largely be forthcoming from the private sector.
External Assistance Requirements
These should include:
(a) training of extension personnel;
(b) exchange of information and periodic gathering of personnel;
(c) provision of professional consultations with respect to construction engineering (marine, brackish and fresh water); artificial propagation of commercially important Hong Kong marine fishes; fish feeds and related nutritional problems; and problems of fish diseases; and
(d) participation in training programmes financed by international institutions/organizations relating to fields noted under (c) above.
TABLE 1
Production, Trade and Consumption of Fresh Marine Fish, Crustacea and other Fresh Marine Products, and Cultured Freshwater Fish
Product
Local landings (tons)
Imports (tons)
Export & re-export (tons)
Total consumption (tons)
Per caput^1/ consumption (kg/yr)
Marine capture fisheries
Fresh marine fish
Crustacea, etc.
Aquaculture
Freshwater fish
^1/ Total per caput consumption (actual situations): 25.7 kg/year for 1961, and 37.3 kg/year for 1973. These figures exclude consumption of cultured marine species, of which 500 tons were produced in 1974.
TABLE 2
Estimated Per Caput Demand for Fresh Marine Fish, Crustacea and Other Fresh Marine Products, and Freshwater Fish for 1976, 1981 and 1986
Year
Per caput demand (kg)
Fresh marine fish
Crustacea, etc.
Freshwater fish
Grand total
Shrimp
Others
Total
TABLE 3
Estimated Demand and Supply (Tons) of Fresh Marine Fish, Crustacea and Other Fresh Marine Products, and Freshwater Fish
Product
Projected demand
Estimated production
Projected net imports
Scope for^2/ development planning
Marine capture fisheries
Fresh marine fish
Crustacea, etc.
Aquaculture
Freshwater fish
Marine fish
^1/ Data for 1973 actual, not estimated
^2/ Increased production required (tons)
<section>f</section>
NATIONAL PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AQUACULTURE IN INDIA^1/
^1/ Prepared by Prof. P.C. George, Joint Commissioner (Fisheries), Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India, New Delhi and Dr. V.R.P. Sinha, Project Coordinator, Composite Fish Culture and Fish Seed Production, Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute (ICAR), Barrackpore, India
1. INTRODUCTION
Fishery development through national plans has been directed at overall development of the industry in its various spheres, such as production from marine and inland capture fisheries, development and improvement of technology, provision of infrastructure at production and distribution centres, training of technical manpower and suitable arrangements for improved storage and marketing. Marine resource utilization is highly capital intensive and has the advantage of application of large-scale effort from selected points. An integrated approach has been adopted in the new programme for marine fishery development. In the inland fishery sector, however, development remained slow for many reasons, such as the widespread nature of the various activities, technology not being transferred down to the producer level, and absence of an adequate number of trained personnel. It is also true that the immense scope for fish production, through adoption of modern aquaculture practices has
been brought to the attention of planners rather late. It has now been established that production could be substantially raised if input requirements and the various factors contributing to the success of modern techniques of aquaculture were fully taken into account and the necessary measures adopted to meet the needs of the country. While it is recognized that national plans have constraints of finance and inter-se-priorities, and regional and subregional patterns of development, it is high time that a projection be made on the way aquaculture could be used to raise fish production, increase employment potential and utilize rural manpower so that rural populations can better themselves socially and economically. It is in this context that an attempt is made in this document to present a ten-year aquaculture development plan for India for the period 1975-84. It is quite evident that such a document need not necessarily fall in line with the national projections or
priorities which have to take care of several other factors in computing targets. Hence, while it is obvious that the assumptions and formulations made by the authors do not necessarily reflect the current official approach of their government, it is understood that these give a valid basis for a new production programme for accelerated development of aquaculture.
2. BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
The present estimated population of India is 621 million and is expected to rise to about 790 million in the course of a decade, i.e., by 1985. The present per caput consumption of fish in the country is only 2.8 kg/year and so, even to maintain this rate of consumption, the quantity of fish required in 1985 will be about 2.3 million tons.
The total fish production in India in 1973 was 1.958 million tons of which 1.21 million tons was obtained from marine resources and 0.748 million tons from inland waters. Out of this production, 0.410 million tons was obtained through aquaculture.
During 1973, the import of fish into India was in the order of 2 500 tons, comprising exclusively freshwater fish to meet the immediate requirements of the north eastern states. The export of marine products during 1973 was 48 785 tons valued at I.Rs. 795.8 million^2/ and represented about 2.5 percent of the country's total export income. However, the export was mainly of prawns and other crustaceans, which accounted for nearly a quarter of the international trade in shrimp products.
^2/ U.S.$ 1.00 = approx. I.Rs. 8.40
In order to reduce the wide gap between fish production and requirement, several measures have to be taken in both marine and inland sectors. Capture fisheries alone cannot offer an inexhaustible resource to meet the ever increasing demands, particularly when conservation and management measures have to be implemented for optimum utilization of the resource on a continuing basis. In this context, aquaculture offers the best alternative approach to effectively supplement the requirements of fish for the people. The advantages of aquaculture particularly include comparatively low capital investment requirements, the intensive nature of the culture operations, and the fact that it could be developed as a cottage industry.
India offers a rich potential for development of aquaculture. Available statistics show that about 1.6 million ha of freshwater ponds and tanks are available for fish culture, of which 0.6 million ha are currently utilized, 0.4 million ha are readily available for fish culture, and 0.6 million ha are swampy areas needing reclamation. The average yield from the presently cultured waters is reported to be only about 600 kg/ha/year. Recently, however, India has taken a great leap forward by evolving polyculture techniques known as "composite fish culture" at the Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, by which a production of 3-8 tons/ha/year has been achieved in manageable freshwater impoundments.
The cost of reclamation of swampy areas being high, techniques of culture of air-breathing fishes in swamps are also being developed.
It has been estimated that there are about 300 major-and medium-sized multipurpose reservoirs with a water spread of about 2 million ha. Studies carried out in these reservoirs in different parts of the country with diverse ecological conditions indicate an average fish production of 15 kg/ha/year. However, through adoption of proper methodology and establishment of necessary infrastructure, it is hoped that an average fish yield of 20 kg/ha/year will be realized in the next ten years.
Enough scope also exists for development of fish culture in the coldwater areas of the country. Frog farming using scientific systems can go a long way in developing a frog-leg industry.
The technical expertise to produce 1.5-2.0 tons of fish/ha/year from brackishwater ponds is now available, and there is therefore considerable scope for developing fish culture in the 2.0 million ha of brackishwater area available in the country.
The investigations carried out on prawn culture in paddy fields, milkfish, mullet and eel culture, and also on mussels, pearl oysters, edible oysters and seaweed culture, have shown promising results.
It is evident that aquaculture can, therefore, play a valuable role in minimizing the wide gap between requirement and production of fish, if carried out on modern scientific lines with the available resources of the country. Besides adding to protein production, it will also create job opportunities for a very large section of the population when implemented on a large scale (see Table 8).
2.1 National Policy
The national policy on fisheries development centres around the concept of improving the socially-backward communities, providing more and better employment opportunities, and evolution of short- and long-term programmes to raise production. The national policy also places emphasis on optimum utilization of all natural resources, accelerated development of technology for rational exploitation of the resources, and development of necessary infrastructure for organized production, storage and distribution. The national programmes include mobilization of manpower at various levels for production and marketing, thereby accruing maximum assured benefits to the producer and consumer, and reducing middlemen involvement to the minimum. Earning of foreign exchange through export of fishery products, without adversely affecting domestic supplies, is also an integral part of the national programme.
3. OBJECTIVES
The main objective is to establish a mechanism by which the advances made in the technology of fish culture may be effectively disseminated for the purpose of increasing fish production in small water areas, such as ponds and tanks. An analysis of the inland fisheries situation has shown that priorities at this stage are to secure a greater flow of institutional finance for fish culture programmes and to adopt an integrated approach to the problems of development, including elimination of gaps in culture technology, organizing training of manpower, providing necessary inputs, and disseminating technology through well developed extension services. The ultimate objective is to raise aquaculture to the level of an organized industry from the present subsistence level activity, as it presently is in most areas.
3.1 Short-term Objectives
(i) The immediate goal is to reach reasonable production levels through substantial development of aquaculture in the country by the wide application of presently available technical knowledge, and to adopt improved technology of fish production in selected areas presently using traditional culture methods.
(ii) Immediate emphasis on the production of fish seed, and their efficient rearing in selected areas in each state to provide the stocking material.
(iii) To create and activate a discrete category of fish farmers throughout the country by introducing suitable training programmes, and at the same time, making water areas available and providing inputs for fish culture.
(iv) Making available water areas to the fish farmers on long-term lease in order to link leasing with intensive production programmes.
(v) To provide basic infrastructure for brackishwater fish and shrimp farming by constructing hatcheries for organized production of seed.
(vi) Bringing the financing institutions and fish farmers closer so that fish farmers may not be financially handicapped in undertaking improved fish culture.
3.2 Medium-term and Long-term Objectives
(i) Progressively adopt improved technology of fish production in certain selected areas.
(ii) Expand and develop brackishwater fish culture with particular emphasis on shrimps.
(iii) Establish fish seed farms in each district and possibly in each sub-division.
(iv) Develop techniques for culture of frogs, molluscs, seaweeds, etc.
(v) Develop techniques for running-water carp and catfish culture.
(vi) Conduct further research on nutrition and reproductive physiology of cultivated species of fishes and crustacea so that their growth and breeding can be better controlled. This will also help in formulating suitable feed mixtures.
(vii) Conduct further research to obtain still better fish production through different improved methods of aquaculture.
(viii) Develop fish culture in the coldwater areas of the country.
(ix) Develop culture technology for the non-conventional species of fish, molluscs, and crustaceans.
3.3 Production Targets
Aquaculture resources of India are as follows:
million ha
(i) Freshwater area presently under culture
(ii) Freshwater area readily available for fish culture
(iii) Derelict and swampy freshwater areas which could be reclaimed for culture
(iv) Reservoirs
(v) Brackishwater areas
A phased programme as shown in Table 1 has been adopted assuming 5 percent of the area presently under traditional culture will be converted annually to intensive culture areas.
Twenty-five thousand ha of ponds are being developed by the Fish Farmers Development Agency for intensive culture during the current fifth plan period, 1974-79. This area is expected to increase by at least 0.233 ha in the sixth plan period, i.e., 1979-84. Thus, it has been proposed that a total of 0.257 million ha out of 0.6 million ha of fresh water, presently under traditional culture, should be utilized for intensive fish culture by 1984 (Table 5). The target production for intensive fish culture has been set at about 2 tons/ha/year (see Table 7).
A similar programme is also envisaged in which presently available cultivable water, both fresh and brackish, and including swamps needing reclamation, will be utilized (see Tables 2, 3 and 4).
Considering the difficulties, particularly in procuring adequate stocking material, it is assumed that an additional 5 percent of the readily available freshwater area will be used for traditional fish culture annually from 1979, i.e., by the beginning of the sixth plan period. The production target has been set at 600 kg/ha/year. Thus, out of 0.4 million ha of fresh water readily available for fish culture, about 0.1 million ha will be utilized for traditional fish culture by the end of 1984 (see Table 2).
Derelict and swampy fresh- and brackishwater areas would need more time in which to develop fish culture. Development activities that are being initiated in some of these water bodies are largely capture oriented. A projection of their development has been made, assuming an additional 5 percent of available area will be used for culture activities annually from the year 1979, i.e., by the beginning of the sixth plan. Thus, out of the 0.6 million ha of derelict and swampy freshwater areas available, 0.13 million ha will be developed for aqua-culture by 1984 (see Table 3). The target of production has been assumed as 500 kg/ha/year.
Of the total area of about 2 million ha of brackishwater, 0.45 million ha will be in use for aquaculture by 1984 (see Table 4). The target of production has been kept at an average of 500 kg/ha/year. The areas under brackishwater production continue to be by and large capture oriented, although limited areas are being developed for culture of shrimp and related organisms.
The present level (1973) of aquaculture production in the country is estimated to be in the order of 0.41 million tons out of a total production of about 0.75 million tons from inland resources. Compared with this, it is expected that 1.45 million tons of fish will be produced from aquaculture alone in 1984 (see Table 7).
The sixth Five-Year Development Plan for fisheries extends from 1975-79, and aims at raising fish production from inland resources from 0.748 million tons to 1.06 million tons; fish eggs from 1 813.5 million to 4 160.3 million; and fry and fingerlings from 433.5 million to 1 188.3 million. The fish seed production will be increased further to obtain 8 451 million eggs for a requirement of 2 958 million fingerlings in 1984 (Table 10).
3.4 Cultivated Species and Production Systems
3.4.1 Carp culture in ponds
On the basis of complimentary feeding habits, six species of carps are cultured together in freshwater ponds under the new technology of composite fish culture. These are the three Indian major carps, viz., catla (Catla catla), a surface zooplankton feeder; rohu (Labeo rohita), a column dweller feeding on decaying vegetation; and mrigal (Cirrhinus mrigala), a bottom dwelling fish utilizing semi-rotten and decayed vegetation and detritus for food and the three exotic carps, viz., silver carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix), a surface phytoplankton feeder; grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella), a macrovegetation feeder; and common carp (Cyprinus carpio), an omnivore feeding on a wide variety of food items both of animal and plant origin at the bottom and margins of ponds. In addition, a few other species, such as Notopterus chitala, Ompak bimaculatus, Mystus seenghala, and Pangasius pangasius are also sometimes included to exploit further unexploited niches in composite
fish-culture ponds.
3.4.2 Development of reservoir fisheries
By regular stocking of carp fingerlings.
3.4.3 Culture of air-breathing fish species in swamps and derelict waters
The commercially important species of air-breathing fishes cultured in India are Clarias batrachus, Heteropneustes fossilis, Anabas testudineus, Channa spp., Notopterus spp., and murrels. Biological studies related to their culture have been completed, and preliminary culture trials have shown promising results.
3.4.4 Culture of fish and prawns in brackish water
The cultivable brackishwater fish and prawns of India are: grey mullets (Mugil cephalus, M. tade, M. macrolepis and M. parsia); milkfish (Chanos chanos); pearl spot (Etroplus suratensis); oxeyed herring (Megalops cyprinoides); betki (Lates calcarifer); threadfin (Polynemus tetradactylus); rock perch (Lutjanus argentimaculatus); and prawns (Penaeus monodon, P. indicus, Metapenaeus brevicornis, M. dobsoni, M. monoceros and Leander styliferus).
Experiment results in brackishwater fish culture have shown a production of about 2 tons/ha/year for the mullet Mugil parsia; about 836 kg/ha/7 months for the prawn Penaeus monodon; and 268.4 kg/ha/3 months for P. indicus; and 2 700 kg/ha/240 days for Lates calcarifer. Further work in the development of the techniques of brackishwater fish farming including pond fertilization and feeding is being vigorously pursued.
Successful spawning of prawns, such as P. indicus, P. merguiensis, Metapenaeus monoceros, M. affinis, M. dobsoni, and Parapenaeopsis stylifera and the rearing of their larvae in the laboratory have been achieved. Large-scale commercial production is being planned.
3.4.5 Other systems
Other systems of culture consist mainly of culture of carps in running water, culture of predatory species in enclosures, culture of oysters and clams, culture of pearl oysters, culture of seaweed, etc.
The culture technique for coldwater fishes, frogs, molluscs and weeds, etc., are under active investigation. Tilapia culture has shown a production as high as 10 000 kg/ha/year. An elver resources survey and a pilot project on eel culture have been proposed, and another pilot project on mussel culture is being implemented. Recently a pilot project for pearl culture was also initiated.
4. ESTABLISHMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
4.1 Extension Service
One of the important activities envisaged during the current five-year plan for fisheries development is the organization of an effective fisheries extension service in the country. Besides extension units attached to research institutes and survey organizations, fisheries extension units are also operating in the states. It has, however, been observed that field level extension services require additional support by way of suitable educational material better equipment and a regular flow of extension information. In addition, the extension officers in most cases require specialized training in advanced methods of extension work. It is proposed to resolve these shortcomings through:
(a) introduction of extension training separately for fish culture and for fish handling and processing;
(b) supply of extension literature, extension equipment, publicity material and professional equipment;
(c) strengthening of the core organization to ensure effective coordination of various activities;
(d) advanced training in aquaculture extension technology.
The Central Government has already started an Extension Training Centre in Fish Culture at Hyderabad. Action is being taken to organize another Extension Training Centre for Fish Handling and Processing. Steps are also being taken to strengthen the organization for documentation and publicity.
There is now no institution specifically organized for research and training in aquaculture. Effective transfer of technology to farmers and speedy adoption of aquaculture as an industry are hampered due to this gap. While effective training of village/Panchayat - level workers in their local language could be organized, higher level technicians and teachers would need specialized training at national and regional levels.
4.2 Training of Core Personnel
The Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute arranges ad hoc courses for training extension personnel of the States Fisheries Departments.
The Extension Training Centre of the Government of India at Hyderabad provides training on fisheries extension techniques. The Central Institute of Fisheries Education, Bombay, conducts a two-year course on different aspects of fisheries, while the Inland Fisheries Training Unit, Barrackpore and the Regional Training Centre at Agra, of the Central Institute of Fisheries Education, provide instruction in inland fisheries and aquaculture at different levels. Fishery education and training programmes and fishery facilities are also being established in several agricultural universities in India.
4.3 Organization of Research
4.3.1 Existing research facilities
Various aspects of inland fisheries research, both freshwater and brackishwater, are at present handled by a well organized, large, central institution, which has established substations in different parts of the country for specialized research. Similarly, certain aspects of coastal aquaculture research form part of the programme of another central institute engaged in marine fishery research. All India Coordinated Research Projects initiated recently under these institutes by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research have responsibility for certain field facilities for aquaculture research. The Central Institute of Fisheries Education with regional centres in inland fish culture and brackishwater fish culture offers facilities for research and training. Many of the agricultural universities have established faculties for fisheries and limnological studies, whereas research programmes in basic life-sciences have been taken up by traditional universities. Established
private industries have been showing interest in supporting and organizing research programmes in mariculture with a view to diversifying their activities and promoting export potential.
Fishery research stations in the various states of India are devoting attention to research programmes of a local nature.
One of the major constraints envisaged in attaining the objective of aquaculture development is the lack of large, properly designed experimental fish farms, both fresh and brackish-water, where aquaculture systems could be tested and developed. Establishment of an advanced centre for aquaculture research with the necessary adjunct of such well designed experimental farms would go a long way toward providing the required research support and incentive. Other requirements in terms of consultancies fellowships and sophisticated equipment are described in section 5.4.
4.3.2 Training of research personnel
While research personnel will acquire considerable experience and expertise in the central aquaculture complex, it is necessary to provide some of them with advanced training in different aspects of high-yielding intensive systems of aquaculture in selected countries where advanced technology is available.
While no precise estimates of the cost of establishing a large, central aquaculture complex is available, it is expected that such a complex of about 200 ha with the necessary working facilities would require a total expenditure of about I.Rs. 30 million (to attain working condition in 1979) by 1984.
5. PRODUCTION PROGRAMMES
5.1 Financing and Credit
An appraisal of credit requirements to implement fishery plan schemes was made, and inadequate availability of finance including credit facilities has been identified as a bottleneck for the development of fisheries in India. While the Agricultural Refinance Corporation is heavily involved in providing credit to coastal fishery programmes, credit has not been forthcoming to any significant degree to meet the requirements of fish culture programmes. The present pattern of ownership and control of ponds through multiple agencies and short-term leasing policies have also hindered long-term development efforts by entrepreneurs. The Committee on Leasing Policies of Inland Fisheries in 1973 made several recommendations to link leasing programmes with production programmes so as to facilitate credit flow into fish-culture schemes. Recently financial institutions have shown appreciation of the special problems of fish culture and have extended cooperation to support programmes in
inland fishery development.
5.2 Phasing and Management of Production Programmes
Projections of annual development of aquaculture, both in fresh water and brackish water, have been summarized in Tables 1-4. The Fish Farmer Development Agency, established with components for training and extension and adoption of new technology, will primarily be responsible for intensive fish culture and seed production on a large scale. It is hoped that these agencies, organized and supported by the central and state governments and commercial financial institutions, will ultimately help in raising aquaculture to the level of an organized industry.
It is also proposed to arrange for 'service parties' of skilled farmers to work in close liaison with the extension staff. These farmers would demonstrate modern techniques and would gradually develop working expertise of their own so that they would subsequently form a competent team for field demonstration. The total requirement of trained farmers will be about 129 000 people in 1984 to take up intensive fish culture in 0.258 million ha (see Table 8) A projection of employment potential of freshwater fish culture in 1984 has also been made' which indicates considerable job opportunities for non-skilled persons also i.e., about 300 000 people (Table 8).
Technical manpower requirements will be in the order of 258 extension workers, assuming one extension worker can look after 100 ha of water area. Each extension worker will be assisted by two senior field assistants or two fieldmen (see Table 9), making a total of 518 field assistants. These requirements can be met primarily by training of in-service personnel for which existing arrangements will be streamlined, re-organized and strengthened. The operative-level training envisaged in the state sector will be able to train 516 field assistants in ten years' time, i.e., 1984.
The total requirement of stocking material in 1984 for India has been estimated (see Table 6). Since the technology of induced breeding of brackishwater fish is Only being developed and may take time for adoption in the field, it is assumed that most of the stocking material will continue to be from natural collection as is presently practised. The technology of induced breeding of air-breathing fishes has also been evolved, which can make available 300 million or more of their seed. In addition to this, approximately 1 000 million finger-lings of carp will be required for stocking part of the derelict water areas. Thus, the total requirement of carp fingerlings needed for intensive culture, traditional culture, and for reservoirs at the rate indicated in Table 6, would be about 2 000 million.
To meet the requirements, it is proposed to partly increase the spawn egg collection from natural sources from 1 705 million presently (1973) to 6 000 million in 1984 and spawn production from induced breeding from 108 million (1973) to 2 451 million (see Table 10). For rearing these spawn a total area of 850 ha of nursery ponds and 7 500 ha of rearing ponds will be required (see Table 13). In addition to these, 100 ha will be required to raise the brood-stock for induced spawning (see Table 12).
It is proposed that rearing of spawn collected from natural sources should be taken up in the respective state government farms in those states where natural spawn is available, i.e., in Assam, Bihar; Bengal, Orissa and Andhra Pradesh. In order to raise 6 000 million spawn to fry stage, 600 ha of nursery area will be required. For induced breeding of 2 451 million spawn, the Fish Farmers' Development Agency and other state government farms will provide the required 250 ha of nursery area.
The raising of fry to fingerlings would require 7 500 ha of rearing space, which may not pose much difficulty since the same ponds can be used for rearing large fish also after the fry are raised to fingerlings in a three-month period.
The technical manpower requirement for induced breeding in 1984 will be about 2 000 since one trained officer can easily produce about 12.5 million spawn per season through induced breeding (see Table 9). The above personnel will get their training from the central institutes.
The requirement for inorganic fertilizers over ten years for intensive fish culture comes to 0.748 million tons and conventional feed consisting of oil cake and rice bran to about 3.0 million tons (see Table 5).
5.2.1 Storage, marketing and export
Organized arrangements for storage and marketing are necessary to make available the aquaculture products in the interior and to stabilize the price structure to benefit both the producer and consumer.
A significant part of the products of coastal aquaculture, particularly of shrimp, eels and crab, are expected to be exported to bring in valuable foreign exchange. The strategy for storage, marketing and export is by and large the same as for capture fishery products.
Since the aquaculture programmes are rather spread out, larger numbers of units of smaller capacity have to be established for the production and storage of frozen products. It is expected that part of the produce will be sold at the farms and also in the nearest urban markets, and that a sizable portion will have to be transported to centres as far away as 1 500-2 000 km. Arrangements exist for storage at production centres and these have to be expanded to provide for increased intake at both production and distribution centres. The two points are being connected by refrigerated rail transport, insulated trucks and also by ordinary trucks to transport iced fish depending on the distance to be covered in each case, thereby providing a "cold chain" structure. It has been found necessary to repack the products at transit centres for transportation to places that could not be reached within a day or two.
Product diversification is envisaged to stabilize prices and utilize all varieties of fish as well as to make available "ready-to-cook" products. Skinning, de-boning and filleting of fish are being organized and these will be expanded to meet additional requirements. Odourless fish powder, acceptable for human consumption and different types of concentrates, could be produced and marketed when aquaculture reaches the level of an organized industry. Development of a fish-meal industry through aquaculture products is not envisaged. The existing dry-fish market also will have to be expanded as aquaculture production picks up.
Since the entire programme has to be dovetailed into the storage and marketing programmes of marine fish marketing projects, no separate projections are attempted. It is intended that the entire marketing programme be brought into the cooperative sector to minimize and ultimately do away with middle-men who dominate fish marketing. Vigorous efforts are needed to make cooperatives more action oriented and viable, so as to enable them to take over marketing of a perishable product like fish with all the related problems of market fluctuations and consumer preferences.
5.3 Budget
5.3.1 Intensive fish culture
Detailed projections of total input requirement for development of intensive fish culture in India in ten years, i.e., 1975-84, have been made in Table 5. The area to be developed has been estimated at 0.257 million ha. Costs estimated include those for initial development and working capital required for stocking material, organic manure, inorganic fertilizers and feed. The total cost over the ten-year period comes to about I.Rs. 5 544 million for a total production of 3 million tons of fish. The gross income from the sale of fish at the rate of I.Rs. 5/kg at the farm comes to I.Rs. 15 000 million. However, this assessment does not include cost of labour or rental charges of water and management expenses.
5.3.2 Natural spawn collection
Projection of input requirement for collection of carp seed from natural sources in 1984 in India has been made (see Table 10). The total requirement of spawn from natural sources will be about 6 000 million. The cost of operation/collection will be I.Rs. 2.4 million. This will include wages for the skilled fishermen, equipment and transport charges in going to the collection site and back. Another I.Rs. 2.4 million will be required for spawn transport and for their marketing, etc. Thus, a total of I.Rs. 4.8 million will be spent, against which the gross income from the sale of spawn would be I.Rs. 12 million at the prevailing market rate of I.Rs. 2 000 per million for 6 000 million spawn.
5.3.3 Carp seed production by induced breeding
Projection of input requirement for carp seed production by induced breeding in 1984 in India has been made (see Table 11). The total spawn from induced breeding required will be about 2 500 million. The cost of culture and maintenance of broodfish in 100 ha for a period of two years will be I.Rs. 2.12 million. This does not include the rental of water or managerial cost. Cost of other items involved in induced breeding will be about I.Rs. 1.24 million, which includes the equipment for induced breeding and the salary of technical staff and labour charges. Thus, the total expenditure comes to I.Rs. 3.36 million, whereas the return from sale of fish after taking out pituitary gland of those which are not selected for hypophysation, and also those after hypophysation at the rate of I.Rs. 5/kg will be I.Rs. 4.2 million, and income from sale of spawn at the rate of 2 000 per million will be I.Rs. 5 million. Thus, the gross income will be I.Rs. 9.2 million.
5.3.4 Rearing of spawn, fry and fingerlings
Projection of input requirement for rearing of spawn, fry and fingerlings in 1984 in India has been made (see Table 13). The total area required per season for nursery space will be 850 ha, and for rearing 7 500 ha. The cost of rearing spawn to fry comes to about I.Rs. 29.7 million, which includes capital expenditure on renovation, etc., and also other expenditures for pond preparation, feeding, etc. On the other hand, the cost of rearing of fry to finger-ling comes to I.Rs. 90 million, which includes capital expenditure for renovation and other expenditures for pond preparation, feeding, etc. However, the rental for nursery and rearing space and also managerial costs are not included here. The cost of 8 500 million spawn at the rate of I.Rs. 2 000 per million will be I.Rs. 17.0 million. Thus, a total cost of I.Rs. 136.7 million will be incurred in rearing 3 000 million fingerlings assuming 35 percent survival from the spawn to fingerling stage. The gross income from the
sale of 3 000 million fingerlings at the rate of I.Rs. 100 000 per million will be I.Rs. 300 million.
5.4 External Assistance Requirements
External assistance is required only in selected areas and this may be in the form of consultancy services, fellowships and limited quantities of sophisticated equipment.
5.4.1 Consultancy service
The following consultants for limited periods will be required for quick development of aquaculture in the country.
(i) Aquaculture engineering
(ii) Fish nutrition
(iii) Oyster and mussel culture
(iv) Improved methods of prawn breeding and rearing
(v) Fish pathology
(vi) Fish marketing,
5.4.2 Fellowships
Fellowships in the undermentioned fields are desired for varying periods to assimilate technology developed abroad for comparative studies.
(i) Nutrition of carps
(ii) Nutrition of shellfish
(iii) Shrimp culture
(iv) Oyster and mussel culture
(v) Nutrition of mullets
(vi) Fish pathology
(vii) Reproductive physiology
(viii) Running-water fish culture
(ix) Biological filters for intensive fish culture
(x)Pollution studies
(xi)Sewage-fed fisheries
(xii)Fisheries economics
(xiii)Fisheries extension
(xiv)Nutrition of air-breathing fishes.
5.4.3 Equipment
Certain laboratory and fish-farm equipment which are not readily available in India may have to be imported in limited quantities.
6. CONCLUSION
In any development planning, the need to synchronize the various aspects of development cannot be overestimated. In the case of aquaculture, these aspects include development of the basic technology, training of technical manpower at various levels, availability of inputs at reasonable cost, credit and financing facilities and suitable organizations to tie up the various loose ends and to give effective supervision. In India, aquaculture practices have been in existence as a traditional activity in several areas. What is urgently required is to raise it to the level of an organized but small-scale industry and spread it to all parts of the country. This will naturally be a long process. The national policy and priority programmes undertaken in the current development plan period are to accelerate this process of development to achieve the objectives already mentioned in this plan in appropriate sections, Details of certain aspects of the proposed "Ten-Year Programme" are not
mentioned here, as it is felt that they may lose relevance in the present age of fast development of technology and shifting of emphasis on priorities, after a five-to seven-year period of experimentation and field trials. Several assumptions also had to be made in these projections in the absence of actual data and field results in those sectors.
TABLE 1
Projection of Development of Intensive Freshwater Fish Culture in Areas where Traditional Fish Culture Methods are Presently Used
Phase of development (year)
Traditional culture area (million ha)
Proposed intensive culture area (million ha)
Notes:
(a) Total area available in this category is 0.6 million ha
(b) The projection has been made assuming an additional 5 percent of the available area will be used for intensive fish culture annually
(c) The Fish Farmer Development Agency recently initiated by Government of India has allocated 25 000 ha for intensive cultivation in the fifth plan period, which is assumed to be raised to at least 50 000 ha in the sixth plan period
(d) Toward the end of the sixth plan period, some areas are also scheduled to be used for intensive culture
TABLE 2
Projection of Development of Fish Culture in Fresh Waters readily avail-for Fish Culture
Phase of development (year)
Area not utilized (million ha)
Area proposed to be utilized (million ha)
Notes:
(a) Total area available in this category is 0.4 million ha
(b) The projection has been made assuming an additional 5 percent of the readily available water area will be used for traditional fish culture annually from 1979, i.e., by the beginning of the sixth plan period
(c) The development activities being initiated in some of these water bodies are not listed here as they are largely capture oriented
(d) Toward the end of the sixth plan period, some areas are also scheduled for intensive culture
TABLE 3
Projection of Development of Fish Culture (mostly of Air-Breathing Fishes) in Derelict and Swampy Fresh Waters
Phase of development (year)
Area available (million ha)
Area proposed to he utilized for aquaculture (million ha)
Notes:
(a) Total area available in this category is 0.6 million ha
(b) The projection has been made assuming an additional 5 percent of the available area will be used for fish culture each year from 1979, i.e., from the beginning of the sixth plan period. Even before this, some areas may be utilized for culture activities
(c) The development activities being initiated in some of these water bodies are not listed here as they are largely capture oriented
(d) 0.136 million ha are shown for extensive culture of air-breathing fishes, out of which some areas are planned to be used for intensive culture of these species
TABLE 4
Projection of Development of Brackishwater Fish Culture
Phase of development (year)
Area available (million ha)
Area proposed to be utilized for aquaculture (million ha)
Notes:
(a) Total brackish water available for culture is 2 million ha
(b) The projection has been made assuming an additional 5 percent of the available area will be used for fish culture each year from 1979, i.e., from the beginning of the sixth plan period. Even before this, some areas may be utilized for culture activities
(c) The areas under brackishwater production continue to be primarily capture oriented, although limited areas are being used for culture of shrimp and related species
(d) 0.45 million ha are shown for extensive culture of brackishwater fishes, out of which some areas are planned to be utilized for intensive culture of these species
TABLE 5 (a)
Projection of Input Requirements for Development of Intensive Fish Culture (1974-84)
Period: 1974-84 = 10 years
Area to be developed: 0.258 million ha over 10 years
Initial Development Cost (includes development cost, farm implements and watermen shed)
Year
Area proposed for intensive fish culture
(million ha)
Total cost at I.Rs.
2 000/ha
(million I.Rs.)
Total
TABLE 5 (b)
Working Capital Required for Development of Aquaculture
* In millions
Notes:
(a) The above assessment, however, does not include the cost of labour or rental charge of water/depreciation and management
(b) The amounts have been calculated on the prevailing market price
(c) The quantity of inputs, such as feed fertilizers, has been estimated on the basis of a production rate of 2 tons/ha/year
TABLE 6
Total Requirement of Stocking Material by 1984
Type of culture
Species
Total area to be stocked (million ha)
Rate of stocking (fish/ha)
Total number of fingerlings (millions)
Intensive culture
Carp
5 000^a/
Traditional culture
Carp
700^b/
Reservoirs
Carp
200^c/
Culture in swamps and derelict waters
Carp, air-breathing fish and others
10 000^d/
Brackish waters
Shrimp
0.05^e/
Mullet
Milkfish and others
5 000^f/
^a/ Anticipating the fingerlings made available for stocking may not always be the right size, a higher level of stocking is projected to ensure that the level of production envisaged is achieved
^b/ Existing low level of stocking has been taken into account
^c/ Average low productivity levels of open-water areas and availability of large size stocking material have been taken into account in deciding the stocking rate
^d/ Based on experimental findings
^e/ At post-larval stage 10-12
^f/ Possibility of harvesting two crops in a year has been taken into account
TABLE 7
Projection of the Level of Total Fish Production from aquaculture in 1984
Type of culture
Average rate of production (kg/ha)
Total area (million ha)
Total production (million tons)
Intensive culture of carp
Traditional culture of carp
Culture in swamps and derelict areas
Brackishwater culture
Reservoir culture
^a/ The present level (1973) of aquaculture production in the country is estimated to be in the order of 0.41 million tons out of a total production of about 0.75 million tons from inland resources
^b/ Although a level of production of about 9 tons/ha/year has been demonstrated through composite fish culture of carp in different parts of the country for the purposes of this projection only a modest level of 2 tons/ha/year has been used because of the present diffused status of the industry, inputs and personnel requirements. The same parameters have been assumed in projection of the other systems of culture as well.
TABLE 8
Projection of Employment Potential from Freshwater Fish Culture (Intensive Culture of Carp) in 1984
Regular
For a 2-ha unit
Direct employment potential for 0.258 million ha
(a)
Managerial personnel or "fish farmers" performing skilled jobs and also looking after, watch and ward
1 person
0.129 million
(b)
Skilled personnel to look after, watch and ward in addition to his other duties
1 person
0.129 million
0.258 million
Assuming one person is already looking after the work, additional employment potential will be 0.129 million.
2. Daily payment basis (casual labour) for stocking and harvesting
On daily payment basis at 110 man days/ha/year = 28.3 million man days/year.
3. Employment through marketing of fish ^1/
^1/ This estimation is based on the assumption that marketing 11 tons of fish provides employment for one person. For the marketing of additional production envisaged, a proportionate increase in employment potential is projected. However, this projection may vary depending on factors, such as local availability of labour, incentives for marketing, etc.
Presently, marketing of 0.36 million tons of fish engages 0.033 million people, so 0.77 million tons (produced from intensive culture and traditional culture of carps) will engage 0.071 million people, an additional 0.038 million people.
4. Employment generated in initial renovation and development of 0.258 million ha
Item
Cost
(in million I.Rs.)
% on wage
Average rate of wage
I.Rs./day
Total man days (millions)
Dev. expenditure
Equipment, sheds, etc.
Initial capital inputs will thus generate employment potential of the order of 50 million man days.
5. Employment generated by floating capital
The indirect employment engagement in producing and supplying the floating capital inputs may be estimated at about 40 percent for fingerling production and about 10 percent on Other input items such as feed, fertilizer, etc. (see Table 5).
Item
I.Rs. (millions)
Wages (%)
I.Rs. (millions)
Fingerlings
Other inputs
Thus, I.Rs. 146.2 million converted to man days at the rate of I.Rs. 5/day = 29.2 million man days per year.
TABLE 8 (continued)
Item
Additional employment potential
in million man days
in million persons
Initially
Annually
Fish culture (regular)
Fish culture (daily payment basis)
Employment in marketing
Employment generated in initial renovation and development
Employment generated by floating capital
Total
TABLE 9
Projection of Technical Manpower Requirements for Intensive Fish Culture and Fish Seed Production in 1984
Intensive fish culture in fresh water (total area 0.258 million ha)
Number
Area under control
Total number required
Officers
100 ha water area
Field assistants
100 ha water area
Carp seed production (total amount required 25 000 million eggs)
Number
Total number required
Officers (trained fish breeders)
1/12.5 million eggs
Note: In addition to the above, 0.129 million fish farmers (skilled) will be needed for intensive fish culture (see Table 8) and 3 200 skilled fishermen for natural egg collection (see Table 11)
TABLE 10
Projection of Carp Seed Requirement (1973-84)
Source
1973 eggs (millions)
1979 eggs (millions)
1984 eggs (millions)
Collection from natural sources
Eggs from induced Spawning (hypophysation and bundh breeding)
Total
Percentage survival
Fingerlings in millions
Notes:
(a) The requirement of carp seed in 1984 shows the stocking material needed for intensive culture, traditional culture, for reservoirs and also for a part of derelict waters for which approximately 1 000 million fingerlings will be required. Nevertheless, the technology of induced breeding of air-breathing fishes has also been evolved, which can make available 300 million or more of their seed.
(b) The technology of induced breeding of brackishwater fish is being developed but here it is assumed that most of the stocking material will continue to be from natural collection as is presently practised.
TABLE 11
Projection of Input Requirements for Collection of Carp Seed from Natural Sources in India (1984)
Total requirement of eggs in 1984 = 6 000 million
Collection to be made = 12 000 million^1/
1. Cost of operation
Million I.Rs.
(a) Wages for 3 200 skilled fishermen at I.Rs. 250/month for 2 months (seasonal collection during monsoon)
(b) Transport charges to site and back and other miscellaneous expenditures
(c) Equipment (nets, hapas, bamboo poles, etc.)
Allowing 25 percent depreciation per annum for items under (c), expenditure amounts to about I.Rs. 2.4 million.
Cost of the eggs at collection site = I.Rs. 400 per million.
It is also assumed that a team of eight skilled fishermen can efficiently handle about 15 nets during the season. The total operation lasts for about 6-8 weeks during the monsoon season. Though the expected collection is highly nature-dependent, this unit can collect on an average 30 million eggs per season.
2. Economics
Million I.Rs.
(a) Cost of operation (at collection site)
I.Rs. 400/million
(b) Transport, market cost, octroi, market commission, etc.
I.Rs. 400/million
I.Rs. 800/million
Market price
I.Rs. 2 000/million
^1/ Fifty percent mortality has been assumed during handling at site and transport, etc. Hence the actual collection should be 12 000 million. Rates of inputs and the eggs are calculated at prevailing market prices
TABLE 12
Projection of Input Requirement for Carp Seed Production by Induced Breeding in 1984
Total spawn produced by induced breeding - 2 451 million, i.e., about 2 500 million
Fertilized eggs required - 5 000 million (assuming 50 percent survival of the fertilized eggs)
Number of eggs per kg of spawner - 100 000
Number of female spawners required = 50 000 at 2 kg body weight each = 100 000 kg of females (assuming 50 percent success of induced breeding)
The total requirement of broodfish
females = 50 000 (each weighing about 2 kg)
males = 75 000 (each weighing about 2 kg)
Cost of culture and maintenance of broodfish
Initial stocking of 500 000 fingerlings in 100 ha at the rate of 5 000 fingerlings/ha, and rearing them for two years
Million I.Rs.
Area required = 100 ha
Stocking material - 500 000
Other inputs (feed, fertilizer, etc.)
Period of culture two years
At 10 percent mortality during two years about 450 000 fish of about 2 kg each will be available, of which 27 percent are selected as high-quality broodfish for hypophysation:
450 000 fish available - 125 000 broodfish = 325 000 fish surplus sold for I.Rs. 3.2 million at I.Rs. 5/kg
After breeding, the remaining fish (50 000 female and 75 000 male) with a total weight of 250 000 kg may lose 20 percent of their weight through loss of gonads. Therefore, the remaining total weight of fish (200 000 kg) is sold at I.Rs. 5/kg = I.Rs. 1.0 million
Therefore, total annual value of broodstock is estimated at I.Rs. 4.2 million
Other expenditures involved in induced breeding
For 10 million spawn
(I.Rs.)
2 500 million spawn
(I.Rs. million)
Breeding hapa, hatching hapa and other small equipment
Salary for technical staff and labour charges
Pituitary gland requirements
For females: 100 000 kg fish at 10 mg pituitary per kg =
1 000 000 mg
For males: 150 000 kg fish at 8 mg pituitary per kg =
1 200 000 mg
2 200 000 mg
This amount of pituitary will be obtained from those fish which are not selected for induced breeding, i.e., 325 000 fish, each weighing about 2 kg and assuming each pituitary will weigh approximately 7 mg
Summary of investment and income for induced breeding
Million I.Rs.
Cost of culture and maintenance of broodfish
Cost of other expenditures involved in induced breeding
Return
From sale of surplus broodstock after removing pituitary gland - 650 000 kg at I.Rs. 5/kg
From sale of spawned fish - 200 000 kg at I.Rs. 5/kg
Sale of spawn - 25 000 million at I.Rs. 2 000 per million
The rental of water is not included in the above cost estimates. Also, managerial costs are not included in cost estimates for rearing broodstock.
TABLE 13
Projection of Input Requirement for Rearing of Spawn-Fry-Fingerlings in 1984
Total spawn required = 8 500 million
Stocking density of 5 million/ha with two crops in one season, gives a total requirement of 10 million/ha
Cost of rearing spawn to fry
(Area required - 850 ha)
I.Rs.
Total
(million I.Rs.)
Capital expenditure for renovation, etc.
10 000/ha
Other expenditures for pond preparation, feeding, etc.
25 000/ha
Cost of rearing fry to fingerlings
(Period of rearing 3 months)
(Area required - approximately 7 500 ha)
Capital expenditure for renovation, etc.
2 000/ha
Other expenditures for pond preparation, feeding, etc.
10 000/ha
Total budget is summarized as follows
Cost of 8 500 million spawn at I.Rs. 2 000/million
Cost of rearing to fry
Cost of rearing to fingerlings
Return from sale of 3 000 million fingerlings at I.Rs. 100 000/million^1/ I.Rs. 300 million
^1/ The rates are calculated at a lower rate than the prevailing market price of I.Rs. 156 000/million (Table 5)
<section>g</section>
NATIONAL PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AQUACULTURE IN INDONESIA^1/
^1/ Prepared by A. Poernomo, Brackishwater Shrimp and Milkfish Culture Project, Jakarta, based on policy and targets formulated during Stage I of the Workshop by H. Atmowasono and R.S. Prajitno, Ministry of Agriculture, Jakarta
1. BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
1.1 Supply, Demand and Requirements of Fishery Products
Indonesia is an archipelago with almost 70 percent of its area covered by water masses, both marine and fresh water. It is quite logical that such a country should obtain much of its food supply, particularly protein food of animal origin, from fishery resources. The present level of fish production is, however, relatively low. Production increases have been small (see Tables 1 and 2) keeping the average per caput fish consumption almost constant for the past decade at a level of about 10 kg (Table 3).
The main reason for the slow production increase is the fact that most of the fishing operations are carried out in a relatively limited area, resulting in very low productivity per unit of fishing effort.
The Indonesian waters as a whole are very rich in many kinds of valuable fish life and other aquatic resources. Conservative estimates put the total maximum sustainable yield of the natural waters of the Indonesian territory at around 4.5 million tons/year. The Indonesian population is, on the other hand, around 120 million in 1971 and it will be about 237 million by the end of the century. Based on the national food balance sheet, a target of 30 kg per caput consumption of fish has been set as a source of animal protein for the average Indonesian (LIPI/NAS, 1968). From this basic figure, fish requirements and effective demand projections for the coming 10 years would be as follows:
Year
Fish requirements on the basis of per caput consumption of 30 kg
Effective demand projection^a/
(tons)
^a/ Demand projection was calculated by using the following formula:
where
a= [1+(e D Y)](1+D P)
e = income elasticity of demand = 1
Y = disposable income growth/year (2.75 percent)
P = population growth/year (2.40 percent)
Basic year = 1973
Extrapolated further, the required fish supply in the year 2000 would be about 7 million tons. The potential of the natural resources alone fall very short of the projected domestic fish consumption in the future, let alone of meeting the challenge of exporting fish products to international markets.
Indonesia has significantly increased its export of fisheries products in the last few years. Almost negligible in value in 1968, it has reached the level of U.S.$ 92 million in 1974, a total increase of 3 116 percent within a period of six years. The increase in Volume, although not quite as impressive, has been 181 percent for the same period. This, however, shows a significant shift from the low value to the high value commodities, especially shrimp (see Table 4). On the other hand, import of fishery products is relatively small, although it also tends to increase year by year. Complete figures can be seen in Table 5.
1.2 Prospects of Aquaculture
It is quite clear from the preceding paragraphs that Indonesia is facing a challenge Of increasing its fish production beyond the limits of the potentialities of its own natural resources. The chances will be that, for practical reasons, at least for the near future, most of the widely dispersed natural fishery resources will be beyond the reach of existing traditional fishermen.
Since the second five-year development plan (1974-78), Indonesia has tried to distribute pressure of the traditional fisheries from the crowded northern coast of Java to other potential fishing grounds in Sumatra, Kalimantan and adjacent islands by applying a multiple base system. It should be admitted, however, that this will be a fairly costly (although essential) operation in terms of infrastructure investment, and it will be a time-consuming process. Indonesia is, therefore, aware of the need for developing its aquaculture potential as well as exploiting its natural resources.
Fish culture has been practised for centuries in Indonesia, but has been limited to fresh- and brackishwater species only, with mariculture still being at an experimental stage. As can be seen from Table 1, the contribution of fish culture to the total fish production has been modest ranging from 9.5 to 11.1 percent of total production, or 10.4-12.5 percent of production through capture fisheries. The potential for expansion is, however, quite large. Through intensification and expansion programmes, including introduction of mariculture, production of at least the same magnitude as from the natural resources is feasible. It is for this reason that the Government is putting considerable emphasis on the development of fish culture in particular, and aquaculture in general, in its second five-year development plan. This policy has been adopted, not only for the sake of increasing fish production, but also for the generation of new employment and rural/hinterland development.
Modernization of the marine fisheries will consequently reduce the manpower per unit effort, which eventually and naturally will cause considerable unemployment. One of the best alternative means of employment for fishermen will be in the aquaculture sector. The role of aquaculture in foreign exchange earnings will also be considerable, especially with high-value commodities like shrimp, Macrobrachium, ornamental fishes, etc.
2. OBJECTIVES AND GOALS OF AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
2.1 Objectives
The long-term objectives of aquaculture development in Indonesia are firstly, to reach the optimum rational utilization of aquatic resources and thus contribution to the increase of fish production. Marketability or economic viability will be important determining factors in selecting species cultured and techniques to be used. Secondly, but equally important, is the achievement of a sound economic structure comprising all aquaculture operators working cooperatively on a modern, dynamic and flexible operation with high sensitivity to the application of new technology.
The medium- and short-term objectives are to increase the average productivity of the existing aquaculture operations in order to increase the income of fish farmers, and simultaneously overcome the immediate needs of the population for fish.
The short-term objective of aquaculture development has been formulated into an operational programme consisting of two sub-programmes, i.e.:
- programme for commercial aquaculture development; and
- programme for non-commercial aquaculture development.
The commercial aquaculture development programme is a market-oriented programme directed to areas with sufficient economic infrastructure for marketing aquaculture products. For this programme, table-fish produced at reasonable cost are recommended to meet the demand of the growing population, and at the same time to fulfil export market requirements.
In relatively isolated rural areas where the average income of the population is very low, the non-commercial fish development programme is introduced, in which it is suggested to the population that fish should be reared as a backyard activity mainly for their own consumption. In this programme, the Government provides breeders of "tawes" (Puntius javanicus) and "nila" (Tilapia nilotica) at no cost to private schools, religious boarding schools and other public societies in the rural areas, all of which in turn have to distribute fish fry to interested people.
The non-commercial fish programme will be of a temporary nature. As soon as respective areas have sufficient marketing facilities connecting to more developed areas, the programme will automatically abandon itself, and all facilities (hatcheries, etc.) used for the programme will be converted for commercial use.
2.2 Production Targets
Targeted production in the ten-year plan (1974-85) for aquaculture development is given in Table 6. The targets for area of production during the same period are shown in Table 7.
2.3 Types of Aquaculture System and Cultivated Species
2.3.1 Brackishwater pond culture
The extent of existing brackishwater ponds and other fish-culture systems and their average productivities are shown in Table 2. Most of the 180 000 ha of brackishwater ponds are located in Java, south Sulawesi, Aceh and north Sumatra, but smaller areas are found in Bali and eastern Nusa Tenggara, east Kalimantan and other parts of Sulawesi and Sumatra. Potential areas for immediate utilization are in the Lampung area especially (Southern part of Sumatra) where almost 7 000 ha of swampland has been specially designated for brackishwater pond development. Potential areas are also found in Aceh, north Sumatra, south Sulawesi and east Kalimantan, where local fish farmers or those coming from other adjacent areas have already started commercial culture.
The average productivity of brackishwater ponds in Indonesia is still very low, around 335 kg/ha/year. One of the targets of fisheries development during the next ten years is therefore to increase productivity of brackishwater ponds to 1 600 kg/ha/year through an intensification programme. A total of 60 000 ha of brackishwater ponds has been targeted for intensive management during that period. A total of 30 000 ha of new ponds will also be established during the same period, with an intermediate production goal of 300 kg/ha/year for the first ten years.
There are a number of problems that need to be resolved during the implementation of the programme. These include:
(a) fry supply;
(b) fertilizer and pesticide supply;
(c) feed supply;
(d) land use planning;
(e) capital and skill.
To overcome the fry supply problems, several steps are being taken. These include: (i) reducing mortality by improvement of nursery technique, to obtain a survival level of 75 percent; (ii) improvement of fry collecting gear and methods, and at the same time, exploitation of new fry grounds mainly in south Sumatra, north, central, south and southeast Sulawesi and Nusa Tenggara Island; and (iii) for freshwater fish seed supply, the Government has given priority to the improvement of hatchery facilities of each province.
Fertilizers for fish farm use will be made available with the establishment of a number of Government fertilizer factories in Java, Sumatra and Kalimantan.
Manufactured feeds for fish farming has been started on a small scale in freshwater fish farms. It is expected that this development will be extended to brackishwater fish farms soon.
2.3.2 Freshwater pond culture
Freshwater pond culture is primarily a backyard activity for many farmers and villagers in certain areas of Indonesia. In total, about 38 000 ha of ponds are scattered all over Indonesia, but most of the ponds are located in Java (particularly west Java), Sumatra, Sulawesi, Bali and west Nusa Tenggara. The average productivity is about 1 500 kg/ha/year, still far behind the optimum level for such operations. During the next ten years, production in about 20 000 ha of freshwater ponds will be intensified with the goal of producing 3 000-4 000 kg/ha/year. As mentioned previously, this programme covers the non-commercial as well as the commercial fish programme. The commercial fish programme is especially directed toward culture of high-value species, such as common carp (Puntius javanicus), eel (Anguilla spp.), giant freshwater prawn (Macrobrachium sp.), etc. To overcome the shortage of fry, intensive efforts have been made in upgrading the existing hatcheries and introducing
induced breeding for certain species with the objective of obtaining optimum yields for every hatchery in operation.
Problems and constraints encountered in this System are conflicts with other land and water users (agriculture, industry and city expansion), water pollution from agriculture pesticides, industrial wastes and city sewage systems, and recently also the problem of obtaining artificial feed.
2.3.3 Fish culture in rice fields
Although more and more rice fields have been brought under irrigation, the extent of fish culture practised has been declining since the introduction of pesticides used for eradicating rice pests. The acreage under rice-cum-fish culture has declined from more than 103 000 ha in 1968 to about 80 000 ha in 1974.
The decline is also a consequence of the use of high yielding rice strains, making fish culture less profitable. The potential for growing fish up to the size of fingerlings is certainly quite promising, especially in overcoming shortages in stocking material, if suitable techniques could be devised to protect stocks from pesticide pollution.
2.3.4 Cage and impoundment culture
Generally speaking, this system is new in Indonesia, although the traditional form of cage culture in streams and sewage systems has been practised to a limited degree for a long time. The development of newer methods, such as the floating pen system and the impounding net system, have just passed the experimental stage and have been introduced to fishermen and fish farmers in certain prospective areas. These types of fish culture might be best implemented in the hinterland development programme as well as in the most rational utilization of lakes, which usually have very low natural productivity. The development of these systems also needs the support of sufficient seed supply, hence requiring hatcheries and fry collection of different species. Cultivated species for these systems range from snake head, common carp, Macrobrachium sp., and ornamental fish species.
The development and implementation of these techniques will also need considerable improvement in supporting infrastructure, at least to enable the transportation of stocking material and other production inputs, and marketing of production.
2.3.5 Mariculture
This is a completely new technique in Indonesia, except for pearl culture and, to a limited extent, also seaweed (Eucheuma sp.) culture. Experiments have been and are being conducted for culturing shellfish (clams and oysters), but almost nothing is known about mariculture of fish species. Potential for the development of mariculture is, however, fairly significant, especially when seen from the point of view of availability of suitable coastal areas and abundance of culturable fish species in Indonesia. More intensive studies and pilot operations are required before large-scale ventures can be started.
3. ESTABLISHMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension Services
As indicated in Fig. 1, fish culture extension services are carried out by the Regional Fisheries Services (Provincial and Regency levels) with general guidance being provided by the Directorate General of Fisheries. In every province, there is one fish culture specialist having the function of an extension worker. In the execution of his functions, he will be assisted by a sufficient number of field extension workers, depending on the number of projects to be covered. As the extension service not only assists in improving the technical skill and knowledge of the fish farmers but also advises on management and requesting credits from banks and solving marketing problems as well, the extension workers usually act as a mobile team. Demonstrations have long been one of the extension methods used, but only quite recently have commercial-scale demonstrations been carried out, to show not only the practicability of improved techniques but also the viability of such operations. The
demonstration ponds usually belong to the Government, but very often ponds owned by fish farmers are used on a compensation basis. This last system has the advantage that the pond owner will usually automatically adopt the innovation and continue to operate his ponds as a demonstration unit voluntarily and at his own expense. Demonstration ponds are selected from existing ponds, and should be centrally located to serve as many commercial ponds as possible. For the development of brackishwater ponds (as is practised in Java and south Sulawesi) one demonstration pond of 2-4 ha will serve an area of 300 ha of fish ponds. As freshwater ponds are usually dispersed, no fixed pattern has yet been adopted.
The degree of extension work planned and the expenditure required for the next ten years is very difficult to predict as many factors are involved. Past experience shows that extension work is limited due to financial constraints, and as an illustration it could be mentioned that an annual budget of Rp. 200-300 million^1/ as has been allocated from the central Government since REPELITA II is far from sufficient to cover as large an area as Indonesia.
^1/ U.S.$ 1.00 = approx. Rp. 415.00
3.2 Training
As far as the commercial sector is concerned, core personnel are needed to carry out the function of pond manager/supervisor on a collective basis and should have a sufficient background knowledge of both fish culture and economics. For the whole REPELITA II about 1 100 men are needed to supervise all intensification and expansion programmes for brackishwater ponds (50 000 ha) and intensification of freshwater ponds (6 000 ha), with the assumption that every 100 ha of brackishwater ponds and every 10 ha of freshwater ponds will need one supervisor. No estimates could be made for other aquaculture activities.
Fig. 1 Organization of Extension Programme for Brackishwater Culture Development
For the public services (extension, training, research) the following core personnel are needed:
- Fishery biologists (marine and brackish water)
- Pond engineers (brackish and fresh water)
- Pen, coral, cage and impounding net culturists (marine, brackish and fresh water) Hatchery technologists
- Fish-feed technologists
- Shrimp biologists (Macrobrachium and Penaeus spp.)
- Seaweed culturists.
Most of the needed personnel can be trained within the country, as at present nine faculties of fisheries are found in Indonesia, besides one vocational high school specializing in aquaculture. Some of the expertise should, however, be obtained from abroad, or foreign experts brought to Indonesia to train local personnel.
To train extension workers (pre- and in-service training) a special training centre has been established in Jepara, central Java, for brackishwater aquaculture, and one in Sukabumi, west Java, for freshwater aquaculture.
3.3 Organization of Research
As was mentioned before, aquaculture development is one of the Government's priority programmes because it will provide opportunities of employment and supply animal protein for the people's diet. Therefore, the Government is giving emphasis to aquaculture research.
Research on mariculture is coordinated by the Marine Fisheries Research Institute in Jakarta, freshwater culture by the Inland Fisheries Research Institute in Bogor, and brackish-water culture by the Research and Training Centre in Jepara.
Research work has been concentrated primarily on exploration of new resources, testing of new culture techniques, investigation of breeding techniques and other supporting activities.
The priorities of research activities on aquaculture undertaken by the respective institutes are as follows:
Marine Fisheries Research Institute (Jakarta)
- Exploration of new resources to develop mariculture
- Improvement of culture techniques for seaweed
- Improvement of culture techniques for oysters
- Improvement of culture techniques for cockles.
Inland Fisheries Research Institute (Bogor)
- Studies on the productivity of man-made lake Jatiluhur
- Studies on fish diseases and parasites
- Studies on the side effects of pesticides in paddy-cum-fish culture
- Studies on nutritional aspects and formulation of artificial feed for Anguilla sp., Cyprinus carpio, catfish and Macrobrachium
- Genetic improvement of the cultivated freshwater fishes
- Domestication and population management of Pangasius sp.
- Studies on the Macrobrachium population in open waters and techniques of exploitation
- Experiments on cage and pen culture of commercially-important species
- Experiments on fingerling industry
- Studies on the "lebak-lebung" fisheries.
Brackishwater Culture Research Centre (Jepara)
- Studies on the mass production of penaeid shrimp and Macrobrachium seed
- Studies on the culture of penaeid shrimp
- Studies on induced breeding of milkfish
- Intensive culture of milkfish
- Studies on residual effects of pesticides in brackishwater ponds
- Studies on artificial feed formulation for cultivated fish.
4. PRODUCTION PROGRAMME
4.1 Financing and Credit
Production programmes are financed through several sources. Loans from Government and private banks and money lenders are available. A small-scale credit scheme for fish farmers was recently introduced through the rural bank system. This credit scheme also handles the sub-loans from the World Bank Fish Culture Development Project.
The preparation for implementing credit to the fish farmers is handled by a project committee chaired by an official of the Directorate General of Fisheries with members from the Bank, credit insurance company and fishery cooperative. Credit is basically distributed on a package basis including design and instructions for operation, and closely connected to demonstrations carried out by the extension workers. The problem of collateral requirement is being solved through the participation of a credit insurance company.
4.2 Phasing and Management of Production Programmes
Intensification of brackishwater pond culture will be primarily carried out in areas where this system has been practised so far, namely in Java, south Sulawesi, Aceh, north Sumatra, Bali and west Nusa Tenggara, while expansion of new areas will be carried out outside Java only, with first priority being in Lampung (southern Sumatra), Aceh and north Sumatra. All new investment opportunities, both through the intensification and expansion programme, will be given to small-scale operators who are cooperatively associated into bigger management units. Manpower requirements for this purpose will be obtained by transmigration from Java and conversion of excessive marine fishermen from the Malacca Strait.
For the freshwater pond development programme, which consists mostly of intensification of production of existing ponds, relatively fewer problems are encountered since they normally already belong to established economic systems. No concrete plans can be formulated for other aquaculture systems, which are still in an initial stage of development before the necessary data are obtained through continuous studies and exploration.
4.3 Marketing
The market programme for aquaculture products can be roughly divided into two sectors.
4.3.1 Export
Referring to Table 4, it is clearly seen that aquaculture products for export in the past seven years are mainly in the form of frozen shrimp and fresh fish. Marketing of these commodities so far presents no difficulties. Exporters have their own cold storage and collect the product, mainly shrimp, through several collecting or buying centres at production centres where sufficient ice and marketing facilities have been provided.
4.3.2 Domestic market
For the domestic market, two different objectives have to be met. Firstly, there is the need to supply town areas and their vicinities where the necessary infrastructure is more developed. The second is to supply the rural areas which still lack infrastructure facilities, and where the purchasing power of the people is still very low. The aquaculture products marketed in these two different sectors will be in both fresh and preserved (mainly dry-salted) forms.
For the first sector, marketing of the product is being handled by cooperatives as well as private companies. Out of 418 existing cooperatives, 242 are actively engaged in the marketing of aquaculture products.
Only a small proportion of the aquaculture production is marketed in preserved form, as it comprises less than 25 percent of -he total (fresh weight equivalent). Emphasis will continue to be placed in future years on supplying markets with fresh aquaculture products. To support this programme, improved marketing facilities specifically adapted for aquaculture products need to be emphasized.
Towns in remote areas have been increasingly equipped with coolrooms to ensure the product quality.
4.4 Budget
It is estimated that about Rp. 80 000 million are required to carry out the intensification and expansion of both brackish- and freshwater fish farms during the next ten years. This would cover both capital and operational costs. The expected annual net return is Rp. 3 800 million.
4.5 External Assistance Requirements
4.5.1 Financial assistance
Loans from the World Bank have been implemented since 1974 and assistance is being sought from USAID to develop brackishwater ponds.
4.5.2 Technical assistance
The programme that is presently being implemented is the Brackishwater Milkfish and Shrimp Culture Applied Research and Training Project, supported by FAO/UNDP. Government input for this project is Rp. 487 550 000 and the UNDP contribution is U.S.$ 832 150. This project is expected to extend for a period of six years from 1972. Expansion of the brackishwater fish farm in Sumatra is awaiting implementation pending USAID assistance. Further projects proposed and technical assistance required in the UNDP Country Programme are:
- tidal/swampy area fish-culture research and development project. This project is aimed at developing fish culture in tidal/swampy areas of south Sumatra, Jambi, Riau and Kalimantan;
- mariculture research and development project. To develop mariculture in the eastern region of Indonesia;
- improvement of the training centre facilities for freshwater culture in Sukabumi;
- supplementing of research facilities of the Inland Fisheries Research Institute in Bogor;
- feasibility studies on aquaculture development in connexion with expansion programmes.
TABLE 1
Fishery Production in Indonesia (1968-74)
Year
Production from capture fisheries (tons)
Production from aquaculture (tons)
Ratio (%)
Annual growth rate of aquaculture production (%)
3/Total production
TABLE 2
Aquafarm Production by Type (1968-74)
Year
Brackishwater ponds
Freshwater ponds
Paddyfields
Cages and others
Tot
Total
Area (ha)
Weight (tons)
Value ('000 Rp.)
Area (ha)
Weight (tons)
Value ('000 Rp.)
Area (ha)
Weight (tons)
Value ('000 Rp.)
Area (ha)
Weight (tons)
Value ('000 Rp.)
Area (ha)
Weight (tons)
Value ('000 Rp.)
TABLE 3
Available Supply and Per Caput Consumption of Fishery Products in Indonesia (1970-74)
Year
Total production (tons)
Exports (tons)
Imports (tons)
Net exports (tons)
Available supply (tons)
Per caput consumption (kg)
TABLE 4
Export Volume and Value of Fishery Products
Weight^a/
Value^b/
Weight
Value
Weight
Value
Weight
Value
Weight
Value
Weight
Value
Weight
Value
Shrimp
Fresh fish
Frogs
Ornamental fish
Salted jellyfish
Others
Total
Index
TABLE 5
Import Volume and Value of Fishery Products
Weight^a/
Value^b/
Weight
Value
Weight
Value
Weight
Value
Weight
Value
Weight
Value
Weight
Value
Smoked, salted, dried
Prepared and pre
served fish
Fats and fish oil
Crustaceans and
molluscs
Seaweed
Others
Total
^a/ Weight is expressed in tons
^b/ Value is expressed in U.S.$ '000
TABLE 6
Aquaculture Production Projection (Tons) (1975-85)
Year
Brackishwater
Freshwater ponds
Paddy-cum-fish culture
Cages, pens and enclosures
Total
TABLE 7
Target of Area (Ha) for Different Types of Fish Farms
Year
Brackishwater pond
Freshwater pond
Paddy-cum-fish
Non-intensive culture
Intensive culture
Area to be expanded
Non-intensive culture
Intensive culture
Area to be expanded
Non-intensive culture
Intensive culture
Area to be expanded
<section>h</section>
NATIONAL PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AQUACULTURE IN MALAYSIA^1/
^1/ Prepared by Mr. D. Pathansali, Fisheries Research Institute, Penang and Mr. S. Zainol, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Kuala Lumpur
1. BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
Fisheries play a significant role in the Malaysian national economy by being a major source of cheap protein food, by providing employment to the population, and by earning foreign exchange. Fish forms almost two thirds of the total animal protein consumed by the population; the fishing industry employs 3.8 percent of the economically-active population; and fish comprise 3.0 percent in value of the total exports from Malaysia.
Total fish production in 1973 from all sources was 466 030 tons of which 431 471 tons were from capture fisheries, and 34 559 tons were from culture fisheries (Table 1). In 1973, fish and fish products exported totalled 129 657 tons as against 79 525 tons of imports, valued at M.$ 201 743 410^2/ and M.$ 65 970 211 respectively. Between 1961 and 1970, marine fish landings increased at a very high rate of 7.0 percent annually but, thereafter, the growth rate has levelled off. This was due to the rapid growth of the trawl fishery and the subsequent levelling off of landings through intensive exploitation in the Malacca Strait. Marine fish landings are expected to increase, however, with the development of the coastal marine fisheries in the South China Sea.
^2/ U.S.$ 1.00 = approx. M.$ 2.60
The population of Malaysia in 1975 is estimated at 13 million and is expected to increase at a rate of 3.15 percent to 15.1 million by 1980, and at a rate of 3.124 percent to 17.5 million by 1985. The 1975 per caput demand for fish is estimated at 27.7 kg; this is expected to increase to 28.8 kg by 1980 and 29.7 kg by 1985. Based on these figures, the total demand for fish for human consumption would be 434 900 and 516 000 tons by 1980 and 1985 respectively.
The greater portion of these projected demands in supply would be met through the expansion of the marine fisheries, mainly offshore and deep-sea, in the South China Sea. The remaining portion would be met through the development of aquaculture, mainly in brackish-water areas (Table 2).
The national policy of the Government has a socio-economic base; the social goals are to increase employment opportunities, raise income and living standards, and to promote active participation by the fishermen in the fishing enterprises through development and maximum exploitation of the fishery resources of the country in line with sound fishery management practices. The role of aquaculture development within the framework of the policy is to contribute to increased production by taking advantage of the existing semi-skilled surplus manpower available within the marine fisheries sector.
2. OBJECTIVES AND GOALS OF AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
2.1 Objectives
The long-term objectives of aquaculture development are to contribute to the projected demand of fish, by developing areas unsuitable for agriculture and other uses through sound culture practices and management.
The short-term objectives will be to identify areas and species suitable for aquaculture, expansion and strengthening of supporting research, and training of the technical and operative personnel.
For the short term, the main thrust of aquaculture development will be in the public sector which will promote small-scale as well as large-scale culture.
2.2 Production Targets
The main type of culture to be developed during the ten-year period, 1976-85, is brackish-water culture. There are about 150 000 ha of brackishwater areas, mangrove swamps and coastal flats suitable for development, though at present only about 376 ha (excluding 1 166 ha of coastal mud-flats used for cockle culture) are being utilized. The main species groups to be cultured are prawns and finfish.
Mariculture and freshwater culture would also be developed; the former through the development of cage culture of finfish and shellfish culture, and the latter through the expansion of culture areas, and improvements in culture and management practices.
In 1973, the total production from all sources of aquaculture was 34 559 tons. Of this figure, 6 030 tons was from freshwater culture; 529 tons from brackishwater culture; and 28 000 tons from mariculture (mainly from cockle culture).
During the Third Malaysia Plan, 1976-80, the projected production by the last year is 41 459 tons. The contributions by the various sources are 7 230 tons from freshwater culture, 4 529 tons from brackishwater culture, and 29 700 tons from mariculture.
During the Fourth Malaysia Plan, 1981-85, the projected production by the last year is 50 859 tons. The contributions by the various sources are 8 930 tons from freshwater culture, 10 529 tons from brackishwater culture, and 31 400 tons from mariculture (Tables 3 and 4).
2.3 Cultivated Species and Production Systems
The types of production systems to be adopted are:
- brackishwater pond culture;
- freshwater pond culture;
- replenishment stocking of public inland-water bodies, including cage culture;
- mariculture in coastal areas by cage culture in impoundments, and raft culture.
In brackishwater pond culture and mariculture, the techniques (other than for cockle culture) are still in the early stages of development. For these systems (which are now practised essentially on a small scale) the basic technology exists, but needs to be upgraded and strengthened. It is planned that measures to acquire and/or upgrade the technology would be through training of personnel and operatives and by demonstration of more efficient methods of culture and management. The development of new technology will be carried out by the public sector, with assistance from international agencies, on an experimental and/or semi-commercial scale.
The types of aquaculture and the species considered suitable for culture are:
Brackishwater culture
Penaeus spp., Chanos chanos, Mugil sp. and Lates calcarifer
Freshwater culture
Puntius gonionotus, Cyprinus carpio, Ctenopharyngodon idella, Aristichthys nobilis, Hypophthalmichthys molitrix, Osphronemus goramy, Trichogaster pectoralis, Helostoma temmincki, Amyada sp. and Macrobrachium rosenbergii.
Other species which are considered suitable for culture are some local riverine species and some Indian major carps.
Mariculture
Anadara granosa, Crassostrea spp., Mytilus sp., Epinephelus spp., Lates calcarifer, Eleutheronema tetradactylum, Chelonia mydas, Eucheuma spp.
3. ESTABLISHMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension Service
An inland fisheries extension service exists within the Fisheries Division with sub-offices in the districts, with its main extension activities being to provide advice and assistance in site selection, design and construction of fishponds, pond management and the distribution of subsidized inputs, the training of farmers, and the supply and distribution of fish seed. During the Third Malaysia Plan, 1976-80, a number of stations for seed production of Macrobrachium and freshwater fish, as well as for demonstration/training, are planned for construction. Though marketing is not included in the extension activity of the fisheries extension service, it is provided for by another agency of the Government.
3.2 Training of Core Personnel
For the public sector activities of extension and training, the type of core personnel required are senior and junior fish culturists who should be trained in all aspects of extension practices and activities. The number required are four and 30 respectively for each grade.
It is planned that these categories of personnel will be trained within the country through local group training programmes and in regional fish culture centres and neighbouring countries and elsewhere, assisted by funding from international agencies.
For the private sector the training of operatives, estimated at 6 250 for the ten-year period, would be within the country. The present facilities will be expanded and new ones set up in conjunction with research and hatchery stations.
3.3 Organization of Research
At present, there are two fisheries research institutes, one with brackishwater and marine culture as one of its activities, and the other for freshwater fish culture. In the Third Malaysia Plan, three new research stations are planned for the proposed culture systems identified under section 2.3 on brackishwater and marine, and freshwater culture.
Training would be required for at least one researcher in each of the following subjects;
- Semi-intensive culture of penaeid prawns in brackishwater ponds
- Hatchery production of seed prawns (Penaeus) and design of hatchery systems
- Culture of brackishwater/marine fishes in ponds and net enclosures/cages
- Culture of shellfish
- Nutritional requirements of fish and the development of suitable fish feeds
- Fish diseases and related problems
- Pond engineering
- Water quality and pollution
4. PRODUCTION PROGRAMMES
4.1 Financing and Credit
There is no specific arrangement for financing production programmes in the private sector. However, a system is being developed whereby farmers can obtain loans from public banks, provided their feasibility is endorsed by the responsible Government agency. Aquaculture projects in land development schemes are supported by the respective agency's funds. The public agency charged with the development of commercial fisheries undertakes to develop culture either with public funds or funds obtained from international funding agencies.
At the present stage of aquaculture development, financing and credit remain a major problem and the solution will not be found until the profitability of large-scale aquaculture operations is demonstrated.
4.2 Phasing and Management of Production Programmes
The kind of culture to be developed during the next ten years would be brackishwater aquaculture. The area to be developed covers 12 000 ha which would require 6 250 operatives. Some preliminary work on the selection of suitable sites and species has already been conducted with FAO/UNDP assistance. The training of operatives would be carried out as an integrated activity in the aquaculture research, demonstration, and hatchery stations to be set up during the Third Malaysia Plan, and through on-the-job training.
As seed production will be one of the most important inputs in aquaculture, the highest priority will be given to the survey of natural seed sources and to the hatchery production of seeds to meet the demands for aquafarm seedlings.
4.3 Budget
Since the greater emphasis and efforts would be directed to the promotion of brackish-water culture, for which 12 000 ha are to be developed during the ten-year period, investment is estimated only for brackishwater culture (Table 5). The total investment estimated is M.$ 150 million for the ten-year period based on a capital expenditure of M.$ 12 000/ha in 1980, and M.$ 15 000/ha in 1985.
4.4 External Assistance Requirements
For the accelerated implementation of the development programmes in Malaysia, technical assistance through international bodies like FAO/UNDP and SEAFDEC, as well as through bilateral arrangements with countries with established aquaculture practices, is imperative. The assistance required includes:
- Aquaculture experts for terms of not less than two years, and consultancies in specified fields to be assigned for the development of brackishwater and marine culture. A project proposal is being considered.
- Material and equipment for aquaculture research, extension and training which are not available locally.
- Assistance in the training of extension and research personnel, locally and overseas.
5. REFERENCES
Labon, A., Malaysian Long Term Fisheries Development Plan until 1995. Rome, FAO, SCS/DEV/73/10: 1974 90 p.
Ling, S.W., Status, potential and development of coastal aquaculture in the countries bordering 1973 the South China Sea. Rome, FAO, SCS/DEV/73/5:51 p.
Malaysia, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Draft master plan for the long term 1975 development of aquaculture, 1976-1985. April, 1975
TABLE 1
Production of Fish (tons) through Capture Fisheries and Aquaculture (1973)
Type
Capture fisheries
Aquaculture
Total
Marine
Brackishwater
Freshwater
Total
TABLE 2
Projected Production and Demand for Fish (tons) by 1980 and 1985
End year
Capture fisheries
Aquaculture
Total
Projected demand
Human consumption
Total^a/
540 000^a/
660 000^a/
^a/ Includes fish production for industrial purposes
TABLE 3
Projected Production (tons) by Aquaculture Development by 1980 and 1985
End year
Type
Production
Net increase
Marine Brackishwater Freshwater
Total
Marine Brackishwater Freshwater
(over 1973)
Total
Marine Brackishwater Freshwater
(over 1980)
Total
TABLE 4
Projected Area (ha) to be Developed for Aquaculture
End year
Freshwater culture
Brackishwater culture
Mariculture
Total increment
Increment
Increment
TABLE 5
Projected Investment Costs for Brackishwater Culture Development^ a/
^a/ Modified from Labon, A., 1974. Malaysian long-term fisheries development plan until 1995. ^- SCS/DEV/73/10/Rome
End year
Production^b/
(tons)
Area^b/
(ha)
Investment ('000 M.$)
Value of production ('000 M.$)
Return ('000 M.$)
Employment
Total
^b/ Denotes net increase by the end year of the plan period over the end year of the previous period
<section>i</section>
NATIONAL PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AQUACULTURE IN NEPAL^1/
^1/ Prepared by Mr. P.J.B. Rana, Deputy Director-General, Department of Agriculture, and Mr. K.G. Rajbanshi, Fisheries Development Officer, Kathmandu
1. BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
1.1 Present and Anticipated Population
Nepal is a small country with an area of 145 689 km^2. The present estimated population is 12.58 million; at the end of 1980 it is expected to rise to 13.71 million and in the course of a decade, i.e., by 1985, it is expected to rise to 15.32 million. It is also estimated that if the present increasing rate continues, the country's population will be in the order of 23.10 million by 2000. With the high rate of population increment it is only natural that increasing pressure will be exerted on available natural resources of the country. Agricultural land and water resources of Nepal are far less than forest resources and the mountain and hilly desert areas. However, 95 percent of the population is involved in agricultural activities.
1.2 Present per caput Consumption of Fish,
At present, the proportion of animal protein in the diet of the Nepalese population is estimated at 4.5 kg per caput, in which the fish is estimated to be only 200 g per caput in 1974/75. However, fish as a protein-rich food is acceptable to every level of the population. Domestically-produced supplies of fish are primarily from simple traditional capture fisheries in rivers and lakes (2 000 tons) and fish culture in the private sector (400 tons) as well as from governmental fish farms (23 tons) and from subsistence level paddy-cum-fish culture in the private sector. Thus, the production of fish in Nepal is still at a very low level, being about 2 500 tons in 1974/75.
Nepal is a landlocked country and, therefore, the production of fish is totally dependent on use of inland waters. It is understood that some quantity of fish is imported into the country from neighbouring countries, but due to the total absence of reliable statistics, this has not been taken into account.
1.3 Role of Aquaculture in Meeting Home Consumption Requirements
Fish culture is a recent activity in Nepal. There is, however, considerable scope for expansion of aquaculture development to increase fish production. Natural lakes and rivers in the country provide an estimated 400 000 ha of water area for development. With the steadily increasing trend in the construction of irrigation dams and hydro-electric power stations, several additional water bodies for aquaculture development are rapidly becoming available. Village ponds, which are common and have a long history in the country, constitute a major resource for aquaculture development. By 1980, it is estimated that irrigated paddy fields in the country will extend over 263 490 ha and a large proportion of these paddy fields offer some scope for fish culture development as well. Natural fisheries resources in Nepal can be briefly described as follows:
Type of natural resource
Estimated area (ha)
Projected additional development by 1985^a/ (ha)
River
Natural lakes
Irrigation hydro-electric reservoirs
Village ponds/tanks
Irrigated paddyfields
Total
^a/ Rough estimate
Considering the nature of resources and the need for increased availability of protein-rich foods, H.M. Government of Nepal has accorded high priority to development of aquaculture in the country. The fifth five-year plan (1975-80) envisages a target of 5 240 tons production of fish per year, aimed at increasing per caput consumption of fish to 382 g by 1980. This objective is to be achieved through intensification of fish culture in public and private farms, in village tanks, reservoirs, lakes and paddyfields, as well as by the development of the natural water fisheries (rivers).
The results of fish culture in artificial fish ponds (drainable as well as undrainable) and paddyfields in the private sector have been encouraging. On the basis of results to date, it is expected that a considerable part of the animal protein needs of the population could be met if modern fish culture practices were to be gradually extended to other parts of the country after the necessary feasibility studies have been undertaken.
1.4 National Policies Related to Food Production
In the national development policy, agriculture development has the highest priority in the fifth five-year plan. The Government, recognizing the importance of aquaculture in improving the nutrition of the people through increasing production of fish in a relatively short period compared with other sectors of animal husbandry, has given considerable priority to the development of fish culture. This has resulted in the adoption of crash programmes of development over and above normal development plans, but a comprehensive assessment of aquaculture development possibilities in the country and their role in rural development, socio-economic improvement and increased employment opportunities, is still to be completed.
2. OBJECTIVES AND GOALS OF AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
2.1 Objectives
Fish culture has only a short history in Nepal, with the limited production utilized for domestic consumption only. The potentials for aquaculture development in the country are, however, considerable. Lack of adequate technical expertise in the field of aquaculture, is one of the major constraints to rapid development. Besides natural waters (rivers and lakes), reservoirs and irrigated paddyfields, the country has approximately 5 000 ha of village ponds in warmer parts (sub-tropical climatic conditions) of the country and these can easily be used for fish culture to increase production. The main objectives for aquaculture development in Nepal are as follows:
2.1.1 Short-term objectives
(i) To increase the nutritional status of the people, with priority being given to increasing aquaculture production by expanding and intensifying fish culture in the private sector.
(ii) To initiate mass production of seed of selected exotic and indigenous fish species to encourage fish culture.
(iii) To adopt new aquaculture technology in suitable undeveloped rural areas (fish culture in ponds and tanks, paddy-cum-fish culture, duck-cum-fish farming, improving production in reservoirs and lakes, and related subjects), and generate additional employment.
(iv) To develop intensive techniques of aquaculture production to augment yield, and to disseminate the techniques among fish farmers.
(v) To increase fish production by intensive stocking of suitable fish species in selected lakes/reservoirs, adopting appropriate measures for conservation and natural propagation and by organized harvesting and marketing of the crop.
To attain these short-term objectives, crash programmes over and above routine country programmes (supported by UNDP) have been developed to bring under intensive aquaculture about 1 200-2 000 ha of ponds, and 600-700 ha of lakes in the public as well as private sector by 1979-80, which will yield about 5 241 tons of prime fish.
2.1.2 Long-term objectives
The long-term objectives are also to increase fish production from the available water resources in order to make available additional supplies of animal protein to the people by:
(i) developing and expanding commercial fish farming or large-scale fish farming and its related activities (auxiliary industries) at cottage-industry scale in the private sector through appropriate organizations;
(ii) encouraging and expanding integrated fish farming, such as fish-cum-duck culture, rearing more animal protein from a limited area;
(iii) organizing the fishermen into cooperatives or fishermen's associations, and extending through them facilities for easy procurement of production inputs. This will raise the socio-economic condition of socially-backward communities of fishermen (estimated at 15 000-20 000 people), and will, at the same time, enhance fish production.
To meet the above short-term as well as long-term objectives of aquaculture development, there are at present nine fisheries development centres producing about 2 million fish seed annually for distribution and two commercial fish farms producing table fish. One of the commercial fish farms has undertaken duck-cum-fish farming, which has been found to be very promising with fish production showing a definite increasing trend.
2.1.3 Sectoral priorities
At present, small-scale as well as large-scale fish production operations in the private sector will continue to receive full protection and support from the Government, with the main aim of maintaining the present level of fish production on the one hand, and increasing the level of productivity on the other. Greater participation by the private sector in the aqua-culture industry is anticipated by continued demonstration of economic viability, if necessary even in their own ponds.
In the current fifth five-year plan of Nepal (1975-80), high priority has been given to the private sector for fish production. Consequently, it is planned to transfer two commercial fish farms of 65 ha in the public sector to the private sector after successful demonstration of commercial production of fish. A policy decision has also been taken to gradually transfer responsibility for fish seed production, especially common carp which breeds easily in pond water, to the private sector. During this five-year plan period, the present fish seed production of 3.3 million (1975-76) will increase to 12.5 million by 1979-80, as shown below:
Requirement of fish seed
This is expected to be attained by a production of 4.26 million fingerlings in the private sector, with the remaining 8.15 million being produced by the public sector. Though the fingerling production in the private sector has been envisaged until 1980, the public sector will be fully responsible for fish seed production and distribution. In case of a high demand for fish seed, cooperation will be sought to meet the deficit through bilateral or multilateral assistance.
2.1.4 Levels and scales of production
The country's present annual production of fish by aquaculture is estimated at about 2 500 tons, which is domestically consumed, but only a very limited amount of fish is smoked and no processing, freezing or icing facilities are available in the country. The bulk of production is sold through local markets and consumed within the immediate vicinity of the production centres.
The present level of fish production stands at an average of 800-1 200 kg/ha in the private sector depending on the farmer's experience, as well as climatic conditions. In the medium term the production target is to be met by increasing the production to 1.5-2.0 tons/ha, while the long-term objective is to increase it to 2.0-2.5 tons/ha.
The projected production will be achieved by:
(i) giving more incentives (e.g., by financing and providing guarantees of distribution and marketing) and technical assistance to the private sector for fish production, as well as producing fish seed;
(ii) establishing new public sector demonstration fish farms in suitable areas in different parts of the country, improving hatchery techniques and providing training and equipment;
(iii) disseminating the techniques developed for increased production for the benefit of the private sector as well as introducing or exploiting suitable fast-growing exotic or indigenous fish species for developing intensive culture systems.
2.2 Production Targets
The targeted production of inland fisheries in the country up to 1979/80 is given below, with projection for 1985.
Capture fisheries
Fish culture
During the decade, 1975-85, the area under fish culture is expected to increase from the 1975-76 area of 550 ha to 3 000 ha with a corresponding increase in production to about 6 000 tons. Intensive culture techniques adopted ensuring a production of over 2 tons/ha will be adopted after 1980.
The annual input requirements and their respective costs, such as fish poison for clearing ponds, fertilizers, feed and fish fingerlings for stocking, are projected in Table 1.
The cost of producing a ton of fish is estimated to be approximately N.Rs. 2 400^1/, while the prevailing rate for fish on the market at N.Rs. 0.10 per kg is about N.Rs. 10 000. Even after making allowances for managerial costs, labour, rental and depreciation, fish culture even on a semi-intensive scale is an economically viable undertaking.
^1/ U.S.$ 1.00 = approx. N.Rs. 10.56
Fish seed requirements for the period have been projected in section 2.1.3. At an average survival rate of 40 percent, the present production of carp eggs is about 10 million. By 1985, this will have to be increased to 50 million to provide the 20 million fingerlings required for stocking. The nursery ponds available in different projects in the country amount to over 20 ha. There will be 12 fish seed production centres at the end of 1980 and seed production by induced breeding will be undertaken at all these centres. Projection costs for production of fish seed is given in Table 2. Transportation and supply of fish seed to fish farms is at present fully subsidized by the Government. By improving techniques of induced spawning and spawn rearing, it should be possible to reduce production costs still further.
Though, at present, the level of fish production from inland waters of the country is low, production can be increased several fold by adaptation of the known techniques of intensive aquaculture from countries where they are developed. Bilateral, as well as multilateral, assistance will have a very important role to play in developing the aquaculture industry in Nepal.
2.3 Cultivated Species and Production Systems
2.3.1 Culture of common carp (Cyprinus carpio)
Fish farmers taking up fish culture are given common carp seed for monoculture. In properly managed ponds where predators have been eliminated, common carp breed and produce some fingerlings naturally.
2.3.2 Culture of compatible combinations of carps
The Chinese carps Ctenopharynogodon idella, Hypophthalmichthys molitrix, Aristichthys nobilis and the common carp Cyprinus carpio are cultivated together in ponds. The fingerlings are produced by induced breeding. By clearing ponds of predators and applying fertilizers, a production of 1.0-1.2 tons/ha/year is achieved. Indigenous Indian major carps, Catla catla, Labeo rohita and Cirrhira mrigala are also used in fish culture.
2.3.3 Fish culture-cum-duck rearing
Fish production is appreciably increased by combining it with duck rearing in fish ponds. Combinations of 3-4 species of carps are stocked at 5 000-6 000/ha and 400-500 ducks are also reared in the same pond. Production of fish in such ponds shows an increase of 5-10 percent as compared to ordinary fish ponds. Through fish-cum-duck farming, more animal protein is produced from the same water area as ducks grow to an average weight of 2 kg in 45-50 days from the date of hatching.
2.3.4 Development of lake fisheries
Indigenous species in some of the lakes include Tor tor and Shizothorax spp. Even though both the above species are high-value species, culture techniques for them have not yet been developed, It is planned to stock large areas of lakes (600-700 ha) and reservoirs with carp fingerlings for increasing production and establishing a fishery of these species.
2.3.5 Paddy-cum-fish culture
Paddy-cum-fish culture has been newly introduced in the country and is practised in a small area in which common carp (Cyprinus carpio) is used. Only irrigated paddyfields are selected for the purpose and dikes of the field are specially prepared beforehand. Fish are stocked after 2-3 weeks of paddy plantation and cultured for 3-4 months with at least 30-40 cm of water. Within this period the fish grows to about 100-150 g and the production is about 200 kg/ha (depending on the farmer's skill and experience).
Expansion of paddy-cum-fish culture has considerable potential as the area of irrigated paddyfields is rapidly increasing in the country (see Table 1). Expansion of fish culture in paddyfields has been taken into account in a new Integrated Fishery Development and Fish Culture Project in Pokhara aided by UNDP.
2.3.6 Cage culture
Cage culture of selected species of carps (especially silver carp) has shown promising results (stocking with 200 g silver carp gives growth of 4-6 g/day) and could be developed into a new culture system in Nepal.
3. ESTABLISHMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension Service
The general Agricultural Extension Agency is now responsible for fisheries extension work as well. Lack of suitably trained personnel for effective extension work is a serious handicap. Fish farmers being largely unschooled, effective extension work demands demonstration of improved culture techniques in farmers' ponds. Extension workers should naturally have a background in fisheries and should receive training in intensive methods of culture. Lack of extension literature and aids (booklets, posters, etc.) is also one of the major constraints to effective extension work. A team of 18 American Peace Corps Volunteers is now engaged in fish culture extension work in the country and they have been able to make some headway in influencing some of the farmers in improved fish culture techniques.
Under the current fifth five-year plan, besides technical and financial help to the private sector, a fish culture training course of three months duration is being organized at the Animal Research and Veterinary Science Institute at the university level. Specialized, short-term courses on specific aspects of fish culture are also being organized for the benefit of fish farmers.
In the long term, it is expected that even at the school stage fish culture could form part of the educational curriculum so that farmers going in for fish culture will have a background of the subject and will need only on-the-job training.
3.1.1 Technical assistance
Technical assistance in site selection, design and construction of ponds and installation, farm management, health inspection and disease control of stock, etc., has been made available to fish farmers in spite of the limited technical manpower available. Transfer of technology to farmers depends on having suitably trained personnel. Facilities do not now exist in the country for specialized aquaculture training. In this area, external assistance is essential.
3.1.2 Procurement and distribution of inputs
Inputs in the form of fertilizers, feeds and technical equipment required have been detailed in Table 1. The present international situation has made procurement of these essential supplies difficult and expensive and consequently sharply raises the cost of production of fish. In the projections made, the total resources of the country have not been taken into account because of the above situation. Even for attaining the targets indicated, organized assistance from regional or international organizations is essential in the matter of procurement of inputs from outside the country.
3.2 Training of Core Personnel
Facilities for training of core personnel do not exist in the country and are not expected to be available for some time to come. It is, therefore, necessary to have the necessary key personnel trained outside Nepal. In this, the country is entirely dependent on external assistance. Specialized aquaculture training, however, is not available in the neighbouring countries or in the region and in this context a regional centre for aquaculture research and development offering advanced training facilities would be a real incentive to aquaculture development in a least developed country like Nepal.
3.3 Organization of Research
In Nepal so far, priority has been given for production-oriented adaptive research in fish culture. The Government has given considerable attention to developing one centrally located warmwater experimental station which is now in the construction phase. This station will conduct studies on induced breeding, rearing and nursing of fish fry and production-oriented studies (feeding, fertilizing, diseases, etc.). The Integrated Fishery and Fish Culture Development Project (Pokhara) assisted by UNDP plans to establish a lake study laboratory.
Training facilities for research personnel on aquaculture development programmes have to be provided to strengthen the infrastructure for rapid development.
4. PRODUCTION PROGRAMMES
4.1 Financing and Credit
The public sector projects are financed by the Government, while the development projects are financed under bilateral and multilateral assistance. A new development project, namely the Integrated Fishery and Fish Culture Development Project (Pokhara), is to be financed by UNDP.
In the private sector, the fish farmers can procure credit and loans from Agriculture Development Banks in the various districts. The loans have been divided into short-term and long-term. The short-term loan is payable within a year while a long-term loan is payable over ten years. Loans are given by the bank on the recommendation of the Fisheries Officer and the Agriculture Extension Officer of the respective districts.
4.2 Phasing and Management of Production Programme
4.2.1 Areas to be developed
To increase the production of fish in a relatively short period, priority is given to developing warmwater fish culture in the lowlands of the country called Terai. There are numerous village ponds (about 5 000 ha) as well as favourable climatic conditions for fish production in this area. Production targets have been detailed in section 2.2. Considerable attention has also been given to developing fisheries in lakes of about 600 ha under the Integrated Fisheries and Fish Culture Development Project (Pokhara-aided by UNDP) within the current fifth five-year plan. According to this plan, the management of fish production programmes will mostly be the responsibility of the private sector, while fish seed production will be undertaken in the public sector.
4.2.2 Arrangements for acquisition of sites and construction of farms and installation
Arrangements for acquisition of sites for expansion or establishment of new projects will be carried out under the normal acquisition procedures of government. A new construction site is selected only on the recommendations of a team of aquaculturists, engineers or overseers (specially trained in fish culture aspects) and soil experts.
As far as designing and construction are concerned, the Fisheries Development Section (under the Department of Agriculture), has one overseer specially trained in fish culture, and on technical aspects he is assisted by a separate Agricultural Engineering Section of the Agriculture Department. Due to limited manpower, it has only been possible to extend this service to the private sector for the construction of ponds.
4.2.3 Manpower requirements and arrangements for training of personnel for production programmes
Only 15 officers and 19 medium-level technicians are now employed for the development of fish culture, out of which only six officers are trained; three are under training in the U.S.A. and the rest are untrained but are receiving practical experience working in different fisheries development centres.
To ensure the attainment of the target production objectives, at least 25 senior officers and 103 technicians are required.
Arrangements for training personnel have to be made through bilateral and multilateral -means, while provision has to be made to train medium-level technicians within the country.
4.2.4 Procurement of inputs
(a) Seed - has been mentioned in 2.1.3.
(b) Fertilizer - In Nepal, the Agricultural Input Corporation takes care of the country's requirements of agricultural inputs, including fertilizer, and also supplies the fertilizer for fish culture.
(c) Fish poison - To prepare the village ponds for fish culture, it is essential to use fish poison to kill the various species of carnivorous fishes so as to ensure high survival of the stocked cultivable fish species to obtain higher production. At the present level of the industry, only small quantities of fish poisons have to be imported but, with further expansion, larger quantities will be required as detailed in Table 1. It is very expensive to import these due to increasing prices. Locally available herbs and shrubs (used as fish poison) could be utilized for the same purpose provided they are first analysed (e.g., for content of rotenone). If suitable sources of fish poisons can be found, it would encourage an auxiliary industry (herb and shrub cultivation) for domestic use or export.
4.2.5 Health and disease control
Various external and internal parasites have been observed, but so far serious mortality in cultured fish has not been experienced. Prophylatic measures are considered the best way to prevent this occurrence and it is necessary to train core personnel in the diagnosis and control of diseases.
4.2.6 Organization of harvesting and marketing
Marketing problems do not exist in Nepal as demand for fish is much higher than production. But it has been recognized during the course of fish culture development that harvesting of fish should be organized so that fish farmers do not compete with each other, especially in those areas having low market capacity.
This will help fish farmers to establish suitable organizations (fish farmers' associations or cooperative societies) to handle harvesting and marketing, and such organizations should be supported with the necessary facilities (e.g., live fish transportation vans, cutting or curing facilities) to develop an efficient marketing system.
4.2.7 Budget
Under the current fifth five-year plan the provision for capital and operating cost of aquaculture in the public sector amounts to N.Rs. 23 569 million. Beyond 1980, the budget will be expanded as projected in Table 1.
4.4 External Assistance Requirements
4.4.1 Technical assistance
Considering the importance of fish culture in meeting the animal protein deficit, H.M. Government of Nepal started fish culture with a few projects, and then with valuable technical assistance from FAO (from 1960 to 1972), extended it throughout the country. The Integrated Fishery Development Programme in Pokhora has been launched with UNDP assistance for a period of 51 months.
More technical assistance is required for an overall water resources survey, and determination of the feasibility for increasing fish production and for aquaculture.
External assistance is also required to develop or improve:
(i) hatchery methods and commercial fish seed production;
(ii) control of diseases;
(iii) fish feed made from locally available materials;
(iv) training of core personnel and fisheries extension personnel;
(v) suitable aquaculture techniques adaptable to the country;
(vi) engineering aspects of fish culture;
(vii) coldwater fish culture, especially to determine whether local species of fish are suitable or introduction of exotic species would be advisable;
(viii) fish culture in combination with other forms of animal husbandry for increased animal protein.
4.4.2 Financing
Since Nepal is a landlocked country with comparatively very limited GNP, the need for external assistance becomes more important. Moreover, as development of aquaculture is an expensive operation (for its establishment), financial assistance with low interest and easy repayment terms will be required for the rapid development of culture activities for which feasibility has been demonstrated in the country.
TABLE 1
Projection of Costs for Fish Production for the Decade 1975-85^1/
Year
Area under culture (ha)
Production (tons)
Fingerlings, at
6 000/ha^2/
Poisoning-and clearing^3/
Inorganic fertilizer at 960 kg/ha^4/
Artificial feeds^5/
Capital cost of construction at N.Rs. 2 000/ha^6/
(million N.Rs.)
Number (millions)
Cost (million N.Rs.)
Cost (million N.Rs.)
Tons
Cost (million N.Rs.)
Tons
Cost (million N.Rs.)
Total
Cost estimates were made at the current price levels
^1/ 1975-80 figures are from the fifth five-year plan; 1981-85 are estimates and subject to change
^2/ Present market rate for 3.5-cm size fingerlings is N.Rs. 100/1 000. 50 percent subsidy is given by the Government to the farmers on cost of fingerlings, i.e., a farmer pays only N.Rs. 50/1 000
^3/ Ponds are cleared by application of 30 kg/ha of Pronoxfish (imported from the U.S.A.) at N.Rs. 15/kg at subsidized rates (actual Government cost works out at N.Rs. 22/kg)
^4/ Inorganic fertilizer N.P. (20:20) costs N.Rs. 3/kg on the market
^5/ During 1980-82 about 10 percent of the area under culture will have supplementary artificial feeding at 1 ton/ha. During 1983-85 the area will be 20 percent with feeding at the same level as in 1980-82
^6/ Bulk of the area to be brought under culture includes existing ponds which need only limited capital cost for renovation
TABLE 2
Costs of Producing 50 million Carp Eggs and Rearing them to Distribution Size
1. Eggs to be produced at different production centres by induced breeding
Total area for producing spawners over a period of three years
= 20 ha
Cost at N.Rs. 5 000/ha/year for three years
= N.Rs. 0.30 million
Production at 1.5 tons/ha/year
= 90 tons
Loss in breeding
= 20 tons
70 tons to be sold
2. Induced spawning
Cost of equipment and supplies = N.Rs. 0.100 million
3. Rearing expenses
Area used
= 20 ha
Expenditure per ha:
Poisoning and clearing
= N.Rs. 500
Fertilizing
Seeding
Capital costs
N.Rs. 7 200  20 = N.Rs. 0.144 million
4. Handling and transport
Receipts cost of 70 tons of fish at 10/kg
= 0.700 million
Cost of production of a million eggs
= N.Rs. 8 000
Cost of production and rearing of a million fingerlings
= N.Rs. 27 200
Note: Labour costs have not been taken into account in this projection
<section>j</section>
NATIONAL PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AQUACULTURE IN THE PHILIPPINES^1/
1. BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
1.1 Status of Fish Production, Supply and Demand
1.1.1 Total production
Total fish production from commercial and municipal fisheries and aquaculture during the past six years increased from 937 684 tons in 1968 to 1 243 268 tons in 1974, with a growth rate of 4.9 percent (as against 4.6 percent for 1968-72). Production in 1974 from the different sectors of fisheries was as follows:
Capture fisheries
tons
Marine - commercial
Marine - municipal
Inland (rivers, Lakes, dams, etc.)
Aquaculture (coastal or brackishwater)
Total
1.1.2 Fish supply situation
The actual available supply of fish for food in the Philippines in 1974 was 1 304 000 tons. This represents domestic production (1 243 400 tons) supplemented by net imports (61 000 tons). Fish supply situation in the Philippines in 1974 was therefore as follows:
thousand tons
Domestic production
Imports (excludes fish meal)
Exports (converted to round weights)
Net import
Available supply (after imports and exports were converted to their equivalent live or round weights, the resulting net import (import minus export) is added to domestic production to give the total supply available for human consumption).
1.1.3 Exports and imports
Significant developments in external trade occurred in 1969-74. Although consistent trade deficits have occurred during this period, the quantity of exports of fish and fishery products has exhibited an annual growth rate of 55 percent. On the other hand, fish and fishery product import declined at an average rate of 4.5 percent.
Tuna, shrimps and lobsters, which make up about 60 percent of the total Philippine fishery exports, showed a dramatic increase of 170 percent from 1971 to 1973. This trend was, however, reversed for shrimps and lobsters in 1974.
The quantity of imports declined from 68 900 tons in 1971 to 41 200 tons in 1973. It will be noted that during this period importation of mackerel, which accounts for about 75 percent of the total imports, was reduced to 58 percent. Importation of fish meal was likewise reduced from 10 100 tons to 1 300 tons, but this was a result of the failure of the Peruvian fish meal supply in 1973. Heavy importation of fish meal was again recorded in 1974.
^1/ Prepared by Miss N.C. Macalincag, Chief, Planning and Management Staff, Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, and Mr. P.A. Acosta, Chief, Fish Propagation Division, Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, Manila
In 1971 external trade in fisheries exhibited about P.ps. 100 million^1/ deficit, but this was almost balanced in 1973. However, the value of imports in 1974 again exceeded exports by P.ps. 100 million. Details of the quantity and value of exports and imports are given in Table 1.
^1/ U.S.$ 1.00 = approx. P.ps. 7.50
1.1.4 Demand for fish
The total effective demand for fish in 1974 was 1 304 400 tons (available supply). This represents a per caput consumption of 31.2 kg. The effective demand for fish (human consumption) for the period between 1974 and 1985 is given in Table 2, with the projections being calculated by using the following equation:
where:
D[t] = demand at year t
D[0] = demand at the base year
p = annual growth rate of population
g = annual growth rate of income per caput
e = income elasticity of demand
t = number of years after the base year
The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) used 1974 as the base year with the corresponding value of effective demand (D[0]) of 1 304 400 tons. This is equal to domestic production plus net imports in 1974, all converted to round weights. For the period 1974 to 1980, value taken for annual growth rate of population is 3.01 percent; annual growth rate of income is 3.6 percent; and income elasticity of demand is 0.55.
1.1.5 Effective demand and production targets
One of the primary objectives of the fish production programme of the. Government is to attain self-sufficiency. Viewed in another way, the goal is to achieve zero net import, and ultimately expand net exports. Effective demand and future production figures based on historical data (4.9 percent growth rate) and the planned production programme of the Government (6.6 percent growth rate) are given in Table 2.
1.2 Status of Aquaculture Development
The Philippines is endowed with vast potential for aquaculture in fresh, brackish and marine waters. At present development is mostly in brackishwater areas, while development of both the freshwater and marine areas has just started.
The total production of the 176 000 ha of brackishwater fishponds in operation in 1973 amounted to 99 600 tons and was valued at P.ps. 434 million. This represented 9 percent of 1 204 837 tons total fish production for the same year. The average production/ha/year is only 500-700 kg. The intensification of production by the application of improved management practices is urgently required.
In freshwater fish culture, about 6 000 ha of fishponds have been developed so far. Since freshwater fish culture has only recently been initiated, average production/ha/year is only about 400 kg.
Other production systems practised in the Philippines include the culture of seaweeds in coastal marine waters, the culture of fish in pens in freshwater areas, as well as the culture of rice and fish in rotation in rice fields. The Government is also undertaking a fish "dispersal" programme which consists of stocking inland communal water bodies with fingerlings produced in its freshwater and brackishwater farms or stations. It is assumed that the recovery from the Government fish dispersal programme ranges from 20 to 30 percent of stocked fish, i.e., the incremental fish production from the bodies of natural waters by stocking is 0.015 ton/ha/year. Estimated quantity and value of production in the various types of fish farms are given in Table 3.
These fish farms produce a variety of products: fish, crustaceans, shellfish, seaweeds and fingerlings for stocking and "dispersal" purposes. Available data at the time of writing are presented in Table 4. Except for seaweeds, which are exported in the dry state, and aqua farm seed production (fingerlings) which are utilized for dispersal purposes, all aquaculture output is for direct human consumption.
Aquaculture provides direct employment to about 179 000 farmers (fishponds, fish pens, and seaweed farming). Indirectly it also gives employment opportunities to fry gatherers and people engaged in fry-fingerling trade operations. The contribution of milkfish exports has slowly but steadily increased. In terms of meeting the protein requirements of the Filipinos, milkfish leads the list of fish species consumed locally.
The present Four Year Expanded Fisheries Programme for fiscal years 1975-78 under the National Economic Development Plan gives top priority to aquaculture development as a means to meet the effective demand for fish. Reasons for giving it top priority are:
(a) Culture of milkfish in the Philippines is traditional and although at present the average production is quite low, it is just a matter of transfer of technology from those who know to those who do not know. With available technology present production can be increased two or threefold.
(b) There are still large areas of swamplands available for conversion into fishponds (approx. 400 000 ha for brackishwater and 126 000 ha for freshwater ponds, not to mention coves or inlets of marine waters which offer potential sites for fish culture).
(c) Presently the effect of pollution is minimal.
(d) It is labour-intensive and therefore complements the Government economic development policies. Especially in small-scale operations, manual labour is preferred to mechanization.
(e) Except for fertilizer, almost all inputs can be obtained locally.
(f) Aquaculture development will support the rural economic activities and dispersal programme of the Government.
2. DEVELOPMENT POLICIES AND OBJECTIVES
2.1 Policies
Government policies for aquaculture development are as follows:
(a) To increase and conserve the fishery resources by intensifying fish stocking in inland Waters and protecting the spawning grounds of fishes.
(b) To classify available swamplands according to their suitability or fitness for fishpond purposes.
(c) To provide loans to the fishery industry making it mandatory for the Central Bank, Development Bank of the Philippines, Philippine National Bank, Veterans Bank and Rural Banks to grant loans for the development of fishponds and to leaseholders of public lands for developing fishponds (refer to Annex A for some financing schemes for aquaculture).
(d) To make available public lands for fishponds. Public lands available for fishpond development and not yet leased, including those earmarked for development of family-size fishponds, shall be leased only to qualified persons, associations, cooperatives and cooperations.
(e) To provide for the construction and development of family-size fishponds. For the purpose of accelerating the development of fishponds, the Bureau shall identify public lands which shall be subdivided into economic family-size fishponds, and distribute them to qualified lease applicants.
In addition to these national policies, the following fishery administrative orders to support the development of the milkfish industry have been issued.
(a) Regulations for the conservation of "sabalo" (full-grown bangus or milkfish) and for the prohibition of the exportation to foreign countries of "Kawag-kawag" (bangus or milkfish fry) and "hatirin" (bangus fingerling).
(b) Special rules and regulations governing the issuance of fishpond permits and/or leases within the areas affected by the fishpond project of Manila Bay.
(c) Regulations governing the issuance of fishpond permits and/or leases on public forest lands.
(d) Regulations covering the establishment of fishponds and fish enclosures in inland waters.
2.2 Objectives
The objectives of the aquaculture development programme are threefold:
(a) To ensure a steady and sufficient supply of fish and other fishery products for the increasing population.
(b) To reduce to a minimum level fishery importation.
(c) To increase fish and fishery product exportation.
2.3 Strategy
For production the major strategy is to increase production through either one or a combination of the following:
(a) increasing the yield per hectare of inland waters;
(b) increasing the area of fishponds.
Inasmuch as the first approach will give more harvest per unit cost and immediate results, it will be given more emphasis.
On the utilization of aquafarm products, efforts shall be concentrated on elimination of wastage in processing, marketing and distribution, and on earning and saving foreign exchange through the development of export products and import substitutes.
The BFAR will intensify efforts in pursuing extension work and research and encourage private initiative to be supported by public financing. Special attention will be given to processing and marketing instead of the almost exclusive concentration on production. Full use will be made of the coordinating efforts of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources as the implementing agency for fish production, together with other agencies such as the Bureau of Lands, Bureau of Forest Development, Bureau of Agricultural Extension, Bureau of Agricultural Economics and financial institutions.
The BFAR will concentrate its resources on targeted areas of fishfarm improvement and development. This calls for optimum use of BFAR personnel and budget through redeployment of these resources into high priority projects.
2.4 Production Targets
The Expanded Fish Production Programme envisions that over a certain period of time the aquaculture sector will contribute 48 percent of total production. This is achievable at an average growth rate of 19 percent, and hopefully by 1985 the total production from aquaculture will be in the order of 1 227 400 tons (see Table 5). However, there are two more likely possibilities, that is by 1985 production from the sector could be 176 000 tons (column 1 based on historical growth rate) or 701 700 tons (column 4 based on medium projections). Assuming that the medium projection is most likely to occur, and assuming further that the present yields from existing fishponds could be doubled (column 6), there is still the imperative need to tap new areas as possible sources of aquaculture output (column 6).
In the Government's current expanded fish production programme, the targeted incremental production in 1976 from aquaculture is 43 000 tons of fish (increase in production from 21.2. 800 tons in 1975 to 255 800 tons in 1976). This is designed to come from:
(a) Freshwater
tons
Yield of new area - 3 900 ha at 1.5 tons/ha
Incremental yield of improved existing fishponds - 5 700 ha at 1.5 tons/ha
Incremental yield of inland waters, lakes - 427 000 ha stocked with fingerling at .015 ton/ha
Rate of recovery
Sub-total
(b) Brackishwater
Yield of new area - 5 000 ha at 1.5 tons/ha
Yield of new oyster and tahong farms - 520 ha at 3 tons/ha
Incremental yield of improved existing fishponds 13 200 ha at 1.5 tons/ha
Sub-total
Total
2.5 Fish Farming Systems and Cultured Species
2.5.1 Milkfish farming
The total area utilized for milkfish culture in 1973 was 176 000 ha, producing 99 600 tons valued at P.ps. 434 million. The species utilized is Chanos chanos. Milkfish is grown on natural food, consisting mainly of microbenthic algae and some filamentous algae. Algae are produced following pond fertilization with both organic and inorganic fertilizers.
2.5.2 Freshwater fish farming
Culture of freshwater fishes is still in its initial stage of development. There are at present 6 000 ha of freshwater ponds in extensive production. Among the species utilized for this type of culture are the common carp (Cyprinio carpio), silver carp (Hypopthalmichthys nobilis), grass carp (Ctenapharyngodon idella), Indian carp (Catla catla and Mrigal), Tilapia (Tilapia mossambica) and catfish (Clarias batrachus and Clarias macrocephalus). Lately eel farming has been undertaken by the private sector. Production from freshwater fishponds is still very low, approximating 400-800 kg/ha. This is due to the fact that pond management is still extensive in nature. In addition to these freshwater ponds, there are 6 000 ha of fish pens producing 30 000 tons of fish. The principal species used in fish pens is the milkfish. Other species are being experimented with due to shortage of milkfish fingerlings which cause high prices.
Freshwater fish farms may be classified into three types as follows:
(a) Lowland fish farm - There are 6 000 ha of this type of fish farm constructed in the interior delta areas along the major river systems.
(b) Upland fish farm - A total area of 22 ha of rainfed ponds or impoundments represent this type. Either one or a combination of the species of fish used in the lowland fish farms are also utilized for this type of fish farm.
(c) Fish pen - There are about 600 ha of fish pens established in the major lakes.
These types of fish farming depend largely on natural food and occasionally on a very little amount of artificial food.
Another type of fish farming system in freshwaters is where a high level of artificial feed is used. Included in this category are catfish and eel culture. These have just started and are still in the pilot project stage. The possibility of expansion will depend largely on the availability of trash fish, which is in short supply at present.
2.5.3 Mariculture
Culture of marine species is still in its initial stage. However, because of the existing, potential resources and the expected economic benefits, the Government is intending to develop this sector rapidly.
In the next ten years, new directions in aquaculture are expected to be initiated. Even at this time there is a growing interest in the culture of other species in fresh water, brackish water, and marine water. Species that are considered to have potential for mariculture are the following:
(a) Crustaceans
(i) Shrimps (Penaeus monodon, P. semisulcatus, P. merguiensis, Metapenaeus monoceros)
(ii) Spiny lobsters (Palunirus sp.)
(iii) Squid (Loligo sp.)
(b) Seaweeds - (Eucheuma sp., Digenea sp., Porphyra sp.)
(c) Shellfish
(i) Oysters (Crassostrea sp.)
(ii) Mussels (Mytilus sp.)
(iii) Window pane shell (Placuna placenta)
(iv) Pearl oysters (Pinctada sp.)
(d) Fish
(i) Stromateus niger, Lates calcarifer, Scatophagus argus, Teuthis sp., Mugil sp., for food supply
(ii) Tropical marine aquarium fishes
3. INFRASTRUCTURE
In order to accelerate the development of aquaculture, physical facilities and other services are provided by the Government. These include the provision of extension services, training of core personnel, organization of research and provision of better marketing and distribution facilities. In due time and in order to cope with the expected expansion in aquaculture production, related expansion is being planned for these facilities.
3.1 Extension Service
The current development programme of the Government depends heavily on its extension programme. To be able to effectively carry out the extension service it is so organized that authority and responsibility are clearly defined for the regional, provincial, municipal and barrio (village) levels. Presently, there are 12 regional coordinators, 18 provincial programme officers and 45 technicians supervising the extension activities of 176 extension workers. At the municipal level, the extension worker involves himself directly in operational activities of the farmers by teaching them cultural and management practices in stock manipulation, feeding, etc. Assistance is also given in the form of guidance on proper construction and layout of fishponds. Operators are also assisted in preparing simple feasibility studies for acquiring loans from banking institutions, and also in the procurement of fertilizers, feeds and fish seedlings.
The Government is operating 11 freshwater demonstration farms, nine brackishwater farms and six oyster farms. Extension workers are required to work in these demonstration farms from time to time, as part of their training activities, to reorient or acquaint themselves with new technology or developments in such farms.
Two external assistance projects, the UNDP Brackishwater Extension and Training and the USAID Aquaculture Production projects, will reinforce the Government extension programme.
To provide more strength to the extension programme of the Government an extension division has been organized. One of the activities of the division is to serve as a liaison between the office of the Director and the Regional Offices.
3.2 Training
In 1971 several short-term courses were conducted by the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources on fish production, extension and training methods, brackishwater fishpond fertilization and project feasibility studies for pond development. Participants, although mostly from the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, also included personnel from banking institutions which finance fishery projects, and local officials of the Government.
In the present four-year programme the Government set out an integrated training approach for aquaculture, to complement its targeted production output expectations. The design of such a scheme is as follows:
(a) Training of national staff. A national staff composed of biologists and engineers, etc., will have on-the-job training on site selection, design and construction of farms and installations, farm management, fish health inspection, disease control, handling, harvesting, and proper handling of farm produce.
(b) Training of regional staff. The national staff will train biologists, engineers and demonstration farm staff at the regional level.
(c) Training of extension workers, bank appraisers and local officials of the Government. The regional staff assigned to the region or demonstration farms will in turn train extension workers, bank appraisers and local officials. The training of bank appraisers and local officials of the Government seems to be very necessary in implementing a development-oriented aquaculture programme where they are deeply involved. On-the-job training will be supplemented by lectures or short-term courses on pond fisheries extension and communication methods, fishpond fertilization schemes, nursery and hatchery operations, and economic analysis.
The USAID project which is in progress in the Bicol and Panay Regions and the recently approved UNDP project will be of valuable assistance in implementing the training programme envisaged.
3.3 Organization of Research
In the field of fisheries the Philippine Council for Agricultural Research has identified the priority problems and manpower requirements for research. This is extremely important to establish the direction, and prevent duplication, of research efforts of institutions like the University of the Philippines (presently assisted by USAID) and other universities, the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, the National Science Development Board, as well as the private sector. Likewise the Philippine Council for Agricultural Research is cooperating very closely with the Aquaculture Department of the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center.
On 7-10 March 1975, the first Philippine Council for Agricultural Research (PCAR) Congress was held. Among the salient features of this congress were the refinement of a mechanism for formulating and updating direction in aquaculture research and the determination of priorities that should be followed. Priority areas identified by the Philippine Council for Agricultural Research are:
Fish seed supply and fish seed improvement
- Spawning of Chanos chanos from natural stock;
- Development of techniques for massive production of monosex tilapia, carps and hito (Clarias);
- Production of milkfish breeders and their induced spawning under controlled conditions;
- Hatchery studies on saltwater fishes;
- Pilot shellfish hatchery/nursery complex;
- Studies to improve survival of milkfish fry and fingerlings.
Fish farm construction
- Survey of engineering structures and problems in aquaculture;
- Studies on pond construction methodology;
- Fish farm design to suit different aquaculture practices, physical features of the area and climate of the region.
Fish food crop production
- Fertilization to increase fish food production
Fish feeds and feeding
- Feeding trials on the basic nutrient requirements of cultivated pond fishes;
- Identification and screening of potential feedstuffs;
- Studies on locally available supplementary feeds and their food value.
Development of new systems and new products
- Development of shellfish mariculture technology based on biological and breeding studies of species of economic importance:
(a) Crassostrea sp. (oyster)
(b) Mytilus sp. (Tahong)
(c) Placuna placenta (Kapis)
(d) Anadara sp. (cockle)
- Studies on propagation and culture of:
(a) Penaeid shrimps
(b) Macrobrachium sp.
(c) Freshwater molluscs
- Mono- and multi-species fish culture;
- Studies on fish pen and cage culture systems;
- Feasibility of culture of siganids, spade fish, mullets and sea bass in brackishwater ponds;
- Studies on rice-cum-fish culture system;
- Development of new products for domestic and/or export markets;
- Development of better and faster-growing strains of seaweeds with high yield of carrageenan, alginic acid, agar and other phycocolloids.
Diseases and parasites and control measures
- Studies on seaweed diseases;
- Studies on control of plant and animal pests and effects of pesticides on fishponds;
- Compilation of detailed description of known parasites of Philippine fishes and their host species; distribution of parasites and identification of diseases in different types of fish farms.
Social and economic studies of fish fanning business and fish farming communities
- Sociological studies on dissemination and application of new technology in fish farming and feedback of industry problems at fish farm level;
- Socio-economic survey of aquaculture industry.
Marketing, storage and distribution of aqua-products
- Studies on channels of distribution, flow system and trading practices in relation to marketing costs and margins;
- Freezing, cold storage and processing of aqua-products;
- Establishment of quality standards and requirements for aqua-products.
In addition to the identification of research priorities, PCAR implemented a programme to strengthen the research capabilities of the different research institutions. It is sponsoring jointly with the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) a training programme for research staff of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, Bureau of Vocational Education, University of the Philippines, and other institutions. Post-graduate training is also sponsored by regional and international assistance organizations.
3.4 Marketing and Distribution
Most of the fish farm areas are inaccessible either by road or water. Generally, production from the farms is consumed in the locality. Besides creating a negative incentive to produce more, this kind of marketing deprives the farmer of better dividends for his produce.
While the present system is being improved, initial action is being taken to integrate marketing and distribution of fish and fishery products. A study has already been conducted to determine fish movements from within and outside each province and region, to identify areas of oversupply, sufficiency and deficiency.
The integrated plan consists of establishing collection centres in oversupplied areas of the country. The collection centres will have the following facilities:
(a) refrigeration (complete with ice making, freezing, fish storage and ice storage),
(b) fish landing, and
(c) marketing.
These collection centres will be supported by satellite installations of refrigeration facilities with ice making, ice storage and fish storage, constructed in production areas. Aquaculture produce can be stored for short periods for subsequent transport to the main collection centres. From the fish collection centres fish will be transported either by boat or by air to fish - deficient areas. The Luzon area will be ready for a bigger volume of operations with the completion of the Navotas fishing port.
Eventually the plan will be to provide storage facilities in other fish-deficient areas. The construction of farm-to-market roads will go a long way in supporting the fish distribution system.
4. PRODUCTION PROGRAMMES
4.1 Government's Supporting Activities
Several action-oriented projects designed to support the aquaculture production programme are:
(a) Fingerling production and "dispersal". Carp fingerlings produced and milkfish fry reared to fingerling sizes in BFAR stations are stocked in communal bodies of water to increase the natural fish population of such bodies of water. An annual production target of 40-60 million fingerlings for stocking 400 000 ha of communal bodies of water is projected during the plan period. Estimated Government appropriations for the plan period are P.ps. 5.6 million annually.
(b) Extension and demonstration services. Extension workers will be deployed in targeted provinces where they will render technical assistance and help fishpond operators improve the yield of fishponds. Public funding support will range from P.ps. 3 million in 1976 to P.ps. 5.3 million in 1985. Estimated expenditures for extension and demonstration services over a period of ten years is given in Table 6.
(c) Research. Aside from supplementing the extension service project, research activities are expected to solve critical bottlenecks, particularly in pond fertilization, pest and disease control, and those stated in section 3.3. Estimated expenditures from 1976 to 1985 for research will range from P.ps. 5 million to P.ps. 7.8 million as shown in Table 7.
(d) Leasing fishponds. Issuance of lease agreements is being accelerated in order to hasten development efforts by operators. The annual target during the plan period is to lease 2 000-3 000 ha of public swamplands. P.ps. 200 000 is the annual estimated expenditure for this project.
(e) Fishpond development survey (zoning). This is a project to determine public lands, tidal and mangrove swamps, marshes and ponds in the country suitable for fishponds. A zoning survey committee comprising personnel from the Forest Development and Lands is directing this project to speed up its rate of implementation. To date, 22 769 ha have been surveyed. Fishpond areas identified come under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, and will be made available for development of aquaculture. Expected duration of the project is five years and will entail a yearly expenditure ranging from P.ps. 2.5 million to P.ps. 3.6 million.
(f) Training. To promote and hasten inland fisheries production and development, various training activities will be carried out by the BFAR for both the private sector and its own technical force, as mentioned in section 3.2. Government appropriation for this activity is estimated to range from P.ps. 1.3 million in 1976 to P.ps. 2.5 million in 1985, as indicated in Table 8.
4.2 Government Budgets and Private Financing and Credit
4.2.1 Government budgets
Public investment necessary to support the aquaculture programme within the plan period is estimated to be P.ps. 27-29 million as indicated in Table 9.
4.2.2 Private investment required for aquaculture development
Financing available to the fishing industry used to be so limited that the industry could not expand at the desired rate until the attention of financing institutions and investors was directed to the demand gap in fish and the investment requirements of the different sectors of the industry through the Expanded Fish Production Programme of BFAR. At present, financial institutions supporting the fisheries industry are the Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP), Central Bank, Rural Bank and the Philippine National Bank (PNB).
In 1976 incremental production from aquaculture is targeted to be 43 000 tons. The estimate of capital cost is P.ps. 152 million with a working capital requirements of P.ps. 53 million, or a total investment cost of P.ps. 205 million, as shown in Table 10.
A model investment plan for a new 24-ha fishpond was prepared by the Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP) for World Bank financing, and total estimated cost is P.ps. 383 800. The fixed cost component is P.ps. 329 400 with a working capital requirement of P.ps. 54 400. For a ten-year period, annual operating costs range from P.ps. 83 000 to P.ps. 168 000. Financial rate of return for this project is 33.5 percent. Details of total cost, fixed cost, and operating cost of the model are given in Tables 11, 12 and 13 respectively.
On the other hand, the total project cost for improving an existing 24-ha fishpond is P.ps. 226 000. The fixed cost component is P.ps. 187 800, and working capital requirement is P.ps. 38 200. Annual operating costs for a ten-year period range from P.ps. 47 000 to P.ps. 161 000. Financial rate of return is estimated to be 50 percent. Details of total cost, fixed cost, and operating cost of the model are given in Tables 14, 15 and 16 respectively.
It may be observed that DBP estimates are higher than BFAR's because unit productivity per hectare envisaged by DBP is 2.7 tons, while the BFAR estimate is slightly lower at 1.5 tons.
In the Philippines today, the aquaculture production programme has generated much enthusiasm. We are now initiating the so-called "managed development" scheme. Obtaining a lease for land from the Government as speculation is discouraged. Obstacles to development are constantly reviewed and today a lease agreement is valid for 25 years and renewable for another 25 years, which is almost equivalent to ownership. This could be used as collateral for obtaining financial support from banks; however, this right or privilege is matched by corresponding responsibility which is as follows:
- Fifty percent of the area leased shall be developed and be producing on a commercial scale within three years and the remaining portion shall be developed and be producing on a commercial scale within five years; both periods to begin from the execution of the lease contract.
- All areas not fully developed within five years from the date of the execution of the lease contract shall automatically revert to the public domain for disposition by the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources; and a lessee who failed to develop the area or any portion thereof shall not be permitted to reapply for the said area or any public land.
4.4 External Assistance Requirements
4.4.1 Financing assistance
Since 1969 the World Bank has provided substantial financial assistance in the form of loans to aquaculture in the Philippines as shown below. This is channelled to either the Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP) or the Central Bank (CB).
World Bank financing for aquaculture
Year
Outlet
Project
Amount
(in millions of U.S.$)
CB
Second Rural Credit
DBP
First Fisheries Credit
CB
Third Rural Credit
(Amount allocated for aquaculture is flexible)
DBP
Second Fisheries Credit
(under negotiation)
Total
The Danish Government also provided assistance totalling U.S.$ 11 million for the acquisition of 14 units of ice plants and cold storage for improvement of the fish distribution and marketing system.
4.4.2 Technical assistance
(a) On-going projects
(i) Brackishwater fish farming demonstration and training. This is a four-year project assisted by UNDP.
Its objectives are: to assist the Government in training national staff, regional staff and extension workers on the different aspects of fishpond management, engineering and economics; to assist the Government in establishing four regional demonstration fishponds in strategic areas of the country - Quezon, Negros, Bohol and Zamboanga.
The contribution of UNDP is U.S.$ 780 000 while the Government contributes U.S.$ 480 000 (estimates).
(ii) Aquaculture production project. This is assisted by USAID for four years. The project covers both brackish- and freshwater culture.
Its objectives are: to assist the Government in the training of extension staff to work in the Bicol and Panay regions; to assist in the conduct of research in pond fertilization, optimum pond water conditions, feed formulations, stocking density, etc.
The contribution of USAID is U.S.$ 4 million, while Government contributes U.S.$ 3.5 million (estimates).
(iii) Aquaculture Department of the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center.
The main objective of the project is the development of aquaculture in the member countries through research, training and extension service. Research in shrimp hatching and cultivation is given priority in accordance with the desire of the Council of Directors of SEAFDEC.
Japan contributes several million yen in terms of experts' services, laboratory equipment and supplies. Other member countries contribute a token amount from their annual contribution to SEAFDEC. The Philippine Government in the fiscal year 1975 contributed P.ps. 15 million, while in fiscal year 1976 it appropriated P.ps. 27 million for SEAFDEC.
(b) Future assistance requirements
(i) Mariculture development project. This project is envisioned to set the stage for a long-term programme on marine culture and conservation activities in specified areas for specific projects.
(ii) Studies on soil improvement of brackishwater fish farms. This project is aimed at raising the nation's brackishwater fish-farm production level by improving pond soil properties considered one of the major factors affecting fish - farm production.
(iii) Establishment of a fish disease centre. The centre is designed to undertake research on diseases and parasites of culturable fish in order to develop methods of controlling and preventing recurrence of diseases. It is also envisaged that therapeutic, prophylatic and pesticidal chemicals will be evaluated for use in aquaculture.
TABLE 1
Weight and Value of Imports and Exports of Fish and Fishery Products, 1971-74
Product
Import
Export
Import
Export
Import
Export
Import
Export
Wt^1/
Value^2/
Wt
Value
Wt
Value
Wt
Value
Wt
Value
Wt
Value
Wt
Value
Wt
Value
Fresh and frozen fish
Tuna
Shrimp and lobsters
All others
Sub-total
Canned fish
Mackerel
Sardines
Cuttlefish & squid
All others
Sub-total
Dried, smoked and salted fish
Shells
Miscellaneous
Fish meal
Total
^1/ Weight in thousand tons
^2/ Value in P.ps. millions
TABLE 2
Alternative Fish Production Targets (Tons), 1974-85
Year
Effective demand projection
Projected production based on historical data (4.9%)
Targeted production based on programme (6.6%)
Deficiency/Sufficiency
Difference between 1 and 2
Difference between 1 and 3
TABLE 3
Aquafarm Production by Farm Type, 1969-73
Year
Brackishwater farm
Shellfish farm
Freshwater farm^5/
Eucheuma farm^7/
Fish & rice (other crop) farm^8/
Fish pen
Others types^9/
Total
Milkfish
Crustaceans^4/5/
Area^1/
negligible
Weight^2/
negligible
Value^3/
negligible
Area
negligible
Weight
negligible
Value
negligible
Area
negligible
Weight
negligible
Value
negligible
Area
Weight
Value
Area
Weight
Value
^1/ Area - ha
^2/ Weight is given as live weight in tons
^3/ P.ps. '000
^4/ Crustaceans are secondary products from milkfish production in brackishwater fishponds
^5/ Figures given here are estimates which are not included in official statistics (1 percent of total production)
^6/ Weight of oysters in shucked form
^7/ Data on area of eucheuma farms are not available at the time of writing
^8/ Data not available
^9/ This is imputed production from the dispersal programme of the Government in communal bodies of water
TABLE 4
Aquafarm Products, 1969-73
Year
Fish
Crustaceans^3/
Shellfish^4/
Seaweeds^5/
Aquafarm seed production, (no. of fingerlings)^6/
Total
Weight^1/
Value^2/
Weight
Value
Weight
Value
Weight
Value
Weight
Value
^1/ Weight is given as live weight in tons
^2/ P.ps. '000
^3/ Assumed to be 1 percent of total production from brackishwater fishponds
^4/ Weight of shellfish in shucked form
^5/ Assumption is that export for a given year is equal to total production for same year
^6/ Production of fingerlings in Government farms which are stocked in communal bodies of water. Weight and value of produce are entered in Table 3 as "other types"
TABLE 5
Alternative Plans for Aquaculture Production (Tons)
Year
Historical growth (4.1%)
Targeted production^1/
Share of aquaculture
Other sources of production
High (19.6%)
Medium
Present (10.9%)
^1/Annual growth rate 6.6 per cent
TABLE 6
Ten-Year Estimated Expenditures (P.ps.) for Extension/Demonstration Services
Year
Personnel services
Travel
Supplies
Sundries
Equipment outlay
Total
Total
TABLE 7
Estimated Expenditures (P.ps.) for Research, 1976-85
Year
Personnel services
Travel
Supplies
Sundries
Equipment outlay
Capital outlay
Total
Total
TABLE 8
Estimated Expenditures (P.ps.) for Training, 1976-85
Year
Personnel services
Travel
Supplies
Sundries
Equipment outlay
Capital outlay
Total
Total
TABLE 9
Government Budgets for Aquaculture Development Programme (in P.ps. '000)
Fingerling production/dispersal
Extension service/demonstration
Research^1/
Training
Leasing of fishponds
Fishpond development survey
Marketing and distribution
Total
^1/ Excludes Government contribution to Aquaculture Department of SEAFDEC
TABLE 10
Private Investment Requirement for Aquaculture Development (in P.ps. '000)
Capital cost
Working capital
Total investment
Unit cost
Total
Unit cost
Total
Freshwater fishponds
Development of 3 900 ha
Improvement of 5 700 ha
Brackishwater
Development of 5 000 ha
Improvement of 13 200 ha
Mariculture
Development of 570 ha oyster, mussel farm
Total
TABLE 11
Model: New Fishpond Establishment (24 Ha)
Investment Cost
Item
Cost (P.ps.)
Cleaning of 24-ha swampland, including hauling, cutting, piling and burning at P.ps. 500/ha
Removal of tree stumps at P.ps. 2 000/ha
Excavation and levelling, including smoothening of pond
Dike construction
Gates
Caretaker's house/bodega
Fishpond equipment
Purchase of fingerlings, 36 000 at P.ps. 0.35
Fertilizers
Pesticides
Salaries/wages
Contingencies (25 percent of total cost)
Total project cost
Less 10 percent borrower's equity
DBP loan
TABLE 12
Model: New Fishpond Establishment (24 Ha)
Projected Fixed Cost (P.ps.)
Item
Year
Total
Clearing of swampland, cutting hauling, piling and burning
Removal of tree stumps
Excavation and levelling
Dike construction
Gates construction
Buildings
Equipment
Contingencies
Total
TABLE 13
Model: New Fishpond Establishment (24 Ha)
Projected Production/Operating Cost (P.ps.)
Item
Year
Stock^1/
Fertilizers
Pesticides
Salaries and wages
Sales charges
(8 percent)
Repairs and maintenance
Taxes, permits, rentals and miscellaneous fees
Contingencies
(25 percent)
Total
^1/ Stocking rates:
1st year - two stockings at 2 000/ha
(1st stocking fingerling at P.ps. 0.35 each; fry at P.ps. 0.12 each)
2nd year - 2 000/ha
(2 crops)
3rd year - 2 500/ha
(2 crops)
4th year - 2 500/ha
(3 crops)
5th year - 3 000/ha
(3 crops)
6th year on - 3 000/ha
(4 crops)
Mortality of fingerlings
= 10 percent
Fry survival
= 50 percent
TABLE 14
Model: Improvement of Existing Fishponds (24 Ha)
Investment Costs
Item
Costs (P.ps.)
1. Excavation and levelling, including smoothening of pond
(a) rearing ponds at P.ps. 1 000/ha
(b) formation and transition ponds at P.ps. 2 500/ha
(c) nursery pond at P.ps. 5 000/ha
2. Dike construction (modernization of dikes)
(a) secondary dikes 8 500 m^3 at P.ps. 3.50/m^3
(b) partition dikes 1 000 m^3 at P.ps. 3.50/m^3
3. Reinforcement/raising/repair of main dike (equivalent to 30 percent of construction cost)
4. Gate system (modernization)
(a) one reinforced concrete main gate (two-door)
(b) one main gate (two-door)
(c) eight secondary gates at P.ps. 3 500 each
(d) seven tertiary wooden gates at P.ps. 500 each
5. Repair of caretaker's house/bodega
6. Purchase of fishpond equipment
7. Purchase of fingerlings - 2 000 at P.ps. 0.35 each
8. Fertilizers
(a) 48 bags 16-20-0 at P.ps. 115/bag
(b) 12 tons chicken manure at P.ps. 600/ton
9. Pesticides
(a) 12 1 Aguasin at P.ps. 85/1
10. Salaries
(a) one caretaker at P.ps. 250/month
(b) two helpers at P.ps. 120/month
11. Contingencies (25 percent of total cost)
Total project cost
Less 10 percent borrower's equity
Net investment
TABLE 15
Model: Improvement of Existing Fishponds (24 Ha)
Projected Fixed Cost (P.ps.)
Item
Year
Total
Excavation and levelling
Dike construction/
modernization
Repair of dikes
Gate modernization
Building repair
Equipment
Contingencies
Total
TABLE 16
Model: Improvement of Existing Fishponds (24 Ha)
Projected Production/Operating Costs (P.ps.)
Item
Year
Stock^1/
Fertilizers
Pesticides
Salaries and wages
Sale charges (8 percent)
Repair and maintenance
Taxes, permits, rentals and miscellaneous
Contingencies
Total
^1/ Stocking rates:
1st year
- 2 000/ha (1 crop)
2nd year
- 2 500/ha (2 crops)
3rd year
- 2 500/ha (3 crops)
4th year
- 3 000/ha (3 crops)
5th year
- 3 000/ha (4 crops)
ANNEX A
SOME FINANCING SCHEMES FOR AQUACULTURE IN THE PHILIPPINES (DEVELOPMENT BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES)
A. Marine Farming Projects (Seaweed Farming)
1. Who May Borrow
To qualify for loans under this programme, applicants should:
(a) possess a Lease Agreement or a Seaweed Concession issued by the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources for the operation of a marine (seaweed) farming project, which shall run for a period of not less than five years, the expiration of which should not precede the term of the loan; and
(b) possess a contract between himself and a reputable buyer/exporter of the farmer's product to be prequalified by the DBP, stating that the latter commits to purchase the entire produce of the former at a guaranteed price for a period of at least two years, the expiration of which should not precede the term of the loan.
2. Amount of Loan
The loan shall be based on actual needs of the project but not to exceed P.ps. 8 500/ha. No loans shall be granted for the production of Eucheuma on more than 1 ha of marine farm.
3. Equity Contribution
All borrowers shall be required to contribute at least 20 percent of total project costs. Contributions shall be in cash or in kind, including labour.
4. Purpose of the Loan
Loan funds shall be used for the following purposes:
(a) nylon nets
(b) banca with engine and accessories
(c) twine and lines
(d) lamps
(e) construction of a guardhouse
(f) "seed" material
(g) operating expenses.
5. Security
The loan shall be secured by an assignment of leasehold rights on the project area in favour of DBP. All durable assets of the project shall be chatteled in favour of the DBP.
6. Repayment
The term of the loan shall be two years. Amortized loan payments on principal and interest shall commence on the sixth month after initial loan release and every three months thereafter until the loan is fully paid. Payments due the DBP shall be deducted from proceeds of harvests delivered and sold by the producer to the buyer/exporter, and the latter shall remit the same to the DBP.
7. Interest rate
Twelve percent per annum.
B. Inland Fisheries Projects
1. Fish Culture Projects
(a) Qualifications of borrower
A borrower for inland fishery projects may be individual, a partnership, a cooperative, an association, or a private corporation that is presently engaged in the business of inland fishery production and desires to expand current operations; or one who proposes to engage in a new inland fishery project and can demonstrate his capabilities to undertake such a project successfully. If the borrower has an existing account with the DBP, such account shall not be in arrears. The borrower may be a lessee of the area on which the project is to be established, or he may be a private owner thereof.
(b) Purposes of the loan.,
Loans for inland fisheries may be for freshwater of brackishwater fishponds for the production of milkfish, carp, hito, crustaceans and other fishpond products. More specifically, loan funds for the rehabilitation of damaged fishponds and the development and construction of fishponds shall be utilized as follows:
(i) clearing of the project area
(ii) construction of main, secondary and tertiary gates
(iii) construction of main, secondary and tertiary dikes
(iv) construction and excavation of nursery, transition, rearing ponds and catching ponds
(v) purchase of bangus fry
(vi) procurement of fertilizers and other productive inputs
(vii) procurement of equipment and paraphernalia required for fishpond operation.
(c) Amount of loan
The amount of the loan shall be based on actual needs of the investment project. Actual needs shall be based on project scales that have been evaluated and found to be technically feasible and economically viable.
(4) Equity contribution
All borrowers shall be required to make a minimum contribution toward the incremental investment costs of the project to be financed, in the following proportions to the area of ponds to be developed:
Size of ponds
Contributions
Up to 25 ha
10 percent
More than 25 ha and up to 50 ha
15 percent
More than 50 ha
20 percent
(e) Loan securities
The loan shall be secured as follows:
(i) if the project site is privately owned, whether titled or untitled, the property shall be mortgaged in favour of the DBP; or
(ii) if the project site is covered by a leasehold agreement from the Philippine Government, leasehold rights thereon shall be assigned in favour of the DBP.
Also, all durable assets procured or acquired out of loan funds shall be chatteled in favour of the Bank.
(f) Repayment
The term of repayment, including grace periods, shall be based on the payment ability of the borrower and estimated cash flow of the project to be financed. In general, repayment terms and grace periods shall not exceed the following:
Project
Grace period
Term of repayment (excluding grace)
Fishpond rehabilitation
2-3 years
5-7 years
Development of existing fishponds
3-4 years
7-9 years
Construction of new fishponds
3-4 years
10-12 years
(g) Interest rate
The rate of interest shall not be less than 12 percent per annum.
<section>k</section>
NATIONAL PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AQUACULTURE IN SINGAPORE
1. BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
1.1 Fresh Fish Supply and Demand
The annual fresh-fish consumption of Singapore is estimated at 65 000 tons, of which more than 75 percent is imported. Table 1 shows Singapore's fresh-fish supply from various sources for the past ten years. It can be seen that in 1974" aquaculture production of 680 tons (600 tons from freshwater carp ponds and 80 tons from prawn trapping brackishwater impoundments) represents about 1 percent of the total supply. In spite of efforts to develop capture fisheries, local fish landings have been static since 1966, while inshore fishery production has been steadily on the decline from 4 340 tons in 1965 to 2 650 tons in 1971, a drop of almost 40 percent. The slight increase in inshore production in 1972-74 was probably due to increase in illegal trawl fishing in coastal waters.
Singapore is an island state with an area of 584 km^2 and a population of 2.2 million. During the past five years the annual rate of population increase averaged 1.7 percent. The per caput consumption of fresh fish is about 30 kg/year. Assuming that the rate of population increase and per caput consumption will remain at 1.7 percent and 30 kg/year respectively, the projected demand for fresh fish in 1985 would be 80 130 tons for an estimated population of 2.671 million.
1.2 Possible Means of Meeting Demand
1.2.1 Development of capture fisheries
In order to meet the projected demand for fresh fish, plans have been implemented at a time of unemployment in the mid-sixties for the development of a fishing industry in the Republic through the establishment of marine fishery research and training centres at the Changi Fisheries Complex. The Jurong Fishing Port/Central Fish Market with its associated labour-intensive fish processing industry at Jurong were also established. However, with the current "full employment" and strengthened economy in industrialized Singapore, the development of capture fisheries has not achieved its projected targets. Factors affecting its development are:
(a) depletion of offshore demersal fishery resources;
(b) lack of new fishing grounds suitable for commercial exploitation;
(c) high operating cost as a result of high fuel cost;
(d) availability and greater attraction of better paid jobs with better working conditions on shore; and
(e) other more lucrative investment opportunities in Singapore.
Unless the results of research on pelagic fisheries resources presently being conducted by national and regional agencies, are encouraging from the view point of geographically handicapped states, the expansion of capture fisheries to meet the projected demand for fresh fish in Singapore will be limited. Singapore will still have to depend heavily on fish imports which may be reduced in the future by the increasing domestic demand of fish-exporting countries.
1.2.2 Development of intensive aquaculture
The traditional Chinese method of carp culture has been practised in Singapore for many years with an estimated yield of 1.8 tons/ha/year. There is no fish fanning activity in brackish and coastal waters. The present method of prawn production in brackishwater impoundments is nothing more than trapping, holding, and harvesting, and is entirely dependent on nature and tidal recruitment. With little or no management prawn production in brackish water is poor, about 0.2 tons/ha/year.
With rapid economic growth, the demand for land for industry, public housing, reservoirs and recreational facilities and parks has resulted in a decrease in the land available for agricultural purposes. At present, about 335 ha of freshwater ponds and 375 ha of brackish-water impoundments are still being used for fish farming, but with the high cost of land and competitive demand the traditional practice is becoming increasingly uneconomical. As the expansion of capture fisheries is limited under the conditions prevailing in Singapore, greater emphasis is now being placed on the development of intensive aquaculture in both inland and coastal waters with the aims of supplementing its food fish supply and reducing the problem of heavy reliance on fish imports.
1.3 National Policies and Food Production
Despite limited land resources, Singapore has been able to attain self-sufficiency in its production of piggery products, eggs and poultry. There is also substantial local production of fresh leafy vegetables. The provision of agricultural land designated solely for the purpose of intensive animal husbandry and horticultural activities will maintain the existing status of local food production, thereby minimizing the over-dependence on external food supply.
1.4 Role of Aquaculture Development in the Implementation of National Policies
Aquaculture can play an important role in Singapore in the implementation of national policies on food production. Intensive aquaculture systems, such as floating cage-net culture of marine fish in coastal waters and Chinese carps in reservoirs, raft culture of molluscs, fish culture in enclosed bays and particularly intensive tank culture, which is less labour-intensive, can be developed not only to supplement Singapore's fresh-fish consumption, but also to utilize efficiently the limited land and water resources for maximum yield and economic returns.
The production of ornamental fish which is export-oriented, is an important form of aquaculture practice. At present, the export value of ornamental fish is more than U.S.$ 5 million, which contribute in some measure to the national economy. In ensuring the viability of this on-going industry, development measures in terms of provision of appropriate services are necessary for its future expansion and consolidation.
2. OBJECTIVES AND GOALS OF AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
2.1 Objectives
The fundamental objectives of aquaculture development are increasing fish production and reducing fish import through the development of intensive and economically viable fanning systems. These systems will be extended to the private sector for large-scale development of an aquaculture industry. Research and development programmes will be so planned as to maintain a balance between mass production of low-value but fast-growing food fish for the majority of the population and high-value fish species for the luxury market and export aimed at maximum yield and economic returns per unit of productive area.
As large-scale aquaculture cannot be developed without the independent supply of young, the immediate objectives are the development of facilities and recruitment of trained personnel by the public sector to conduct research geared toward achieving self-sufficiency and independence in the supply of seedlings. Other short-term (five years) objectives include economic feasibility studies following research to pave the way for large-scale development of a viable aquaculture industry and other auxiliary industries, besides:
(a) identification of coastal waters which are available and suitable for mariculture;
(b) identification of fish species suitable for intensive farming in confined conditions;
(c) development of intensive and economically-viable aquaculture systems with special emphasis on intensive tank culture with recycled or running water and suspended cage-net culture leading to the utilization of less labour and land;
(d) fish nutrition studies for feed development;
(e) identification of fish pathogens and effective measures of their control and prevention;
(f) environmental control and management;
(g) aquaculture engineering and management;
(h) increasing existing aquaculture production of traditional fish farmers and prawn trapping operators by introducing improved management techniques.
The first phase of the ten-year aquaculture development plan will be over a period of five years while the implementation of the second phase consisting of mid-term (10 years) objectives will largely be determined by the results of studies undertaken during the first phase. On the fruitful completion of the first phase, the obvious lines of action to be taken will consist of:
(a) development of expanded extension and training programmes for aquaculture in the private sector;
(b) creation of incentives by provision of adequate land and coastal areas suitable for aquaculture at nominal rentals and introduction of legislation for protection of aquaculture investments;
(c) improvement and conversion of existing brackishwater impoundments into well managed ponds;
(d) expansion of inland and coastal waters including those of outlying islands available for aquaculture industry.
With the successful completion of the ten-year aquaculture development plan, it is envisaged that the existing small-scale, family-operated type of traditional culture and prawn trapping operations will eventually be phased-out. Once economic viability of intensive aquaculture is demonstrated, financial interests from the private sector are expected to be attracted to the aquaculture industry.
2.2 Production Targets
At present, Singapore has 710 ha of freshwater ponds and brackishwater impoundments. In addition, it has a potential of 2 400 ha of coastal waters available for aquaculture development. If the activities planned are carried out successfully within the next ten years, the targeted production would be in the region of 10 000 tons by 1985, representing about 12 percent of the projected demand for fresh fish as opposed to the current 1 percent. With the introduction of improved culture systems and management, the existing 710 ha of freshwater ponds and brackishwater impoundments are expected to yield 2 000 tons. Subject to the achievement of self-sufficiency in the supply of marine and euryhaline fish seedlings, the floating cage-net and tank culture systems are targeted to yield 1 500 tons while the remaining 6 500 tons may be derived from the development of raft culture of green mussels.
2.3 Cultivated Species and Production Systems
As aquaculture science is still in its infant stage of development in Singapore, the following production systems and fish species will be studied. These, however, will be subject to change and modification depending on the outcome of research.
2.3.1 Freshwater pond culture
Efforts will be made to increase the existing Chinese carp production by the introduction of better pond management. While some farmers will be encouraged to initiate intensive catfish culture subject to the availability of feeds in the form of trash fish, others will be allowed to continue with their traditional method of carp culture until such time when suitable cheap pelleted feeds are developed. The freshwater giant prawn (Macrobrachium rosenbergi) is also recommended for polyculture with the Chinese carps while the marble goby (Oxyeleotris marmorata) will be farmed with free-breeding tilapia on a prey-predator basis. To supplement the fish farmers' income, ornamental fish may be introduced for culture in net boxes floated in small sections of ponds used for carp-prawn culture.
2.3.2 Utilization of brackishwater impoundments
The utilization of the existing 375 ha of brackishwater impoundments for intensive aquaculture will present some difficulties. As these impoundments are large, averaging 20 ha each, badly constructed and heavily silted, farming management can be a major problem. Operators will be encouraged to subdivide these into smaller and more manageable ponds for the production of mullet, milkfish, tilapia, marble goby, groupers, snappers, sea bass (Lates calcarifer) and prawns. The proposed farming systems will be the polyculture of compatible species and prey-predator culture of carnivorous species.
2.3.3 Cage-net fish culture
Of importance to aquaculture development in land-scarce Singapore is the method of fish culture in floating cage-nets attached to palisade traps in coastal waters. Species suitable for such a system of culture are the groupers and snappers. As the lack of fish fingerlings for stocking is the major constraint to its large-scale development, studies on induced breeding will be undertaken. This cage-net culture of big-head carp has been successfully undertaken and has proved to be a profitable way of reducing plankton blooms in Singapore water impoundments.
2.3.4 Floating raft culture of green mussels
The raft system of green mussel culture in coastal waters has the greatest potential for mass production of cheap protein in Singapore. It also contributes to the reduction of nutrient load in coastal waters.
2.3.5 Intensive tank culture
The system of intensive tank culture is the ultimate aim of aquaculture development in land-scarce Singapore. It could align fish farming with animal husbandry. The system of tank culture requires high inputs, high stocking density, high rate of water flow and pelleted feed of high protein content. Fish suitable for this form of culture are the mullets and carps.
3. DEVELOPMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension Service
Extension services in Singapore are directly provided by the research staff of the Fisheries Division, Primary Production Department.
Training of inland farmers in freshwater fish culture is carried out in conjunction with training in animal husbandry and horticulture. Emphasis is placed on the practical aspects. Training of this nature is not provided for operators of prawn trapping brackishwater impoundments. However, they are encouraged to increase production through supplementary feeding, stocking of fry, and prevention of natural predators from entering the pond.
3.2 Training of Core Personnel
The training of research and supporting staff is partially met by in-service training arrangements. Training opportunities to be offered by international and regional agencies will be of direct assistance in creating the necessary core of functional extension personnel.
3.3 Organization of Research
The Fisheries Division of the Primary Production Department, Ministry of National Development, has presently two aquaculture experimental stations. The Freshwater Fisheries Laboratory at Sembawang is situated inland and is involved in research on freshwater food fish and prawns, and aquarium fish culture. The Aquaculture Unit at Changi deals with research on marine and brackishwater fish and prawn production and culture.
Research personnel are provided with training in the latest aquaculture developments. Such training is usually provided through fellowships and scholarships for studies abroad.
Funds for research are provided by the Government and annual allocations depend on proposed research inputs. Since research inputs for the next ten years are difficult to assess, it is not possible to estimate the total expenditure for the period 1975-85.
4. PRODUCTION PROGRAMMES
4.1 Financing and Credit
Programmes for the production of fish and prawn fry are financed by the Government. Fry are distributed to farmers either free of charge or at a minimal cost. The Government does not, however, provide financing and credit facilities to farmers for aquaculture. The private sector has so far utilized their own finance for aquaculture activities and it is felt that the trend may remain the same with development of intensive aquaculture.
4.2 Phasing and Management of Production Programmes
The areas to be developed for aquaculture only include existing fresh- and brackishwater ponds and coastal areas.
Since production programmes have not been finalized, manpower requirements, procurement of inputs, and other information pertaining to the need of such programmes, cannot be estimated at this point in time.
In broad terms, the following sequence of events may be envisaged:
(a) First phase (1975-80). Continuation and intensification of research. Assessment and selection of production programmes based on research data. Design and implementation of production programmes.
(b) Second phase (1978-85). Continued implementation of production programmes and formulation and implementation of expanded production programmes.
4.3 Budget
The capital and annual recurrent costs for operation of aquaculture development plans are provided by the Government. A provision of approximately Sgp. $ 200 000^1/ has been made this year for aquacultural research projects. This amount includes funds for the establishment of additional facilities and purchase of equipment and the operational cost of the projects. This amount would be increased substantially with the approval and implementation of the proposed aquaculture development project.
^1/ U.S.$ 1.00 = approx. Sgp. $ 2.55
4.4 External Assistance Requirements
Assistance required for aquaculture development in Singapore includes expertise in the following order of priority:
(a) Induced breeding of marine fish.
(b) Engineering aspects especially in connexion with intensive tank culture and the associated water recycling system, and other confined cultures (sea enclosures, floating cages, pens, etc.).
(c) Fish nutrition and pelletized fish feed development.
(d) Fish diseases and related problems.
(e) Environmental control and management.
TABLE 1
Annual Fresh Fish Consumption (tons)
Projected 1985
Local production
- inland (aquaculture)
- inshore
- offshore
Total local production
Total imports
Total supply
Total exports
Total consumption (supply less exports)
Population (millions)
Increase in population (%)
Per caput consumption (kg/year)
<section>l</section>
NATIONAL PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AQUACULTURE IN SRI LANKA^1/
1. BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
Fish contribute significantly to the protein intake of the people of Sri Lanka with 70 percent of the annual protein consumption being derived from fish. Present production of fish in the country is insufficient for the needs of the population and about 40 percent of the requirements have to be imported, largely in dried and processed forms. A recent restriction on importation of dried fish, due to national balance of payment problems, has reduced the per caput consumption of fish from 14 kg to 11 kg in the country emphasizing the need for increased local production. The domestic production of fish, amounting to 108 000 tons in 1974, is derived primarily from the coastal fishery. The 1974 inland fish component of 7 600 tons was mainly the result of stocking programmes (see table below).
Year
Annual fish production in Sri Lanka (tons)
Deep sea
Coastal
Inland
Total
Fish exports from Sri Lanka, particularly exports of shellfish, have increased in recent years as evidenced by the following figures:
Year
Quantity (tons)
Value (U.S.$)
The figures for imports during the same period are as follows!
Year
Quantity (tons)
Value (U.S.$)
^1/ Prepared by Mr. E.G. Goonewardene, Secretary, Ministry of Fisheries, Colombo and Mr. A.S. Mendis, Deputy Director (Research), Ministry of Fisheries
The present population of Sri Lanka is 13.85 million and is expected to rise to 17.1 million by 1985 and to an anticipated population of 21.5 million in 2000.
Fish is the preferred item of animal protein in the national diet and has been so over the years. With the rise in the standard of living, it is expected that the demand for fish and fish products will increase. In order to meet the increased demand for fish caused by the growth of population and the increase in per caput consumption, the Government has in its medium-term plan, 1972-77, provided for an increase in both marine and inland fish production. This is sought to be achieved by stepping up the mechanization programme in the coastal fisheries, expansion of the offshore and deep-sea fisheries, and a crash programme for the development of inland fisheries. A projected increase in production from marine and inland fisheries is indicated in the table in section 2.3.
It is anticipated that the total fish production will increase from 131 767 tons in 1975 to 334 780 tons in 1985, with production from inland fisheries accounting for 77 280 tons. With this increase in production, it will be possible to raise the present per caput consumption level of 11 kg to 25 kg as envisaged in the medium-term plan, 1972-77. In 1985, a population of approximately 17.1 million would require 427 500 tons of fishery products at a per caput consumption of 25 kg as against the estimated production of only 334 880 tons.
It is expected that of the total production in 1985, 10 percent of the marine fish production could be exported together with a very small proportion of production from coastal aquaculture.
1.1 National Policies
The national economic development policies envisage the ultimate attainment of self-sufficiency in food production both in the agriculture and fisheries fields. The land policies of the Government are directed toward elimination of large holdings as well as non-resident ownership, and increase in employment and productivity. Rural community development projects receive high priority and small export-oriented industries are encouraged. Foreign exchange savings will be affected by reducing consumption expenditure. Export earnings will be encouraged by special incentives for export-oriented industries.
The Government has recognized the importance of inland fisheries and aquaculture in attaining national objectives and improving the nutritional status of the people. It has, therefore, given high priority to a crash programme for the development of inland fisheries through aquaculture to increase the production of fresh fish and dried fish of suitable species to offset as far as possible the reduction in imports brought about by the recent restriction.
2. OBJECTIVES AND GOALS OF AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
Development of inland fisheries in Sri Lanka has been through the stocking of lakes, reservoirs and ponds with Tilapia and common carp, which were introduced about 25 years ago. The yield from fresh and brackish waters average about 150 kg and 12 kg/ha respectively. Expertise in the field of aquaculture is limited. To remedy this and to increase production from the 200 000 ha of inland waters, the short-term objectives as set out in the crash programme for inland fisheries development envisaged the establishment of 13 freshwater extension centres and six brackishwater centres (i.e., one in each administrative district) at a cost of approximately Cey.Rs. 12 million^1/ .The projected increase in production is from 7 600 tons to 26 000 tons by 1977, comprising 20 250 tons from fresh water and 5 350 tons from brackish water by 1977. The work on the crash programmes is supplemented by the establishment of a Freshwater Fish Breeding Experimental Station through bilateral aid from
China at a cost of approximately Cey.Rs. 10 million. This station is expected to supply initially about 400 000 fingerlings of grass carp and bighead carp for stocking of ponds, reservoirs arid farms.
^1/ U.S.$ 1.00 = approx. Cey.Rs. 7.12
Anticipated fish production through aquaculture will be as follows:
Present production (kg/ha)
Expected production (kg/ha)
Yield (tons)
Expected production (kg/ha)
Yield (tons)
Fresh water
- large, low country reservoirs (56 000 ha)
- "villus" (flood lakes)
(4 000 ha)
- village reservoirs
(12 000 ha)
- hill-country reservoirs
(8 000 ha)
- river and streams
(8 000 ha)
- fish farms
4 250 ha at 2 tons/ha
5 250 ha at 4 tons/ha
Total
Brackish water
- deep lagoons
- small lagoons and swamps (40 000 ha)
- fish farms
200 ha at 1 ton/ha
400 ha at 1.5 tons/ha
Total
Grand total
In view of the lack of a technological base, and limited developments in fish farming in the past, a short-term (3-5 years) period has to be considered as an experimental phase for developing a suitable system of culturing the major carps. A target of 2 tons production per ha in 1980 is anticipated. The medium-term (10 years) objective is to develop intensified aquaculture to meet the production target of 4 tons/ha by 1985. The anticipated production target for brackishwater farms by 1985 is significantly less than half that of freshwater farms. The long-term objective will be to further intensify production to achieve yields higher than 4 tons/ha of water. It is hoped that this can be done by:
(i) the development of fish farms;
(ii) the development of fish feeds;
(iii) environmental improvements, e.g., oxygenation;.
(iv) genetic improvement of cultivated species.
2.1 Sectoral Priorities
In the short term (five years) the public sector will be largely responsible for the production programme. Once the economic viability of aquaculture is demonstrated, it is expected that the cooperative and private sectors will participate in aquaculture development. It is not anticipated that joint ventures will have a place in freshwater aquaculture, but this could be considered for brackish water and mariculture.
2.2 Levels and Scales of Production
Though subsistence-level fishing in inland fisheries is prevalent, it is unlikely that subsistence-level aquaculture for home or village consumption will develop to any great extent, at any rate in the short term, because of religious and social prejudices. Small-scale, low-investment/commercial-type operations are envisaged in the medium - and long-term phases when production levels of 2-4 tons/ha are attained.
2.3 Targets
The targeted production in 10 years with projections up to the year 2000, are given below. Reliance will be placed on carp culture in freshwater ponds and more intensive production from large open waters.
Annual Production Targets (tons)
Marine fisheries
Aquaculture
- freshwater
- brackishwater
Total
2.4 Cultivated Species and Production Systems
The species which will be selected for culture include the following:
(i) Tilapia spp.
(ii) Varieties of common carp
(iii) Chinese carps - grass carp, silver carp, bighead carp and mud carp
(iv) Indian carps - rohu, catla and mrigal
(v) Air-breathing fish - catfish and murrels
(vi) Rainbow and brown trout
(vii) Mahseer for selected streams
(viii) Giant freshwater prawns
(ix) Penaeid prawns
(x) Chanos, Lates and Mugil spp.
(xi) Seaweed (Gracillaria)
(xii) Oysters and mussels.
At the present time, fish culture techniques for these species have not been developed in Sri Lanka. The technology will be developed through the work of the Freshwater Fish Breeding Experimental Station (established with aid from China) and the Central Institute for Aquaculture Development and Training, for which assistance has been requested from UNDP.
3. ESTABLISHMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension Service
The existing extension service in aquaculture is extremely limited. To remedy this, steps have been taken to set up 19 extension centres in different parts of the country by 1977. These extension centres will be used for the organization of demonstrations for new staff and prospective fish culturists. The base for an extension service has been created by the recruitment of university science graduates, who have undergone training in China through support from a UNDP programme. More graduates have been appointed and it is expected that they will receive similar training in 1976 and possibly in 1977. These officers will be supported by other staff both during and after the present experimental stage.
External technical assistance for establishing an extension service has been sought under:
(a) a bilateral agreement with the People's Republic of China;
(b) UNDP assistance for setting up the Central Institute for Aquaculture Development and Training;
(c) FAO/SIDA - Establishment of a Centre for the Development and Marketing of Fish Products, to be operational in the beginning of 1976.
It is expected that advice and assistance in the design and construction of fish farms and other installations, farm management, health inspection and disease control, harvesting, processing and marketing will also be available from these sources.
3.2 Inputs
The total requirements for fish seed for the expanded aquaculture production programme will be as follows:
Fingerlings (millions)
Fresh water
- large reservoirs 56 000 ha at 1 500 fingerlings/ha
- "villus" (flood lakes) 4 000 ha at 1 500 fingerlings/ha
- village reservoirs 12 000 ha at 2 000 fingerlings/ha
- hill-country reservoirs 8 000 ha at 750 fingerlings/ha
- fish farms:
4 250 ha in 1980 at 4 000 fingerlings/ha in 1980 (17.0 million)
5 250 ha in 1985 at 5 000 fingerlings/ha in 1985
Total
Brackish water
- deep lagoons 80 000 ha at 500 fingerlings/ha
- small lagoons 40 000 ha at 1 000 fingerlings/ha
- fish farms
100 ha in 1980 100 ha for shrimp at 30 000/ha
300 ha in 1985 300 ha for finfish at 5 000/ha
Total
Grand Total
The fish seed requirements indicated above will be produced by the following:
Fingerlings (millions)
(a) The existing inland fisheries stations
(b) New inland fisheries stations to be set up under the crash programme
(c) Freshwater Fish Breeding Experimental Station
(d) Central Institute for Aquaculture Development and Training proposed to be established with UNDP assistance
(e) Collection from natural sources and supplemented by aid programmes/purchases from abroad
(f) New seed production units
Total
Supplementary fish feeds will require development and this will be done under the proposed UNDP programme referred to earlier. Fertilizer and feed requirements for fish farms are indicated below:
4 250 ha of ponds
feed (tons)
5 650 ha of ponds
feed (tons)
Lime (0.5 tons/ha)
Inorganic fertilizer (0.7 tons/ha)
Organic manure (6.25 tons/ha)
Feed (rice, bran, oil cake, etc.) (2 tons/ha)
3.3 Training of Fish Culturists (Farmers)
Training of fish culturists (farmers) will be carried out by the extension/demonstration centres which are being set up under the crash programme and at the other existing stations. It is expected that the training would be carried out at 20 centres, each training two classes of 25 fish farmers/year.
3.4 Training of Core Personnel
The categories and numbers of personnel to be trained are as follows:
(i) Research officers/understudies to UNDP experts (honours graduates) approximately eight.
(ii) Fish culturists (university science graduates) approximately 40;
(iii) Other staff will, it is expected, be trained locally at the Institute for Aquaculture Development and Training and at the Freshwater Fish Breeding Experimental Station.
The core personnel, particularly the fish culturists, will have to be trained at a regional or sub-regional centre to be set up for the purpose.
3.5 Organizational Research
For research in aquaculture, the Ministry of Fisheries, Sri Lanka, has its main freshwater research station at Polonnaruwa. A smaller freshwater station is located at Uda Walawe, a midland freshwater research station is under construction at Ginigathena, and there is a trout farm with a hatchery at Nuwara Eliya. For research in brackish aquaculture, there is a farm at Pitipana, Negombo. However, the above farms and laboratories cannot fulfil the anticipated research needs. For developing techniques of intensive aquaculture, especially of the Chinese carps and Indian major carps, and for undertaking adaptive research in respect of technologies developed elsewhere for the above species, there is a proposal to set up, with UNDP assistance, a Central Institute of Inland Aquaculture Development and Training with four stations located in different agro-climatic zones of the country. There are also proposals to set up with UNDP assistance a running-water fish culture centre, and to
enhance the capabilities of the present trout farm in order to carry out development-oriented research for commercial trout production. In the field of brackishwater fish culture, there is a proposal to carry out investigations leading to the development of farms suited to the tidal regime prevalent in Sri Lanka and to develop a system for breeding and culture of the giant freshwater prawn Macrobrachium.
Research personnel are proposed to be trained in Canada, China, India, Japan, the Philippines, Malaysia and Thailand. Theoretical and practical instruction to students, teachers, extension workers and prospective fish culturists will be given at the Central Institute of Inland Aquaculture Development and Training and its regional stations. Extension and demonstration of technology developed at the research station in respect of warm freshwater fish culture will be undertaken at nine centres widely distributed throughout the country. Technologies developed for running-water culture, trout culture, Macrobrachium culture, and brackishwater fish farming should be demonstrated to fish culturists and fish farm personnel at the relevant research stations.
Equipment for research is expected to be acquired with UNDP assistance and from local sources.
The estimated expenditure of Sri Lanka Government on the establishment of the Central Institute of Inland Aquaculture Development and Training, its four regional stations, the running-water fish culture centre, trout production commercialization centre, and the Macrobrachium centre at the brackishwater farms investigation centre is expected to be approximately Cey.Rs. 10 million (i.e., local contribution). The UNDP contribution has not yet been finalized, but is expected to be in the region of U.S.$ 1.5 million.
4. PRODUCTION PROGRAMMES
4.1 Financing and Credit
The first stage of 3-5 years will be primarily a period of experimentation, in which the public sector will play a leading role with assistance from the UNDP and through bilateral aid.
The second stage (1980-85) will involve intensification of production with the participation of cooperative and private sectors, in small- and large-scale activities. It is expected that the financing of inputs will be undertaken by the two State banks as was done in the case of the poultry industry, and as has been agreed to for the financing of inputs under a special marine fisheries project. It is expected that, as in the case of this fisheries project, the extension services of the Ministry of Fisheries will act as a link between the borrower and the banks and that the banks will be guided by the recommendations of the extension arm of the aquaculture group.
4.2 Phasing and Management of Production Programmes
4.2.1 Areas to be developed
These will be largely the low-country plains. Aquaculture will be undertaken with warm-water fish mainly, while trout culture will be undertaken in the hills. The management of production programmes will largely be the responsibility of the public sector in the experimental phase of the development programme with the private and cooperative sectors taking over thereafter.
Arrangements for the acquisition of sites for extension/demonstration centres will be carried out under the normal acquisition procedures available to Government under the existing laws of the country. The cooperatives and private sectors are not expected to have any special difficulty in obtaining sites for the establishment of viable projects.
4.2.2 Construction of farms and installations
As far as the construction of farms in the public sector is concerned, the appropriate department of the Government which has experience in related fields will be given the responsibility. An expert in farm construction and installations is expected to be provided through the proposed UNDP project.
4.2.3 Manpower requirements
(a) A total of 48 scientific staff and 72 personnel for auxiliary, technical and extension work will be required.
(b) It is anticipated that the employment generated through aquaculture will be as follows:
Yield (tons)
Employment potential
Yield (tons)
Employment potential
Full-time
Part-time
Ancillary
Full-time
Part-time
Ancillary
Fresh water
- large low-country reservoirs
- "villus" (flood lakes)
- village reservoirs
- hill-country reservoirs
- rivers and streams
- fish farms
Total
Brackish water
- deep lagoons
- small lagoons and swamps
- fish farms
Total
Grand Total
The employment potential of aquaculture has been estimated on the basis of the following assumptions:
(i) In the large, low-country reservoirs, villus, hill-country reservoirs, and deep lagoons, fish is commercially harvested mainly from dugout canoes and log-rafts, each craft being manned by two fishermen. The average annual catch of a unit is estimated at 7 tons. Each 7-ton unit of catch will provide employment for two persons.
(ii) In the village reservoirs, rivers and streams, and small lagoons and swamps, fish is harvested by subsistence fishermen using rod and line, castnets, or other simple gears. The average catch/fisherman is estimated at 1.3 tons at the rate of 10 lb (4.5 kg) per day for 300 days. Fishing is considered a part-time employment for these persons.
(iii) The average size of each freshwater fish farm is assumed to be 1 ha, and the average size of a brackishwater fish farm is 2 ha. Each farm will be operated by one family unit as a full-time occupation. Each farm is deemed to provide full-time employment for two persons - one male adult and one female adult.
(iv) Ancillary employment will be provided in processing, transport, sale of fishing equipment, constructing fishing craft, supply of fertilizer, supply of fish food, supply of spawn/fingerlings and in wholesale and retail marketing. The number of persons for which ancillary employment is provided is assumed to be one third the number of persons for which full-time employment is provided by fish production.
4.2.4 Training of core personnel for production programmes
Apart from core personnel dealt with in section 3.4, it is expected that 1 000 persons (50 persons a year at 20 centres) will be trained each year at extension/demonstration centres run by the Ministry of Fisheries.
4.2.5 Health and disease control
Various external and internal infections of fish caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi, protozoa, Crustacea, etc., are known to afflict fish. These infections and infestations, and their control, become more significant and important as aquaculture techniques become more intensified. The proposed Central Institute for Aquaculture Development and Training is expected to develop the capability required to deal with problems of fish diseases as they develop.
4.2.6 Organization of harvesting and marketing
There already exists a demand for freshwater fish in Sri Lanka, and markets also exist throughout the country for sale of fish. Suitable harvesting and marketing procedures for the produce of aquaculture will be developed in the country consistent with the social and religious circumstances of the people. Part of the fish will be marketed in the dried or smoked form.
The Ceylon Fisheries Corporation, the cooperative wholesale establishment and cooperative societies will also be associated with marketing of aquaculture products. Ice-making and fish storage capacity for marketing are available to meet expected demands. Assistance in product development will come from the FAO/SIDA Centre for the Development and Marketing of Fish Products.
4.3 Budget
Estimated capital and annual operational costs of aquaculture development projects are given below:
Local capital requirements (million Cey.Rs.)
Recurrent expenditures (million Cey.Rs.)
Expected returns (1985)
Remarks
Million fry
Existing freshwater stations^1/ (A)
Fry of common carp, tilapia, etc.
Crash programme stations^1/ (B)
Fry of common carp, tilapia, etc.
Proposed Central Institute for Aquaculture Development and Training (C)
Fry of common carp, tilapia, etc., and major carp
Freshwater fish breeding experimental stations
Fry of Chinese carp
Collection and distribution of fry from natural sources
Funds from items (A) and (B)
New seed production units
Fingerlings of all types of fish
Tons of fish
Construction of new ponds
Capital is for construction of new ponds
Increasing fish production in large reservoirs
Funds for the purpose have been pro vided under items
(A) - (C)
Increasing fish production in "villus" (flood lakes)
Funds for the purpose have been pro vided under items
(A) - (C)
Increasing fish production in hill-country reservoirs
Funds for the purpose have been pro vided under items
(A) - (C)
Increasing fish production in village reservoirs
Funds for the purpose have been pro vided under items (A) - (C)
Increasing fish production in deep lagoons
Funds for the purpose have been pro vided under items (A) - (C)
Increasing fish production in small lagoons and swamps
Funds for the purpose have been pro vided under items
(A) - (C)
^1/ Fry production will be in addition to other functions of these stations
^2/ The UNDP contribution is likely to be in the region of U.S.$ 1.5 million
Sri Lanka has had no experience of commercial fish farm construction, hence any estimates of capital outlays on farm construction would be merely conjectural. Detailed capital outlays will be known after the exact areas of cultivable waters of the country have been identified and some commercial farms constructed. Apart from fish farm construction, there is recurring expenditure in fish culture, such as cost of pond manuring and fertilization, cost of producing or procuring stocking material, cost of feeding fish, pond maintenance, harvesting and marketing. It is expected that the cost of production of fish would not exceed Cey.Rs. 2/kg. If the rate of production is 4 000 kg/ha/year then, at the wholesale rate of Cey.Rs. 4/kg, one can expect a gross income of Cey.Rs. 16 000/ha/year. After allowing for operational costs, a net income of Cey.Rs. 8 000/ha/year could be expected. The rate of production can substantially increase with further development of technology, imparting
a greater measure of economic viability to aquaculture.
4.4 External Assistance Requirements
Technical assistance required for the implementation of the development programme will be in the following fields:
(i) Fish farm designing
(ii) Fish breeding
(iii) Fish culture techniques in static and running waters
(iv) Commercialization of trout production
(v) Macrobrachium culture.
Over a period of four years, the foreign cost of the above would be approximately U.S.$ 800 000. Meanwhile, equipment required for the implementation of the programme would cost approximately U.S.$ 750 000.
While the national centre referred to earlier will engage in the short-term programmes of improvement of production technology, training of technical manpower, etc., the country will have to lean heavily for its long-term requirements on the proposed regional centre for aquaculture development. This regional set-up is particularly important to a country like Sri Lanka, with its high priority for fish production through aquaculture to reduce the large protein deficiency of an expanding population, to raise the employment potential in rural populations, to improve the technical competence in different aquaculture fields, to train core personnel and to raise aquaculture for subsistence-level production to the level of an organized industry.
<section>m</section>
NATIONAL PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AQUACULTURE IN THAILAND^1/
^1/ Prepared by Dr. Deb Menasaveta, Mr. A. Sidthimunka, Mr. U. Pongsuwano, Mr. S. Swegwan and Dr. T. Bhukaswan, Department of Fisheries, Bangkok
1. BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
Fish constitute an important source of animal protein in the diet of the Thai people, as it is in all of the countries in southeast Asia. The Thai marine fishing industry at present employs 75 000-85 000 fishermen operating over 27 000 fishing boats, and landings approximate 1.5 million tons of fish annually. The catch is worth approximately Baht 6 870 million^2/ at first-hand sale, and the per caput consumption of fish in Thailand averages 25 kg.
^2/ U.S.$ 1.00 - approx. Baht 20.15
During the past two decades, with the introduction of new types of fishing gear such as trawlnets, the improvement of traditional gear such as gill and purse-seine nets and the discovery of new fishing grounds in Thai waters and contiguous zones, there has been a spectacular increase in marine fish landings in the country. In 1960, the total fish production from inland and marine waters amounted to 186 500 tons, but by 1973 this had increased to 1 679 000 tons as shown in Table 1. It should be noted that during 1972-73, the total landings were at the same level, i.e., 1 679 000 tons. However, in 1974 there was a slight decline in the total fish production to 1 511 000 tons. It is evident that freshwater fish, both from the natural waters and from pond culture, made a relatively small contribution to the overall production increase, with output increasing from 40 000 tons in 1960 to 160 000 tons in 1974, i.e., an average annual growth of approximately 10.4 percent. The
present production from aquaculture in fresh and brackish waters is estimated to be about 55 128 tons (1974). Within the period 1960-73, the rapid growth of output changed the contribution of fish production to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) from Baht 980 million cc 1.8 percent in 1960 to Baht 6 870 million or 3.66 percent in 1973 at current market prices. Hence, fishing is now the second most important natural resources sub-sector. Data on the GDP are presented in Tables 2 and 3.
Fisheries have contributed substantially toward increasing foreign exchange earnings of Thailand. In 1966, Thailand exported fishery products to foreign markets valued at Baht 234.97 million. By 1972, 80 570 tons of fish and fish products valued at Baht 796.47 million were exported. On the other hand, Thailand imported fish and fish products into the country valued at Baht 52.5 million in 1966 and Baht 70.9 million in 1972. The data concerning the exports and imports of fishery products of Thailand and their values are summarized in Tables 4 and 5.
1.1 Projected Demand and Supply of Fish Production
inland waters and reservoirs will continue to increase as a result of better management of these waters, and during the period 1976-85 this increase should be in the order of 90 000 tons.
On the basis of potential areas for aquaculture, it is projected that the aquaculture production from inland and brackishwater sources could be increased from the estimated 80 780 tons in 1976 to 224 390 tons in 1985. On these assumptions, it is anticipated that Thailand should have a surplus of fish for export in the order of 60 000 tons in 1985. The production consists of species that are highly demanded such as catfish, eel, marble goby and Penaeus spp., which are also export commodities.
1.2 National Fisheries Policies
Recognizing the important contribution of fisheries and aquaculture to the economy of the country, fisheries development including aquaculture is considered an integral part of the overall national economic and social development plan of Thailand. This plan, initiated in 1961, has contributed both directly and indirectly to the rapid expansion of the Thai fishing industry. The Third National Economic and Social Development Plan (1972-76) stipulates that the overall increase in fish production from both marine and inland sources and from aquaculture should not be less than 7 percent per annum. In order to achieve this target the Government of Thailand has established the following policies for fisheries development:
(i) To conserve the fully exploited fishery resources of the country through sound management programmes to ensure maximum sustained benefits from them
(ii) To develop coastal aquaculture with special emphasis on shrimp culture
(iii) To develop deep-sea fisheries by exploiting new fishing grounds in the high seas
(iv) To accelerate the production of fish from inland resources
(v) To raise the standard of living of small-scale fishermen.
1.3 Role of Aquaculture Development in the Implementation of National Policies
With the anticipated change in the sea regime in the near future, it is expected that the marine fish production of Thailand would be considerably reduced, say, in the order of 250 000-300 000 tons. Hence emphasis must be placed on the exploitation of under-utilized pelagic resources (e.g., round scad (Decapterus spp.) sardine-like fishes, tuna-like fishes), the intensification of inland fisheries development and aquaculture development. With the recent advance in technology pertaining to aquaculture, the favourable climatic condition and the potential areas for further aquaculture development (Table 7) it is expected that aquaculture production could replace some of the loss in marine production due to decreasing fishing areas available to Thailand in the high seas.
2. OBJECTIVES AND GOALS OF AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
2.1 Objectives
The long-term objectives of aquaculture development are to maximize production of aqua-farms and to establish aquaculture as an economically viable industry, with a view to providing increased employment, generating ancillary industries and increasing foreign exchange earnings.
In order to achieve these goals, inputs from the public sector (Government) in terms of research and extension services must be intensified. Hence, during the Fourth National Economic Development Plan (1977-81), the Department of Fisheries will concentrate its activities in the following areas:
(i) Research on pond engineering and management, environmental control, genetic improvement of cultivated species, nutrition, the development of fish seed and feed, the identification of diseases and parasites and determination of effective measures for their control and prevention
(ii) Land reforms for providing adequate areas for aquaculture
(iii) Accelerated extension programme
(iv) Lake and swamp improvement
(v) Provision of adequate loans for aquaculture.
It is anticipated that these activities will continue during the subsequent 1977-81 five-year plan.
As the objective of the forthcoming National Economic and Social Development Plan (1977-81), in general, is to reduce the gap between the rich and the poor, the Government will give priority to programmes pertaining to rural development. This would accelerate the development of small-scale fish farming and increase economic activities in rural areas.
The private sector with sufficient funds of its own will be encouraged to undertake aqua-cultural activities. Joint ventures with foreign companies will be supported with the privileges given under the laws of the Board of Investment of Thailand, to raise those aqua-products which are in demand on foreign markets. It is hoped that these activities will contribute substantially toward increased foreign exchange earnings.
2.2 Production Targets
Taking into account the potential areas for aquaculture, the development of methodology and techniques employed, the improved management skills and favorable climate for investment in aquaculture, production for aquafarm production through different culture systems (Tables 8 and 9) have been made. It is anticipated that the production from aquaculture of various types will be approximately 67 000 tons valued at Baht 583 million in 1976. The production is expected to reach the level of 240 000 tons, valued at Baht 2 525 million in 1985.
2.3 Cultivated Species and Production Systems
2.3.1 Freshwater species
Fish culture is an age-old practice in Thailand; however, intensive fish culture has been developed only during the past two decades. The Department of Fisheries has made a significant contribution to the development of aquaculture, thereby effecting the substantial increase in fish culture activities in the country. In earlier days, farmers were encouraged to grow fish in paddy fields, and emphasis was placed on the rearing of herbivorous and omnivorous fish including the Nile tilapia, Thai carp, common carps and sepatsiam.
Commercial-scale aquaculture was developed some time later. The species raised in commercial-scale ponds include catfish (Clarias batrachus), Pangasius sutchi, sepatsiam (Trichogaster pectoralis), snakehead (Ophiocephalus striatus), grass carp, bighead carp, silver carp, common carp and true eel (Anguilla japonicus). Among these species, the culture of Clarias spp. gives good returns (approximately 174 tons/ha/year). Snakehead culture also yields promising returns.
Besides finfish culture, the cultivation of the giant freshwater prawn (Macrobrachium rosenbergi de Man) has recently received wide attention from fish farmers. The artificial propagation of this prawn has been carried out by the Bankhen Fisheries Station and the Songkhla Fisheries Station since 1970. A seed production centre will soon be established by the Department of Fisheries at Chacheong-sao Province.
2.3.2 Brackishwater species
In Thailand, the species used in brackishwater fish culture include:
(a) Finfish
Sea bass (Lates calcarifer)
Milkfish (Chanos chanos)
Mullet (Mugil spp.)
(b) Crustaceans
Shrimps (Penaeus and Metapenaeus spp.)
Mangrove crab (Scylla serrata)
(c) Molluscs
Ark-shell clam (Anadara granosa)
Mussel (Mytilus smaragdinus)
Oyster (Crassostrea spp.)
With the success achieved in the controlled spawning of sea bass by the Songkhla Fisheries Station in the early seventies attention had been devoted to this species by fish farmers in several southern provinces along the west coast of the Gulf of Thailand and provinces on the Andaman Sea side. As a common practice, small ponds along the coast are stocked with sea bass fry collected from the natural populations inhabiting coastal areas.
Milkfish farming is presently carried out on a very limited scale due to the lack of market demand for this species in Thailand. The culture of this species entails the rearing of fry collected from natural waters to marketable size. If there is any incentive, e.g., increased demand for the fish both for domestic consumption and export, it is believed that milkfish culture could be expanded. Although shrimp species mainly Penaeus merguiensis, Penaeus monodon, Metapenaeus spp. could be artificially bred, shrimp culture practised by traditional shrimp farmers in Thailand involves pumping in water containing shrimp seed and other organisms into ponds.
The presence of predators and fluctuating water level in ponds often result in very large mortalities of cultured shrimp, resulting in low yield per unit area. Extension work on improved traditional methods of shrimp culture is being carried out by the Samut Sakorn, Rayong, Songkhla and Phuket fisheries stations. The culture of mangrove crab (Scylla serrata) has also been developed in Thailand on a limited scale. This involves the collection of small crabs from natural beds and subsequent fattening for the market. The rearing period is about 4-6 months. Traditionally, mollusc production is a by-product of bamboo screen traps and up to the present, there has been no attempt to introduce effective methods of mollusc culture in this country. It is anticipated that the increased demand for protein food will encourage the development of mollusc culture in the future. The culture of ark-shell clam, once a very profitable venture in the inner Gulf of Thailand, has shown a decline
in production in recent years due to pollution.
2.3.3 Development considerations
Although freshwater fish culture development in Thailand has progressed very satisfactorily with substantial increased production particularly during the past two decades, the following areas need to be strengthened:
(a) Pond management with the view to increasing yield per unit area
(b) Research on the identification, prevention and control of fish diseases and parasites, and on pollution monitoring and control
(c) Research on fish nutrition, the development of fish feed using local ingredients
(d) Development of an effective extension programme covering all aspects of technical assistance activities.
In brackishwater fish culture, technical problems remain to be solved. These include cultural techniques, controlled or artificial spawning, seed production, control of predators and environments, etc.
3. ESTABLISHMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension Service.
In the proposed ten-year plan for aquaculture development, the extension service should be strengthened since it is inadequate at present. In the existing organization of the Department of Fisheries, the extension service comes under the responsibility of the Fisheries Protection and Promotion Division and of the Inland Fisheries Division. An appropriate number of extension officers must be assigned to the fisheries field stations or provincial fisheries offices in provinces with fish production farms.
The extension activities under the ten-year aquaculture development plan will include:
(i) Preparation and issuance of manuals on cultivable species and on different systems of aquaculture to interest fish farmers
(ii) Group training of fish farmers twice a year for inland, brackishwater or marine culture. The training will include pond farm management, book-keeping, handling and processing of aquacultural products
(iii) Establishment of pilot farms in centres of aquaculture industry, e.g., Suphanburi, Samutsakorn, Songkhla and Pangnga Provinces, etc.
(iv) Establishment of seed production centres for selected species used in culture, e.g., shrimp, freshwater prawn, catfish, etc., in the initial stage of the development. However, preparation should be made to encourage private sector to undertake commercial seed production when the aquaculture industry of the country has been developed
(v) On-the-spot advice on various aspects of aquaculture to private companies, joint ventures and small-scale farmers.
The expenditure incurred in extension activities will be covered by the budgetary allocation to the Division of Inland and Brackishwater Fisheries of the Department of Fisheries.
3.2 Training of Core Personnel
The Department of Fisheries has developed facilities for research, development and training. At present, there are 16 inland fisheries stations responsible to the Inland Fisheries Division. At the National Inland Fisheries Institute (NIFI) under a bilateral agreement between the Governments of Canada and Thailand, a fish culture research project is being established. The Brackishwater Fisheries Division maintains seven stations, equipped with facilities for research and training.
The majority of technical officers of the Department are graduates in fisheries and biological sciences. Several of them have received further training abroad through scholarships or grants either from the Thai Government or from bilateral and/or multilateral aid agencies. In implementing the ten-year aquaculture development programme, it is envisaged that a number of technical officers from both the central and local governments would require proper training to supervise production activities in the field. These officers include:
Category
No. of personnel to be trained
(a) Provincial fisheries officers (aquaculture)
(b) Managers of field demonstration fish farms or stations
These technical officers are also responsible for training of field extension workers in various provinces.
The estimated expenditure for the training of core personnel is included in the proposed budget of the Division of Inland and Brackishwater Fisheries of the Department of Fisheries (see 4.3).
3.3 Organization of Research
As mentioned in the preceding paragraph, the Department of Fisheries has developed research facilities. However, the Department needs more specialists to undertake particular aspects of research on aquaculture development. Hence, the training of specialists mentioned is considered very important for the success of the aquaculture development plan.
The long-term research requirements are to find solutions for maximizing production of seed of cultivable species and yield per unit area, and for minimizing the costs of such production. Research is also needed in the fields of marketing and distribution of aqua-cultural products for domestic and export markets to ensure maximum profits for the industry.
The immediate research requirements (1977-81) are to obtain knowledge leading to environmental control including the prevention and control of diseases, parasites, predators and pollution; and stock manipulation, feed and feeding to ensure rapid growth and low mortality of cultivable species.
Expenditure for the research programmes is included in the proposed budgets of the Divisions of Inland and Brackishwater Fisheries (see item 4.3).
4. PRODUCTION PROGRAMMES
4.1 Financing and credit
The present loan fund amounting to Baht 6 million set up by the Department of Fisheries is not sufficient for the expanded programme of aquaculture in the country. Hence, it is strongly recommended that the Government set aside sufficient funds for this purpose, and the Bank of Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives (BAAC) should be the executing agency for the loan. Since most of the small-scale fish farmers are not rich and have limited collateral, the conditions for obtaining loans should be formulated in such a way that they are favourable to the borrowers. If future development in the aquaculture industry proves to be financially viable, the Government should approach the World Bank (IBRD) or a regional bank such as ADB for additional loans.
In executing the loans, a local committee consisting of an extension officer from the Department of Fisheries, the Provincial Fisheries Officer and a representative of the Bank may be set up at a centre of aquafarms to process the applications for loans. The committee should have the power to authorize the loan to a borrower up to a certain amount, say Baht 50 000. For a larger amount, the local committee may refer it to a central committee in Bangkok for approval. The central committee may include the representatives of the Department of Fisheries and the Bank. In this connexion, it should be emphasized that the extension officer(s) in the area concerned will play a major role in recommending an applicant for a loan.
4.2 Phasing and Management of Production Programmes
4.2.1 Areas to be developed
During the Fourth National Economic and Social Development Plan (1977-81) it is planned that more inputs in terms of extension work, loans, etc., from the Government will be provided to small-scale fish farmers and other private sectors. Under the Investment Laws, private joint venture companies enjoy the privilege of tax exemption for imported materials for the initial period of five years if the amount of investment is beyond a certain level specified by the laws.
The acquisition of lands for aquaculture for small-scale farmers will be undertaken by the Government through legislation and the land reform scheme.
The areas expected to be used for aquaculture development are as follows:
Region
Period
Area (ha)
Central Plains and Coastal Areas
4.2.2 Manpower requirements
As mentioned earlier, 100 officers are required for the extension service. Fish farmers, either individuals or from cooperatives or farmer groups, will be trained by the Department of Fisheries. It is anticipated that between 2 000 and 4 000 farmers will receive training during the ten-year period of the programme.
4.2.3 Procurement of inputs
It is recommended that the Chachaengsao Fisheries Station be responsible for the production of seed of Macrobrachium spp.; Rayong, Songkhla, Phuket, Chantaburi and Samut Sakorn Fisheries Stations will undertake the supply of seed of Penaeus spp. and Metapenaeus spp. at low cost to shrimp farmers. Prachuabkirikhan, Songkhla and Suraj Dhani Stations will produce seed of finfish, oysters, etc. for brackishwater fish farming. The inland fisheries stations and private sectors will produce seed of inland species for distribution to fish farmers at low cost.
The Department of Fisheries and the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives should make arrangements with local fertilizer companies to supply fertilizer at a moderate price to fish farmers. It is expected that with the intensification of research on fish feed formulae during the forthcoming fisheries development plan, fish feeds may be produced on a commercial scale and can be purchased locally at moderate prices. Arrangements may be made for the stations concerned to distribute fertilizers and feeds to fish farmers in their vicinities.
4.2.4 Health inspection and control
The Department of Fisheries should work in close collaboration with the Department of Public Health, Ministry of Public Health, to undertake essential studies leading to the formulation of health standards for various aquacultural products both for domestic and for foreign markets. These studies should be completed early in the forthcoming development plan and be ready for implementation in 1981.
4.2.5 Organization of marketing and processing of aquacultural products
As the Section concerned with marketing of aquacultural products in the Department is rather weak at present and there are no trained personnel, it is strongly recommended that the Department use external assistance to study market potentials for aquacultural products, the existing practices in marketing and the demand of home and foreign markets during 1976-81. Concurrently, appropriate local personnel should be trained so that they can be useful to the aquaculture industry in the future. Furthermore, a quality control unit of the Division of Fish Technology should be established to develop the export market for aquacultural products.
The organization of harvesting and marketing of aquacultural products should be entrusted to fish farmer groups or cooperatives with assistance from the Department of Fisheries.
4.3 Budget
Capital and operating costs for the implementation of the proposed aquaculture development project will be covered by the annual budget of the Department of Fisheries. Since the project wilt be executed by Inland, Brackishwater and Marine Fisheries Divisions of the Department, the proposed budgetary requirements of the two Divisions for 1976-85 are shown in Table 10.
4.4 External Assistance Requirements
In order to achieve the objectives in the accelerated aquaculture development programme, external assistance would be required in the following fields:
(i) Commercial seed production of some cultivable species, e.g., shrimp and prawn
(ii) Development of fish feed
(iii) Pond management including the identification, prevention and control of fish diseases, parasites and pollution
(iv) Intensified extension work
(v) Product marketing and quality control.
The Government has received technical assistance from the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) in the field of aquaculture and inland fisheries research, and the National Inland Fisheries Institute (NIFI) has been established under this project. In the field of shrimp culture, the Government of Japan through the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) has rendered assistance to the Department of Fisheries, and the project will be continued until 1978. A request has now been submitted to UNDP for technical assistance in the Country Programme in the fields of pollution research, farm pond management and the expansion of the freshwater prawn farming industry.
TABLE 1
Annual Fish Landings (tons) in Thailand from 1960 to 1973
Year
Marine
Inland
Total
Sources:
(i) Report on some aspects of fisheries development in Thailand by R.C. Cole and N. Anand. Tropical Products Institute, Ministry of Overseas Development, U.K. Government
(ii) Statistical Unit, Secretariat Division, Department of Fisheries, Bangkok, Thailand
TABLE 2
Gross Domestic Product (thousand million Bahts) at Current Prices, 1960-73
1973^a/
Agriculture
Crops
Livestock
Fisheries
Forestry
Total
Mining and quarrying
Manufacturing
Construction
Electricity and water supply
Transportation and communication
Wholesale and retail trade
Banking, insurance and retail trade
Ownership of dwellings
Public administration and defence
Services
Gross Domestic Product
^a/ Preliminary
Source: Report on some aspects of fisheries development of Thailand by R.C. Cole and N. Anand, Tropical Products Institute, Ministry of Overseas Development, U.K. Government
TABLE 3 Percent Contribution of GDP at Constant 1962 Prices (1961-73)
First Development Plan
Second Development Plan
Third Development Plan
1972^a/
1973^a/
Agriculture
Crops
Livestock
Fisheries
Forestry
Total
Industry
Mining and quarrying
Manufacturing
Construction
Electricity and water supply
Total
Transportation and communication
Wholesale and retail trade
Services
Banking, insurance and real estate
Ownership of dwellings
Public administration and defence
Miscellaneous services
Total
Gross domestic product
^a/ Preliminary figures only, and further revision is anticipated
Source: Report of some aspects of fisheries development by R.C, Cole and N. Anand. Tropical Products Institute, Ministry of Overseas Development, U.K. Government
TABLE 4
Exports of Fish and Fish Products (1966-72)
By volume ('000 tons)
Fish (fresh or alive)^a/
Other kinds of preserved fish
Shrimps, prawns and lobsters^a/
Cuttle fish
Other crustaceans and molluscs^a/
Fish meal
Other
Total
By value (million Baht)
Fish (fresh or alive)
Other kinds of preserved fish
Shrimps, prawns and lobsters
Cuttle fish
Other crustaceans and molluscs
Fish meal
Other
Total
^a/ Part of these are produced from aquaculture as explained in section 1.1
Source: Fisheries record of Thailand and foreign trade statistics (1966-72)
TABLE 5
Weight and Value of Fish and Crustaceans Imported (Fresh Chilled or Frozen or Salted, Dried or Smoked, Canned) into Thailand (1963-72)
Year
Weight (tons)
Total value
(million Baht)
Fish
Crustacean
Source: Department of Customs, Government of Thailand
TABLE 6
Projected Demand and Supply of Fish and Fish Products (1973-85)
Year
Projected demand (tons) (1)
Supply of edible fish (tons)
Differences (2)-(1)
Marine
Inland
Aquaculture
Total
TABLE 7
Thailand Inland Water and Areas Used for Aquaculture Production
Type of water
Area actually used for aquaculture (ha)
Total potential area (ha)
Source of information
Ponds (freshwater)
Fisheries Record, 1972
Water ditches of vegetable and fruit farms
Fish. Dept., 1961
Paddyfields (irrigated)
Boonbrahm, 1972
Irrigation tanks
Fish. Dept., 1961 and Boonbrahm, 1972
Large impoundments
Boonbrahm, 1972
Rivers and canals
Boonbrahm, 1972
Mangrove and tidal flats
Sribhibhadh, 1972
Total
Source: The Potentials of Aquaculture Development by H.R. Rabanal, SCS/74/WP 1
TABLE 8
Projected Aquafarm Production by Farm Type
Year
Item
Brackishwater farm
Freshwater farm
Fish pen (or cage)
Marine farm
Total
Area^a/
Products^ b/
Value^c/
Area
Products
Value
Area
Products
Value
Area
Products
Value
Area
Products
Value
Area
Products
Value
Area
Products
Value
Area
Products
Value
Area
Products
Value
Area
Products
Value
Area
Products
Value
Area
Products
Value
Area
Products
Value
^a/ Area in ha
^b/ Products in tons
^c/ Value in million Baht
Note: Fish seed not included
TABLE 9
Projected Aquafarm Production for Table Fish, Crustacea, Shellfish and Seed (1973-85)
Year
Item
Table fish
Crustacea
Shellfish
Aquafarm seed
Total
Products^a/
Value^b/
Products
Value
Products
Value
Products
Value
Products
Value
Products
Value
Products
Value
Products
Value
Products
Value
Products
Value
Products
Value
Products
Value
Products
Value i
193.0 i
^a/ Products in tons
^b/ Value in million Baht:
Note: 10-15 percent of seed production comes from fisheries stations
TABLE 10
Budgetary Requirements for the Proposed Aquaculture Development Programme (1976-85)
(in million Baht)
Year
Fresh water
Brackish water and salt water
Total
Total
Notes:
1. The budgetary allocation for the fiscal year 1976 has been approved by the Government
2. Approximately 30 percent of the allocation to the Inland Fisheries Division will be used in the Lake and Swamp Improvement Project
3. Approximately 20 percent of the allocation is for research and development and 50 percent for operating costs including salaries of personnel
