<title>Organization, operation and maintenance of irrigation schemes - FAO irrigation and drainage paper 40. Organization, operation and manintenance of irrigation schemes</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Good management of irrigation schemes is becoming increasingly recognized as an essential means to achieve successful irrigated agriculture. Consequently, in recent years, there has been a noticeable interest in studying existing irrigation schemes in order to learn where improvements can be made in their operation and maintenance. However, much of the recent literature on the topic tends to concentrate on the description and analysis of case studies in one or a few countries in a region. This paper is intended to fill a gap by taking a more global look at the experience gained in several places in various parts of the world and drawing some generalized conclusions.
Part I of the text is mainly concerned with organizational and management issues. An attempt has been made to provide a spectrum of the possible alternatives with some analysis of their pros and cons. Although it is recognized that local circumstances have a strong influence on defining the project organizational structure, improvements can be made based on experience gained somewhere else under similar circumstances.
Broad guidelines are provided in Part II for the activities that should be carried out in an irrigation scheme. Each of the chapters provides guidance, but they are not intended to be used as a manual. Each country or region must prepare its own operating manuals in the light of its specific circumstances.
During the long preparation of the publication, the author was exposed to a certain amount of experience at first hand and also had the opportunity to read many unpublished papers and reports. He received generous help from many professional people and institutions. It would be impossible to thank them individually without risking regrettable omissions, but the opportunity is taken here to thank them all.
Special thanks are due to Mr. A. Bottrall, Organization and Management Specialist, Overseas Development Institute, London, for his considerable contributions to Chapters 2 and 4, and subsequent reviews. The research work and fruitful cooperation with Mr. G.O. Uittenbogaard, Associate Expert, Irrigation Engineer, should also be acknowledged.
Finally, the author wishes to thank Ms. H. Tonkin for her commendable and dedicated work in editing the publication, and Ms. H. Smith Redfern and Ms. C. Tomalino Ricco for typing the publication.
<section>2</section>
Abbreviations
FSDC
Farm Systems Development Corporation
IA
Irrigation Association
IAS
Irrigation Assistance Service
IMS
Irrigation Management Service, USA
MPIS
Multi-purpose Public Irrigation Schemes
O&M
Operation and Maintenance
PIM
Programming and Implementation Management
PIS
Public Irrigation Scheme
PLAMEPA
Plan de Mejoriamiento Parcelario, Mexico (On-farm Improvement Plan of Mexico)
SAM
Sistema Alimentario Mexicano
SARH
Secretaría de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos, Mexico
T&V
Training and Visit (system of extension)
<section>3</section>
Introduction
Rapid increases in the world's population have made the efficient use of irrigation water vitally important, particularly in poorer countries, where the greatest potential for increasing food production and rural incomes is often to be found in irrigated areas. It has therefore become a matter of serious concern in recent years that, despite their very high costs, the performance of many irrigation schemes has fallen far short of expectations.
It is becoming increasingly recognized that poor performance is not only a consequence of technical deficiencies in the design of irrigation systems (though this is also sometimes an important factor), but that many of the problems stem from weaknesses in the organization and management of the scheme. The measures most commonly favoured as a means of remedying these problems have often been incomplete, largely because issues of organization and management have not been analysed in a detailed and systematic manner. There has been a tendency to examine problems of water management at two levels: the very highest level - the national administration of water resources, river basin management; and the very lowest level - water management within individual farms and under conditions of small farm agriculture. The management of irrigation at the project level has, however, received scant attention.
It is important to have a rational overall framework for water administration which is consistent with the promotion of national objectives and policies. However, the development of such a framework may often entail major reorganization at the ministerial level, and this can take a long time to implement. It cannot be assumed that the most important micro-problems can be solved by concentrating attention exclusively on improving farmers' water management capabilities at the field and watercourse^1 levels. Support for such an assumption is sometimes sought by reference to the fact that technical irrigation efficiencies tend to be much lower at the watercourse and farm levels than in the main water delivery system. This, however, ignores the numerous reasons which may have contributed to these low efficiencies, including weaknesses in management of the main system. Only a comprehensive analysis of all the factors that may be contributing to poor performance at the lower levels
of the system can indicate the correct mixture of remedies required, in the correct sequence. In other words, organization and management at the project level needs to be fully reviewed, as well as constraints at the farmers' level.
^1 The term 'watercourse' meaning a tertiary canal is predominantly used in the Indian subcontinent.
The purpose of this paper is to help correct some of the imbalances commonly found in current thinking about irrigation organization and management by focussing on the provision of services at the project level. It aims to demonstrate to planners (whether they are concerned with new projects or older projects requiring improvement) the importance of an appropriate organizational structure, the application of suitable management methods and the provision of technically adequate services as factors determinant of good project performance. It also indicates, often in considerable detail, the guidelines to be followed in the course of any evaluation and/or planning exercise.
The focus on the project level is not meant to imply that improvement at the farm and watercourse levels is necessarily a less important issue. The need for farmers to be provided with effective irrigation assistance and extension services is strongly emphasized in the paper and, wherever justified, such services should be an integral part of water management organizations. There are, however, important implications on the sequence of action which can only be clearly understood if management problems at the field and watercourse levels are examined in the broader context of project management as a whole. For example, many recent studies of irrigation projects have indicated that (for various reasons, some of them connected with the technical skills of operating staff, some with social factors) main system water distribution is frequently very unsatisfactory. Where this is the case, it follows that proposals to improve water management practices at the field and watercourse
levels, in the absence of simultaneous or prior measures to improve practices or the irrigation system at the project level, will lead to disappointing results.
Water distribution is clearly of central importance in any irrigation project, but many other aspects of project organization and management also have a profound influence on performance. These include the project's organizational structure, its overall direction and coordination, and the provision of other services such as operation, maintenance, irrigation assistance to farmers, finance and administration.
Considerable emphasis has been placed on the establishment of a suitable organizational structure because in many instances poor performance of irrigation schemes is due to inappropriate organizational structures. Unsuitable organizations can be found in countries with little experience in irrigation, and sometimes organizational structures are tried out on the basis that they were successful somewhere else. Such structures are also found in countries with a long tradition of irrigation where obsolete water laws limit the planners' possibilities to introduce more dynamic or more suitable organizational forms. The paper provides some general criteria and guidelines to help planners to identify a suitable organization. Specific guidelines cannot be given since local conditions will bear strongly on decisions regarding the structure of the organizations.
Technical activities related to operation, maintenance, irrigation assistance to farmers, administration and finance are covered in the paper in considerable detail. Organizational aspects related to the management of these services, such as manpower requirements and possible alternatives for the organization of the technical services, are discussed as well. Therefore the paper should also be of interest to the technical and administrative staff engaged in these functions, and their observations on the text would be highly appreciated.
The gathering of data to provide some standards for manpower needs and the use of machinery has been a long and difficult process since data often differ greatly due to wide variations in local circumstances. The standards provided are reasonable averages of the most consistent data that could be obtained through personal experiences and communications. Nevertheless, they should be taken as orientations which must be tested and verified locally before project implementation. There is still considerable scope for detailed research in this field at country level, and for different agro-climatic regions.
There is a great need to train professionals and medium level technicians in matters related to organization and management. Unfortunately, with very few exceptions, the subject is largely neglected in the curricula of universities and postgraduate courses. The present paper, since it deals with the subject in a rather comprehensive manner, should be useful to introduce the subject to students. In order to introduce the paper to a wider audience, efforts have been made to reduce the use of mathematical formulae or detailed technical discussions in the main text. For those interested in the detailed discussions of some of the technical issues the annexes and references provide further information.
<section>4</section>
1. Goals and irrigation organizational structures
1.1 Associations, institutions and organizations
1.2 Goals, objectives and targets
1.3 The organizational hierarchy of goals
1.4 Main types of organizational structures
1.5 Segregated organizational structures
1.6 Integrated organizational structures
The theory of goals has become a useful tool in water resources planning. Some of the ideas developed are used here to visualize interrelationships that can occur within the organizational framework of an irrigation scheme. Some terminological distinctions appear necessary before initiating the exercise.
1.1 Associations, institutions and organizations
When individuals establish agreements among themselves to achieve a common goal, an association is born. One or several groups of individuals is then vested with the responsibility for implementing the agreements. These groups are the executive bodies of the founded association.
While the term "association" is linked to the desire of a group of individuals to act in common, the term institution originates generally from the desire of the government to achieve a certain goal. In many instances the government delegates authority to a group of individuals with the responsibility of achieving this goal. The way in which this group of individuals organize themselves to pursue the goal constitutes the new institution.
Though the above illustrates some distinctions between the terms "institution" and "association", the difference is far from clear. Some authors, such as Hutchins (1952), use the term "institution" for any kind of social organization. However, in the present paper the term "institution" is used mainly in relation to government concerns, and "association" in connection with farmers' groups.
The term organization is perhaps the most complex of all and is used with a variety of meanings. It is used here in a generic sense as the design of any kind of social arrangements between individuals - regardless of whether they are farmers or government officials - to achieve a goal or set of goals. Therefore the term is used recurrently in this text to define any kind of association, institution or possible combination of these.
1.2 Goals, objectives and targets
Goals are defined as positive attributes or characteristics which individuals or groups of individuals strive to achieve. The term is therefore used for attributes of a very general nature which are beyond precise definition as, for example, promotion of social welfare, maintenance of security, environmental enhancement. They are human aspirations held by individuals or societies sufficiently broad and multifaceted to ensure unanimity as to their appropriateness but perhaps there is disagreement as to how they are explicitly defined.
The achievement of a goal implies the realization of other goals, which in turn can only be achieved by surmounting others of lower rank. Thus, in a structural sense, goals can be arranged in an order of hierarchy where a higher position conveys a greater generality. Some authors differentiate between "ultimate aims" and "goals" by saying that ultimate aims are goals of greater universality. The distinction appears rather arbitrary and the term goal is preferred in the text.
In a strict sense, an objective is a goal of lower rank in the hierarchy of goals. This is why both terms are frequently used interchangeably in water resources literature. However, objectives, contrary to goals, connote a more specific relationship to a particular policy, programme or project, such as building a dam, appropriate use of water, etc.
Targets are quantified objectives. The establishment of targets implies a formal commitment to reach a clearly specified objective and should be preferred, where possible, to objectives. In establishing a target it is not only important to know what is to be reached but also the starting point.
1.3 The organizational hierarchy of goals
Statements such as "betterment of farmers' welfare" are indisputable goals but are operationally meaningless. Thus there is a need to translate this human aspiration into more tangible objectives, which in turn can be converted into measurable targets.
The division of the goal "betterment of farmers' welfare" into other subgoals is subject to many considerations of a socio-political nature. For the purpose of the model developed here the traditional idea that farmers' welfare has its origin in the following two subgoals has been adopted:
- a higher income level
- improvement of social facilities (education, sanitation, recreation, housing, etc.).
For the purpose of the present chapter the way in which the main goal has been subdivided is not so important as the fact that it has to be subdivided into more explicit objectives. In fact one of the tasks of the planner would be to identify the relative importance of these goals in increasing farmers' welfare. For instance, the improvement of housing facilities may be highly relevant in continental climates where the climate is rigorous, but this is certainly not the case where a tropical climate imposes less heavy requirements on the housing facilities.
In theory, the higher income level derives from an increase in agricultural production sold at remunerative and relatively constant prices.
Greater production is only possible when water, other inputs and resources are available at the correct time and are all used in an appropriate way.
In summary, the improvement of the farmers' welfare can be subdivided into goals of minor order indicated in Figure 1. The most important consequence of the diagram is that the objectives at different levels are hierarchically dependent and no single objective at a superior level can be fully reached without achieving those at the immediately lower level. An example well known to farmers is that the higher income necessitates an increase in production but greater production is not always a guarantee of greater income.
The figure illustrates that there are four main goals, which are classified from the low to high level:
- appropriate use of water
- appropriate use of other agricultural inputs
- remunerative selling of agricultural produce
- improvement of social facilities
for which it may be necessary to provide some kind of institutional support if the final goal is to be achieved. One can reasonably assume that the remaining goals, such as greater agricultural production, greater income and betterment of the farmers' welfare will be automatically reached if the others are achieved.
Fig. 1 The organizational hierarchy of irrigation schemes
Indeed, the achievement of these four goals implies the existence of certain prerequisities such as 'know-how' by the farmers and the availability of capital. Should these prerequisites not exist, the corresponding institutional support will have to be provided in terms of extension, research and credit.
1.4 Main types of organizational structures
The foregoing ranking of goals indicates that there are two main approaches to achieve a given goal:
A. The Segregated Approach: This approach assumes that the final goal selected - betterment of the farmers' welfare, the increase of production or any other - can be reached by the interaction of individual organizations having as main objectives some of those illustrated in Figure 1, i.e. appropriate use of water, appropriate use of other agricultural inputs, remunerative selling, etc. Thus the organizational structure of the project is made up of a number of organizations acting independently but in a coordinated manner. This is called a "Segregated Organizational Structure".
B. The Integrated Approach: On the contrary, this approach assumes that the final goal can only be achieved by an organization having different departments or sections whose tasks are the achievement of the independent objectives formerly mentioned. This is called an "Integrated Organizational Structure".
In fact, these two approaches represent two different philosophies. The segregated approach implies the existence of dynamic social groups capable of developing their own organizations according to their needs and the organization develops from the bottom to the top. The second approach recognizes that, in the absence of such groups, it is necessary to have a centralized management providing for the needs of the individuals, and the organization develops from the top to the bottom.
1.5 Segregated organizational structures
As stated earlier, a segregated organizational structure is made up of a number of units acting independently, but in a coordinated manner, to achieve the final goal of the betterment of the farmers' welfare. In other words, there is one organization that provides for the appropriate use of water, another, or several, for the appropriate use of other inputs, and others for the remunerative selling of the produce, etc. Figure 2 illustrates a typical segregated organizational structure. Although this appears a highly desirable approach since it allows the development of each organization according to the specific needs, experience shows that all too frequently the establishment of the organizations related to inputs other than water never materializes. The reason for this is that water is needed by every farmer and the corresponding organization is established in one way or another as soon as water becomes available; however, the need for the other organizations (marketing,
cooperatives, etc.) is felt in so many different ways by the individual farmers that the sheer diversity results in the fact that they are not established. This, indeed, handicaps the achievement of the final goal. In order to get a segregated organizational structure working properly, it is necessary to motivate and promote the formation of the organizations that provide the other needed supporting services, and this often has to be done by the government.
The characteristics of the organizations needed to achieve an appropriate use of water will be described later in the text. Other organizations, such as cooperatives for different purposes: marketing, machinery, production, savings, social organizations, etc., will not be dealt with since they go beyond the scope of this publication and have already been described and studied by many other authors.
Fig. 2 Typical segregated organizational structure
Fig. 3 Typical integrated organizational structure
1.6 Integrated organizational structures
Integrated organizational structures are those where the final goal is achieved through the interaction of several departments or organizational units, each one aiming at lower goals, all connected through a clear line of command (Figure 3). These organizational structures are frequently referred to as "project authorities" or "project organizations", since they deal with most of the socio-economic issues of an irrigation project in an integral manner.
An organization aiming at covering all the many aspects of irrigated crop production, marketing and socio-economic factors must have a very complex structure to cover all the different situations. Therefore the first, and perhaps, most important, condition for the establishment of these organizations is a certain degree of homogeneity in the socio-economic conditions of the farmers. This is the main reason why this type of organization is mostly found in settlement projects, state farms, state cooperatives, and suchlike. Otherwise the complexity of the administration is such that the chances for failure are too high to be taken.
Integrated organizational structures are useful to overcome difficulties in coordination at national level. For instance, it is frequently mentioned in project evaluations that the credit system through normal banking' institutions only reaches a minority of the irrigators, due to lack of sufficient coordination between the banking institutions and the irrigation projects. To remedy this, in some settlement projects, the organization provides the farmer with all the necessary inputs on a credit basis and at the end of the harvest all the credited inputs are subtracted from the total income and the rest returned to the farmers. Such measures are indeed a guarantee that all irrigators enjoy equal opportunities, as far as credit is concerned. The same can be said about other necessary services such as extension, applied research, etc. However, because the establishment of integrated organizational structures may duplicate the functions undertaken by existing institutions,
special care should be taken to analyse the potential risks of overlapping of any functions and activities.
Integrated organizational structures may be a good way to solve problems of coordination at the national level, but in order to be able to do so they must be well-organized and equipped with competent technical staff and sufficient financial means to undertake their many responsibilities successfully. This implies firstly that there must be a central/national institution capable of procuring the technical and financial support necessary at the project level and, secondly, that the government must be willing to delegate a considerable amount of authority and autonomy to the individual project authorities. Otherwise there will be permanent conflict between the project authority and the departments of the national institutions dealing with credit, research, extension, etc.
<section>5</section>
2. Planning the project organization
2.1 Organizational structure at the project level
2.2 Organizational structure at the small group level
2.3 Organization at the government level
The success of an organization depends partly on its structure (the way in which tasks and responsibilities are formally allocated among its members) and partly on its management process (the way in which decisions are taken within the existing structure). This chapter and the next are concerned with questions of organizational structure. The management process will be considered in Chapter 4.
In the planning of an irrigation organization the most important questions about structure arise at the project level itself and also - particularly in small-farmer agriculture - at the level of the small local group.^1 In each case, the choice of an appropriate structure will depend on a large number of factors specific to the particular objectives and context of the organization concerned. In other words, there is no single "ideal" structure which is best for all organizations in all circumstances. The principal factor affecting choice of structure at the project level will be discussed first and then those affecting choice at the small local group level.
^1 The expression "small local group" is used here to designate those groups of farmers (informal associations) which are formed on the basis of the watercourses and are characteristic of many irrigation projects in the Far East and Asia.
2.1 Organizational structure at the project level
2.1.1 The organization of water management activities
2.1.2 The distribution of responsibility
Organizational structure has a horizontal and a vertical dimension. The horizontal dimension is concerned with the way in which the various activities essential to the achievement of an organization's objectives can best be differentiated (in accordance with the specialist skills required for each activity) and then coordinated in order to produce the necessary unity of effort among the resulting specialist units. The vertical dimension is concerned with the way in which responsibilities are distributed among members working at different levels of the organization and its component units, from the project to the small group level. We will deal first with horizontal dimension and later with the vertical dimension.
i. Large projects: alternative forms and functions
Two of the most "important factors affecting the choice of an appropriate form of horizontal organization at the project level are the size of the project area and its level of economic development. Other important factors include the objectives of government and the character of existing institutions in the area concerned.
Large projects (usually greater than 200 ha and/or more than 500 farm units) can be defined as projects which require a substantial professional staff to manage them. A survey of existing large project organizations would show that all of them concern themselves with certain central water management activities. These activities include water distribution and system maintenance (always); assessment and collection of water charges or similar fees and taxes (nearly always); and assistance and extension to farmers on water management at the local level (sometimes). Certain general management services - finance, personnel, planning and monitoring - are also provided.
However, many irrigation organizations also embrace other sets of activities: agricultural services (agricultural extension, possibly with research support); commercial services (input supplies, credit, marketing); and basic infrastructure and social services (housing, roads, schools, health services, etc.).
The case for including commercial services within the project organization is usually very strong in new settlement schemes. It is also very important that, on new projects in already settled areas, the project management should ensure satisfactory provision of commercial services. If other existing agencies in the area are poorly developed, the project should be invested with the responsibility for these services, at least initially until the other agencies acquire greater strength. The provision of adequate marketing facilities is likely to be particularly needed in many new projects, because the introduction of irrigation will create a potential for cultivating crops which have previously been unknown in the area; if farmers lack reliable marketing outlets for these crops they will not be prepared to take the risks of adopting them.
In certain types of project (usually settlement projects) the government may have to pay particular attention to making commercial services an integral, indeed central, part of the project organization. The key to these "integrated management" schemes is the project management's ability to control a single-channel marketing outlet. Such an organizational pattern is usually feasible only when the project has been established for the primary purpose of producing high-value cash crops, often for export. The farmers' obligation to sell their produce through the project organization makes it possible for the management to deduct a sufficient amount from the farmers' final payment to cover the cost of the other services it provides - water distribution, agricultural extension, credit, input supplies, in some cases even mechanized land preparation - and management's direct control over these activities can be used to ensure greater timeliness of throughput as well as quantity and
quality of production.
Where conditions for an "integrated management" approach do not exist, i.e. in areas where farmers are allowed a relatively free choice as to the crops they cultivate, the reasons for wishing to include commercial services as one of the continuing activities of project management are much less compelling. The establishment of single-channel control is extremely difficult in conditions of multichoice cropping, especially if food crops predominate. Over time, as farmers become increasingly familiar with irrigated agriculture and alternative commercial service institutions develop in response to the new production patterns, the need for the project organization to concern itself directly with commercial services will decline.. This does not mean that it can afford to abandon its responsibilities in this area altogether. To give one example, it is an important function of irrigation management at all stages of small-farmer development to ensure the timely supply of other inputs
besides water. However, once other specialist agencies are in a position to take direct responsibility for such services, the best results may be achieved through good coordination between them and the project organization.
The inclusion of responsibility for basic infrastructure, social services and commercial services within the irrigation organization (in addition to water management and agricultural services) is usually necessary where the area to be irrigated has hitherto been little developed and there are no other institutions in the area capable of performing these tasks satisfactorily.
The project organization must almost inevitably take direct responsibility for providing the necessary infrastructure and social services on new settlement schemes. In the case of projects whose purpose is to supply irrigation water to already settled areas, there will usually be less need for this. There may well be a need for the project management to participate in decisions concerning infrastructural development (particularly roads) but it should often be possible for direct responsibility for planning and implementation in these fields to be left to other agencies which are already in existence.
This raises the question as to when water management and agricultural extension activities should be combined within one organization and when a specialized organization should be established for water management activities alone, with agricultural extension and all other service activities being performed by separate agencies.
Again, this is partly a question of the level of economic development of the area concerned and of the farmers' experience with irrigated agriculture. Where the farmers' level of education and technical knowledge is low, there are usually considerable advantages in combining agricultural extension and water management activities within the same project organization. There are additional arguments in favour of a combined approach in the case of countries where there has traditionally been a very sharp division of responsibilities between the Department of Irrigation and Public Works, usually headed by civil engineers, and the Department of Agriculture. Very often this divided pattern of organization has had most unsatisfactory results. One of the principal reasons is that the civil engineers are experts in design and construction work, but have no specialist training in irrigation management, which requires a detailed understanding of agricultural processes and the farming
community. Moreover, the agriculturalists, whose department is often poorly endowed with resources and has to cover both rainfed and irrigated areas, are often very short of specialist expertise in irrigated agriculture, especially water management extension.
For these and other reasons, several governments of countries with previous experience of a divided administration are showing an increasing tendency to favour an integrated project authority with direct responsibility for coordinating both water management and agricultural activities. Countries in which this unified approach has recently prevailed include India (The Command Area Development Programme), the Philippines (Upper Pampanga and other major irrigation projects), Malaysia (Muda and Kemsuku projects), the Irrigation Districts of Mexico, El Salvador and others.
The need for a combined organization is much less strong where farmers already have a long experience of irrigated agriculture, the agricultural extension service is of a high calibre, and the officials in charge of water distribution are specialists in irrigation and are well-versed in agricultural matters. Here there are often advantages in having one organization exclusively concerned with water management activities. The degree of coordination within the project organization is reduced and one of the possible risks of bringing agriculture into a command area structure - the comparative neglect of rainfed areas - is reduced.
Examples of successful organizations of this type are the Irrigation Associations of Taiwan Province (Republic of China) where responsibility for agricultural extension is vested in Farmers' Associations, which also have credit, input supply and marketing functions, the Irrigation Associations of Spain, and the "Asociaciones de Canaleros", Chile. Where specialized water management organizations are adopted, close coordination with agricultural agencies is clearly essential. It is also desirable that the offices from which they operate at the local level should be at the same place and that, where farmer groups are being employed as a point of contact, they should use the same groups.
ii. Medium-sized and small projects
Medium-sized projects may be defined as those which are too small to allow consideration of unified or multipurpose project agencies (owing to their relatively high administrative costs) but which nevertheless require a substantial input of professional staff to operate and maintain them. In general, a specialized water management organization is likely to be most feasible on medium-sized projects. However, there may be other possibilities in areas where there are numerous medium-sized or relatively small, discontinuous irrigated commands interspaced with rainfed land. Here the choice appears to lie between a specialized water management agency strongly linked to agriculture through a coordinating committee and the more radical alternative of an area-based pattern of administration in which the units of management would be defined not on the basis of irrigation commands but on complete watershed and catchment areas.
Small projects are definable as those in which official staff are either not required or not available to operate and maintain the main water delivery system, except perhaps for the headworks. In many parts of the world, particularly in hill-stream areas, small indigenous systems can be found, i.e. ones constructed by the farmers themselves. These continue to be communally managed by the farmers with little or no external government assistance. They are typically in the 50-200 ha size range, with between 40 and 100 members and depend on simple technology (e.g. simple diversion weirs of boulders or brushwood). Their internal organization is often impressive, the most remarkable being the Balinese subaks, which have memberships of up to 700 and very complex rules and methods of water distribution. In indigenous systems the farmers themselves are entirely responsible for the activities of water distribution, repairs and maintenance and financing, though they are of course
dependent on outside support for extension advice and input supplies. Group members are often willing to accept stringent discipline from their selected leaders, who are accountable to them.
Despite their often excellent organizational features, there is usually considerable scope for improving the performance of most indigenous schemes at relatively little cost, not only through better agricultural extension but through advice and assistance on various aspects of system design. For example, major benefits can frequently be obtained from installing permanent diversion structures in place of traditional temporary weirs, particularly in areas of heavy seasonal rainfall where valuable farming time tends to be lost at the end of each rainy season on repair and reconstruction work. However, intervention by government in the affairs of indigenous organizations should always be done with caution to avoid disrupting the relationships from which the traditional groups have derived their organizational strength. Unfortunately, it has been a common experience that when governments have attempted to influence the development of indigenous systems, the old groupings have
tended to disintegrate, because they lose many of their old responsibilities and are given no new ones in their place.
Small schemes which have been constructed by government usually lack the strong internal organization which is characteristic of the indigenous systems and often perform very poorly as a result. The main reason appears to be that after construction, operational responsibility is handed over almost immediately to the farmers without sufficient time being devoted to technical or management training. As in the case of indigenous systems, service support is often inadequate; when new small schemes are to be constructed it is essential that the planners should obtain a good prior understanding of the capabilities and needs of the farmers in the areas concerned, and in the initial stages of implementation emphasis should be given to group formation and training.^1 Thought also needs to be given to the most effective way of organizing supporting services for small irrigation systems of all kinds.
^1 Most of the points made with regard to the formation of groups within larger projects also apply here (see section 2.2).
It appears to be generally true that outside the larger command areas, resources for the development and support of irrigated agriculture - both financial and personnel - tend to be spread particularly thinly. An obvious explanation for this is that it is more difficult to organize services to a large number of scattered small irrigation schemes than to a single large one. Nevertheless, it seems probable that in many cases very high returns could be obtained from improving administrative support to these small schemes. An increase in the number of staff may often be required for this purpose and questions of organizational structure will also need to be considered. In many cases, the provision of specialist advice on operation and maintenance may best be provided through a rural engineering service, with junior field staff based at local offices of Farmers' Service Centres offering a range of other services (agricultural extension, credit, inputs, etc.). They would need to
be in regular contact with senior engineers for technical advice and support. Much of their work should be concerned with low-cost improvements in design and with the development of improved water distribution procedures. It is extremely important in the latter case that a clear division of responsibility be established, with the farmers' organization being encouraged to undertake all functions except those that require specialist knowledge.
The points made here apply equally to small surface schemes and to those groundwater schemes which are not integrated into a large surface irrigation system. In the case of groundwater development, the choice of technology is particularly important with regard to the question of appropriate group size. It has often been found that large tubewells, though expected to be more efficient than smaller wells on the basis of purely technical and economic calculations, have in fact proved much less efficient owing to problems associated with their management. Many of these problems have arisen because the command area of the tubewells is too large and includes too many farm units. Apart from the physical difficulties of conveying water over much larger distances than would be necessary with a greater number of smaller wells, there are many more grounds for social conflict and it is much more difficult to establish communal responsibility for high standards of operation and
maintenance.
With larger tubewells the choice between operation by a publicly-owned operator and a supervised farmers' group may be difficult to make. Unless subjected to close management control, public tubewell operators have often taken advantage of their position of local monopoly to exploit the farmers who are dependent on the water from their wells; but group operation may also cause problems, particularly if the numbers involved are large. Essential functions of government, irrespective of patterns of ownership and operation, are the organization of comprehensive studies and surveys in advance of any major groundwater development, continuous monitoring of groundwater conditions as extraction proceeds, and the imposition of controls over extraction rates where necessary. Where groundwater is developed privately, it will be particularly important to provide credit and other supporting services, although it may be possible eventually to transfer many of these service functions to the
private sector as new businesses are set up to undertake repair and construction work.
2.1.1 The organization of water management activities
Once a decision has been reached on the most appropriate form of horizontal organization at the project level, there are further questions to be considered regarding the pattern on which specialist units should be set up within the organization. In particular, there are two important questions concerning the division of responsibilities for water management. The first is whether water distribution and maintenance work should be undertaken by the same unit or two different ones; and the second is whether there should be an additional unit with specific responsibilities for assisting farmers in matters related to the water management at the watercourse or small group level, which is discussed further on in the text.
With regard to the first question, there are strong grounds for arguing that, except on very small projects where the two functions may have to be combined, there should be separate units for water distribution and maintenance, each with its own specialist cadre. The reason for this is that the skills required in each case are very different. Water distribution requires detailed knowledge of agricultural processes, whereas maintenance work is best carried out by civil engineers in the case of canal and drainage systems and by mechanical engineers in the case of wells and low-lift pumps. If functions are to be differentiated on the basis of specialization of skills, this would imply that canal systems should have two units - one for operation and one for maintenance - and systems with additional groundwater or pumped supplies three units: (i) canal and well operation (for conjunctive use of surface and groundwater); (ii) canal and drainage maintenance; and (iii) well and pump
maintenance. This pattern, which is used by the Irrigation Associations in Taiwan Province (Republic of China), has obvious merits over the following division of responsibilities which is not uncommon elsewhere: (i) canal operation and maintenance; (ii) well/pump operation and maintenance; and (iii) drainage operation and maintenance.
An alternative solution would be to give water distribution specialists responsibility for maintenance as well. The feasibility of such a solution would depend on the scope and complexity of the maintenance function of the project concerned. On some projects, for example, mechanical maintenance is a complex and time-consuming activity and requires the undivided attention of a specialist cadre; on others, maintenance work may include a substantial amount of minor design and construction work, in which case the full-time attention of a separate cadre is again required. In all cases, the important principle to be observed is that water distribution should always be done by people with appropriate specialist training, and the quality of their work should not be impaired by overloading them with excessively heavy maintenance responsibilities. The qualifications and training required by water distribution and maintenance staff are described in Chapters 5 and 6.
2.1.2 The distribution of responsibility
i. Officials and farmers
Subject to certain limitations, it is generally desirable in the administration of any kind of agricultural project or programme that as much responsibility as possible should be delegated by government from its own officials to the farmers themselves. This is not only because there are obvious advantages to government if some administrative responsibilities can be transferred from officials to farmers, but also because in agriculture there are nearly always significant differences in physical conditions and farmers' needs between one small locality and another. The quality of executive decisions is therefore likely to be substantially improved if farmers have an effective means of informing officials about their local circumstances and discussing with them alternative solutions to their problems. There is also the point, particularly important in the case of rural communities in the early stages of social and economic transformation, that one of the long-term objectives of
rural development - the strengthening of the position and status of poorer and smaller farmers - will be enhanced by their active participation in the management of their own development process.
There are, however, limits to the amount of responsibility that can profitably be delegated to the farmers in any particular set of circumstances (not only in terms of benefits to government but also of benefits to the farmers themselves). The most important limiting factor is the farmers' level of education and the length of their experience of irrigated agriculture. Where their level of education and experience is low, the form of official-farmer relationship likely to produce the best results is one involving a high degree of supervision and support and a relatively low degree of delegation. However, as the farmers' experience and management capabilities increase over time, increasing responsibilities can be delegated to them and the need for the officials to act as educators and supervisors is correspondingly reduced.
Three other factors place an upper limit on the extent to which it is feasible for farmers to participate in irrigation management decisions. The first is the technical complexity of the water distribution activity. The second is the need on all irrigation systems except the very smallest for an executive agency which can implement all water distribution decisions impartially and act as an arbiter in the case of major water disputes between groups of farmers. The combined effect of these two factors is that the farmers' responsibilities with regard to water distribution (whatever the level of their management capabilities) are restricted to participating in strategic decisions about planned patterns of cropping and water scheduling before each major crop season, monitoring the pattern of scheduling actually adopted by the officials within each crop season, and taking direct responsibility for operation and maintenance decisions below the watercourse outlet. The officials
must retain responsibility for the execution of day-to-day operations of the main distribution system and the settlement of major water disputes above the watercourse outlet.
The final limiting factor is the degree to which the project is financially dependent on government funds. Because of their very high capital costs, there are few irrigation projects in any part of the world to which government has not been a net financial contributor. To the extent that it has contributed funds towards the capital and recurrent costs of a project, government clearly has a right to take part in decisions as to how they shall be spent. But at the same time, the greater the farmers' own financial contributions, whether their payments go into general government revenue or are partly or fully retained by the project organization, the greater their entitlement to a share in decisions about the project's programme of expenditure.
Certain types of projects tend to be subject to a relatively high degree of government control at all stages of their development owing to the nature of their objectives. For example, specialized cash-crop schemes (which are usually settlement schemes by origin) frequently make use of various measures which restrict farmers' freedom of choice for the purpose of standardizing the production process and stimulating increased output.
At the opposite end of the organizational spectrum to the specialized cash-crop settlement schemes in terms of their potential for decentralized management are the Irrigation Associations, which make formal provision for farmers' representative bodies at the project level and sometimes at various primary and secondary levels within the project. However, although IAs are intended to be highly democratic bodies, in the final stages of their development farmers require high levels of education and experience if they are to be capable of assuming the full responsibilities of self-management. It is therefore common practice in the early years of an IA for officials to be given very substantial responsibilities with regard to management decisions and farmers' training.
ii. Within the project organization
Within each unit of the project organization, the most appropriate distribution of responsibilities among different levels of staff will depend largely on three sets of factors:
- the nature of the activity or activities with which each unit is chiefly concerned;
- the technology used to perform the activity, whose appropriateness will depend in turn on the relative scarcity of capital and labour;
the availability of skills (management skills, technical skills, skills in communication) at different levels of the agency.
The ways in which the nature and technology of different activities combine to affect the pattern of vertical organization required for them can be illustrated by the following examples:
a. In the case of any work concerned with farmer extension and training, the principal need will be for a large number of junior field staff with skills in communication. Their level of technical knowledge need not be high. A small number of higher-level specialists will however be needed to provide them with the necessary technical advice and knowledge.
b. The mixture of skills required for water distribution may vary considerably according to the technology of the water delivery system (number of control structures; whether manually or automatically operated) and the complexity of the water distribution method: simple proportional distribution methods require less computing skill at all levels and less communication skill at the lower levels than an 'on-demand' method or a method which calls for differential allocations of water to areas with different designated cropping patterns. The greater the availability of relatively unskilled manpower, the more labour-intensive the technology should be.
c. Where the technology of the irrigation system is simple and labour abundant, the maintenance of civil works can be done by a large body of relatively unskilled labour, directed and supervised by a small number of technically skilled senior officials. Systems with more complex technologies, particularly those requiring a lot of mechanical maintenance (as in the case of tubewells), will have a greater need for qualified technicians at the lower and middle levels of management.
In the case of all these activities, good communications and transport can either enable fewer staff to achieve the same level of effectiveness or else increase the effectiveness of a given number of staff. The first of these is likely to be the more important objective where staff costs are high, the second where these are low.
With information about these three factors - the nature of each activity to be performed by the organization, the administrative manpower available, and the technology appropriate to that manpower - it should be possible for the planners of new irrigation projects to build up a detailed picture of the organizational structure required. Chapters 5,6, 7 and 8 provide information regarding manpower and machinery requirements for each main activity. A very important point to note here is that the availability of manpower and skills should be one of the principal determinants of choice of technology and not vice versa. The implication of this is that investigations into the organization and management aspects of irrigation projects should begin at an early stage in the planning process and not, as so often, at the end of the process (if they are carried out at all).
Once a basic structure has been established, there is still the question as to how much responsibility should be delegated from more senior to more junior staff within that structure. This will depend on the degree of management skill attained by staff at each level. As in the case of official-farmer relationships, the distribution of skills in the early stages of economic transformation is likely to favour an initial pattern of high supervision/low delegation. But with the passage of time, as junior staff increase in experience, increasing responsibilities can be delegated to them. This process of change can be greatly assisted by appropriate in-service training of junior staff, which should be combined with promotion policies stimulating their motivation to perform well.^1 The adoption of policies that will help to promote as rapid a transfer of responsibilities as possible to lower levels of the administration is particularly important in those countries where higher
level agricultural managers are themselves in short supply; otherwise senior staff will be continually burdened with excessively heavy workloads.
^1 See Chapter 4.
2.2 Organizational structure at the small group level
There is a particular need to establish farmer groups at the local level where the number of small farm units is so high that it is impossible for each one to be provided with services such as agricultural extension. On large and medium-sized irrigation projects, this generally leads to the need for water users' groups to be formed for the purpose of organizing water distribution and maintenance work below the watercourse outlet. The project's organizers can hardly ever afford the staff which would be required for the direct management of numerous small channels and field outlets. Moreover, if well-trained, water users' groups are likely to be the best possible agencies for the purpose owing to their members' intimate knowledge of local conditions.
The need for a special unit within the project organization to educate farmers about watercourse operation and maintenance depends on the level of the farmers' previous experience of irrigated agriculture and the degree of social cohesion within the farming community. In small-farmer agriculture, there will almost always be a need for intensive extension work on watercourse management in the early stages of an irrigation project. This should have the dual purpose of educating farmers about the technical aspects of good operation and maintenance within the watercourse area for which they are communally responsible and also of fostering the development of small group institutions to which increasing responsibilities can be delegated over time. Initially, a separate cadre of field staff is likely to be required for the purpose, but as time passes and the farmers' capacity to manage their own watercourse affairs increases, it should be possible to transfer these extension and
supervisory responsibilites to the water distribution staff.
One point which must be strongly emphasized is that agricultural extension staff should on no account be asked to take on this work. Not only would this leave them less time for their principal work at the farm level which is of particularly vital importance in the early stage of irrigation development, but there are certain aspects of the work (involving the resolution of local conflicts over water and the imposition of discipline) which are incompatible with the agricultural extensionists' effective performance of their central role as the farmers' counsellor and friend.
However, the work of these special units is likely to be a far from easy task. Not only will individual farmers be unfamiliar with good water management practices but there may be little natural social cohesion among those whose land happens to fall within a particular watercourse command and who are therefore expected to cooperate with one another in a mutually advantageous way. Friction is particularly likely to occur in societies with religious differences and significant disparities in power between larger and smaller farmers, manifesting itself in refusals to share water equitably or to collaborate in watercourse maintenance. There is also almost always a potential conflict between the interest of head-reach and tail-reach farmers within the watercourse.
Under these circumstances group formation will often require much patient effort, backed by a capacity to use powerful sanctions against persistently uncooperative individuals or groups, and an essential condition for success is a reliable and predictable water distribution service to the watercourse outlet. However, once farmers have been persuaded of the long-term private benefits of collaborative action, at least two other major advantages can follow from the existence of effective water users' groups besides the primary one of improved watercourse management:
a. They can help to provide a point of contact for other services - agricultural extension, credit, input supplies - and may prove particularly valuable for this purpose in societies where larger village-level cooperative organizations have failed because of domination by large farmers.
b. They should also provide the best possible foundation on which to build a system of representative farmer participation in decision-making at the project level. Indeed, unless such local groups can be formed, it is unlikely in many societies that the farmers chosen to participate at the project level will be genuinely representative of the mass of farmer opinion. Local group formation is thus a key to a long-term process of social transformation within the project area.
Because of the great potential contribution of watercourse groups to improved project performance, the manner in which a project's watercourses are designed at the planning stage takes on added importance. It is generally agreed from observation of spontaneously formed farmer groups (including those formed for the purpose of managing small "indigenous" irrigation systems), that there will be the greatest chance of cooperative action and the least chance of major conflict or large farmer domination where the groups are very small - usually between 10 and 30 farmers.^1 This factor should therefore be very carefully considered by project planners. Decisions based entirely on topographical considerations and cost of survey are unlikely to be satisfactory. Questions also need to be asked about the number of farm units within each watercourse and the cohesiveness of the local society.^2 This is another example of the importance of basing technological decisions on social science
information and hence of the need to consider management issues early in the planning process.
^1 See literature references (Coward).
^2 Further questions also need to be asked on issues which affect water management practices at farm level (e.g. what is the rate of water flow which an individual farmer, with his existing technology, can most easily handle?).
2.3 Organization at the government level
A few words also need to be said about organizational structure at the national and provincial government levels, since this too can often have a very significant influence on an irrigation project's performance.
As far as horizontal relationships between departments are concerned, it is clearly desirable that collaboration between irrigation and agriculture be very close even if they are not in fact part of the same Ministry. This is particularly important for the purposes of achieving a balanced and integrated approach to project planning. Invaluable support can also be given to the improvement of management practices at the project level through a central research agency with responsibilities for directing and coordinating field experiments on crop water requirements, optimum irrigation intervals, etc., in different agro-climatic regions of the country. The results of these experiments can then be tested on each irrigation project and adapted to its own particular circumstances.
The nature of the vertical relationship between the higher level of government administration and project management is of great importance. If the project manager is to perform his function well it is essential that so long as his appointment is in the hands of government, very substantial authority and autonomy of decision-making should be delegated to him. At the later stages of a project's development the manager may automatically acquire greater autonomy if a policy is followed (as in many Irrigation Associations) of retaining the revenue from farmers' fees within the project agency itself. This process may eventually lead to the manager becoming an appointee of the farmers themselves, with government providing only a limited amount of supporting finance. In the absence of such a policy of devolution of powers to an Association or a project authority, however, the government must ensure that the project manager and his senior staff are in a position to act as relatively
independent managers, not simply as passive administrators of policies laid down for them at higher levels.
<section>6</section>
3. Main types of irrigation organizations
3.1 Integrated management organizations
3.2 Specialized water management organizations
3.3 Multipurpose water management organizations
This chapter aims to familiarize the reader with the most characteristic types of irrigation organizations. According to the principles delineated in Chapters 1 and 2, an attempt is made here to categorize the irrigation organizations. The criteria used are only one way of categorizing most of the existing irrigation organizations, while other authors use different criteria. The main criterion chosen to classify the organizations is whether the organizational structure covers all the development activities (water management, agricultural extension, applied research, supply of inputs, credit, marketing and basic infrastructure and social services), or a few of these activities, or only those related to water management. Within each of these categories a further distinction is made depending on the degree to which management is controlled by the farmers and/or the government. Figure 4 shows in summary form the main types of irrigation organizations, i.e.
- Integrated management organizations
- Specialized water management organizations
- Multipurpose water management organizations.
No attempt is made to cover all the organizational possibilities but to illustrate the salient features of the most characteristic ones. For greater details on the described organizations or information on other organizational possibilities, the references should be consulted.
3.1 Integrated management organizations
3.1.1 State farms
3.1.2 Irrigation settlement projects
3.1.3 Irrigation cooperatives
These organizations are characterized by an integrated organizational structure where all development activities are undertaken by specialized units which are all connected by a clear line of command and finally responsible to a single person (project manager) or committee.
As pointed out in Figure 4, there are several types of integrated management organizations depending on the degree of intervention of the government and the farmers in the management of the scheme. Where the organization is run by the farmer it usually adopts the shape of a Service Cooperative. Where the government officials fully control the organization there are two possibilities depending on the size of the production units:
- State Farms (large production units)
- Irrigation Settlement Projects (small production units)
Another distinctive feature of these cooperatives is that most of the farmers involved are relatively wealthy. This is almost a precondition because of the high cost of irrigation infrastructure. Although part of the needed funds can be obtained through loans, it is obvious that such credit must be backed by the strong payment capacity of the farmers.
The organization of an irrigation cooperative depends greatly on the kind of contributions made and the services needed by the members. The organizational structure is similar to that of the Irrigation Association which is described later in the text. The rules and regulations governing the activities of the cooperative are established within the framework of the national laws for cooperatives.
Fig. 4 Main types of irrigation organizations
A very distinctive feature of a cooperative is that it is established by the free will of its members and is only binding on them, while many irrigation organizations are established by a majority of the members and can be binding on the minority, who sometimes may not be members of the association.
3.1.1 State farms
State Farms are often established where the land is nationalized or where land reform processes have taken place.
The purpose of establishing a State Farm can be to maximize agricultural production or to gain experience on newly reclaimed lands for its later transfer to farmers as settlement projects. The first type is the most commonly found.
Much disappointment exists all over the world with the performance of State Farms. Since all the production inputs can be provided at their optimum level one would expect that State Farms would be able to achieve the highest production levels. However, it is often found that the production levels are higher in private farms and their operating costs are similar to those of the State Farms. There are even cases where State Farms operate at higher cost than settlement schemes.
The management of a large State Farm, with all the numerous and complex activities that it involves, is extremely difficult under the limitations usually imposed on public institutions. Late release of government funds for operating the farm, unavailability of inputs at the time needed, lack of involvement by the government officials in the potential benefits, and large bureaucracies, are some of the many reasons which often hamper the management of State Farms.
In order to maximize the productivity, there is a noticeable tendency to use highly capital intensive technology for the water distribution systems and machinery for the agricultural practices. This in turn means that the management of these farms must be highly technically qualified. Unfortunately such personnel are not abundant in developing countries and they are more attracted by positions in the main offices than by those in the field. Insufficient properly trained personnel is often a serious limitation for the development and operation of State Farms.
The organizational structure of State Farms is characterized by a number of units covering the main development and production activities and directly dependent on the Manager or Executive Director. An example is shown in Figure 5.
The question of whether the farms should be subdivided into several independent production units or grouped into a large central unit is often discussed. A convenient solution is to provide most of the services under a central unit with the exception of those related to the main agricultural inputs (water, fertilizer and machinery) which are normally integrated in farm production units. An organizational example for a Crop Production Department under such an approach is given in Figure 6.
The manpower and farm machinery requirements of the State Farms are determined by criteria of maximum efficiency. However, in practice the previously mentioned management problems lower the performance standards to values often below those encountered in less centralized organizations.
Fig. 5 Organizational chart of a State Farm (Kufra Production Project, Libya)
Fig. 6 Organization of a Crop Production Department in Production Units (State Farm)
3.1.2 Irrigation settlement projects
The most complex of the Integrated Management Organizations are the irrigation settlement projects, described here in more detail. Irrigation settlement projects aim at improving the economic and social welfare of landless people or poor farmers by providing them with irrigated land and agricultural production means.
The greatest difficulty in managing an irrigation settlement project successfully arises from the fact that most of the settlers have a low educational level, practically no financial resources and, occasionally, even no experience in agriculture. To upgrade them from their subsistence level to farmers living on commercial agriculture is a huge task, and one should not be surprised at the effort and time needed to achieve this.
The key to the success of a settlement project is that government officials must initially be responsible for and perform many of the tasks, only giving the farmers simple and straightforward tasks which they can carry out with their own means. As time goes by, it may be possible to transfer more and more of the tasks and responsibility to the farmer.
The question arises as to how to integrate or coordinate such a wide variety of services needed for agricultural production, and often under different ministries. The formation of a coordinating committee in charge of bringing together the responsibilities of the different institutions is, in theory, the easiest way. However, such an arrangement seldom works in developed countries and much less in developing countries where financial and organizational problems are greater. Therefore, the solution of a single integrated organization providing most of the social and technical services is normally preferred.
The choice of the alternative depends on the existence or absence of a national institution specifically designed to support and financially back-up the integrated organizations at the project level. Where such national institutions exist, an integrated structure generally functions better than a segregated one. In this connection, it should be noted that an integrated organization is most needed during the initial stages of a settlement project. Once settlers become more independent, because of the higher standards, many management responsibilities can be transferred to them or cancelled. This learning period lasts for many years - frequently 15 or 20 years - but can hardly be avoided.
For obvious reasons of complexity of the tasks to be undertaken and financial requirements these projects are managed by government officials and therefore can be considered as public institutions during the initial stage.
i. The structure
The organizational structure of settlement projects generally has the following main units:
a. The Manager's Office: This is the highest executive body of the scheme and frequently consists of the Manager himself and some advisory members. He is directly dependent on the national institution responsible for the management of all irrigation schemes in the country.
b. The executive units, which are generally:
- operation
- finance
- maintenance
- marketing
- training
- production
- administration
- social assistance
Figure 7 illustrates an organizational structure of this nature (the Mwea Irrigation Settlement Scheme).
ii. The development of a settlement project by stages
Settlement projects generally go through several identifiable phases, where the project organization has to adjust to the main tasks to be performed: (a) planning; (b) implementation; (c) transitional stage; and (d) full development.
However, the above phases only apply to settlement projects where the farmer may become the owner of the land at the end of the process. For those settlement projects where farmers are permanent tenants, there is little difference between phases (c) and (d).
a. The planning stage of a settlement project does not differ much from that of other irrigation projects, with the exception that some additional problems have to be considered and studied, such as (1) size and type of farm; (2) settlement villages with all their infrastructure; (3) communications; (4) workshop for maintenance of equipment; (5) stores; (6) regulations for the future land tenure; (7) organization. Most of them are treated in depth in the specialized literature. No particular organization is needed at this stage, since the planning of these projects is normally done by the government institutions and/or consulting firms.
b. The implementation stage is the period between the beginning of the construction work and its end. During this period the organization of the project is rather variable. Activities normally start with some of the implementation tasks, such as land development works, construction of on-farm structures, establishment of experimental plots, etc., moving gradually towards those tasks more intimately related to the management of the scheme.
This procedure is found appropriate since it allows the project authority to gain knowledge about the physical characteristics of the area and to anticipate some of the problems that may arise later.
Of particular importance during this stage is the selection of settlers, since the future success will depend largely on the farmers selected. The importance and magnitude of the services needed will also depend on the farmers selected. To evaluate their capabilities questionnaires can be utilized. In addition to an initial careful scrutiny, settlers can be subjected to probationary periods of up to 5 years. This practice has been widely adopted in Spain and has been found to be useful. It not only allows the management to evaluate the farmer thoroughly, but also the farmer himself may realize his capabilities of becoming a small "entrepreneur".
Settlement projects are frequently established in newly developed areas where uncertainty exists about their potential and the appropriate techniques. In such circumstances, a state farm is often established during this stage of implementation. After some years of operation, when the land potential has been fully developed, the state farm is converted into a settlement project. In this case, to avoid losing the experience of the staff working on the state farm, part of that staff should be retained in the management of the settlement project.
c. The transitional stage is the period between the completion of the public works and the full development stage. It often involves a long period of farmer training, but the nature of the training varies in accordance with the government's ultimate objectives with regard to the form of the project at the fully implemented stage. In certain projects, particularly those set up for the specific purpose of producing high-value cash or export crops, the government may aim to maintain an "integrated management system" for a long period. In that case, the emphasis of farmer training may be largely on improved agricultural techniques. Elsewhere the objective is likely to involve the devolution of increasing responsibility and freedom of choice to the farmers; and where the government's intention is to set up IAs, the transitional stage will be as much concerned with training farmers to organize themselves to undertake the major water management functions as with training them in
agricultural practices. '
In integrated management schemes, government retains control over a wide range of activities. In the Mwea scheme in Kenya, for example, the official project management has control over all the following areas, besides the initial selection of farmers and the enforcement of irrigation rules:
- land tenure (land is owned by the State; farmers' tenancies are renewable annually and subject to termination if their performance is deemed unsatisfactory);
- choice of crop (monocrop rice, which is sold through a single marketing channel controlled by the project management);
- timing of cultivation operations (official management organizes mechanized land preparation according to pre-planned schedules; irrigations to each field are organized by project staff, not by farmers).
In the first 10-15 years of its operation the Mwea scheme, which is an extreme example of a highly supervised project, has been very successful in terms of increased production and higher farmer incomes. However, experience elsewhere has tended to show that on projects where the mechanisms for centralized control are particularly powerful in the initial stages, there is a danger that their institutions fail to adapt to circumstances changing during a period of time, with consequent social and economic stagnation. Insecurity of land tenure becomes a particularly inhibiting factor, since farmers have no long-term interest in investing in their own land. A system common on many post land-reform projects, whereby farmers are allowed to purchase their land over a 20 or 30-year period, provides for a similar degree of management control in the initial stages but has the great advantage of allowing farmers to assume increasing responsibility for decisions at the farm and local
group levels.
Such a policy is followed in Spain, where new settlers are probationary tenants during the first 5 years of the transitional stage but are subsequently allowed access to a permanent title to their land if they satisfy the government authorities with regard to their standards of farming and irrigation. The period of preparing farmers for the full development phase, when they are supposed to take over the management of the scheme as an IA, can often take between 10 and 20 years.
d. The full development stage is the stage at which the potential of the area has been fully developed in technical as well as socio-economic terms. Where the purpose is to establish independent IAs, a gradual transfer of responsibility can be achieved either by geographical sectors - those more advanced and better organized will start and be followed over a period of time by subsequent ones - or by delegating functions over a period of time. Usually the geographical transfer gives better results.
Where government wishes to retain overall control of the management of the scheme but is not concerned with operating an integrated management system, the original organizational structure of the scheme will have to be modified. Many of the activities that were initially important may no longer need to be carried out by the project itself and can be left to other organizations, e.g. research, credit and possibly extension.
Fig. 7 Mwea Irrigation Settlement Organization Chart, 1972 (Chambers and Moris 1973)
3.1.3 Irrigation cooperatives
Many types of cooperatives exist but here reference is made to a particular type in which a group of farmers associate to develop a common irrigation system for their properties, and jointly farm the land. Such a type of cooperative occurs mostly among progressive farmers and is generally found in developed countries. It is often financially attractive to farmers because they enjoy the advantages (tax exemptions or reductions) applicable to any other cooperative.
3.2 Specialized water management organizations
3.2.1 Irrigation associations
3.2.2 Public irrigation schemes
3.2.3 Establishment of specialized water management organizations
3.2.4 Irrigation schemes with mixed control
A specialized water management organization can be broadly defined as a social organization aiming at an appropriate use of water for irrigation purposes among the farmers of a community. The term "appropriate" is used here to designate a timely and equitable distribution of the water. It is normally part of a segregated organizational structure as defined in Chapter 1.
The functions of specialized water management organizations are: the operation of the irrigation and drainage systems, the maintenance of the systems, and the assessment and collection of water charges. They are supported by certain general management services (finance, personnel, planning and monitoring).
Mention should also be made of the fact that some of the water management organizations are entitled to the use of water for purposes other than agriculture. This is the case in the USA irrigation districts, and those of Hungary. These purposes may include any of the following: hydropower generation, navigation, water supplies for towns, villages and industries. The question whether or not an irrigation scheme should limit its functions to the agricultural uses of water is somewhat controversial but, provided that irrigation remains the main use, there is no harm in undertaking some of the above mentioned functions. On the one hand, this helps the government administration to simplify its bureaucracy and, on the other, benefits the irrigation scheme with some extra income. Of course, such a system can only be established in conformity with the existing laws and institutions.
The degree of intervention by the government and the farmers in undertaking the functions described above indicates the main types of specialized water management organizations, which are:
i. Organizations mainly controlled by the farmers: There are many relevant examples of this type: the Irrigation Districts (USA), the Water Districts (USA), the Comunidades de Regantes (Spain), the Subak Irrigation Association (Indonesia), the Irrigation Associations of Afghanistan, the Asociaciones de Canalistas (Chile), etc. They are termed here as Associations of Irrigation Water Users or, more briefly, Irrigation Associations (IA).
ii. Organizations mainly controlled by government officials: These are also very numerous and are found in many countries (Spain, Turkey, Bolivia, Iraq, most of Ecuador and Kenya). They are denominated here as Public Irrigation Schemes (PIS).
iii. Organizations with mixed control by farmers and government officials: Schemes where the main irrigation system is managed by government officials while the tertiary canals are controlled by farmers' associations, are increasing in several Asian countries. They are designated as "Irrigation Schemes with Mixed Control".
Although countries tend to adopt policies favouring either (i) or (ii), it is not infrequent to find both types in the same country.
3.2.1 Irrigation associations
The most distinctive characteristic of Irrigation Associations (IA) is that they are organizations of the people, for the benefit of the people. However, even though government participation is excluded by their very nature, most of these associations would never have existed without the promotion and encouragement of governments.
i. The structure
From the organizational point of view an IA is made up of the following executive bodies:
a. The General Assembly composed of all the farmers of the association. It is the highest authority. Its main function is to select their representatives (Board of Directors) and to approve or disapprove the management plans.
b. The Board of Directors: This is the highest executive body. Its main function is to supervise and direct the execution of the work approved by the assembly and to prepare management plans annually.
c. The Manager's Office: Is directly responsible for the execution of the mandate giver by the Board of Directors and for day-to-day work.
d. The Executing Units: Are responsible for specific functions, such as operation, maintenance and administration.
e. The Irrigation Juries: Some of these associations - especially the traditional ones - have their own juries to punish faults against the set rules and regulations. The jury is generally selected from distinguished members of the Board.
Figure 8 illustrates the organization of an Irrigation Association in Spain, which corresponds largely with the above description.
Fig. 8 Organization of a "Comunidad de Regantes" (Spain)
ii. Coordination with the supporting agricultural services
The very existence of a water management organization implies that a segregated organizational structure has been selected and that therefore the other necessary services are provided by other institutions. All too frequently this assumption is arrived at too quickly since the mere presence of extension, credit and other services in the project area does not mean that they are available to farmers in sufficient quantity to satisfy their specific needs. This is particularly important in the case of irrigation extension services which are a prerequisite to proper use of water and other agricultural inputs.
To ensure coordination with the agricultural services and to engage them actively in the affairs of the irrigation scheme, it is good practice to include representatives of such institutions on the Board of Directors of the association as special members. Alternatively, representatives of the IAs should be invited to the decision-making meetings of the concerned institutions at regional level or, where justified, at national level. In any case, it is important to assure the possibility of a dialogue between the institutions providing the services and the representatives of the farmers receiving them.
iii. Main characteristics
Annex I gives a detailed description of the main features of these associations. This includes their origins, main types (modern and traditional), legal character, water use rights of the association and its members, operation of their main functional bodies and financial responsibilities. Reference is made here only to their most outstanding characteristics:
a. Irrigation Associations (IAs) secure farmers' participation in decision-making for the irrigation schemes. The democratic process of selecting farmers' representatives guarantees such participation. In a world where the people's desire for participation in public affairs is expanding quickly, securing such participation is most relevant.
b. In this connection it may be opportune to raise the issue of the non-political nature of these associations. Their development has sometimes been handicapped because of the belief that these associations may become political and so be a powerful instrument of political leaders. Although in theory such a risk exists, practice has demonstrated that it rarely happens.
c. IAs appear to be more effective administratively than Public Irrigation Schemes. Farmers are personally interested in their own organization and this sometimes permits them to do the same job cheaper and faster. Thus IAs reduce the need for a heavy public bureaucracy to run the irrigation schemes. The civil servants utilized in the development of an irrigation scheme can be moved to a new scheme when the first is completed, instead of remaining as permanent employees of the developed scheme.
d. The recovery of water fees is more effectively carried out through IAs than through Public Irrigation Schemes. Experience shows that payment of water fees is higher among farmers of IAs than in those run by government officials.
e. Rules and regulations are respected better since the punishment of faults in IAs is effective and quick. Most of the IAs have their own irrigation juries or regulations that are highly respected by members, so making any punishment effective.
f. The relations between those distributing the water (water masters and water guards) and the farmers receiving it are much more friendly and cooperative than when the same job is undertaken by personnel of the administration. In the latter case, the water masters and ditchriders are seen as representatives of the government and not as part of the farmers' group.
g. The IAs provide an excellent communication channel between the administration and the farmers. When they do not exist, communication tends to be one-sided from the top to the bottom.
h. The Board of Directors and often the appointed Manager himself are farmers of the irrigation scheme and continuation in their jobs will depend largely on their performance. This is indeed an important incentive to carry out their jobs in the best possible way.
In spite of the fact that IAs are a highly desirable way of managing an irrigation scheme, they also have some limitations:
(1) The water distribution system utilized frequently leads to considerable operational water losses. Most of the IAs operate on the basis of a 'semi-demand' system, i.e. the farmer requests water and within a period of 3 to 7 days his request is granted. Although this system is perhaps the most desirable one from a social point of view, it is less efficient than the rotational system. This can be easily understood when one considers that to grant the request of a few farmers sometimes the whole canal irrigation network has to be kept in operation, with the corresponding water losses.
(2) Sometimes old water rights are an obstacle to efficient water distribution. In the course of their history many old irrigation associations have developed particular water rights which are incompatible with an efficient operation of the network. Such systems usually grant a fixed amount of water to the landowner and such a right can be sold or bought from others. This leads to all kinds of transactions - many of which bring social unrest - and subsequently to the need for constructing small but long ditches to bring the water to the buyer's land. Operational losses are bound to be high in this kind of water distribution system and consequently infiltration losses will be considerable owing to the complexity of the distribution.
(3) There is little capability for undertaking responsibilities outside the operation and maintenance field. Most of the people running an IA are from the farmers' community and are unlikely to have technical and managerial skills, thus tending to limit their sphere of competence to problems that they themselves can easily handle. So the involvement of IAs in farmers' training activities or water research investigations, monitoring of water quality problems, marketing and agricultural processing activities, etc. becomes problematic. However, it is possible for the IA to become more involved in activities other than those purely related to operation and maintenance problems by having qualified personnel. The Irrigation and Water Districts of the USA prove that under proper technical guidance and with sufficient financial resources, IAs can be very dynamic organizations with a wide sphere of competence.
(4) Long periods of considerable effort are required to get an IA established and working properly, even in countries like Spain where such institutions have centuries of tradition. The farmers"' irrigation experience, educational level, the tradition of such associations in the region, the absence or presence of farmers' leaders are all factors that may influence the time required for the proper functioning of such organizations. In favourable conditions the IA can be operational a few years (5 or less) after completion of the irrigation works, while in less favourable conditions long periods of 15-20 years may be required.
iv. Size of the Association
The question of the optimum size of the Association is important in determining its potential capability to undertake the related functions efficiently. Indeed, up to a certain size of irrigation scheme (about 5000 ha), the size of the Association is predetermined by the physical size of the scheme. In larger schemes, the possibility of subdividing them into irrigation sections, each having its own IA, or having a large association for the whole scheme, is frequently debated.
Large IAs have the advantages of greater economic potential and negotiating power. However, the larger the IA the more difficult becomes communication between the individual farmers and the executive body. In countries where the means of communication (mainly telephone) is effective and widespread in the rural areas, the formation of large IAs may be desirable (this is the case in the Irrigation and Water Districts of the USA), otherwise a federation of smaller associations may be preferable.
On the other hand, small IAs facilitate communications; but the administrative costs are greater and therefore place more of a burden on the farmers.
From these discussions it appears that the optimum size for an irrigation association is neither too large nor too small: a size corresponding to 10000 ha (2000 - 4000 farmers) is perhaps a desirable target. This should be matched with the criterion that each IA should operate within the command area of hydraulically independent canals, as far as possible.
3.2.2 Public irrigation schemes
Public Irrigation Schemes (PIS) are mainly controlled by government officials, in contrast with the Irrigation Associations which are predominantly controlled by the farmers. In some countries these organizations are of a permanent nature while in others they are established to prepare the way for transferring responsibilities to the farmers.
These institutions are, in general, closely connected with the organization used during the construction stage of the irrigation project. Frequently, most of the executive and administrative personnel employed during the construction period remain to run the irrigation scheme after completion of the works. The risk involved is that too little attention may be paid to agricultural problems. These management questions are discussed in greater detail in the next chapter.
i. The structure
The main executing bodies of the Public Irrigation Schemes are:
a. The Manager's Office: The Manager is in charge of the implementation of the plan previously approved by the central office which may be the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Irrigation or the Ministry of Public Works. An able manager is crucial to securing successful scheme administration. Sometimes the manager is supervised by a regional committee comprising representatives of several ministries. This is the case when emphasis is placed on regional development. He is also sometimes assisted by a group of advisers.
b- The Executive Bodies: Are the operational, maintenance and administrative units.
The organization is characterized by a clear line of command that goes from the national level to the lowest units. Figure 9 illustrates the organization of a typical Public Irrigation Scheme.
Fig. 9 Typical organization of a Public Irrigation Scheme
The case in which a PIS takes on further responsibilities will be discussed later under the so-called Multipurpose Public Irrigation Schemes. However, even in cases where a PIS does not take on direct responsibility for the provision of such additional services, it can play an important role in ensuring that such services are effectively provided for the scheme. For this purpose a supervisory board could be established where representatives of the institutions responsible for providing the services are members of the Board together with the farmers' representatives. Figure 10 illustrates an organization of this type used in Malaysia.
ii. Main characteristics
The main distinctive features of these organizations are:
a. They offer good possibilities to rationalize water distribution. They are not bound by obsolete water rights and can enforce the type of water distribution considered most efficient. However, it has to be recognized that such possibilities are frequently disregarded and water distribution is not much better than with IAs.
b. Due to the presence of technical personnel in these institutions, a considerable amount of technical data is kept which is extremely useful to plan the future O&M^1 of the scheme properly.
c. When sophisticated techniques are used for the distribution of water, such as dynamic regulation of canals, distribution on demand, etc., the use of these institutions is almost inevitable since the management of such systems is beyond the capacity of farmers' organizations.
d. The complex operation and maintenance of very large canals, especially those having multipurpose use, may also be justified since this may be the only way to coordinate conflicting interests.
e. Little time is required to get the institution established.
f. Where farmers have little or no experience in irrigation, the PIS may be the only way of running the irrigation scheme during the initial stages, until the farmers learn enough about the scheme to handle it themselves. However, there is the risk that these institutions can tend to be self-perpetuating unless otherwise specified by law.
g. To function properly, a PIS needs strong institutional support at the national level. In other words, these organizations should be part of an autonomous or national institution dealing with the management of irrigation schemes.
h. The manager of the irrigation scheme and some of the professionals in charge of the different units are generally public officials, who often stay for a few years in the project and are then transferred to other projects. This lack of continuity of staff does not provide incentives to improve their performance in their jobs.
i. The project staff are not accountable to the farmers - who are the most interested in the efficient running of the system - but to the central administration. In very large bureaucracies efficient financial control is often not possible, especially where it is considered that part of the funds comes from two sources: the water fees paid by the farmers and the government subventions. Under these circumstances misuse of funds often occurs.
^1 O&M means Operation and Maintenance in this text.
Fig. 10 Organizational structure to ensure coordination between O&M matters and agricultural services
3.2.3 Establishment of specialized water management organizations
The establishment of Public Irrigation Schemes (PIS) is relatively simple since it only requires some qualified personnel, equipment and financing, elements which are all generally present during the construction of the irrigation system, and therefore it is not normally difficult to guarantee continuity during the subsequent operational phase.
The question is much more complicated when the intention is to transfer the management of the scheme to the farmers, in particular when trying to establish IAs. However, the effort is worth it. Most researchers agree that the role of an IA can be instrumental in increasing irrigated agricultural production in many countries, and any expenditure made in this direction gains high returns.
The main problem in establishing IAs lies in the difficulty of explaining to the future members of the association what an association is, and then in convincing them of the convenience of its establishment. Furthermore, there is also the problem of training a small group (the executive board) in operation and maintenance matters in such a way that they will be able to undertake these functions properly.
There are two main approaches that can be followed by countries to overcome these problems, referred to as:
- the model approach
- the training approach.
i. The model approach: The idea behind this approach is that farmers learn mainly by seeing. In the initial year of operation of the irrigation scheme, a PIS is set up which then serves as a model to show how the system should be managed. During these early years, a proposal is made that an IA should be established. When the IA is prepared to take on the responsibilities, the corresponding functions are transferred. This is usually a long process and experience in Spain, where such associations have a long tradition, shows that an average of 10-15 years is needed before the IA is properly established.^1
^1 This average includes large variations. Where farmers had long experience in irrigation it could be shortened to 1-2 years, while in settlement projects in newly developed areas periods of 20 years were not infrequent.
This approach has the great advantage of permitting an almost immediate utilization of the water distribution system since the establishment of a PIS is a relatively simple matter. It also has the advantage of allowing for a certain degree of "on-the-job" training. On the other hand, it has the great risk that once a PIS becomes settled, it may tend to perpetuate itself, thus delaying the transfer to the IA.
In spite of this latter risk, which can be avoided by appropriate laws, this approach has been found practical and is the one most commonly followed.
ii. The training approach: Where farmers already have some notion about irrigation practices and a good attitude towards cooperation exists, the training approach can be tried out. Under these conditions it is possible to give to farmers, and especially to their leaders, some short training that permits early establishment of the IA. The Philippines is adopting this approach through its Farm System Development Corporation^1 (FSDC) and the programme is quite successful. However, this approach requires strong support from the government - the FSDC was established by Presidential Decree in 1975 - and well-qualified and specially trained groups of people capable of undertaking the training of the farmers' leaders.
^1 In the space of 3 years more than 400 Irrigation Service Associations (involving 22000 farmers) have been established which cultivate some 48000 hectares of irrigated land.
3.2.4 Irrigation schemes with mixed control
This designation is applied to irrigation schemes where part of the physical system is handled by government officials and the rest by the farmers. This management system is becoming increasingly popular in many countries of the Far East and Asia where water distribution problems in the watercourses have always been acute. The distribution of water in the watercourses has often been a no-man's land due to the lack of definition of responsibilities for their operation. Furthermore, it is practically impossible for the few government officials to handle the distribution of water when large numbers of farmers^2 are involved. This has led to some innovative actions where the government is promoting the formation of irrigation associations for each Watercourse or tertiary canal, while the rest of the irrigation network is still managed by government officials. This management alternative appears promising and its effect on some pilot projects has resulted in dramatic increases in
crop production due to a more equal water distribution. Nevertheless, most of these experiences are not yet consolidated and their evolution should be monitored in order to learn more about their potential.
^2 The farm units are often very small (0.5-1.0 ha) and therefore the numbers of farmers served by a watercourse can be quite large (500-1000).
The establishment of the irrigation associations based on the watercourse is for all practical purposes similar to small irrigation systems, therefore much of what has been said in Chapters 2 and 3 on this issue applies. Chapter 7 also illustrates some of the approaches that have been followed in establishing such associations.
Regarding the main system managed by government officials, all that has been said for PIS applies. The crucial point remains the relationship between the associations and the officials managing the main system. It is most likely that most of these associations will evolve into a federation that will have a strong voice in all the management affairs of the scheme.
3.3 Multipurpose water management organizations
A multipurpose water management organization is characterized by having responsibilities directly related to water management and some others which may include irrigation extension, research, water quality management, marketing, etc. These responsibilities should be the result of a careful examination of what is needed in the project that cannot be effectively provided by existing institutions.
In many cases a fully integrated management organization would be unnecessarily complex and would lead to duplication of existing institutions, while the use of specialized water management organizations would not provide sufficient services. In this case the multipurpose water management organization represents a suitable solution since it uses the nucleus of a water management organization and adds only those activities that are most needed and are not done by any other existing institution.
This kind of organization is unusual among irrigation associations because there are several obstacles to establishing one. First of all, the water laws of many countries state categorically that the functions of any irrigation association must be limited to aspects related to the management of irrigation water, leaving no room for the addition of any other activity. Secondly, farmers' associations have to live from the contributions of their members, and it is unlikely that they will dedicate any effort to activities which do not appear financially attractive such as irrigation extension and/or applied research. Thirdly, most of the irrigation associations have traditions established long ago and are somewhat reluctant to undertake any additional responsibility.
Therefore, multipurpose organizations basically take the structure of a PIS where the relevant new activities are added. They have been designated here as Multi-purpose Public Irrigation Schemes (MPIS). Typical added functions are: irrigation assistance to farmers, applied irrigation research, irrigation improvement service, water quality management, etc. Sometimes a MPIS may also take responsibility for the establishment of some physical infrastructure aimed at improving marketing (stores, processing plants, markets), provision of inputs (fertilizer, seeds, etc.) or credit facilities, depending on the specific needs of the project area. While the establishment of the first group of functions (formative and training nature) is strongly favoured in many instances, the second group must be restricted to very specific situations, and only if they cannot be undertaken in the near future by any existing institution.
Of particular importance is the assistance to farmers in matters related to irrigation practices. In many circumstances, the establishment of an irrigation assistance service within the project organizational structure can be fully justified and effective. The functions and responsibilities of irrigation assistance are discussed in detail in Chapter 7.
Another important responsibility which is often added in irrigation schemes established on newly developed land relates to applied research. In such circumstances, it is most convenient to gain experience rapidly in the management of soils and new crops. For this purpose, applied research farms are established by the MPIS, which can also be very useful for demonstrations of good agricultural practices to the farmers. If such farms are properly managed, the income from the agricultural produce often covers all the research expenses and therefore it is not a financial burden in the management of the scheme.
Most of the characteristics described for PIS also apply to this multipurpose type, although the latter has the great advantage of providing some supporting services (irrigation assistance, research, etc.), which are nearly indispensable in the early stages of development of an irrigation scheme. It is felt that the provision of these services - in one way or the other - is the key to achieve proper water management at the farm level.
<section>7</section>
4. Managing the project
4.1 The nature of the management function
4.2 Managers
4.3 Preconditions for good project management
4.4 The importance of management systems
4.5 Personnel training
4.6 Water charges and their effect on the quality of management
This chapter starts by considering what the nature of the management function should be in irrigation projects, who should perform it and what conditions are required for it to be performed most effectively. The need for planners to develop a well-designed management system is then emphasized. The basic components of a good management system are described, together with some of the principal benefits that can be expected to follow from its adoption. Finally, two further aids to good management are discussed: in-service training and the provision of added incentives for project staff through the retention of revenue from water charges on the project itself.
4.1 The nature of the management function
4.1.1 Overall direction and coordination
4.1.2 Management of specialized activities
There are two main elements in the management of irrigation projects. One is the overall management function, which has much in common with the management of any other kind of organization. It is concerned with the direction and coordination of the decision-making processes within the project area and its purpose is to get all those involved in the process (farmers, staff, external government agencies) to work towards the achievement of the project's objectives. The other element is the management of specialized activities (water distribution, maintenance, irrigation assistance services) which are peculiar to irrigation projects. These activities have certain characteristics calling for particular kinds of management skills and styles of operation.
4.1.1 Overall direction and coordination
Planning and management are essentially part of the same process. Project management is concerned with the implementation phase of the planning cycle (plan formulation - implementation - evaluation,- plan reformulation), but it also contains within itself the same elements and sequential steps as the broader planning process: plan formulation - budgeting - programming - monitoring - plan reformulation. One of the principal functions of the project manager, then, is to plan. He is not simply an administrator, required to react pragmatically to problems as they arise.
The most important tasks of the project manager include:
- setting objectives and priorities (short-term, medium-term, long-term);
- directing the annual planning and budgeting processes;
- directing the formulation of detailed work programmes for staff members within each of the project's units;
- monitoring and training staff and farmers to implement the programme;
- supervising the day-to-day implementation of the programme, identifying problems that arise and finding solutions for them;
- monitoring project performance against objectives;
- monitoring staff performance against agreed work targets;
- seeking the opinion of the project's clients (the farmers) about the quality of the services provided to them;
- identifying strengths and weaknesses and recommending appropriate remedies for the weaknesses.
For the last of these tasks - the diagnosis of causes for poor project performance - the project manager will require a system of monitoring capable of identifying the relative importance of the following factors as influences on performance:
i. Resources (finance, manpower, equipment).
ii. Skills (technical, management, communication).
iii. Motivation (material incentives - salaries, bonuses, promotions; non-material incentives - job satisfaction, recognition of good performance by senior officials).
4.1.2 Management of specialized activities
Of the three most important field activities of irrigation management - water distribution, system maintenance and irrigation extension - extension activities are likely to assume greatest relative importance in the early stages of a project, and water distribution in its later stages. System maintenance will remain an extremely important ancillary activity throughout but, in contrast to the other two activities, it does not require constant interaction between staff and farmers and to that extent should entail somewhat fewer difficulties with regard to man-management.
In the initial phase of projects in which farmers are unfamiliar with irrigated agriculture, it is clear that special emphasis will need to be placed on various aspects of agricultural and irrigation extension work, in some cases accompanied by the development of infrastructural and commercial services. Water scarcity is unlikely to be an immediate problem; water distribution, though always an important activity, may therefore require rather less detailed attention at this stage. Because the focus will be on teaching activities (about field level water application, watercourse operation and maintenance, irrigation rules), junior staff will have a particularly important part to play; and there is therefore a correspondingly greater need for management techniques which will maximize the effectiveness of their role as communicators and counsellors to the farmers.
A common problem affecting the management of all the field activities of an irrigation organization at any stage of its development is the widely dispersed location of its junior field staff. On large projects, decentralized regional offices can greatly assist senior officials in their ability to supervise the performance of junior staff, but carefully devised methods of information feedback and management are also extremely important.
As the farmers' agricultural knowledge increases, and with it their demand for water, so will the need for well-designed water distribution techniques. Not only is it important that these should be technically finely-tuned (in their capacity to match scarce supplies as closely as possible to demand) but they should also contain inbuilt mechanisms designed to counteract the almost inevitable pressures which will be placed on operating staff to misallocate water. Because of its frequent technical complexity and the tensions associated with the rationing of a scarce and highly-valued "open access" resource like water, water distribution is usually the most difficult of all the field activities of an irrigation project to manage well. It requires specialist technical skills, man-management skills and skills of communication with farmers.
The elements of water distribution which appear to make the most critical demands on management skill are:
a. Planning. Collection and analysis of both supply and demand data; estimation of probabilities and risks. Reconciliation of objectives and preferences of different interest groups - farmers, irrigation officials, agricultural officials, higher level government agencies - in order to reach agreement on the forthcoming seasonal plan. Communication of the plan to farmers.
b. Implementation. Adjustment of the seasonal plan in the light of observed variations in actual patterns of supply and demand. Communication of adjusted schedules to farmers.
In the interests of equitable water distribution, motivating staff (through rewards and sanctions) to resist pressures from farmers to misallocate water; also rewarding farmers for good watercourse operation and maintenance and punishing them for misappropriations.
c. Monitoring. Development of simple information and control systems with clearly-defined criteria of performance and suitable objective indicators.
Spot checking to ensure the accuracy of information being collected by field staff for monitoring project performance (e.g. gauges for measurement of water losses; crop yield estimates for computation of production levels).
Spot checking to monitor the performance of field staff (are they where they should be? Are their field diaries correctly entered? Are their records complete and consistent?). Identification of reasons for divergences between prescription and practice.
4.2 Managers
The formal management structure of irrigation projects may vary considerably, depending on whether they are constituted as Irrigation Associations or are government or semi-public institutions. If they are Associations, the responsibility for major policy decisions is vested with a farmers' Representative Committee or Governing Board, but authority for the execution of day-to-day decisions within the broad policy framework is delegated to professional managers, usually chosen by the Committee. On government-run projects, the policy framework may be largely determined by higher-level government authorities in consultation with the project managers.
However, it is extremely important that on government-run projects there should also be some formal mechanisms for consultation with farmers' representatives before major management decisions are taken, in order to ensure that the professional managers are aware of and sensitive to their clients' needs and opinions and are to some extent accountable to them. Specific provision should therefore be made in each project's operational procedures for periodic meetings between managers and farmers' representatives to discuss policy issues. Provision should also be made in the procedures for the regular dissemination of information to farmers about decisions taken - not only with regard to variations in water flows but also with regard to actual patterns of project expenditure.
A common question which arises in connection with the choice of professional managers is whether they should be general administrators or technical specialists; and, if they are to be specialists, in what kind of academic discipline should they have been trained. The argument in favour of generalist administrators is strongest in the case of very large projects, particularly those in which a large number of diverse activities have to be coordinated. For example, large settlement schemes and "integrated" cash crop schemes may often be most suitably headed by a senior administrator with long general management experience, with the support of technical specialists in charge of each major activity. On the other hand, where the project is not unusually large and its range of activities is limited to water management, with or without agricultural extension, a technical specialist may be suitable as a project manager. As has already been stressed, he should be familiar with
agricultural matters and farmers' social and economic conditions as well as with irrigation engineering.
4.3 Preconditions for good project management
The chances that the project management function will be performed effectively will be much increased if the managers have been provided with a favourable decision-making environment. On the other hand, if certain conditions have not been met, their tasks may be made extremely difficult. The most important conditions for a favourable decision-making environment are:
i. an adequately designed irrigation system;
ii. an appropriate organizational structure;
iii. the establishment of consistent and clearly-defined overall objectives;
iv. a well-designed management system (detailed management procedures, job descriptions, information and monitoring systems);
v. policies on staff recruitment, production and salaries which provide incentives for the attainment of project objectives;
vi. adequate financial support for recurrent expenditure, either from government funds or from water charges paid to the project, or a combination of the two;
vii. an effective legal framework, for the enforcement of water distribution rules or the control of groundwater extraction.
These are all essential elements in the framework of project management and should always be given careful consideration at the project planning stage as part of the process of "planning for management".
In practice, many of these conditions often prove to be absent. In the case of some of them (items v - vii) the main reasons are to be found in the realm of government policy, and the introduction of changes is likely to be impossible in the short term. This will probably be particularly true in the case of policies regarding the salaries of government employees.
Policies which favour low water charges and therefore contribute to the inadequacy of recurring funds may also prove difficult to change. However, it should be one of the functions of project planners to bring to the attention of government the extent to which these policies can be expected to act as constraints on project management and performance; evaluations of existing projects should be able to provide the necessary evidence.
In the case of certain other policies, modifications may be somewhat easier to achieve in the medium term, e.g. the introduction of more flexible regulations with regard to promotion on merit; or the retention of a certain proportion of the revenue from water charges for reinvestment within the project. If so, project planners should consider raising these issues with government and encouraging the review of current policies.
Meanwhile, there are other factors capable of having a profound influence on a project manager's ability to perform well for which the planners themselves are largely responsible (items i - iv). Problems created by the inadequacy of system design can often be extremely serious; in the worst cases good management may become virtually impossible. Certain kinds of deficiency (e.g. absence of measuring structures) can be rectified relatively quickly but others (e.g. inadequate watercourse layout, insufficient provision of drainage, insufficient control structures) may require substantial programmes of rehabilitation. The second factor, inappropriateness of organizational structure, has already been discussed. As in the case of many of the policy factors, government may require considerable time in which to agree to significant changes in organizational structures and then to plan and implement its decisions. In addition, there are two further factors - the provision of clear
objectives and a well-designed management system - which can be dealt with in the short term and are vital to the project manager in all circumstances, whatever the longer-term constraints within which he may be obliged to operate.
There are no complex reasons of policy why these two items should not be considered in detail by planners whenever a new irrigation project is being designed or an old one being rehabilitated. In practice, however, they are frequently neglected -largely because they are not included in the planners' terms of reference.
The establishment of clear overall objectives requires consultation between the planners and higher-level government officials. It is essential that clear objectives should be agreed for the particular project concerned and that they should be consistent with the broader objectives of government at the national and provincial levels. They should be unambiguously recorded in the project manual. Since national objectives are obviously subject to revision in accordance with changing circumstances, provision should also be made for the periodic review and updating of project objectives.
The design of an appropriate management system is a much more complex and time-consuming task and requires more detailed discussion.
4.4 The importance of management systems
4.4.1 A management system and its components - An example
4.4.2 Particular requirements of irrigation projects
4.4.3 Planning management systems
Management systems are required as an aid to decision-making in any organization. They are particularly valuable in the context of irrigation management, because this involves the performance of many activities which lend themselves unusually well to systematization and programming. This is especially true of water distribution and maintenance; but even agricultural extension, which always requires a considerable degree of adaptability on the part of its staff to variations in local conditions, can also benefit greatly from a substantial degree of planning and control under irrigated conditions.
In the case of projects largely depending on government funds rather than on direct contributions from the farmers within the project area, there is a further powerful reason why effective management systems are needed. On such projects one of the most potent mechanisms for directing project managers towards the objective of satisfying their clients' requirements - payment in return for services rendered - is absent. In these situations, which are the norm in most kinds of service institution, it is especially important that objectives and priorities should be clearly defined and that very specific procedures and easily measurable performance standards should be developed so that the efforts of managers and their staff will be focussed on attaining these objectives.
It cannot be too strongly emphasized that any irrigation project which does not have a detailed management system is lacking an essential tool of management and cannot be expected to perform at a level approaching its potential. Project managers cannot themselves be expected to produce their own management systems and procedures, although they may often be able to suggest changes and improvements in existing systems. Where they are either absent or deficient, project managers should bring the matter to the urgent attention of the government's planning agencies.
An irrigation project requires management systems which will provide guidelines both for the performance of the overall project management function and for the performance of the specialized field activities. Since performance of the specialized activities is discussed in some detail in later chapters, an example of a management system will be outlined here which is most immediately relevant to the overall management function. However, the basic principles embodied in the system can also be used in planning systems for each of the specialized activities.
4.4.1 A management system and its components - An example
The Programming and Implementation Management (PIM) system was developed by Belshaw and Chambers (1973) for use in area development programmes in Kenya. Its three main components are:
- a programming exercise, carried out annually and held just before or just after the beginning of the financial year. This is a meeting at which all those directly concerned with the implementation of decisions (junior as well as senior staff) jointly and freely draw up a phased work programme for the coming year.
- a management meeting, usually held monthly, at which the same people review progress against the phased work programme, identify bottlenecks and agree on what remedial action should be taken;
- an action report, a monthly management report which briefly summarizes the progress made and the problems encountered, and names those responsible for action; it is sent simultaneously to all those concerned, including officials in higher-level government organizations in cases where the project's work programme is affected by the timing of the release of government funds.
The programming exercise, which is the most crucial part of the system, starts with an open-minded discussion of the objectives of the project and of its various component action programmes. Once agreement has been reached on objectives and the feasibility of achieving them, the programming process begins. Its main stages are:
- listing and agreeing the operations to be carried out;
- identifying and agreeing who is responsible for each operation;
- agreeing start and completion times for each operation;
- agreeing targets and a completion indicator for each operation;
- checking for feasibility, agreement and acceptance of targets.
Various techniques - involving the use of blackboards and programming charts -can be used as aids to the programming exercise. They are intended not Only to encourage clarity of thought but also to stimulate free discussion about the merits of alternative proposals. Through this discussion, the project manager tries to ensure that the proposals are realistic and that all those attending the meeting are fully and freely committed to the programme and to achieving their part in it.
At the monthly management meeting the project manager checks on progress with all responsible. Entries are made on the programming chart to indicate which programmes are on time or on target and which are behind time or below target. Remedial action is then discussed and decided. The action report is intended to be a management control device. It is not (as many reports are) just a means for communicating routine information. It follows directly from the management meeting and records its findings. It contains a brief statement of progress made, whether or not targets have been achieved, the remedial action if they have not been achieved, and who should take that action. The report is written by the project manager and is quickly and widely distributed.
Evaluation of the PIM system showed that it contributed to improved performance, not only because more efficient use was made of existing resources of staff, equipment and time, but also because the emphasis on joint programming, involving junior as well as senior staff, reduced previous tendencies to authoritarian behaviour and consequently enhanced the morale and motivation of junior staff. Specific benefits identified were as follows:
i. the procedures encouraged a more participative, egalitarian and less authoritarian approach to decision-making;
ii. wasteful meetings were eliminated; each meeting was clearly focussed on details of implementation, who should do what, when and how;
iii. lengthy routine reports were eliminated; the action report was problem and opportunity-oriented and was designed as a management tool for getting things done;
iv. collaboration between departments and specialist units was greatly improved;
v. staff at all levels set their own targets instead of having them imposed from above; staff were found to set themselves quite high targets and, because they drew up their own programmes, they developed a greater commitment to the programmes for which they were responsible;
vi. joint programming helped to identify the resources needed; reasons for failures and delays were clearly shown in the action report, including late releases of funds from higher level authorities;
vii. staff were trained to think in detail about their work commitments for the following year, and periods of over and underload were more easily identified; the allocation of responsibilities for each operation was clearly specified;
viii. senior officials of the same rank were encouraged to compete against each other in the maintenance of high performance standards, since actual performance became widely known through the management meetings and action reports;
ix. the capabilities and confidence of junior staff were increased as a result of their participation in discussions and their ability to contribute local knowledge; and
x. the effectiveness and status of the project manager was increased, both in relation to his own staff and to higher level government agencies.
4.4.2 Particular requirements of irrigation projects
The basic principles and techniques of the PIM system could clearly be used in the development of similar systems for the overall management of irrigation projects. One modification to the system which would help to strengthen the project management's accountability to its clients would be to include farmers' representatives among those attempting the programming exercise and/or receiving copies of the monthly action report.
In the case of the specialized field activities, still greater modifications would be required. For agricultural and irrigation extension activities a pattern similar to the Benor Training and Visit System could prove suitable. Its principal elements are the regular provision of weekly or fortnightly training sessions for junior field staff, at which they are briefed by senior Subject Matter Specialists about topical issues expected to feature prominently in their discussions with farmers; and a regular timetable of farm visits to which field staff are expected to adhere. Various mechanisms of management control, including field diaries, are used to enable senior officials to check that junior staff are keeping to their schedules and are providing correct advice.
Detailed Operation and Maintenance Manuals are common in most countries with highly developed agricultural sectors, and there are some good examples in small-farm agriculture - for example, those of the Khairpur Tubewell Project, Pakistan, the irrigation districts of Mexico, the Irrigation Associations of Spain, the Gezira Scheme, Sudan, etc. On many projects, however, such manuals are either lacking altogether or else they are very inadequate, often because they are old and require radical revision. The scarcity of good operational manuals is a particular matter for concern. In addition to specifying the detailed procedures on which estimates of water supply and demand should be built up, it is essential that they should also contain effective methods of monitoring project performance and the performance of field staff.
4.4.3 Planning management systems
The development of appropriate management systems for individual irrigation projects requires the initial production of a prototype system which can subsequently be modified to the needs of particular conditions through testing and adaptation in the field. For operation and maintenance purposes, different prototypes should be developed for each distinct agro-climatic region within a particular country, in accordance with variations in the methods of water distribution and the irrigation system designs required to support them.
The formulation of these prototype systems may often take considerable time. Although apparently very simple, the particular PIM procedures developed for the area programmes in Kenya were the product of many man-months of detailed work in which techniques were devised, tested and often dropped or radically revised because they were found to be too complex or otherwise inappropriate for use in that particular context.
The planning agency responsible for developing the prototypes should first try them out on a trial pilot basis.
After their introduction on a pilot project, the suitability of the proposed procedures should be continuously monitored and evaluated in collaboration with the staff who are required to apply them, and subsequent modifications should be made before a "master system" is produced. The process of testing and adaptation will then need to be repeated on other projects within the same region.
In the case of water distribution procedures, it is most important that alternative methods should be tried out under normal project conditions and not as part of an artificial research experiment.
Once comprehensive management systems are in existence, it is the task of the project manager to check on the continued appropriateness of procedures, job descriptions, etc., from time to time, and to recommend any necessary changes.
4.5 Personnel training
4.5.1 Conditions for success: Improved career and promotion prospects
Like the reform of management systems, the development of training programmes is a relatively uncontroversial issue and it can usually be brought about within a fairly short space of time.
There is likely to be a particular need for senior officials to receive technical in-service training in those countries where the engineers in charge of irrigation O&M are not water management specialists. The main object of the course should be to educate them in the agricultural aspects of their work and to introduce them to the potential complexities of alternative water distribution techniques. On the agricultural side, there is frequently a scarcity of senior water management specialists. This could also be rectified by appropriate training programmes. Many senior officials could also be expected to welcome an inclusion in their technical programmes of a further element of general management training.
In the case of junior staff, much of the most useful training can be provided on the job. Training of this kind can be incorporated into the project's basic management procedures. However, there are two areas in particular for which some special in-service training may be required: the extension of advice on watercourse management, and field-level water management extension.
4.5.1 Conditions for success: Improved career and promotion prospects
Certain important conditions need to be met if such training programmes are to have a significant and lasting effect. Where there are plans to introduce training programmes which will have the effect of greatly expanding the number of specialists in a certain field (e.g. water distribution or watercourse management), it is essential that decisions should already have been taken to change existing administrative structures in such a way as to accommodate the new trainees and to provide them with attractive career prospects. Otherwise, the trainees concerned will have little incentive to acquire their new qualifications.
Another important point, particularly relevant in the case of junior field staff, is that the effectiveness of training may often be severely limited unless its provision is linked to some prospects of promotion. One of the consequences of a good training programme will be to raise the trainee's capabilities to a level which makes him ambitious to undertake more challenging work. If he has no promotion prospects, the long-term effect may merely be to make him more dissatisfied with his position and consequently lower his morale and motivation instead of raising them.
This can often be a particularly serious problem in the case of junior staff concerned with water distribution. Since they are frequently under heavy pressure to misallocate water and to make themselves unpopular if they resist such pressures, they require a more than usually powerful reward and penalty system to encourage them to perform well. Where salaries are low and there is little scope for increased finance to raise them, it is extremely difficult for senior officials to achieve good results through the exaction of penalties alone. A combination of training with better prospects of promotion on merit seems likely to be the only measure capable of producing significant improvement in motivation under such conditions. This implies that, although the necessary reforms in policy may not always be easy to introduce, particularly high priority should be given to the introduction of flexible regulations with regard to promotion.
4.6 Water charges and their effect on the quality of management
The point has already been made that one of the great advantages which an irrigation association has over a public irrigation scheme wholly dependent on government revenue is that it tends to provide farmers with a greater incentive to pay the water charges and therefore the total revenue is normally higher. This in turn provides project staff with an increased incentive to give the farmers improved services. The basic reason for this lies in the different way in which the two organizations are paid.
In the case of the Irrigation Associations a substantial proportion of the recurrent budget comes from members' fees or water charges. As a result, the IAs management and staff are made directly accountable to their clients and are put under pressure to provide them with a good service. If they do not, fees will be more difficult to collect, total revenue will decline and cuts will have to be made in staff numbers and salaries. On the other hand, if they provide good service, fee recoveries are likely to be high (since farmer members recognize that high levels of payment will increase the likelihood of good service in the future) and management will be able to reward itself and its staff members with bonuses as well as having additional funds for reinvestment. There, is thus a series of self-sustaining links (client satisfaction -higher fee payment - higher rewards to staff - good service - client satisfaction) which not only tends to encourage good staff motivation but also
to provide the project with sufficient revenue.
On government-run projects, by contrast, there is usually no direct link between the level of performance a project organization achieves and its financial rewards. The amount of funds it receives from government is determined first by the total availability of funds for recurrent expenditure within the irrigation and agriculture sectors and then by reference to "yardsticks" which reflect the government's view as to the relative operation and maintenance needs of different projects. The quality of the project's performance, either in terms of increased agricultural production or in its recovery of revenue through water charges or other forms of taxation, is not a criterion of how much finance it receives. Such a system removes any incentive for farmers to pay their water charges, since the proceeds go to general revenue and have no direct effect on the level of local reinvestment. There is similarly no material incentive to management and staff to improve their service to
farmers since it will not lead to any increase in their financial rewards. Further side-effects of this policy are a hardening of farmers' resolution to oppose attempts to raise water charges; a reluctance to pay water charges and other taxes, even at the very low rates often prevailing; and a consequent need for revenue-collecting staff to be more coercive in their relations with farmers.
There is little doubt that the performance of many irrigation project organizations could be significantly improved if ways could be found to introduce some degree of competitiveness among projects in place of the conveniently inflexible methods of budget allocation. Even very modest changes in current practice could be helpful and it is suggested that governments contemplating other measures for improving irrigation management performance might consider several possibilities, perhaps on an experimental basis in the first instance..
Any of the possible measures would involve the need to establish significant indicators of performance against which financial increments could be earned. These might be based on increments of levels of production and/or equity of water distribution or preferably on levels of recovery of water charges. The government could then provide each project with an annual payment consisting of two elements: a flat-rate grant, which would take into account the particular characteristics and needs of the project area concerned, and a variable bonus whose level would depend on the project's performance in the previous year. Alternatively, each project might be allowed to retain a certain percentage of the revenue it had raised in accordance with its performance, to which the flat-rate grant could be added. Some of the bonus could be earmarked for reinvestment, some for local increments in staff salaries.
An alternative measure would be to limit the government assistance to the salaries of the civil servants, but any other service or expenditure should be covered by the water fees paid by the farmers. The funds collected would be used directly by the irrigation scheme to provide the necessary services. This method would need a suitable auditing system.
Such strategies could be expected to be attractive to project managers, staff and farmers. Moreover, they should also lead to substantial benefits to governments if (as might be expected) project managers begin to press for higher rates for water charges and farmers themselves begin to see that such a policy could have its advantages. This would help to overcome two of the most intractable problems of management on many publicly-operated irrigation projects at present: staff motivation and shortage of recurrent investment funds.
<section>8</section>
General remarks
The first part of the text is to familiarize the reader with the main types of existing irrigation organizations. Their pros and cons have been briefly analysed and some general principles are given for their establishment and management.
The second part is more specific in the sense that it provides some guidelines for the organization of each of the units of a water management organization in the scheme. Therefore, this part is divided into the four main services or units that are generally needed in an irrigation scheme, i.e.
- Operation Service
- Maintenance Service
- Irrigation Assistance Service
- Administrative Service
The fact that the text has been divided according to these four Services is mostly a question of clarity of presentation and does not preclude that the Services be grouped in one, two, three or four independent units, according to the needs and characteristics of the water management organization.
For each of the Services, the main functions are described, followed by a discussion of how to undertake the functions for the most generalized situations. The equipment and manpower needed to staff the units is discussed as well as the most usual organizational structure of the unit.
The framework of this part refers mostly to large surface irrigation schemes (more than 2000 ha) and it is assumed that the management of the scheme strives for high standards of performance. Although effort has been made to obtain information from several regions of the world, the biggest input comes from the Latin American and Mediterranean regions and this is likely to be reflected in some of the standards presented in the text.
<section>9</section>
5. Operation service
5.1 Main objectives of an operation service
5.2 Planning the operation
5.3 Distribution of water (implementation)
5.4 Monitoring the operation
5.5 Staffing the operation service
5.6 Equipment
5.7 Organizational structure
It has become a matter of increasing concern in recent years that the performance of many irrigation schemes has fallen short of expectations. This is due to a number of factors but no doubt the lack of proper operation and maintenance is an overriding cause for the malfunctioning of schemes. It is always surprising to find that while planning, design and construction of irrigation schemes receive considerable attention and are generally carried out with great care, little attention is paid to operation and maintenance matters.
There are three fundamental causes for the poor operation of an irrigation system:
i. lack of technical skills in planning, implementing and monitoring the system;
ii. poor man-management;
iii. technical deficiencies in the physical system.
This chapter is mostly concerned with the technical skills necessary for suitable operation of an irrigation scheme. For this purpose it analyses the different water distribution methods with their advantages and disadvantages. It also considers the two main alternatives for organizing an operation service and describes the necessary skills of the required manpower.
The main problems related to poor man-management, such as minimization of corruption, friction between farmers, lack of incentive for the operational personnel to do a good job, have already been discussed in Chapters 3 and 4. Insufficient manpower is also a management problem which can cause serious repercussions in irrigation operations. For this purpose, standard manpower requirements for the main activities are given in this chapter.
Technical deficiencies are either the result of poor maintenance, which is discussed in Chapter 6, or faulty design. Remedying a faulty design requires major rehabilitation work which has to be properly studied and designed.
There is a tendency to believe that out of the three fundamental causes outlined above, those related to technical deficiencies are the main ones responsible for a low efficiency. Although any generalization in this respect may be risky since exceptions are bound to exist, the chief reasons for low efficiency are more often related to lack of technical knowledge among the people operating the system and man-management issues than to technical deficiencies in the system.
In order to illustrate the extent to which deficiencies in the operation procedures may adversely affect performance, a recent experiment in the Philippines is quoted. In this experiment, conducted by members of the International Rice Research Institute on a canal-irrigated command of 5700 ha, it was found that the introduction of quite modest changes in water distribution procedures was associated with a 97 percent increase in the production of the system overall, and a 1494 percent increase in the tail section of the system, over a two year period. Before the intervention of the study team there had been a familiar pattern of over-irrigation at the head of the system, with insufficient supplies remaining for the tail. Official control over water appropriations had been poor and there was widespread uncertainty among the farmers about the likely timing and quantity of water supplies. The experiment was carried out without the introduction of any physical improvements
(Valera and Wickham 1976).
Other interesting evidence has been recorded in Sri Lanka and Pakistan. In the Sinhalese case, the introduction of improved management in a small reservoir system of about 5000 ha enabled a level of production to be reached which was about 50 percent higher than it would have been under normal conditions. In Pakistan, a sample survey revealed very high average water losses within the watercourse command, a substantial proportion of which could be attributed to poor main system operation.
Nevertheless, it is obvious that any serious attempt to evaluate the operation of any given irrigation scheme must take a close look at the three groups of problems if suitable improvements are to be achieved.
5.1 Main objectives of an operation service
An Operation Service has as its chief objective the timely delivery of the irrigation water necessary to satisfy crop water requirements. The accomplishment of this objective implies the following main activities:
- Planning the Operation (preparation of the so-called Irrigation Plans)
- Implementation of the Plan (actual water distribution)
- Monitoring of the Operation (collection of data related to water use and preparation of the corresponding reports).
To undertake these tasks different kinds of personnel are required with specific qualifications depending on the type of water distribution system and other local characteristics. These functions and manpower requirements are examined below.
5.2 Planning the operation
5.2.1 Estimating future water supply
5.2.2 Estimating water demand
5.2.3 Matching supply and demand
5.2.4 Restrictive measures to match supply and demand
The object of this activity is to match supply with demand as closely as possible. The planning exercise may be a complex and laborious undertaking, as is the case when preparing "Irrigation Plans" for large canal systems, or just a simple meeting where farmers are informed of the amount of water available and the times when it will be distributed. The complexity or simplicity of the planning process varies from case to case depending on the scope for manipulating supplies to meet demand, but planning is essential in all cases (and two-way communication with the farmers). As water is a scarce resource in irrigation schemes, the importance of this planning process cannot be overemphasized, but unfortunately there are too many occasions when this process is not carried out even in its most elemental form.
The preparation of an Irrigation or Crop Plan implies the following main steps:
- Estimating future water supply
- Estimating water demand of the expected cropping pattern
- Matching supply and demand.
5.2.1 Estimating future water supply
The estimation of the future water supply may be a fairly straightforward calculation or a rather complicated one, depending on several factors such as the characteristics of the dry and wet season, the type of water storage utilized, the reliability of climatic data, or the effective rainfall during the irrigation season.
Simple cases of determination of the water supply are: (a) pumping or diversion from a river, with an average flow much greater than the one pumped; (b) pumping from fairly abundant aquifers; (c) dam storage where the season for filling the reservoir does not coincide with the irrigation season during which hardly any water contribution can be expected. In all these cases the available water resources are known precisely at the beginning of the irrigation season.
However, there are many other cases in which a certain degree of uncertainty exists about the availability of the water resources. In these, the management of the project should make its projections on the basis of conservative estimates, i.e. using a rainfall probability of 75 or 80 percent. The mathematical modelling technique, based on reliable climatic data, can also be a very useful tool to forecast the water available for different levels of risk. In any case, it is most important in these circumstances to have alternative plans which can be adopted according to changing climatic conditions. In other words, rather than a fixed plan, a dynamic programme is necessary which can be modified according to changes in the weather. Technically; this is quite feasible, but the usual bottleneck is the rapid transfer of this information to the farmer, so that he can adjust to the changing conditions.
5.2.2 Estimating water demand
The water demand is basically determined by the expected cropping pattern and the irrigation efficiencies at the farm and project level.
i. Cropping pattern
The difficulty of foreseeing the expected cropping pattern on an irrigation scheme varies according to the degree of freedom allowed to farmers in their choice of crops and the timing of their cultivation activities. It is least difficult under conditions of land settlement projects with an integrated management: the government through the operating agency controls the cropping pattern (and, often, the timing of certain cultivation activities, e.g. mechanized land preparation). Alternatively, demand can be controlled by means of differential control over the water supply pattern (permitting certain highly water-consuming crops to be grown only in certain designated areas which will be the only ones to receive sufficient water); or legal limits can be placed on the areas to be covered by certain crops (with fines being exacted for contravention of the rules). Or, finally, there can be a free choice of cropping, when response to market demand will be the main determining
factor.
These restrictive measures will be discussed in greater detail under 5.2.3.
In irrigation schemes where the management has recognized authority over the cropping pattern, a good method to keep a balance between the cropping pattern desired by the farmers and the management is the use of approval or rejection forms. The farmer proposes a cropping pattern which is examined and computed by the project management in terms of water requirements. The farmer is informed whether his proposal has been rejected, approved or slightly modified. In the case of a rejection, the farmer must propose another cropping pattern. If rejected again, the dispute can be settled by a special committee of appropriate representatives.
On the contrary, in irrigation schemes where the management has no authority over the cropping pattern, information must be gathered from statistical data from previous years and study of the trends in relation to expected prices of different crops. This kind of data should be gathered in the Operation Service office, but sometimes it is collected by other government offices; for instance, in the Indian subcontinent, cropping patterns are often recorded in detail by the land and water revenue officials.
To make accurate calculations of monthly project water requirements, information is needed not only on the expected cropping pattern but also on the actual water requirements (which will vary according to the stages of crop growth) of different crops under different soil conditions. This basic agronomic information is often not available to (or used by) system operators (particularly where Irrigation and Agriculture belong to two separate organizations). This emphasizes the need for a small planning unit - at least in a large project - within the Operation Service where such data are collected and processed effectively.
Once all these data are known, the calculation of the monthly crop water requirements must be made. A variety of well known formulae exists to undertake this exercise. Those described in Irrigation and Drainage Paper No. 24 (FAO 1977) and the methodology followed therein are recommended. Calculators and small desk computers can be valuable tools for calculation.
ii. Irrigation efficiencies
To complete the evaluation of the demand, the efficiency of the water distribution system and of application must be known. This is usually the weakest point in estimating the demand, because such evaluations are rarely made in the field as they are time-consuming and the qualified staff needed to undertake them are frequently not available. This again stresses the need for some specialized unit to take care of this important function. These functions could be integrated within the formerly mentioned "planning unit" or in the Irrigation Assistance Service (see Chapter 7), depending on local circumstances, but the important thing is that they are carried out by someone.
In the absence of reliable field data on efficiencies, empirical data from the abundant literature on the subject can be used.
5.2.3 Matching supply and demand
Once calculations regarding the supply and demand have been completed, the most difficult part of the exercise begins: to decide on water distribution practices or other measures which allow the closest possible matching of supply and demand. Before discussing such practices and measures, it is useful to recall the most common situations that can be found in matching supply and demand. Although the spectrum of possible situations is very large, three main cases can be clearly distinguished:
i. Irrigation schemes where water supply is greater than or equal to the demand.
ii. Irrigation schemes with a moderate water deficit.
iii Irrigation schemes with a large water deficit.
i. Irrigation schemes where water supply is greater than or equal to the demand
This is the most favourable situation from the management point of view. Although systems with relatively abundant water are easier to operate, they are likely to be less efficient in terms of returns per unit of water distributed than systems with some degree of scarcity. This kind of situation often corresponds to the construction period of very large irrigation schemes in which, until their completion, demand is considerably lower than supply. It is also typical of incomplete schemes.
In technically well designed schemes, supply and demand should match fairly equally. However, it is not only important to check the seasonal volumes needed but also to check if the demand in the peak month can be met. When the supply is smaller than the peak month demand, the usual corrective measure is to advance the planting dates of some of the crops in order to avoid coincidence of peak demands.
ii. Irrigation schemes with a moderate water deficit
A moderate water deficit (10-20 percent of the water supply available) is often encountered in irrigation schemes. This can either be a periodic situation found only in "dry" years or recurrent every year. In the first case, it is normally an accepted risk in the design of an irrigation scheme, while in the latter it can often be attributed to designs associated more with social factors than technical ones, although other factors (changes in planned cropping pattern, overestimation of the potential water supply, technical deficiencies of the system, etc.) may also have led to this kind of situation. Whichever the case may be, these irrigation systems offer the best potential for maximizing the returns from the water that is available.
Suitable water distribution practices and methods, combined with some of the measures pointed out below, can be extremely useful in matching, as far as possible, supply and demand in these schemes.
iii. Irrigation schemes with a large water deficit
There are many irrigation schemes, particularly in the Middle East and Indian subcontinent, which command an area much larger than can actually be irrigated. The water deficit is often greater than 50 percent of the available supply. However, these schemes were not designed to irrigate the whole command area at cropping intensities of 100-200 percent. In their case, 'demand' may be fulfilled if 40-60 percent intensities are achieved.
Many of these schemes were designed with the important social objective of benefitting as many people as possible; others were merely the result of an underevaluation of crop water requirements; still others were aimed at maximizing government revenue. Whatever the reason, these projects have frequently yielded less than expected. Production per hectare is low and large areas are sometimes abandoned due to salinity problems. Some of the reasons for such a state of affairs were:
- that although the efficient use of water was essential, the farmers were not assisted in preparing their lands (land levelling, grading) for efficient use when water supplies were limited;
- the same can be said about irrigation practices suitable for salinity control and efficient water use;
- that no preventative measures (drainage system) were taken to prevent build-up of soil salinization;
- that the water distribution network was much longer than it should have been; therefore losses were bound to be greater.
These problems do not only occur in irrigation systems with large water deficits; they can also happen in any of the others. The crux of the matter is that under very limited water supply, these problems are likely to have more damaging effects.
Some of these problems can be corrected a posteriori through the rehabilitation and improvement of the scheme, although this entails greater difficulties and costs than if the project had been suitably designed and operated from the beginning. The point to be made here is that where water supplies are extremely scarce in "socially designed projects", it is possible to obtain high returns from water, provided good management (i.e. ensuring regular and predictable water supplies) is ensured, suitable technical designs are implemented and the farmer is assisted to use water efficiently.
5.2.4 Restrictive measures to match supply and demand
Several restrictive measures and water distribution practices can be utilized by the project management to reduce the gap between supply and demand. Obviously such measures apply mostly to situations described under (ii) and (iii) of 5.2.3.
The measures that can be taken to reduce the water deficit are related to:
i. the cropping pattern
ii. the water distribution practices
iii. the water fees.
They are not mutually exclusive and a combination can usually be recommended.
i. Measures related to the cropping pattern
There are three main measures that can be undertaken to reduce water demand: (a) changing the planting time; (b) changing the existing crops for others with lower water requirements; and (c) reducing the irrigation area. Of all the possible measures these are the most effective to reduce water deficit but they are also the most difficult to implement. They require that the management of the irrigation scheme be invested with the necessary authority to introduce such changes in the cropping pattern. Otherwise a long dialogue may take place between the management and the farmers to convince them of the necessity for this measure which may not always end with a positive decision.
a. By suitable regulation of the planting time and other cultivation activities large reductions can be attained during the peak demand of an irrigation scheme. For instance, in Taiwan (Province of China) water supplies are very carefully varied according to the stage of crop development and farmers know that in order to obtain enough water at periods of peak requirements (for land preparation, etc.), they must keep to a pre-planned timetable. Careful planning of this kind also allows controlled staggering of cultivation activities between different sections of the same irrigation system leading to a more rational use of available machinery and manpower.
b. Changing the existing crops for others is an effective measure to reduce water demand, e.g. clover for alfalfa, sorghum for maize, etc. However, the condition must be met that the two crops have similar characteristics or end purposes. Otherwise there is the risk of introducing crops which may have very low water requirements (soybeans, groundnuts, etc.) but that are not financially attractive to the farmer. Therefore the possibilities for applying this measure are limited.
c. Reducing the irrigated area is the most expedient way of reducing the demand, but it is difficult to implement. Rather than physically reducing the irrigated area, the usual measure is to reduce the water allocation which in turn should lead to a reduction in the area irrigated by the, farmer. However, the farmer often decides to take a risk and instead irrigates a much larger area than technically feasible. As pointed out earlier, with suitable levelled land and using good water management practices, the risk taken by the farmer might yield high returns - but unfortunately this is rarely the case.
Other methods of reducing the cropped area are:
- eliminating the areas furthest from the distribution point (quite common in small tank schemes in S. India and Sri Lanka, where the farmers may have fragmented holdings some near the tank, others farther away);
- giving water to certain sections of the command area only, with the sections being rotated from season to season. This is only feasible where irrigation is supplementary and farmers in sections not receiving irrigation water are able to grow rainfed crops in the season concerned.
ii. Measures related to water distribution practices
There are only two measures that can be used to lessen the water deficit:
(a) reducing the water allocation but keeping the same water distribution method?
(b) changing the water distribution method to a more efficient one.
a. Reducing the water allocation can be effected in different ways:
- by allocating water to preferential crops
- by decreasing the amount of water being given per irrigation
- by extending the interval between irrigations.
Allocating water to preferential crops: This is common where high value crops (fruit trees, nursery produce, vegetables) are grown near to less valuable ones. In such cases, the regulation is sometimes established that the valuable crops must receive their necessary allocation and whatever is left can be utilized for the other crops. This was the case in the Gezira Irrigation Scheme^1 (Sudan) where the irrigation of cotton took precedence over any other crop. This kind of measure is easy to implement provided that the interests of the farmers and the management are the same, which is generally the case.
Decreasing the amount of water given per irrigation: This can be done in a manner proportional to the deficit with no regard to the possible effects on the crop yield or, on the contrary, by trying to decrease the amounts in such a way that the effect on crop production is minimized. The first alternative is the most commonly adopted because of its simplicity, but the second one offers much better possibilities, where it can be applied. An example calculation according to this latter alternative has been given in Annex II (Case b). The calculation is based on new developments resulting from studies made on crop yield response to water (FAO 1979). This method can be extremely effective in irrigation schemes concerned with one single crop, but its effectiveness decreases with the number of crops grown because the intervals that fit one crop well may not necessarily do so for others.
With measures like these, the reduction that can be expected in the water demand is moderate. Large reductions in flow in canals will often hamper their operation, e.g. the canals of northern India are designed to run above 75 percent capacity and will not distribute water proportionally if run below this figure.
Extending the interval between irrigations is the measure most commonly used to cope with water deficits. For example, if in one given year the system is able to provide 8 irrigations but the following year the supply is only half this amount, the system will deliver 4 irrigations at double intervals of time. Although this measure is most common, there is, however, as in other cases, also the possibility of giving the 4 irrigations at times when the crop can make best use of the water. As in the previous case, an example has been worked out in Annex II (Case a) using the same principles of crop yield response to water. Similarly, the effectiveness of the method is reduced by an increase in the number of crops grown in the scheme.
b. Changing the water distribution method: Among the different water distribution methods described in detail in the next section, it is to be expected that some will be more efficient (assuming comparable situations of management and technical design) than others. The possibilities of changing the water distribution method are very limited since a certain method is normally linked with a specific technical design.
In most cases, changing the method also means changing the physical system to some extent. However, even in cases where there is no need to alter the physical system, a switch is difficult to introduce because farmers have been used to a particular system for many years. When such changes are intended, it is advisable to try them out in a pilot area and later extend them to the rest of the system when the positive attributes of the new method have been demonstrated.
^1 This policy changed later because of a reduction in cotton prices on the international market and an increase in the water supply to the scheme.
iii. Measures related to water fees
Increases in the water fees tend to decrease the amount of water used. However, this measure should be exercised with great care and only where the preconditions for its use exist. One precondition is that the water distribution system must be equipped with water measuring devices at the farm level, in order that prices of water can be associated with the volumes received. Another important requirement is that the farmer must have some understanding of the soil-plant-water relationship, otherwise he will continue to use the same amount of water as before and simply pay more for it.
The possible effects of a large increase in water fees should always be studied carefully before actual implementation. There have been cases where a large increase was introduced but the farmers refused to pay, putting the management in a difficult position (see Chapter 8 for more details).
5.3 Distribution of water (implementation)
5.3.1 On-demand
5.3.2 Semi-demand
5.3.3 Canal rotation and free demand
5.3.4 Rotational system
5.3.5 Continuous flow
The actual distribution of water has different characteristics depending on the water distribution method utilized. The main water distribution methods are:
- On-demand: Water is available to the farmer any time that the intake or hydrant is opened. Therefore the amounts to be used are not limited but water consumption is usually metered and paid for by cubic metre.
- Semi-demand: Water is made available to the farmer within a few days (generally 2-7 days) of his request. The amount is often limited to a certain volume per hectare.
- Canal rotation and free demand: Secondary canals receive water by turns, for example every 7 days, and once the canal has water farmers can take the amount they need at the time they wish.
- Rotational system: Secondary canals receive water by turns and the individual farmers within a given canal area receive the water at a pre-set time and generally in a limited quantity.
- Continuous flow: Throughout the irrigation season, the farmer receives a small but continuous flow that compensates the daily crop evapotranspiration.
As stated earlier, the water distribution method is normally linked to the design of the conveyance system - although there are exceptions; therefore once a water distribution method has been selected there is little possibility to change it. The selection of the water distribution method is thus an important matter where social, technical and economic characteristics must be taken into consideration. Each of the methods has its own characteristics which may, or may not, suit local conditions. They are briefly discussed below.
5.3.1 On-demand
On-demand irrigation systems are generally designed with high-level technology. The degree of human intervention is minimal since they operate on automatic principles, i.e. when the water level or pressure drops in a canal or pipe due to the opening of an inlet, the level or pressure is immediately reinstated by an automatic device which calls for a greater supply, provided by automatic gates or valves. The efficiency of these systems is very high (up to 90 percent) particularly when using pipes for the distribution.
There is very little actual operation in these systems and that is limited to some overall control of the automatic system, which is usually done through remote control panels located at the management office. Although the manpower requirements are small, the people must be highly qualified.
The great advantage of this method is that it allows the farmer to use the water when it is most necessary for the crops. The main disadvantages are high costs and the need for a high level technology in the construction and maintenance of the systems. Thus the systems are more suitable for developed countries than developing ones and rather unsuitable for the least developed countries.
The success of on-demand systems in developing countries depends on many factors but, in any case, the closed system (pipes) has better possibilities than the open canal system. The reason for this is that in the latter the automatic gates are susceptible to blockage by vegetation or misuse by human intervention and once the automatic regime of the canal is disrupted the chances of overtopping are great, with subsequent damage. On the contrary, pipe systems have the important advantage that they cannot be manipulated by anyone, and thus operational and social problems (e.g. stealing of water, etc.) are reduced.
5.3.2 Semi-demand
This is perhaps the most common system of water distribution due to its simplicity. A farmer requests the water from the water guard, who passes the information up to the water master. He makes the necessary calculation to accommodate it with the demands of the other farmers within the limited capacity of the canal. If the demand can be met, the information is passed back through the water guard to the farmer with an indication of the exact time of his turn. In irrigation systems where the canals have been designed with a certain flexibility, the request is usually met within a short time (2-3 days), although sometimes 6-7 days can elapse in the case of canals with little flexibility and high demand.
The amount to be supplied to the farmer is usually fixed in relation to the number of hectares. A known amount of water is an indispensable requirement for such a system, otherwise the water master cannot calculate the time and flow needed for each request in order to prepare the water distribution programme.
This form of distribution requires a well-designed and constructed irrigation system since the flows delivered by the canals should be well-known, and the intakes should also be capable of delivering the requested flow.
The water guard has a crucial role and he must be a man trusted and respected by the farmers. It is preferable that he lives among the farmers of the canal in order to facilitate communications, and he must be able to undertake elemental calculations to adjust demand and supply.
To avoid possible excess in water use by the farmers some restrictions may be imposed, such as: the number of irrigation per year is limited, or a certain time (7-10 days) must elapse between two requests for water, or those who in a given month have already received water have a lower priority than those who have not, etc.
Another advantage of this system is that when the need arises (peak month) or during exceptionally dry years, it can also function on a fixed rotation.
The only disadvantage of this distribution system is its low efficiency at times of low demand, because the opening and closing of canals for a few farmers could imply considerable losses. However, the problem is mitigated since at times of low demand water losses are not so relevant.
5.3.3 Canal rotation and free demand
This system is adopted particularly where there is mixed control of management. The public administration undertakes the operation of the main and secondary canals, and the farmers either take the water freely from those canals or distribute it themselves from a smaller canal.
The main feature of this system is that canals receive water in turns. For instance, in Upper Egypt, all the canals of a given region are classified as either A or
b. All those classified A receive water for seven days, and are then closed for seven days, while the B canals receive water when the A are closed. These turns may be changed during the irrigation season and vary from region to region.
The duration of the turns is generally the result of experience in the area. When the number of crops grown in the irrigation project or region is fairly large, there is not much opportunity for rationalizing the duration of the turns. However, where the number of crops is limited or some crops clearly prevail, the duration of the turns can be determined in a rational way. Annex II gives an example of a generalized procedure for the determination of the minimum irrigation turns.
When it is their turn, the farmers take the water from canals on free demand or they may eventually establish some kind of rotation among themselves. In the first case, which is the more frequent, the canal must be designed to cope with a concentration of demand at any time.
This type of distribution can be handled easily by public organizations but it implies large operational losses. The low efficiency of the system is mainly due to the fact that demand and supply are disassociated: canals are filled every turn irrespective of the demand. Some adjustments can be made in the canal water levels according to the demand pattern but still operational water losses are bound to be high. The system can easily be improved by properly organizing the farmers along the watercourses and regulating the flows according to the requests received from the groups of farmers on each watercourse. Under this hypothesis the system could be much more effective.
5.3.4 Rotational system
In this system all canals receive water by turns and farmers on the tertiary canals or watercourses receive water at a pre-set time and in the allowed quantity. This system is an improvement on the previous one where the rotation is not only of the main canals receiving water but also of the farms. It is a highly efficient system from the operational point of view and socially fair since it gives an equal chance to everyone.
There are several ways in which a rotational system can be implemented:
i. The water is distributed by turns of equal duration throughout the irrigation season. The farmer receives the water on a fixed day for an amount of time that is always constant, regardless of the crops that he may plant.
ii. The water is distributed by turns of different duration, longer at the beginning and end of the irrigation season and shorter in the middle, according to crop demand. The order of distribution within each turn is always the same and the amount delivered is constant throughout the season.
iii. The water is distributed by turns of different durations and the amount delivered also changes throughout the season. The amount delivered is calculated according to the actual crop water requirements.
The degree of technicality increases from (i) to (iii) and this not only refers to the actual calculation of the amounts of water to be delivered but also to the design of the irrigation network. For instance, method (i) can only be applied if the irrigation network has water measuring devices for each farm.
Method (i) is the simplest of the three and perhaps the most widely used. Socially speaking, it is a fair method, since it gives every user an amount of water proportional to the amount of land. If water is extremely scarce, the method is still quite efficient as the farmer must adapt his cropping pattern to the fixed turns. Calculations for the water delivery are simple and can be made easily.
Method (ii) requires a little more technical knowledge as the intervals must be adapted more to the actual needs of the crops. This can be very effective when the scheme is concerned with monoculture but the more diversified the production, the less effective will it be.
Method (iii) technically offers the best opportunity to meet crop water requirements and achieve greater water efficiency. However, it is difficult to implement. First of all, water measuring devices are needed at the farm level in order to measure the amount of water that must be delivered. Secondly, the management must have an excellent communication system in order to inform the farmers well in advance about their turns. Thirdly, since the calculations for the amounts of water to be delivered are made by the management and change from one irrigation to the next, the system is very vulnerable to malpractice. Fourthly, the calculation procedures are quite complicated and lengthy, needing qualified staff for their execution. As a result of all these requirements, this method is rarely used, in spite of its theoretical advantages.
5.3.5 Continuous flow
In most of the rice growing areas, paddy fields are submerged continuously throughout the crop growing period. In irrigated conditions this permanent submergence is normally achieved by providing a continuous feeble flow that compensates the crop's daily evapotranspiration and percolation. Any excess water is drained away from one field and provides the supply for the next lowlying field.
Continuous flow is perhaps the simplest water distribution system, but it is also the least efficient because delivery is generally from field to field, resulting in large evaporation losses. These are inevitable since the water moves from top to bottom in a thin, but extensive layer. Under this system water losses by deep infiltration and excessive runoff are high.
Where water is scarce, the continuous flow system can lead to considerable social unrest because farmers on higher land get the water needed while those lower down get very little or nothing.
Although continuous submergence of paddy fields has certain advantages (saving of labour, prevention of crop damage, better control of weeds, etc.), the system is more and more restricted to areas where water is plentiful and its efficient use is therefore less important.
In areas of water shortage, continuous flooding is gradually being replaced by "intermittent irrigation"^1. With this system, any paddy field can be filled or drained at will by the farmer within the restrictions imposed by the irrigation and drainage network. Of course, it implies the existence of a complete and usually expensive system of irrigation and drainage with the necessary control structures. Water savings of 20-30 percent can be obtained by intermittent irrigation, when compared to continuous irrigation. This system also helps plant growth through periodic drainage and reduces any tendency for fertilizer to be leached.
^1 The term "intermittent irrigation" means the intentionally controlled supply of water to paddy fields by the farmer.
5.4 Monitoring the operation
This is an extremely important activity, with two main purposes: (i) short-term: acting as a means of management control - comparing the actual pattern of water distribution with what it should have been and helping to identify reasons for divergences; and (ii) long-term: amassing information on water supply, demand and performance etc. in past seasons as a guide to planning and implementation in forthcoming seasons.
In larger schemes, a full-time monitoring and planning unit should be attached to the Operation Service to undertake these functions, as indicated in Figure 11.
Besides the day-to-day activities in relation to water distribution, important functions that this unit could perform are: (a) the preparation of the annual Irrigation or Crop Plan; and (b) preparation of the Annual Report covering the irrigation season to account for the water distribution affairs throughout the season. It is essential that only relevant information (for the purposes of performance evaluation and future planning) should be included. A lot of Annual Reports are compiled for routine purposes only and are of very little value as management tools because the wrong information has been collected, or the information collected has not been correctly collated or analysed. It is also important that the accuracy of the data should be regularly checked; this means checks not only on equipment (e.g. measuring gauges) but also on the junior staff who do the recording.
A monitoring and planning unit could also be extremely useful in irrigation systems affected by drainage problems, in order to monitor the behaviour of the system. Irrigation systems affected by problems of periodic increases in sediment in the water or poor quality could also benefit greatly from the services of the monitoring and planning unit.
The establishment of agro-meteorological stations within the area of an irrigation scheme is most advisable in medium or large schemes to provide data for sound calculation of crop water requirements and water balance studies. The systematic collection of these data is essential for the proper operation of the system. Whether these data should be collected by the monitoring and planning unit, the irrigation scheme itself or the meteorological services is largely a question of internal agreement between these organizations, but in any case the data must be made available to the management of the irrigation scheme.
5.5 Staffing the operation service
5.5.1 Water guards
5.5.2 Operators of large structures
5.5.3 Pump-set operators
5.5.4 Water masters
5.5.5 Chief of the operation service
5.5.6 Auxiliary staff
To function adequately an Operation Service requires the following personnel:
- Water guards
- Operators of large structures (main canal gates and intakes and dam gates)
- Pump-set operators
- Water masters
- Chief of Operation Service
- Auxiliary staff (drivers, clerical staff, secretaries).
The main responsibilities and manpower requirements for each of the above personnel are discussed below. With regard to the staffing, it should be noted that it can vary greatly depending on the technical characteristics of the irrigation system (number of control structures, complexity of information required about farmers' demands, etc.) and the social attributes of the farmers (educational level, size of holding, etc.). Staffing requirements are also obviously affected by the nature of local transport facilities and telecommunications.
5.5.1 Water guards
Ditchriders, ditchtenders, water guards, guards, water bailiffs, "zanjeros", and some other local names are used to designate this key man in the operation of the irrigation scheme. They are the main communication channel between the scheme management and the farmer, so the success of a smooth relationship between the two parties depends on their capabilities and honesty. Their main characteristics are described below:
a. Job description: Although these may vary slightly according to the type of scheme, the usual tasks are:
- distribute and control the flows that each intake must deliver
- open and close intake gates or valves
- collection of the water requests
- preparation of the daily forms for the water delivery
- communication to the master water guard of the request for water
- control of the canals and watercourses to avoid unauthorized use of water
- compilation of agricultural and water data as needed
- delivery of water bills.
In many irrigation schemes, the water guards not only perform functions related to the operation of the system but also maintenance work during the off-season. In such cases the added duties are:
- cleaning of the irrigation canal and ditches
- small repairs in the small hydraulic works (intakes, siphons, joints, etc.)
- supervision of workers doing any needed major repairs
- repairing and maintaining gates.
b. Qualifications: Basic primary school education is normally sufficient to undertake these functions. Water guards should have neither relatives nor properties in the areas they serve. They should be people of recognized honesty. They should also have farming and irrigation experience.
c. Manpower requirements at scheme level: The number of water guards needed at the scheme level is greatly influenced by the type of water distribution used and by the number of intakes to be controlled. Table 1 gives some average standards derived from projects in several parts of the world. Local circumstances, such as ease of access, particular configuration of canal layouts, transport facilities, etc., may introduce considerable variations in the manpower requirements. As far as possible the water guard should be made responsible for entire ditches or watercourses, because there could be friction between people due to differences in criteria for the water distribution.
Table 1 WATER GUARDS REQUIREMENTS FOR EACH 5000 HA^1
Type of water distribution
Very large
Size of the farm^2
Large 5-10 ha
Medium 2-5 ha
Small 2 ha
On-demand
NA
NA
NA
NA
Semi-demand
Canal rotation-free demand
NA
NA
NA
NA
Rotational system
Continuous flow
^1 The figures quoted are averages of data gathered from several projects. Local circumstances, such as transport facilities, ease of access, particular configuration of canal layouts, etc., may reduce or increase the above standards. The figures refer to fully-developed projects.
^2 It is assumed that each farm has one intake. When an intake serves several farms, it should be considered as a unit, made up of all the farms served by the intake.
NA = not applicable
5.5.2 Operators of large structures
The operation of main canals and large secondary canals requires a specialized operator to handle the flow regulating hydraulic structures. These operators have responsibility for the structures in a given stretch of canal. A main intake may require one or more operators depending on its complexity and hours of work.
Main canal operators are frequently given round-the-clock responsibility and should therefore live in proximity to the stretch for which they are responsible, housing being provided by the management. They are often connected by telephone or radio with the Head Water Master in the main office. Information from the water guards is passed to the main office, where it is computed and orders for the control of flows are passed back to the canal operators.
The same applies mutatis mutandis to the operator of dam sluices where the main use of the dam is for irrigation.
a. Job description:
- read the water levels in the canal, river or reservoir
- transmit data to Head Water Master
- manipulate gates and structures as indicated by main office
- receive data from master guards as to the required amount of water, and transfer data to the main office
- report to the Head Water Master any malfunctioning of gates and structures
- control and report on the state of maintenance of the stretch of canal for which he is responsible.
b. Qualifications: Completed secondary school education can be sufficient. Some mechanical knowledge is desirable.
c. Manpower requirements at scheme level: Data from several projects indicate that one canal operator can cover 10-15 km depending on the number of hydraulic structures in the canal. The main intake needs one or two people depending on the complexity of its operation. One person is also sufficient for the operation of the dam gates.
5.5.3 Pump-set operators
Where pump-sets are used either for lifting groundwater or surface water, pump operators are needed. They are particularly liable to abuse their positions because they have monopoly control over distribution within the areas commanded by their pumps. To keep this situation in hand, effective management control systems are especially important, linked to incentives, e.g. through promotion, to induce correct operation.
a. Job description:
- start and stop engines and motors
- operate engines or motors under the most suitable conditions
- provide for the regular maintenance of pump and engines/motors
- check the well discharge regularly check the number of hours that the pump is utilized by each farmer or group of farmers (where applicable)
- ensure the requisite supplies of fuel oil and grease are available.
b. Qualifications: Those who complete secondary school education can be pump operators provided short training courses are given to them on the operation of pump-sets. It is desirable that pump operators be mechanics, or alternatively have mechanical training; however such people are usually in short supply. Where the pump operator is responsible for providing the water to the farmers, he must be a man of known integrity because undesirable situations can arise when an operator accepts bribes from farmers or is a party to other malpractices.
c. Manpower requirements: Normally there is an operator for each pump-set (in the case of wells) for each turn of 8-10 hours. Where several pump units are grouped together the whole group also needs one operator for each turn. Manpower requirements for pump operators can be reduced by automation of the operation.
5.5.4 Water masters
Water masters, known also as "master water guards", "head water bailiffs", "water foremen" or "capataces riego", supervise the ditchriders and canal operators and are the main channel of communication with the Chief of the Operation Service. Such an appointment is only necessary when the group of water guards to be supervised is larger than 12-15, otherwise the Chief of the Operation Service can do the supervision himself.
a. Job description:
- receive the water request from the water guards transmit the water request to the Chief of the Operation Service
- coordinate, with the canal operators, the operation of the main canal gates
- transmit operational orders to the water guards according to instructions received from the Chief of the Operation Service
- supervise that the orders transmitted to the water guards are executed accurately.
Where the Operation Service is entrusted with maintenance responsibilities during the off-season, the water master supervises major and minor maintenance work.
b. Qualifications: Secondary school level. Ability to manage and direct people. Preferably he should have a number of years of experience on the same scheme.
c. Manpower requirements: The number of watermasters is dictated by the management rule that direct supervision can only be exercised over a limited number of people (5-10), although there are exceptions depending on the complexity of the coordinating and supervisory tasks, as well as on the nature of communications, transport, etc. In line with this rule, experience has shown that for most of the existing irrigation schemes, the standard is one water master for each 6-12 water guards.
The other determinant element is that the water master should, as far as possible, be responsible for one or several hydraulically independent sections, i.e. those served by a single canal.
5.5.5 Chief of the operation service
The Chief of the Operation Service - also called Irrigation Supervisor - is responsible for the operation of the whole scheme or a large section of it. His main function is to collect the information provided by the water guards, process it, and issue the operational orders to be executed.
a. Job description:
- responsible for the preparation of the annual irrigation plan
- contribute as required to the preparation of the annual report
- schedule the operation as planned
- supervise all the aspects related to the operation of the scheme
- impose fines and penalties on farmers breaking the rules as adopted in the rules or regulations of the scheme
- control operational expenses
- ensure the supply of materials necessary for continued operation.
Where the operation and maintenance activities are carried out by the same unit, the responsibilities of the Head Maintenance Engineer may have to be added.
b. Qualifications: The incumbent should be a qualified irrigation engineer (MSc), i.e. someone with a technical understanding of soil-water-plant relationships as well as engineering matters (hydraulics, construction, etc.). He should have at least five years of professional experience in the field. An agricultural engineer could also qualify, provided that proper experience in operational matters has been gained.
Fig. 11 Typical organization of an Operation Service
The ability to direct and coordinate people is an essential requirement.
c. Manpower requirements: A Chief of the Operation Service is needed for medium or large irrigation schemes (2000 to 50000 ha). For larger independent sections of 30 to 40000 ha, each with its own Head of Section, overall supervision is necessary by the Chief of the Operation Service. In the latter case, the qualifications of the Chief must be appropriately upgraded.
On the contrary, in small irrigation schemes (less than 2000 ha), the functions of the water master can be merged with those of the Chief of the Operation Service.
5.5.6 Auxiliary staff
Auxiliary staff (drivers, bookkeepers, clerical staff, etc.) should be limited to the minimum indispensable to undertake the necessary work. When possible, these services should be provided by a pool serving the other units (maintenance, administration, etc.).
5.6 Equipment
Little equipment is needed for the operational activities, although it does include items for transport. The following are usually needed:
a: for the Water Guards: portable water measuring devices can be used to check water flows when the irrigation system is not equipped with water measuring structures. Bicycles or motorcycles help to improve the service.
b: for the Canal Operators: radio or telephone for communicating with the main office. They should also have good transport facilities.
c: for the Pump Operators: adequate mechanical tools for their maintenance work. Transport of fuel, oil and grease should be arranged by the main office.
d: for the Main Office: small desk calculators and desk computers are necessary for medium-scale schemes. The value of using desk computers or larger ones depends on the complexity of the water distribution methods being used, but they are becoming increasingly popular in several countries (USA, France, Spain, Mexico and others).
5.7 Organizational structure
The hierarchical basis for the organization of the Operation Service was given in Chapters 2 and 4. The example given in Figure 11 illustrates a typical organization of an Operation Service. As mentioned earlier, the establishment of a Planning and Monitoring Unit to assist the Chief of the Operation Service is highly desirable, particularly in large and medium schemes.
<section>a</section>
6. Maintenance service
6.1 Main functions
6.2 Types of maintenance
6.3 Maintenance activities
6.4 Planning maintenance activities
6.5 Implementation of the maintenance programme
6.6 Staffing the maintenance service
6.7 Organizational structure
The irrigation network is perhaps the most costly element of an irrigation scheme and is designed to last a long time. However, all too often one finds that irrigation schemes not long constructed bear little resemblance to the original construction and design. Silt deposition, weed infestation, malfunctioning of structures and other undesirable situations make it practically impossible to control the flow in these canals. As a result, the system is unable to deliver the necessary water and distribute it equitably. It is not surprising that farmers working in those irrigation schemes sometimes feel frustrated because they know the potential benefits of irrigation and yet cannot realize their expectations.
On the other hand, there are many examples illustrating that with proper maintenance and cooperation among farmers in this task, irrigation systems may last much longer than their original designers or constructors ever envisaged. Irrigation schemes that have been in operation for centuries can be found in Spain, Egypt, Italy, Pakistan and other countries, and are a living testimony that properly maintained irrigation schemes can be of permanent benefit to many generations.
There are several reasons for poor maintenance: just to mention the most important:
- insufficient funds made available to the management;
- lack of interest by the farmers in participating or collaborating in the maintenance work;
- poor organization of the work.
The most widespread cause for poor maintenance in public irrigation schemes is the lack of sufficient funds for servicing and repair. As this not only affects the maintenance but the whole water management organization, it will be dealt with separately under the Administrative Service (Chapter 8).
Lack of interest by the farmers in participating in maintenance work is sometimes the chief reason for a state of disrepair of the tertiary canals or watercourses for which the farmer may have been made responsible. The reason for this lack of interest, demonstrated by the farmer disassociating himself from repair and maintenance work, can have various causes and be complex. In some cases, the farmer does not realize the importance of maintenance work nor does he know how to do it, or be feels that his work benefits others rather than himself. In yet other situations, the farmer does not identify the irrigation system as his own system and therefore purposely avoids any participation in the maintenance work. To improve such situations, each case should be analysed to discover the reasons for non-participation and the assistance of sociologists can be helpful in determining them.
Poor maintenance may also result from inadequate planning of such work, or it may be that the available resources have not been used to the best advantage.
This chapter provides some guidelines for the planning and undertaking of the maintenance work. It is assumed, for reasons of simplicity, that the project management is responsible for the maintenance of main and secondary canals.
One interesting observation regarding the need for maintenance is that it is greater in "low-cost technology" constructed irrigation schemes than in "high-cost technology". To illustrate the point: a concrete lined canal requires less maintenance than an earth canal. Since most of the developing countries tend to use low-cost technologies, because of limited funds, the consequence is that maintenance requirements should receive greater attention. Unfortunately, it is precisely in these countries that maintenance receives less attention, the causes being several, such as: poor administrative organization, shortage of funds, etc. The point to be made here is not that high-cost technologies should be used because less maintenance is required but that, when using low-cost technologies, special attention should be paid to the maintenance problem if the scheme is to work properly. Where there is little hope that maintenance will be satisfactory, the choice of a high-cost
technology design may be justified, but keeping in mind that, although the maintenance requirements of such schemes are smaller in terms of manpower, they require highly specialized personnel.
Another reason for differences in maintenance requirements is the degree of completion of the irrigation system. All too often, an incompleted irrigation scheme is handed over to the ministry (usually of agriculture) responsible for its 'operation and maintenance'. Obviously the difficulties of maintaining and operating such a system are much greater than those for a properly completed one. It should not and cannot be expected that a normal maintenance service will suffice for an incomplete system. Where this is the case, special units must be established to undertake this 'completion work'.
In India, where the completion of many schemes has been considered a matter of urgency, many of the recently established project authorities have special units to complete on-farm developments, i.e. to provide watercourses for water delivery to each farm and to ensure land grading which was not initially undertaken. Special completion or rehabilitation programmes may also be considered in these cases.
6.1 Main functions
The Maintenance Service is entrusted with the overall responsibility for keeping the irrigation and drainage systems working in a satisfactory manner, within the limitations imposed by the initial design.
Similarly to the Operation Service, the main functions to be undertaken are:
- planning the maintenance activities;
- implementing the maintenance activities planned and those unforeseen;
- monitoring the above mentioned activities.
Planning the activities to be undertaken in the following year is particularly important in countries where government allocations for operation and maintenance are made on the basis of planned expenditure. A good justification of the work to be done and the consequences if it is not undertaken is of foremost importance to obtain financing for maintenance work. Even where this is not the case, planning the activities that can be executed within the limited resources available is a useful exercise.
Maintenance activities can be more easily undertaken in the off-season, as during this period, labour from the farming community is normally plentiful. Furthermore, if farmers are engaged in maintenance work on their own land for their own benefit, they' are more likely to work willingly. Also, operational personnel are more free at that time of the year and can be engaged to supervise or execute part of the maintenance work themselves.
A Maintenance Service requires data for good planning which can be obtained by regular monitoring. Without reliable data on costs for the different units of work and on productivity no realistic planning can be done. Later in this text, productivity data are given for machinery and manpower engaged in maintenance operations. They will be helpful when planning and costing activities if no better data are available, but a project should endeavour to have its own data based on the specific conditions of the area.
6.2 Types of maintenance
There are three main types of maintenance, namely:
- routine or normal maintenance which includes all work necessary to keep the irrigation system functioning satisfactorily and is normally done annually;
- special maintenance including repairs of damage caused by major disasters, such as floods, earthquakes and typhoons. The unforeseeable nature of such natural phenomena make it very difficult to take specific preventive action, although general safeguards can be installed in particularly prone areas, e.g. large drainage dykes in flood areas. In irrigation schemes located in places subject to these hazards, a "special reserve fund" or budget allocation should be established for repair work;
- deferred maintenance including any work necessary to regain the lost flow capacity in canals, reservoirs and structures when compared to the original design. It often includes large modifications to the canal system and structures arising from important changes (cropping patterns, drainage problems, etc.) that have occurred in an irrigation scheme. In practice, its difficult to differentiate between so-called 'deferred maintenance' and a 'rehabilitation programme'. The difference is mainly of a financial nature, because 'deferred maintenance' is normally undertaken with funds from the national budget allocated to operation and maintenance while rehabilitation programmes are considered as an investment and the funds come from a different source (loans, national development banks, etc.).
This chapter is mostly concerned with routine maintenance, and to some extent with deferred maintenance.
6.3 Maintenance activities
6.3.1 Dam and reservoir
6.3.2 Irrigation network
6.3.3 Drainage network
6.3.4 Rural road network and flood protection dykes
6.3.5 Pump stations
6.3.6 Ancillary works
The maintenance activities for which the Maintenance Service is responsible should be clearly spelled out in the by-laws of the irrigation scheme. While some activities are clearly a responsibility of the Service (silt removal in canals, weed clearing, etc.), there are others not so precisely defined, for instance, rural roads, ancillary works, buildings, the cleaning of the drainage system. Nevertheless, it has 'been decided to include in the text all potential activities that could be the object of maintenance with a brief description of their characteristics and relative importance.
The maintenance activities have been grouped according to the major elements of an irrigation system; they are: (i) dam and reservoir; (ii) irrigation network; (iii) drainage network; (iv) rural road network and flood protection dykes; (v) pump stations; and (vi) ancillary works. They are described below.
6.3.1 Dam and reservoir
Maintenance activities in a reservoir itself comprise:
- controlling aquatic weeds,
- removing large debris (e.g. tree trunks) floating in the water that may damage hydraulic works,
- monitoring the water quality: not only from the salt content point of view but also from a biological standpoint in order to detect possible sources of pollution,
- surveying the solid deposition in the bottom of a reservoir.
These activities require little time because they are periodic with the exception of aquatic weed control, which is in any case only likely to be a severe problem in tropical and semi-tropical climates. However, they are extremely important in order to detect promptly the need for corrective action.
The most common water weed in reservoirs in semi-tropical and tropical areas is the water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes). This plant represents a serious problem because it forms an ideal environment for mosquito larvae and has an evaporation several (2.2 to 13.4) times greater than an open surface of water. The plant has a very fast rate of growth: two plants can produce enough offspring to cover one acre in less than eight months.
Another frequent problem is eutrophication (over-abundance of nutrients in the water bodies) resulting in high production of blue-green algae and the associated phenomenon of lack of dissolved oxygen in the water. This problem, which is very serious if the water is used for urban water supplies, is less important when the water is used for irrigation, the main consequence of the latter being an increase of vegetation in the irrigation canals and greater weed infestation. Injecting compressed air into reservoir water has proved to be a satisfactory solution on several occasions but there are other techniques that can be applied.
The main maintenance actitivies for an irrigation dam are: lubrication of gates, anti-corrosion treatment, cleaning of debris, control of filters, and some other minor work. Earth dams require greater maintenance, especially the upstream slope where weed control is necessary once or twice a year. The electro-mechanical system of a dam must also receive proper maintenance, particularly electric engines, head gates, and the lighting system. The maintenance of these elements is rather specialized and the manufacturers of the equipment usually provide detailed instructions.
6.3.2 Irrigation network
The canals in irrigation networks are generally either of earth or concrete-lined and their maintenance characteristics are quite different.
i. Concrete - lined canals
Concrete-lined canals should require little maintenance, provided that they have been properly constructed and any potential problems studied (subpressure, gypsum soils, swelling clays, etc.) and adequate technical solutions provided. One of the main reasons for constructing concrete-lined canals is precisely to reduce maintenance operations.
The routine activities include: replacement of joints, replacement of damaged concrete slabs, weed control in joints and on the surface of concrete slabs, control and treatment of filters, control and removal of silt. In the case of concrete flumes, chemical sterilization is also needed around the supporting structures.
Under normal conditions, the silting in concrete-lined canals is not an important problem since water velocity is high and sand traps and silting basins are often provided to reduce the solid content of the water. Heavy rain may cause deposition of solid materials if the berms are not properly formed. Drifting sand may be a serious problem in schemes surrounded by desert or bare land and subjected to strong winds. The most effective way of preventing this type of silting is to install windbreaks or barriers where sand accumulates before reaching the canal.
Removal of silt from concrete-lined canals is an expensive operation because it is mainly manual. Mechanical equipment can be used when specially adapted to avoid damaging the lining. In some irrigation schemes, the technique of flushing "quick water" through the canal is used to remove silt from one place and concentrate it in another where it can be more easily removed or disposed of. For this purpose, the canal should be run at its maximum capacity to reach the highest possible velocity.
Weed control should not be a major problem in lined canals, although aquatic weeds must be periodically removed. Later in the text, guidelines are given for weed control in both lined and earth canals.
The main problem in concrete - lined canals is cracking of the lining and eventual eruption of concrete slabs due to subpressure. Apart from repairing the damaged lining, corrective action must be taken. Usually the installation of subpressure valves is enough to relieve the pressure, but this involves major work. An alternative measure can be the construction of a subsurface drainage system to lower the water level.
ii. Earth canals
There are four main problems in earth canals requiring maintenance attention and, although they are closely interrelated, they will be treated separately.
a. Silting
Excessive sedimentation is perhaps the most common problem affecting the performance of earth canals. Malik (1978) identifies the following causes for canal siltation:
1. excessive silt entry at the main canal intake
2. disproportionate withdrawal by branches
3. prolonged heading up at control points
4. drifting sand
5. inadequate transport capacity of channels
6. re-entry of excavated material by rain and wind action
7. malfunctioning of intakes
8. haphazard sediment excavation
9. excessive weed growth
10. wrong channel regulation.
Causes 1 to 5 indicate defective design, 6 to 9 inefficient maintenance, while 10 denotes improper channel operation. Corrective measures for defective design are difficult to implement since they require major physical changes which imply heavy investments. However, the effects of defective design can be reduced by proper maintenance. For example, an erroneous angle between the parent branch and canal may induce the formation of a sand shoal which, if allowed to develop, will accelerate the silting process, thus compounding the consequences. Incorrect operation is also a major cause of silting. Canals carrying a heavy load of material in suspension should not be allowed to run at less than three quarters of their capacity since at lower capacities the velocity decreases inducing silting.
Abrupt shutting of gates, causing rapid changes in flow velocity, may induce bank erosion near the gates.
b. Weed infestation
Weed infestation can seriously impede the flow of canal water not only in tropical conditions but also in semi-arid and arid climates. There are two groups of weeds:
- earth weeds: they root in the soil and their habitat is not the water; they proliferate on the canal slopes and in the banks, benefitting from favourable soil moisture conditions;
- aquatic weeds: they can either root in the water or the earth but their habitat is in the water. Robson (1976) classifies them as follows:
· emergent plants - these are plants growing in the water and whose foliage emerges above the surface, e.g. the common read (Phragmites communis);
· floating leaved plants - there are two sub-groups with floating leaves: in one, the plants are rooted in the mud and their leaves float flat on the surface, in the other, plants are not rooted but free-floating on the surface;
· submerged plants - this group consists of plants whose foliage is totally submerged; a number of them produce flowers which emerge above the surface; one or two plants are free-floating, but most are rooted in the mud;
· algae - this group consists of a variety of algae of various forms, including unicellular algae and the large filamentous forms.
The relevance of the type of weed to the method of control will become apparent when control measures are discussed. Some of these weeds, such as nutgrass (Cyperus rotundus), are not only a problem in the operation of the canals but can become a menace for the farmers when water transports them into fields. There they reproduce rapidly and become a serious problem because of the difficulty of eradicating them.
Another hazard of weed infestation is the shelter and good breeding conditions they offer for vectors (mosquitoes, snails, etc.) of debilitating diseases.
c. Water infiltration
Water leaks through canal banks can be caused by burrowing small crabs and water rats or by rotting plants and roots which were not removed from the canal bank seat during construction. Ants are also known to be a problem even in concrete-lined canals. These leaks can be repaired by following the path of the leak through the bank either by hand digging or hydraulic backhoe if available and once the path has been found, the trench must be carefully backfilled and compacted. Canal leaks, if not repaired in time, can result in major breaches in banks causing far greater inconvenience and most costly repairs.
Water seepage through porous soils may also be a major concern. Seepage through banks can be considerably reduced by trenching them and burying a plastic membrane or thick slurry made from the excavated material. The trench is backfilled with sand after the barrier has been interred.
d. Erosion of banks
Canal banks can be eroded by heavy rainfall or wind, improper canal operation, stock grazing or passage by drinking animals, and the transit of vehicles. Heavy rainfall or wind can cause serious damage to unprotected banks. Seeding of grasses in the unwetted part of the canal is a cheap and effective protective measure. Short growing varieties (e.g. Agropyron riparium (streambank wheat-grass), Psathyrostachys juncea (Russian wildrye), Festuca ovina (sheep fescue) and Phleum bertolonii (dwarf timothy)) give good results.
Abrupt and rapid shutting off of canal water may also contribute to erosion of the banks. The practice of leaving a canal empty during the rainy season will contribute considerably to erosion of canal slopes.
Cattle and sheep damage the channel banks in different ways (Swales 1976). Cattle tend to push the moist bank material at the waterline into the waterway when they drink. Sheep, however, graze the banks bare thereby allowing wind and rain to wash away the bank material.
Erosion of canals can be repaired by mechanical means or manually by re-building the worn canal banks. However, care should be taken to construct a proper join between the old and the new part, otherwise the canal will deteriorate at the same place.
The most effective measures are of a preventive nature: such as seeding grass mentioned earlier, fencing the canals, and constructing special places for animal watering and bathing.
6.3.3 Drainage network
The retention in good working order of open drains includes the following operations:
- light deforestation
- weed control in the canal section
- seeding grass in the canal section
- maintenance of flow gauges and other measuring devices
- removal of silt
- maintenance of pumping stations where water cannot be evacuated by gravity.
For practical purposes, the maintenance of open drains is very similar to that of earth irrigation canals. However, all too often drainage networks receive much less attention than the irrigation ones. The result is that during heavy rain, when they are much needed, they do not work as they should.
Drainage maintenance should always be programmed from downstream to upstream, and as far as possible completed within an irrigation season. The intervals in regular maintenance should not exceed periods of 2-3 years between two consecutive cleanings.
Tile drains are subject to two main problems: (a) obstruction due to silting and plant roots, and (b) mineral deposits. The most common is the first. Mineral deposits of iron and manganese occur quite frequently in some irrigation schemes and the time necessary for such depositions varies widely from a few months to 30-40 years, depending on the mineral composition of the soil.
Methods for cleaning the drains are discussed later in this publication.
6.3.4 Rural road network and flood protection dykes
Rural roads are of vital importance in irrigation schemes, especially at harvest time. Many post-harvest losses can be avoided and better marketing facilities obtained by having a fully serviceable rural road network. Whether such networks should be maintained by the Project Management or by the local administrative divisions (village, district) is an internal matter than changes from country to country, and the appropriateness of one or the other position will not be discussed here. For comprehensiveness, it is assumed that such maintenance is the responsibility of the Project Management but let it be understood that this is not always the case. The same consideration applies to flood protection dykes constructed along river banks.
i. Types of roads and their upkeep
Maintenance requirements are different for each type of rural road; these are:
a. all-weather roads (paved)
- surfaced with bituminous macadam
- water-bound macadam
b. dust-roads or access tracks
c. berms of canal banks and dykes.
All-weather roads are mostly damaged during the rainy season combined with the action of traffic. Repairs imply removal of loose material, refilling of holes with the base and sub-base material, compaction of the layers and resurfacing. Most of these operations are normally manual except for the compacting which is done with heavy rollers pulled by tractors and the hauling of crushed material by trucks or trailer/tractor units depending on the haulage distance.
Macadam roads are more susceptible to damage than bituminous surfaced roads, but they are also easier to repair with the machinery normally available to maintenance units (scrapers, motor-scrapers). Dust roads deteriorate rapidly in rainy conditions and become unusable without proper maintenance. Unfenced roads can also be damaged by stock using the tracks. Repairs and maintenance can be greatly reduced by keeping the shoulder drains in good condition to evacuate excess water quickly. These tracks are usually graded by mechanical means for long stretches, whereas a small tractor-mounted blade is used for small sections. Grading can only be done when soil moisture conditions are suitable. This entails either waiting long periods before the machinery can be brought to the damaged places or in the other extreme, wetting the surface.
Maintenance of the berms of canal banks or flood protection dykes is similar to that for dust roads. Preventive measures, such as prohibition of traffic on banks and berms which are not supposed to be used by heavy machinery (trucks, tractors, etc.) may considerably reduce the maintenance needs. Flood protection dykes can be badly damaged in severe flood conditions and as such situations cannot be anticipated, their repair must be by so-called special maintenance, for which special budget allocations are needed.
6.3.5 Pump stations
Pumping stations for irrigation schemes may be:
a. main irrigation lift-pump stations (surface water or groundwater);
b. booster-pump stations for additional lifts in the main or branch canals;
c. drainage-pump stations.
The first two are usually of medium to high lift, required to pump forecasted quantities of water for long continuous periods. The last is usually for low lift with much larger quantities of water and required to operate intermittently. The irrigation pumps are usually manually controlled whereas the drainage station is frequently float controlled to ensure automatic starting once drainage levels in the scheme begin to rise above a pre-set level. A manual operator should also be on call even with an automatic control.
Operation and maintenance tasks for electric pump stations are comparatively simple, those for diesel operated a little more complex. The operators must be given clear instructions on safety measures, on the methods of starting the pump motors and the way in which they must be brought into full operation. Electric motors sometimes require to be stepped up in speed manually at a strictly controlled rate. Also canals may be damaged if all pumps come rapidly into full operation.
They must also be given a programme of irrigation quantities to be pumped i.e. 1, 2 or 3 etc. pumps to be operating. Where 24 hour pumping is not provided, account must be taken of the rate of rise and fall of canal levels in the irrigated area. It is of little use with a 12 hour pumping schedule if canals do not fill up until late in the morning and still remain full long after dark.
In case of an emergency, there must be some system for easy communication between the pump house operator and the officer in charge - either telephone or signal or runner.
6.3.6 Ancillary works
The hydraulic structures in an irrigation scheme include: gates, inlets, spillways, outlets, dividers, siphons, jumps, check dams and other minor structures. Maintenance of such items, when they are constructed in concrete, is restricted to the removal of silt and obstructions. The mechanical elements require periodic greasing. Iron elements require antirust treatment. The same applies to structures in drainage networks (culverts, drainage outlets) and those in road networks (bridges, culverts, crossings, etc.).
Administrative buildings and some other special installations (stores, workshops) require a certain amount of upkeep and should not be overlooked.
6.4 Planning maintenance activities
6.4.1 Inventory of the works
6.4.2 Volume of maintenance activities
6.4.3 Optimum cycle of maintenance
6.4.4 Machinery and manpower requirements
6.4.5 Costing and establishing maintenance priorities
In order to be able to formulate a maintenance programme, the following steps must be taken:
i. make an inventory of all the works that require maintenance;
ii. determine the volume of maintenance activities to be undertaken annually;
iii. establish the optimum cycle of maintenance for each type of work;
iv. determine the machinery and manpower requirements to undertake the maintenance;
v. budgeting and establishing the maintenance priorities.
6.4.1 Inventory of the works
Most irrigation schemes already have maps available, also lists of the main works and structures, but for maintenance purposes it is necessary to group the latter into types with similar characteristics. In this way, calculations can be simplified and machinery utilized to the optimum. The grouping is a peculiarity of each irrigation scheme. As an example, the "Secretaría de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos" of Mexico (SARH) classifies an earth canal for maintenance purposes as follows:
Canal Type
Width of Base
Height of Water
(m)
(m)
A
B
C
D
E
Other works (roads, structures, lined canals, etc.) can be grouped similarly.
6.4.2 Volume of maintenance activities
In order to prepare a maintenance programme, the amount of work to be undertaker under each category of maintenance must be known. Many of these activities are mentioned in 6.3 of this Chapter. A detailed list of maintenance works should be prepared for the main elements in the irrigation canal network, the drainage system, and for work concerning roads, buildings and workshops.
The extent of work to be undertaken is in most cases determined by visual inspection, followed by detailed measurement of the volume, area, or unit lengths of each task. The most complex estimate is generally that of silt clearance, since owing to variations in the sections of the canal and consequent differences in water velocity, the silt is deposited unevenly. The amount of silt deposition in the different stretches of a given canal may quite well differ 3-5 times.
In order to determine the amount of silt to be removed, a topographical survey is made by taking the sections every 50 or 100 m according to the required degree of precision. With the data obtained the area of the sections is calculated. The volume of sediment (Vp) for each stretch of length &, will be:
V[p] = ½(A[1] + A[2]) l
where A and A are the transversal section of the sediment and l the length of the section, and therefore for a canal of constant section:
V[p] = {½(A[1] + A[n]) +A[2] + A[3] + .....A[n-1]} l
Once all the measurements of the maintenance are complete, they should be grouped according to activity in order to study the manpower and machinery requirements.
6.4.3 Optimum cycle of maintenance
The optimum cycle of maintenance is the time that can safely elapse between two consecutive maintenance operations of a constructed element (canal, road, drain, etc.) without that element failing and disrupting the efficient operation of the whole. A certain degree of malfunctioning (10-20 percent reduction in absolute efficiency with respect to the design) is normally acceptable between the two consecutive maintenance operations. For instance, in a given canal, a reduction of the flow by 15 percent in relation to the design capacity-may be acceptable during the silt removal cycle of three years. If the reduction in flow is greater, water distribution will be adversely affected and the cycle will have to be shortened to one or two years.
Therefore, for each servicing activity the optimum maintenance cycle must be known. As it is determined by local factors such as climate, length of irrigation season, quality of the water, quality of the construction, etc., it should be based on experience gained in the particular project. During the initial years, when such experience does not exist, it is usually advisable to rely on experience gained by other irrigation schemes with similar conditions in the country. As a general indication, the cycles of maintenance used by SARH are given in Table 2.
6.4.4 Machinery and manpower requirements
The next step in the maintenance programme is to determine the machinery and/or manpower required to undertake the amount of work already identified. Several methods can be used for the maintenance work, but the first decision is whether it should be manual or mechanical. In general, preference is given to machinery in high cost technology projects because the original reason for constructing them in that way was influenced by the scarcity of labour and the availability of technically skilled personnel. On the contrary, low cost technology projects should rely as far as possible on manual labour. As far as technically and economically feasible, maintenance should be by local labour and only where it is not possible is resort made to machinery, particularly since most of the irrigation projects are in areas where labour is plentiful. In some cases, there may not be sufficient labour to undertake the requisite amount of work in the time available and thus the use of machinery
becomes unavoidable. This is the case in Egypt where a period of one month (January) is available for maintenance.
As there are many maintenance activities, it is not always possible to have the ideal machine for each specific activity. Therefore, versatile machinery is preferable to highly specialized.
Table 2 OPTIMUM MAINTENANCE CYCLES^1
Type of Canal
Maintenance Cycle (years)
IRRIGATION CANALS
Low silted water
High silted water
Silt clearance
A
B
C
D
E
Weed clearance
A, B, C, D, E
Reshaping of berms
A, B, C, D, E
Structures (metallic)
Large structures
Small/medium structures
DRAINS
Silt clearance
A, B, C
D, E
Weed clearance
A, B, C, D, E
Structures (all types)
DAMS
Weed clearance
Soil conservation works
Masonry
Gates
Electric engines
- revision
- overhaul
ROADS
Weed control
Road reshaping
Maintenance of road berms
Structures
^1 Standards used by SARH (Secretaría de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos, Mexico).
The machinery or manpower requirements can easily be calculated once the output of the machinery or labour for a given maintenance task and the amount of work to be done are known. The productivity of manpower and machines for the most important activities are discussed below.
i. Silt clearance
Silt is still removed manually in many parts of the world, provided that the water levels in the canals can be lowered sufficiently or, even better, the canals dried for several days. This method is quite effective, although the actual organization of the work can be a problem. Labour, its organization and supervision are discussed in section 6.6.
Where water-borne diseases are known to be prevalent, the use of labour should be restricted to those canals that can be dried completely for several days, otherwise mechanical means should be adopted.
Productivity of labour is generally low due to the muddy conditions in which they often work. Although some effort has been made to increase productivity by developing more appropriate tools like dredging scoops, specially designed digging hoes and forks, traditional tools (head baskets and shovels) are still used and productivity remains low. Output therefore varies widely from 2 to 8 m^3/manday, depending on several factors such as working conditions, tools, lifting and hauling distance.
Several types of machines are utilized for silt removal and canal reshaping. The productivity depends largely on how well suited the machine is to the particular work. As already mentioned, only large irrigation schemes are likely to have specialized machinery for each type of maintenance work. Table 3 rates the productivity of machinery most commonly used for removing canal silt and reshaping, but most of these machines can do a certain amount of weed clearance at the same time, which affects their productivity. The given rates are applicable to medium or small size canals and refer mostly to dry working conditions. The output will be reduced by 20-30 percent under wet conditions except for the machines (dredgers) specially designed to work in running water.
The selection of machinery is mainly influenced by its reach and working conditions: wet or dry, accessibility, amount and type of work, weed infestation, etc.
Table 3 MACHINERY FOR CANAL CLEANING*
Type
Productivity
Characteristics of use
Remarks
Dragline excavators:
(a) small (0.3 m^3)
80 m/day^1/
· works from the canal banks on dry or running channel
Versatile machine adaptable to several jobs and working conditions.
120 m/day^2/
Spoil can be dumped clear of canal banks.
300 m/day^3/
· reach: 9-10 m
Care needed to avoid damage on compacted bed channels.
To be used when desilting job smaller than 3000 m^3/km of canal.
(b) large (1 m^3)
100 m/day^1/
· works from canal banks on dry or running channel
Similar to small dragline excavator.
160 m/day^2/
· reach: 18-20 m
Suitable for jobs greater than 3000 m^3/km.
500 m/day^3/
Hydraulic excavators:
(a) back-actor type
800-1000 m/day^4/
· digging depth: 5-6.5 m
They are normally crawler mounted and all hydraulically operated.
· reach: 6-8 m
· works from canal bank for maintenance work or from the rear in construction of new canals
· a great variety of buckets can be fitted
More appropriate for construction of new canals.
· can be used for desilting or weeding jobs
Those mounted on rubber tyres require firm ground conditions.
Hydraulic excavators:
(b) telescopic boom (Gradall Type)
1000 m^3/day^5/
· digging depth: 6-7.5 m
Can handle several jobs but highly suitable for excavating new drains or canals and heavy maintenance work.
· reach: 9-11 m
· bucket can be rotated hydraulically
Compares favourably with the small dragline.
· tilt capacity is often 90° (other types only 45°)
Hydraulic backhoes:
(a) tractor mounted
300-600 m/day^2/
· digging depth: 3.5-4.5 m
More powerful and robust than trailer type.
· reach: 5.5-6.5m
Suitable for construction and maintenance work.
· slew: 180°
Normally associated with a front- end loader attachment.
The most common type is the side shift which can be mounted at each side of the tractor.
Can be used effectively for excavation, desilting and weeding jobs.
Needs good footing.
(b) trailer mounted
200-400 m/day^2/
· digging depth: 2.8-4.0 m
· reach: 4.5-6.0 m
Highly suitable and economic for maintenance work.
· slew: 180-190°.
· hydraulic pump of the hoe is driven by the drive-shaft of wheel tractor
Can work in difficult positions, while prime mover remains on level standing.
Dredges
100-200 m/day^6/
· good for use in marshy ground or canals that cannot be cleaned from banks. Also good for removal of soft weeds
Highly specialized machine.
· maximum depth: depends on model but for small dredges 2 m
Useful for concrete-lined canals since no damage is produced when fitted with suitable skid plates.
· spoil (slurry) on nearest bank or collected in special pontoons
Difficult to transport and to move in and out of canals.
· cable and winch system for locomotion needs strong anchorage points along banks
Flat bed ditchers (Briscoe type)
3000-5000 m/day^7/
· operates within the waterway, towed by tractors from each side; therefore can only work on dry canals
Needs powerful crawler tractors for towing (D6, D7).
12000 m/day^8/
· bed width: 1.2-4.2 m
Most ditchers have their own engine and hydraulic system.
Experienced operator needed.
More suited for construction of new canals or reconstruction work.
Rotary digger
400-600 m/day^8/
· bed width: 0.4-1.0 m
· operates within the canal
Powered by PTO of wheeled tractor.
· suitable for quick removal of light siltation and soft weeds
Works canal bed and batters simultaneously.
Bulldozer
300-400 m/day^9/
· spreading of excavated material.
Also used for road maintenance, light deforestation and rough land levelling.
· used as prime mover of attachments mentioned above
Grader
500-800 m/day
· finishing of canal banks and spoils
Better suited to road maintenance work and levelling jobs.
Notes:
^1/ With standard bucket and for heavy excavation.
^2/ With light-weight bucket and for removal of silt and vegetation.
^3/ With the weed bucket but does not include any cleaning of the batters.
^4/ Refers to remodelling of badly silted canals,
^5/ Equipped with the 2.4m wide bucket.
^6/ Desilting of 1.5m wide canal. Rates for soft weeds are much higher,
^7/ For normal cleaning operations towed by a D6 crawler tractor.
^8/ Light cleaning operation, with wheeled tractor.
^9/ Refers to spreading of excavated material with a -medium size machine (D6).
NB: The equipment listed is the most commonly used but many specialized machines (pontoon mounted excavators, rotary brushes - tractor mounted, flushing machines, etc.) are also available on the market.
A combination of labour and machinery is particularly frequent in lined canals, where silt is removed and accumulated at certain points by labour and then removed by mechanical means.
ii. Control of canal vegetation
Weeds are normally removed by cutting, mowing or dredging. Emergent and submerged weeds are best cut near the base of the stem, leaving roots and rhizomes undisturbed. Weeds need cutting at regular intervals throughout the season and the interval varies according to the environmental conditions and species. In temperate zones during the summer, it is usually no more than four weeks. The stage of growth at which the plant is cut affects the rate of growth; cutting at an early growth stage tends to be more effective than at a later one.
Four main methods are used to control canal vegetation mechanical, (c) chemical, and (d) biological. The choice primarily on the availability of labour, the predominant environmental and economic conditions. (a) manual, (b) of method depends weed species, the
a. Manual
Much of what has been said for the manual removal of silt applies to this method of weed control. However, since it requires a little more skill, the choice of an appropriate hand tool is more important and will lead to relatively, high productivity. Table 4 illustrates some of the characteristics of these hand tools and their related productivity.
Table 4 HAND TOOLS FOR CONTROL OF CANAL VEGETATION
Type
Use
Dimension of Canal
Productivity
Scythe
Submerged weeds + grass and reeds on banks
Small canals up to 0.6-0.8 m depth
15-25 m^2/hour
Sickle, grasshook
Submerged weeds + grass and reeds on banks
Small canals up to 0.75-1.25 m depth
8-12 m^2 hour
Rake, fork
Removing cut material, lifting floating weeds, removing algae
Highly variable depending on weed species and vegetation density
Chain knives and chain scythes
Submerged weeds + grass and reeds on banks
up to 6 m width
4-60 m^2/hour (two or three labourers)
b. Mechanical
There are many types of specially designed machines available for specific weed control purposes. In some cases, it is preferable to adapt a regular farm, tractor for use with different attachments. Rubber wheeled 40-60 hp farm tractors can travel along channel banks with a maximum slope of 1:3 percent using the PTO (power take-off) for the implement. This operation requires neither specialized operator nor training nor equipment. For slopes steeper than 1:3 percent, hydraulically operated machines are available. Tractor-dragged chains are more effective on steeper slopes. Two 60 hp tractors can easily handle channels 6 m wide. Mower and cutter attachments are used mainly for grass and reeds on banks of watercourses, while buckets are more appropriate for emergent and submerged weeds. Launches can be used for mowing and cutting emergent weeds on banks, if the size of the channel permits their passage. Boats with cutting attachments are particularly useful for large waterways
of shallow depth (up to 2.5 m) and where floating vegetation prevails. Details and productivity of the different types of machinery are given in Table 5.
Table 5 SPECIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF POWER MOVED TOOLS FOR CONTROL OF CANAL WEEDS^1
Type
Attachment
Use
Outreach
Productivity
Remarks
Tractor powered attachments or trailers
Oscillating grass cutter Bar
Emergent weeds
3-6 m
1-2.5 km/hr^2
Machines can only work on one side of the canal at a time (crossing places Industrial tractors (70-150 hp) increase outreach to 8 m.
Rotary cutter
Emergent weeds
1-2.5 km/hr^2
needed to complete operation).
Flail mower
Emergent weeds
1-2.5 km/hr^2
Chain, harrow
Submerged + emergent
Width: 2 m
0.5-3 km/hr
Hydraulic excavator with attachments
Oscillating grass cutter bar
Emergent weeds
horizontal outreach; 6-12 m depth: 3-5m
800-1200 m/day^2
Wheeled machines 1 metre less effective outreach than tracked machines.
Rotary cutter
Emergent weeds
0,1 ha/hr
Can work on both sides of canal at same time.
Flail -mower
Emergent weeds
0,1 ha/hr
Mud bucket
All types
400-600 m/day^3
Weed cutting bucket
All types
600-800 m/day^3
Dragline
Weed rake Mud bucket
Submerged + algae +emergent
9-21 m (dragline throw)
500 m/day3
Max. channel width depends on access and configuration of channel
Large boats C10-15 hp)
Oscillating rigid knives
Bank weeds + floating leaved plants + emergent weeds + algae
Width; 6-10m
1-4 km/hr with a width of cut of 1.5-2.8 m
Max. depth of cut: 1.5-2.8 m$ min. depth of cut: 0.5-1.0 m;-max. riverflow velocity: 2.5 km/hr.
Modified (T type) grass cutters
Wilder 'D' shaped cutter
Small boats C4-5 hp)
Oscillating knives grass cutter
Width; 5-6 m
1.4 km/hr with a width of cut of 1.0-1,8 m
Max. depth of cut: 1.0-1.8 m; min depth of cut: 0.5-1,75 m; max. riverflow velocity: 2.5 km/hr.
^1 Adapted from Robson (1976) and other sources.
^2 Covering a swathe of 1,5-2 m,
^3 Refers to the complete cleaning of medium sized canals (5-6 m width),
c. Chemical
Chemicals have been developed which can control weeds effectively and safely, provided that adequate precautions are taken. They also offer an economic system of weed control in certain circumstances. The use of herbicides should, however, be limited because of their possible adverse effects on the environment. It is known that some herbicides may affect the quality of water to the extent that it becomes harmful to humans, animals and crops. Therefore, they should be selected with care. Where their use may prove hazardous, it may be necessary to limit or even prohibit them. Table 6 gives a summary of some available herbicides and their use.
d. Biological
Biological control may become more important in the future in view of the disadvantages of other methods (high costs, danger to the environment). The most common method is the introduction of an animal, fish or insect which feeds especially on the problem plant. Recently, attention has been given to the use of the grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) for the control of submerged weeds and, in some cases, it appears to be an economical and effective way of control.
The introduction of competing plants (grasses) has been tried but this is not appropriate in watercourses where the flow must be unobstructed.
Sometimes weed growth can be prevented by fluctuations in the water regime, for example, holding a canal dry for 3-6 days is most effective in the control of algae. In the Bhukra Irrigation System in India, a system was developed to drain the canals and let them dry for five days; this prevented weed growth for six months. However, the success of this method depends on the weed species.
iii. Road maintenance
Road maintenance is work well suited to execution by labour, although hauling base and sub-base materials over distances greater than 200 m and compacting are operations more appropriate for mechanical means. There are several useful combinations of labour and machinery that depend on the local wages and availability of machinery.
Table 7 gives some generalized information on the machines most commonly adopted for road maintenance. Motorgraders, complemented with a water bowser and roller, are particularly useful for remodelling macadam and dust roads. Tipper trucks combined with loaders are normally used to haul base material for distances over 500 m, which is usually the case. The scraper is more suitable for short distances but there is rarely opportunity for its use in road maintenance work. Medium size bulldozers are also useful in some of the remodelling work before a grader can be used efficiently.
Table 6 SELECTED HERBICIDES FOR CONTROL OF AQUATIC WEEDS^1
Type
Use
Dose
Safety interval^2
Remarks^3
Aromatic solvents
Submerged weeds
40-80 ppmv^4
Inject under water. Toxic to fish. Distasteful in water
Acrolein
Submerged weeds
4-7 ppmv
Inject under water. Very toxic to aquatic fauna
Amitrole-T
Floating + emergent weeds
1-1.5 kg/ha
Spray on foliage. In USA can only be used in drainage canals
2,4-D amine salt
Broad leaved plants near water
2-4 kg/ha
3 weeks
Spray on foliage, especially for water hyacinth
2,4,5-T
Ditch bank control (woody vegetation)
4 kg/ha
Spray on plants
Dalapon
Aquatic grasses + cat-tail
10-25 kg/ha
5 weeks
Spray on foliage, repeat applications. Safe to fish
Diquat
Submerged + floating weeds
1-1.5 kg/ha
10 days
Spray on foliage. Considered safe at recommended dosages
Dichlobenil
Submerged + some floating weeds
1 mg/1
4 weeks
Spray on foliage. No adverse effect on wild life. At high concentrations can be toxic to fish
Copper sulphate (CSP)
Algae
1.0 ppmw^5
Toxic to fish, distasteful in water when suggested dose exceeded
Sodium arsenite
Submerged + floating weeds
4 ppmw
Inject or spray, highly toxic (0.02 g may kill a man) to mammals. Its use is discouraged
Endothall
Submerged weeds
1.5-4 ppmw
7-25 days
Inject underwater. Some of the salts (long chain type) are toxic to fish and mammals
^1 Thomson (1976), Unesco (1974) and other sources
^2 Before use of water for irrigation
^3 Time to spray one hectare:
Hand operated back sprayer, 10 litres capacity
- 9 hours
Back mounted power sprayer
- 6.5-7 hours
Tractor mounted boom sprayer
- 4-5 hours
^4 ppmv = parts per million by volume
^5 ppmw = parts per million by weight
Table 7 MACHINERY USED FOR ROAD MAINTENANCE AND LAND GRADING AND RELATED PRODUCTIVITY^1
Type
Productivity
Optimum hauling distance
Bulldozer (130-150 HP)
400 m^3/day
100 m
Grader
1000 m/day
50 m
Tipper truck^2
300m^3/day
500 m or more
Loader/shovel (1.2 m^3 bucket)
300 m^3/day
20 m
Scraper towed (12.0 m^3 bowl)
1100-1200 m^3/day
100-250 m
Motor scraper (12.5 m^3 bowl)
1100-1200 m^3/day
250-500 m
Tyre or sheep foot roller
800-1000 m^3/day
Water bowser
1000 m^3/day
^1 Productivity figures are only an approximation; precise indications can be obtained from dealers when working conditions are known.
^2 Used in combination with loader or shovel.
iv. Cleaning tile drains
Tile drains are usually cleaned by mechanical means and flushing, although sometimes chemical methods are necessary to remove mineral deposits.
a. Mechanical
A hard PVC hose or rod of bamboos screwed together is pushed into the drain. A device is attached to the end of the rod or hose to stir up the dirt and/or remove it from the drain. Different attachments can be used, e.g. iron lamellar flaps, hollow pipe or brushes. This method will remove sand, roots and mineral deposits. Its disadvantage is that only a small quantity can be removed at one time.
b. Flushing
This method consists of pumping water under pressure into the drain, thus removing the dirt by jet action. It can be done with a high pressure nozzle (80-100 atmosphere) delivered from a farm tractor of about 40 hp, or with a low pressure nozzle (20 atmosphere) delivered from a movable motor; 1000 m/day of tile drain can be cleaned with this machine. Its disadvantage is that it only removes a small portion of the silt and in sandy soils there is the risk of sand entering the pipes. With this method drains of up to 350 m can be cleaned.
c. Chemical
Mineral deposits can be removed by injecting SO[2] at the upper end of the drain. Finding the upper part of a drain is not easy if it has not been properly marked previously. A convenient practice is to connect the upper end of a drain to a stand pipe. The cleaning must be carried out in wet conditions and the drain closed for about 24 hours after the appearance of the gas at the outlet.
6.4.5 Costing and establishing maintenance priorities
Costing the intended maintenance programme is an easy operation because the amount of work to be done has been determined and the basic unit prices are known. It may be important to present a detailed justification for some of the intended works emphasizing the consequences (financial and social) if they are not carried out. It is also advisable to earmark some funds for unexpected repairs. About 10-20 percent of the total budget for this purpose is generally accepted.
As in any budgeting operation, the initial estimates may have to be reconsidered and curtailed in relation to the finances available. This is often the case in public irrigation schemes, where allocated funds are considerably lower than those requested. At this point, the establishment of priorities is an important exercise in which all the units of the water management organization should participate. The maintenance programme is usually adversely affected by this kind of budgeting exercise because the effect of reducing the level of upkeep is not apparent in the short run. The establishment of maintenance priorities depends on many factors such as reduction of manpower and machinery, etc., and is therefore site specific.
6.5 Implementation of the maintenance programme
The implementation of maintenance activities is highly site specific in nature, but some general management principles can be applied, the most relevant of which are as follows:
a. Good planning is particularly important in maintenance work since the time and resources available for its execution are limited. The use of planning techniques such as critical path methods and bar diagrams, is helpful, though rarely put into practice.
b. Monitoring the output productivity is essential, not only to feed back the planning process with realistic data but also to control the progress of the work planned.
c. Farmers' participation in maintenance work should be encouraged. In some irrigation schemes the contribution of a number of mandays per farmer is spelled out in the by-laws of the scheme. In other cases the responsibility may be for specific studies of irrigation ditches. The Maintenance Service should provide technical guidance, organize and control the work.
d. Maintenance work on a voluntary basis is customary in some old irrigation associations but it is difficult to obtain in public irrigation schemes. In this latter case, the use of incentives such as food and transportation, is advisable and work should be restricted to special repairs that need unexpected large human resources.
e. Whenever unskilled labour is required, use should be made of the human resources of the farming community of the project.
f. Subcontracting part of the maintenance work may be advisable in certain circumstances and should be more frequently adopted. It reduces the number of permanent staff in a maintenance unit and is a system that can be adapted to maintenance conditions that change from one year to another. It is highly suitable for specialized jobs such as maintenance of electro-mechanical equipment of gates and remote control devices, placing and removing deep well pumps, etc. Irrigation schemes having few vehicles and machines should also consider the possibility of subcontracting their maintenance rather than having a poorly equipped workshop where maintenance may be of low standard.
6.6 Staffing the maintenance service
6.6.1 Labourers
6.6.2 Ganger or headman
6.6.3 Overseer
6.6.4 Work inspector
6.6.5 Machine operators
6.6.6 Mechanics
6.6.7 Chief of maintenance
A maintenance service needs the following kind of personnel:
1. Labourers
2. Ganger or headman
3. Overseer
4. Work inspector
5. Machine operators
6. Mechanics
7. Chief of Maintenance.
6.6.1 Labourers
Most of the maintenance workers are unskilled labourers. The basic unit is the gang consisting of 8-20 labourers under the supervision of the headman or ganger. The number of labourers required for a maintenance task varies widely since it depends on many factors: type of work to be done; labour/machinery substitution policy of the irrigation scheme; working conditions, etc. Table 4 and section 6.4 provide some standards for labour but requirements will depend on local conditions. Unskilled workers are seldom part of the permanent staff of a scheme, they are contracted for periods of time to undertake a certain task.
Skilled labourers are also needed for certain jobs such as pipe laying, masonry work, etc. They are often contracted on a piece-work system. Since such people are not easily available in the rural areas, it is advisable to have a number of them as part of the scheme's permanent staff, provided enough work is available for them throughout the year.
6.6.2 Ganger or headman
The headman is usually one of the workers and quite often elected by the group either because of natural leadership or on traditional grounds. Essentially, his function is to enforce discipline and to ensure that productivity targets are met. For most activities no special training is required; he need not be literate and his rate of pay is marginally higher than that of an unskilled labourer. As said earlier, he supervises a group of 8 to 20 labourers.
6.6.3 Overseer
When maintenance is undertaken mainly by labour, the overseer has the function of controlling the work of a group of 5-10 gangs. The more specialized the task, the smaller the group of gangs that can be controlled. In some countries, where labour intensive methods are currently used, the labour gangs and their overseers are provided by small contractors who are given contracts for specific tasks.
In other circumstances, when the operation and maintenance of a scheme are undertaken by a single unit, this responsibility is given to the water guard or ditchrider because most of the maintenance is done during the slack season.
a. Job description:
- organize and control the work of the group
- ensure proper standards of workmanship and productivity
- keep records of hours worked and work done
- maintain an adequate supply of materials and tools.
b. Qualifications:
The overseer is normally selected from the gangers because he has shown greater initiative and capability of leadership. He must be literate and have an understanding of work measurement. Secondary school level is desirable. In irrigation schemes where most of the equipment is mechanical, the overseer is normally a qualified machine operator promoted to this position after some years of work and having shown leadership capabilities.
c. Manpower requirements:
One for 5-10 gangs (labour-intensive)
One for 3-5 machine operators (capital-intensive).
6.6.4 Work inspector
Within a maintenance unit he is the key person upon whom depends the achievement of a good standard of maintenance. He is the man concerned with periodical supervision of items that may need maintenance, the preparation and estimation of work to be done and the supervision of the actual work at the site.
a. Job description:
- inspect periodically the state of the physical system (canals, roads, buildings) and prepare estimates for the maintenance needed
- report to the Maintenance Chief on the repairs needed
- set up the work to be done either by labourers or machinery
- measurement of work accomplished
- ensure that proper technical standards are achieved
- ensure that safety measures (in the use of machinery and chemicals) are followed.
b. Qualifications:
Work inspectors are usually promoted to this position having risen through the ranks from a manual labourer or an operator. They must have considerable supervisory capacity, as well as technical skill. People that have risen from the ranks have seldom had the opportunity to acquire technical skills; however through in-service and other training their abilities and qualifications can be improved.
c. Manpower requirements:
A work inspector is usually appointed for each group of 4-6 overseers.
6.6.5 Machine operators
Most of the equipment used in maintenance work (draglines, hydraulic excavators, motorgraders, trucks, loaders) is expensive and hence operators must be fully qualified. Productivity with the same machine varies widely, depending on the skills of the operator. Furthermore, the working life of a piece of equipment will rely largely on its proper handling and routine maintenance by the operator.
a. Job description:
- operate the equipment assigned
- undertake regular maintenance of the equipment assigned
- report the work undertaken and completed to the work inspector
- report the fuel and oil consumption
- report any incidental damage or breakage.
b. Qualifications:
Technical school with five years' experience in the operation of the equipment used in maintenance work.
c. Manpower requirements:
One operator per machine is the norm; however, if the machines are not in simultaneous or daily use, one operator can be assigned to 2-3 machines. Where it is necessary to complete maintenance within a very short period of time, 2 or 3 turns per day are established to keep the machine working the maximum possible number of hours per day.
6.6.6 Mechanics
Qualified mechanics are needed to repair the equipment. They are part of the staff of the maintenance workshop.
a. Job description:
Overhaul, repair and service the equipment used for maintenance work.
b. Qualifications:
Technical school with five years' practical experience in diesel engine and maintenance equipment repair.
c. Manpower requirements:
These vary widely depending on the functions of the workshop. The most common case is that the workshop does only simple repairs and major ones are sent to specialized workshops. If such is the case, a group of 2-3 mechanics with an equal number of helpers or apprentices can handle a machine plant of 20-30 units.
6.6.7 Chief of maintenance
Apart from the general duties of administering and organizing the maintenance work, the following tasks would also be his responsibility:
a. Job description:
- evaluate annually the maintenance work needed
- plan maintenance work in sequential order to achieve maximum utilization of available resources
- prepare technical and economic specifications of the work to be undertaken by contract
- order, account for and issue tools and materials
- supervise the upkeep of equipment approve payment of contracts
- issue instructions to subordinates on the work to be done
- report on maintenance costs to the scheme manager.
b. Qualifications:
BSc degree in Engineering and 5 years experience in irrigation engineering. Experience in maintenance of irrigation schemes is desirable. The ability to organize and direct people is also an indispensable requirement.
c. Manpower requirements:
A Chief of Maintenance is necessary for any irrigation scheme over 10000 ha. For smaller schemes, the functions of a chief of operations and maintenance can often be combined in a single person. For schemes over 50000 ha, it is advisable to have an Assistant Chief of Maintenance for each unit of 30000 ha who is, in turn, supervised by the Chief of Maintenance for the whole scheme. A Chief of Maintenance is assisted in carrying out his functions by various auxiliary staff (record and store keepers, secretarial services, drivers, etc.) as appropriate to the size and complexity of the scheme.
6.7 Organizational structure
For medium and small irrigation schemes (up to 20-40000 ha), it is common that the services of operation and maintenance are put together in a single unit. Responsibilities for operation and maintenance work often coincide in the same person and it is difficult to differentiate the 'maintenance service' as such; at the most there is a small unit mostly concerned with repair and overhaul of machines. Since operation activities are concentrated during the irrigation season and those of maintenance in the off-season, it would be logical to use manpower best by combining these activities in the same unit. However, there are also occasions when this arrangement is not suitable; for instance: (a) in many arid regions the irrigation season lasts 9 to 11 months, leaving too little time for the operation personnel to occupy themselves with maintenance; (b) there are schemes in such a bad state of repair that maintenance care throughout the year is needed to keep them functioning,
without deflecting attention to operational matters.
Whenever operation and maintenance are together in the same unit, some of the maintenance responsibilities are added or combined with those of the operation personnel; for instance, the water guards can also act as overseers, the water master can act as a work inspector, and the Chief of the Unit would cover operation and maintenance responsibilities. The organizational structure for maintenance activities is parallel to that of operation since, virtually, they are undertaken by the same staff. Therefore, the organization by areas and sections of the scheme, as indicated in Figure 11, prevails.
For large irrigation schemes, or whenever the maintenance activities are sizeable enough to justify full occupation of the staff throughout the year, the usual organizational pattern is to separate the operation and maintenance units. In this case the maintenance service can be organized in two ways:
i. by specialized maintenance units
ii. by areas (sections of the irrigation scheme).
The organization by functions is more suitable where there is a heavy reliance on specialized machines, i.e. in high cost technology projects and where labour is scarce and expensive. In less developed areas with greater reliance on manpower and poorer communications, a decentralized, area-based approach is likely to be more efficient. The two alternatives are briefly discussed below:
i. Organizational structure by functions: The basic idea is that by organizing small units specialized in a certain type of work, such as desilting and cleaning of small and medium canals, cleaning of tile drains, road maintenance, etc., higher standards of efficiency should be achieved. The size of the specialized unit in terms of manpower and machines is determined by the standard outputs which can be achieved under the local conditions and the cycle of maintenance for the particular work. Each unit is supervised by a work inspector and the work of all the units is programmed and controlled by the Chief of the Maintenance Service. Wherever the number of operators to be supervised is too large (more than 8-10), the unit should be organized by sub-units headed by an overseer (the most experienced of the operators) and the sub-units supervised by the work inspector. Figure 12 illustrates an organizational structure of this type where all the work is undertaken by machines.
ii. Organizational structure by areas: The scheme is divided into suitable sections as far as maintenance is concerned. The size of the section is quite variable and depends on the means available to undertake the work and the configuration of the scheme. As a guiding rule the whole maintenance of the section should be completed in a cycle of 3 years. A size of 10-15000 ha often meets that condition. For each of the sections a work inspector is appointed who is responsible for organizing the maintenance work as if the section were an independent scheme. In order to supervise the different activities he is helped by a number of overseers, who in turn are responsible for organizing the different maintenance tasks (desilting of canals, cleaning of drains, repair of roads, etc.). This system is often complemented by a pool of specialized machinery which, at the request of the section, is used for specialized jobs. Figure 13 illustrates an organization of this type where the
work is undertaken by labourers. Between the two cases outlined in Figures 12 and 13 there are other possible combinations.
Fig. 12 Organization of a Maintenance Service by main functions
Fig. 13 Organization of a Maintenance Service according to irrigation areas
<section>b</section>
7. Irrigation assistance service
7.1 Planning for the irrigation assistance
7.2 Objectives and main types of irrigation assistance at the farm level
7.3 Irrigation practices improvement
7.4 On-farm development
7.5 Tertiary canal system improvement
7.6 Manpower requirements
The introduction of permanent irrigation facilities should result in change from traditional rainfed agriculture - often at subsistence level - to commercial agriculture. This substantial change is unlikely to be accomplished unless the following conditions are met:
a. the water is distributed at the appropriate time and equitably by the physical system;
b. the farm has the necessary physical conditions to receive the water and use it efficiently; and, above all:
c. the farmer knows how much water to apply and when, and is familiar with the practices of irrigated agriculture.
A timely and equitable distribution of the water is not found as often as desirable. Besides the causes mentioned in Chapters 5 and 6 for the main systems, many irrigation schemes have serious deficiencies in the so called 'tertiary canal system' or 'watercourses' from which originate large water losses and uneven distribution. The rehabilitation of these canals together with an improvement in their O&M can bring substantial benefits in terms of greater water availability and better distribution. Most of the rehabilitation work can be done by the farmers or with their cooperation, but some technical guidance and supervision are needed. The establishment of suitable organizational arrangements for the proper O&M of these systems or courses is usually most difficult and time-consuming.
On-farm development work is frequently left to the farmers' initiative and is his own responsibility. However, in most cases, this is not a simple undertaking that can be carried out without any financial and technical help. If this happens, the result is often that farms are poorly prepared to apply the irrigation water which leads to severe water wastage and low crop production.
Last but not least is the question of the farmer's knowledge or experience in irrigated agriculture. The path to irrigated agriculture, for a farmer who has practised rainfed farming all his life, can be long and financially painful, if he is left to his own devices and to the "trial and error" method of learning. The process can be shortened and made less hazardous if a suitable irrigation technology is available (but this may require some applied research trials) and it can be transferred to the farmer's field.
For reasons of uniformity and simplicity, this chapter has been entitled "Irrigation Assistance Service" giving, perhaps, the idea that there is always a Service or Unit at the scheme level to undertake any assistance necessary for the farmer to make full use of the irrigation water. Although this is the thesis advocated in many instances, it is not always desirable or possible. The different organizational patterns for this assistance, as well as their main characteristics, are discussed below.
Irrigation assistance at the farm level is a relatively new approach (with one or two decades of existence) and few countries have attempted it. The observations made in the text are the result of a brief exposure to some of these experiences and therefore tend to be of a more general nature than those of former chapters. A much deeper study of the subject is needed to establish more conclusive recommendations and suggestions.
7.1 Planning for the irrigation assistance
The establishment of an Irrigation Assistance Service in any of its possible organizational forms is not a traditional element of the management of an irrigation scheme and therefore the first step in planning its implementation is to demonstrate that there is a need for it. The best way to do this is to carry out detailed studies to determine the deficiencies in the irrigation schemes, their origins and possible solutions.
Once the problems have been properly identified, the corrective measures can be costed and the possible benefits more easily evaluated. For instance, the PLAMEPA (On-farm Improvement Plan) of Mexico identified that 350000 farmers needed assistance and that physical improvements were needed over 1.5 million hectares; based on these data the cost of the programme was estimated at US$ 770 million for a duration of 7 years; the farmers' benefits were expected to increase by US$ 840 million/year. The preparation of the Plan took several years but it was financially attractive and funding was not difficult to obtain.
This example illustrates two important points: the necessity for investment in serious studies and surveys, and the need to demonstrate the programme's financial attractiveness - evidenced not only by the Mexican experience, but corroborated by similar undertakings in Pakistan, Indonesia and elsewhere.
Regarding studies aimed at demonstrating the need for assistance, the following points should be taken into account, with others relevant to the situation:
i. Surveys are required to determine the farmer's competence in irrigation practices and the need for training. Sociological surveys will also be needed to determine the possibilities of involving him in the improvements to be made as well as the organizational aspects relating to the future O&M of the watercourse. Special care should be taken that the sociological surveys result in practical and viable application.
ii. Evaluating the physical improvements (tertiary canal improvements, small hydraulic structures, land levelling, irrigation methods, etc.) is relatively easy and expeditious, when appropriate technical information exists (detailed topographical maps, aerial photos, etc.) but even when such information is not available, a survey can be made in a reasonably short time.
iii. Much more complex and time-consuming are surveys to determine the efficiency of water use at the farm level. They should be undertaken for a complete irrigation season at least (under the assumption that it is climatologically representative of the average conditions). In order to know the amounts of water consumed annually, it is indispensable to set measuring devices at the farm intake. Installing them and checking on consumption is a time-consuming operation. The problem is obviously simplified in schemes where such devices are part of the irrigation network.
iv. Determination of benefits - the conventional way is to determine the total amount of water saved and calculate the number of additional hectares that could be irrigated; the gains arising from those additional hectares are the benefits of the programme. A more technically sound method consists of evaluating the effect of the additional water on each of the main crops. For this exercise the water-yield response curves for each crop must be known, which is usually a bottleneck because they are seldom available for the site specific conditions.
7.2 Objectives and main types of irrigation assistance at the farm level
The main areas where irrigation assistance at the farm level is needed are:
- advice to farmers on how to improve their irrigation practices and to establish irrigated crops;
- assistance to farmers in improving the farm layout;
- encouragement for farmers to organize themselves into groups for the operation and maintenance of the tertiary systems and their improvement when needed.
A potential Irrigation Assistance Service (IAS) can therefore be engaged in numerous different activities depending on the particular needs of the irrigation scheme. In countries where on-farm developments are somewhat disregarded, the tendency should be for the IAS to concentrate first on designing a suitable farm layout and supervising its construction; and then at the second stage, to give greater weight to assistance on irrigation practices. In countries where the on-farm layout is part of the whole irrigation development process, the emphasis should be on helping the farmer to use suitable irrigation techniques, particularly scheduling of the irrigation water. Lastly, in irrigation schemes constructed long ago where experience is good with irrigated agriculture and the farm layouts are appropriate, the greater need would be to identify the areas where rehabilitation of the tertiary system is necessary, followed by better organization of the farmers to distribute the
water and operate the system. There are also other instances in which all these factors (farm layout, irrigation practices and tertiary canal system) may be satisfactory and there is no reason for an IAS, in which case, but this is unfortunately the rarest, ad hoc traditional extension services may suffice to cover the needs of the farmers, provided that they have staff knowledgeable on water issues.
Therefore irrigation assistance at the farm level can be channelled in the three ways already mentioned and which, for reasons of easy reference, can be called:
i. irrigation practices improvement;
ii. on-farm development;
iii. tertiary canal system improvement.
This classification merely allows for greater clarity in the presentation of the text, but in practice various combinations of the three are found.
There is, however, an important difference between assistance for "irrigation practices" and the other two. The assistance for irrigation practices does not require funding other than that necessary to pay for the staff and their working means, since the main activity is the transfer of knowledge. The other two types do require substantial funds to undertake the development works either on the farm or outside it. Although farmers can contribute a great deal to this kind of work with their own working means and funds, some financial support is also needed from the Central Government in the form of credit facilities or materials, equipment and the like. These main types are discussed below.
7.3 Irrigation practices improvement
7.3.1 Main activities
7.3.2 Organizational alternatives
7.3.1 Main activities
Maximum or optimum crop production can only be attained by applying the right amount of water at the right time. Deviation from this golden rule inevitably leads to decreases in crop production. The amount of water required is determined by the evapotranspiration rate of the crop. The timing depends on the soil's characteristics and the rooting depth of the crop. Farmers, through years of observation and learned tradition, develop irrigation practices that are often very close to the actual needs of the crop. However, every time that a farmer tries a new crop, a time-consuming learning process starts and, until the moment when a satisfactory level of skill is reached, a considerable crop production potential may have been wasted. Farmers are aware of this problem and it is one of the reasons why they are often reluctant to plant crops with which they do not have previous experience. This is a characteristic problem of newly established irrigation schemes where most of the
farmers have little or no experience with irrigated crops. Technical advice can be instrumental in shortening this learning process and accelerating the beginning of the "full production" stage of the project.
Good irrigation practices include not only questions related to when and how much water is to be applied, but also the application of suitable irrigation and drainage methods, the establishment of cropping patterns, the management of poor quality water and soils.
The introduction of suitable irrigation methods is an important point that is intimately related to the need for appropriate land development work (usually grading) and will therefore be treated in greater detail under the next type of assistance. There is great interest among many farmers in the potential of some of the recently developed methods: drip, mini-sprinklers, sprinklers, mechanized systems, etc. Technical advice on the suitability of these irrigation methods to a specific farm situation can be instrumental in saving labour and investment.
The benefits of a rational cropping pattern are known to be many, but where water ^1 s scarce they are still more relevant. In cases where farmers are allocated limited amounts of water, careful selection of the crops and the planting time may lead to dramatic increases in the planted area.
Poor water quality can affect crop production significantly, through soil salinization and other associated problems. The negative effects of poor water quality can be minimized or greatly increased, depending on the agricultural and irrigation practices used and the drainage system. The following example may illustrate the point: if salinity is a problem, the common practice of planting seeds in the centre of a single-row raised bed will place the seed exactly in the area where salts concentrate (FAO 1976). A double-row raised planting bed will offer a considerable advantage. Alternate furrow irrigation may also help; and there are other alternatives. Most farmers will understand that salinity is affecting their production but would be uncertain of the irrigation practice that would help to solve or mitigate their problem.
Irrigation practices can be strongly influenced by the soil physical characteristics. Highly impermeable soils require special techniques to make irrigation effective. Frequent irrigation is needed for them, while poorly permeable soils can be irrigated with longer intervals. However, they may crack on the surface causing severe damage to young plants. Suitable agricultural practices (e.g. harrowing) may be needed in combination with good irrigation practices (such as preplanting irrigation).
The foregoing implies that the staff dealing with this type of assistance should have the necessary technical knowledge to answer any questions that may arise from the introduction of new crops in a new irrigated area or when improving production in an existing one. In areas or countries with a good tradition of irrigation, this knowledge is often available and is only a question of demonstrating to the farmers the suitability of adopting certain practices. However, as many countries have only a short experience in irrigation or it is limited to particular areas of the country, the IAS technical staff may not have access to factual data on the new intended crops. Normally it is the responsibility of research institutions to undertake such investigations, but they are often involved in more scientific research and are sited at centralized locations. The establishment of some kind of applied research farm at the project location, operated by a research institution, will
probably encounter logistic and financial problems. Consequently, some public irrigation schemes establish their own applied research or demonstration farms, or they may do it in cooperation with research institutions, where the behaviour of newly irrigated crops can be monitored and the data used to provide essential information to irrigation extensionists.
The establishment of one of these farms does not necessarily imply another financial burden on the public administration or the users, because if the farm is of a suitable size and it is well managed, it can be self-sustaining from its own produce. There is another point in their favour: the use of such farms to train the local farmers in a newly irrigated area cannot be overemphasized.
7.3.2 Organizational alternatives
Assistance on irrigation practices is in theory covered by the extension services functioning on a national or regional scale. However, in most instances, these services are overloaded with work; they are limited in their financial resources, and frequently their staff do not have suitable training on irrigation matters. In most developing countries there is less than one extension agent per 2000 farmers. It is obvious from this figure that it is impossible to give adequate assistance to the farmers in irrigation practices, which require considerable attention and supervision by the agent especially during the first years of a newly irrigated area.
A more serious problem is the lack of proper technical training in irrigation matters. Most of the extension agents have a general training in agriculture, but no special training in irrigation techniques and practices. This is appropriate for the variety of duties they have to perform in areas where agriculture is rainfed but is not adequate for irrigated agriculture. The same applies to field assistants, who have only completed high school plus one or two years of training in general agriculture.
Furthermore, some of the newly introduced extension programmes, like the Training and Visit (T&V) system, are not well suited to demonstrating the advantages of improved water management practices. Because the establishment of plots to demonstrate good water management on the land of leading farmers needs close monitoring and supervision, the extension worker should be present in the area or village for several months (at least during the irrigation season). This is contrary to the T&V system which requires that the extension staff travel regularly among pre-established villages/areas within a fortnightly rotation. A system with a rigid schedule is not suited to providing advice on the irrigation activities mentioned above.
Perhaps as a result of the difficulties encountered in many countries to convey some irrigation assistance to the farmers through traditional extension services, different strategies have emerged. Some of the most relevant examples are cited.
i. National/regional plans for improved water use
This is the case of PLAMEPA (Plan de Mejoramiento Parcelario), established in Mexico in the early seventies, whose main purpose was to improve water use in the irrigation schemes. The basic methodology of the plan was that surveys were made in each irrigation scheme to determine which farmers were using the water properly and which not. It was found that more than 40 percent of the farmers were using too much or too little water. Specially trained irrigation extension staff concentrated their work with those farmers. Key farmers were provided with detailed irrigation schedules, improved irrigation methods and cropping patterns which were supposed to be followed strictly during the first year. These farmers were strategically selected so that results should become apparent to surrounding ones.
The Plan was most successful during its functional period, but it has been reported that, once the irrigation staff moved away from the project area, farmers often reverted to previous malpractices.
This emphasizes the views expressed in this text that IAS should be attached to projects on a long-term basis rather than on the medium term (2-3 years) of national programmes. Good reasons may be advanced for decreasing the staff allocated to this function after the first few years when greater effort is needed, but assistance should continue afterwards to consolidate the initial results obtained.
ii. Irrigation scheduling services
In industrialized countries, where the educational level of farmers is higher, farms are well prepared for the application of irrigation water and farmers have acquired a certain degree of skill in handling irrigation water, so the irrigation assistance tends to concentrate on irrigation scheduling.
A typical example is the IMS (Irrigation Management Service) of the Bureau of Reclamation in the USA which was established in 1969 and provides weekly irrigation scheduling information to farmers. The system uses the crop and soil data provided by the farmer and meteorological information. All the data are processed by computers and passed back to the farmer via telephone or postal services. Similar services are available in the irrigation areas of the South of France (Bas-Rhone and Provence) and in the West of Spain (Badajoz) on an experimental basis.
Such services tend to be established on a regional basis, which also applies to the irrigation areas, in order to serve a maximum number of farmers with a minimum of staff. But they can also be organized on a project area basis, providing it is sufficiently large.
iii. Project area based units
In order to provide proper assistance on irrigation practices, a close dialogue is necessary between the farmer and the irrigation extensionist. Hence, a considerable number of staff is needed, especially during the initial stages of the work. Under these conditions, the establishment of an Irrigation Assistance Service as part of the project organization appears logistically justified. It is also preferable that such a Unit or Service depend hierarchically on the Project Manager in order to guarantee unity of command. But this is not always possible because the irrigation extensionist may not come from the same institution or ministry as the O&M staff.
As already mentioned, Mexico has made considerable efforts to improve the use of water at the farm level not only under the PLAMEPA but also under subsequent programmes of the SARH (Secretaría de Agricultura y Recursos Hidráulicos) such as SAM (Sistema Alimentario Mexicano). Their experience in irrigation assistance indicates that a field irrigation worker (secondary education with agricultural training) can assist 300-500 farmers and that a group of 3 to 5 field irrigation workers should be supervised and guided by an extensionist (high-school education with special training in irrigated agriculture).
Irrigation assistance can be integrated with a more general type of agricultural extension. In fact, in the case of Mexico, the irrigation field workers are in a team with the agricultural extension workers and are supervised by a general extensionist who has been well trained in irrigated agriculture, thus ensuring a good combination of agricultural and irrigation practices.
There is no reason why assistance with irrigation practices cannot be undertaken by extension personnel, provided that the following conditions are met:
a. the number of irrigation agents in the irrigated areas is drastically increased compared to those in rainfed areas;
b. the staff has the requisite knowledge of irrigation practices;
c. the staff is attached on a more or less permanent basis to the irrigation area;
d. suitable working means (transport, etc.) are given them to undertake their functions.
7.4 On-farm development
7.4.1 Main activities
7.4.2 Land grading or levelling
7.4.3 Organizational alternatives
All the structural work to be done within the boundaries of a farm is (theoretically) the farmer's responsibility. However, carrying it out implies that the farmer has considerable technical knowledge and the financial resources necessary. Unfortunately such a case is more the exception than the rule.
The question is therefore to what extent the public administration should engage itself in the provision of on-farm facilities. Some countries tend to have a paternalistic approach and provide all the facilities as part of the irrigation development while others provide none of them. Neither of the two approaches seems to render satisfactory results, so a medium solution would seem to be the answer. The government must stimulate the farmer to carry out the improvements necessary on his farm by providing some technical and financial assistance but only if the farmer is willing to reciprocate with his own available means.
It has been found that with a fully paternalistic approach, a positive interest may be apparent during the first years but is likely to deteriorate thereafter because the farmer will tend to consider the assistance received as a government obligation and not something which results from his own efforts and therefore he must work to maintain. Any irrigation assistance programme aimed at improving on-farm physical facilities must be carried out in close cooperation and agreement with the farmer; otherwise, efforts are likely to be wasted.
7.4.1 Main activities
Before any on-farm development assistance takes place, a brief review should be made of the elements that constitute the farm layout. They may already exist or have to be added, depending on the complexity desired. The elements of the farm layout are the following in the most complex case:
i. intake (one or several),
ii. head-farm ditches,
iii. water retention structures (checks),
iv. land preparation for the irrigation method (furrow, border, basin, contour furrows, contour border), and related land grading,
v. drains collecting tail water,
vi. farm drains,
vii. location and layout of the family orchard,
viii. fences (mainly in case of livestock),
ix. watering facilities for livestock,
x. tail water ponds and reuse facilities.
If the house is located within the farm:
xi. location of the house and distribution of farm dependencies,
xii. access to the house,
xiii. water supply and sanitation.
To improve the irrigation and drainage layout of the farm and to prepare for suitable land grading, the following actions must be taken:
a. the farmer's concurrence sought for any works to be done,
b. detailed topographic survey made of the farm (scale 1:1000),
c. data collected on soil characteristics and intended cropping pattern,
d. the future layout designed in full cooperation with the farmer,
e. the planned work should be undertaken as far as possible with the farmer's working means, or else with the machinery of the programme.
A bottleneck in these programmes arises from the discrepancy in interest between tenants and owners. Although tenants are usually interested in the programme, they are not willing to contribute to it because, they argue, the improvements remain for the owner. Conversely, owners are unwilling to contribute since they tend to believe that the benefits from the improvements are enjoyed mostly by the tenants. Various compromises can be worked out, depending on the predominant characteristics of the leasing contract. Nevertheless, the problem merits particular attention before initiating a programme of this nature.
In most cases, on-farm developments can be reduced to two essential elements: relocation of irrigation and drainage ditches, - land grading or levelling.
These elements are interdependent and can hardly be separated in practice. In view of their greater importance the rest of the text refers basically to them.
7.4.2 Land grading or levelling
Land grading is the movement of earth necessary to obtain a perfectly uniform inclined plane and land levelling is for a horizontal plane, although both terms are used interchangeably. This operation is indispensable in surface irrigation to obtain a uniform application of the water. Even very flat areas may need some land grading in order to provide uniform slopes. Of course, the more irregular the topography, the more expensive the operation.
Land grading is not an operation that is intuitively attractive to farmers. Furthermore, it is usually expensive and, if not done with great care, productive top soil can be removed leading to a decrease in productivity in affected areas for a few years. Therefore, in order to make the operation attractive to farmers, it is imperative that some sizeable incentive be offered. A common way is that 50 percent of the costs are absorbed by the public administration.
Land grading work is most easily executed during the construction of an irrigation scheme because there is no interference with agriculture, and legal problems are minimal. Execution of a grading programme after the system is operating is a complex undertaking. The operation must be done during the fallow period which is usually very short on irrigated land. This is one of the reasons for the tendency to use machinery rather than labour for land grading. Experience shows that the work can be effected by labour, but productivity is low due to the long transport distances, and much supervision is needed.
7.4.3 Organizational alternatives
On-farm development work for irrigation is carried out in a few countries by the public administration and normally in connection with land settlement projects. The farmer may be asked to repay some, or all, of the cost involved over a period of time. This approach will not be discussed here since the chapter concentrates on the types of action that a government may take when no such work exists.
The more general case is that on-farm development work is left to the farmers' initiative. Though most farmers make some effort to improve their farms, what they achieve may not be sufficient to ensure efficient application of water. The two main alternatives for government action to bring irrigation norms up to standard are discussed below.
One approach assumes that the farmer has some interest in doing the necessary improvement works on his farm, but he is not highly motivated nor has he the necessary means (equipment, time, technical knowledge) to undertake them; therefore substantial financial and technical assistance will need to be provided by the government in order to influence the farmer's decision. In practice, the public administration does all the work in consultation with the farmer and he pays part of the corresponding cost or, very rarely, the full amount. This approach has been called 'On-farm Development by the Public Sector'.
The other approach implies that the farmer is interested and capable of doing the improvement work on the farm. He only needs some financial help from the government for construction material that is not easily available within his own community such as cement, iron, etc., and some technical guidance for the particularly difficult jobs. This has been called 'On-farm Development by the Farmer'.
Both approaches have pros and cons. Either can be suitable depending on the conditions prevailing in the farming community and the level of socio-economic development in the country. The following examples may illustrate the point: a farmer owning a sizeable farm (10 hectares for instance) is likely to have some financial status and he probably operates with his own or hired agricultural machinery. Such a farmer is likely to be highly receptive to a government programme that offers improvement to his farm at bargain price, particularly if he knows that the government has the necessary financial resources and that the programme is likely to be executed within a reasonable time.
On the other hand, a farmer owning a small farm (0.3 ha for instance, as in many Far East and Asian regions) and living near subsistence level, cannot commit any funds to repay improvement works on his farm. However, he would probably be willing to devote his surplus labour time to the improvement work provided that he is instructed how to do the work and that he receives some financial incentive (e.g. food for work, construction material, etc.). He is also likely to be more stimulated if he sees his work as part of a common endeavour with all the farming community participating in similar activities.
As a first approximation, it can be concluded that the 'public' approach is more suitable for middle income farmers where the size of the irrigated farms generates a reasonably good income, while the 'farmers' approach is better for low income farmers where the size of the average irrigated farm is small. The approaches are not mutually exclusive, on the contrary, they can be combined although there are not many cases.
i. On-farm development by the public sector
It usually takes the form of a national programme with a good degree of financial and institutional autonomy. The area to be covered during the life-span of the programme is well defined and so are the priority regions and areas to be covered annually. Though execution often tends to lag behind the planned figures, the main targets are generally met. Any work undertaken must be at the request of the farmer since it concerns his land. It is a good practice to sign a contract between the farmer and the administration establishing clearly the responsibilities of each side, and the method of recovering agreed costs from the farmer, though this sometimes poses problems.
The main limitation of the programmes is their considerable cost, which in many developing countries is associated with high foreign currency costs.
The programme is rarely undertaken in isolation from the on-farm work. More frequently it is associated with training in irrigation practices and improvements to the tertiary canal systems. When it is concentrated on on-farm development, the leading component is land levelling. In any case, the staffing of the programme must include topographic surveyors, machinery operators and contractor supervisors, agricultural engineers, mechanical engineers, irrigation engineers and 'promoters' of the programme (Table 8).
The programme generally concentrates its efforts on a particular region, the size of which depends on the available resources and work proceeds for one or two years until more or less completed, at which time the team moves to the next priority area where the process is repeated. A corps of staff and machinery may be left at the first location for completion and repair works.
Once the scheme has been completed, the upkeep of the work is sometimes deficient owing to the farmer not having been directly involved in the design and execution stages.
ii. On-farm development by the farmer
The basic idea behind this approach is that there is great labour potential in the farming communities of some irrigation schemes, which is not fully utilized because of the small size of farms. In these circumstances, it is pointless to bring in earth moving machinery and to add a financial burden to the farmer. On the contrary, a programme aimed at improving his farm must rely mostly on his capacity to undertake the work with his own labour and draught animals. Such a programme entails intensive preliminary promotion to encourage the farmer to do the work and strong technical support during the operation.
If land grading is to be executed by the farmer, a considerable amount of supervision and preparatory work is necessary. Furthermore, it can happen that the farmer is unable to undertake the work during the agreed period, in which case all the preparatory work must be repeated during the next season.
For these reasons any public administration willing to support such activities will have to ensure that it has:
a. specially trained staff to undertake the promotional work;
b. sufficient technical staff for the technical supervision;
c. staff in the project area for several seasons.
These conditions and the need to work in close cooperation with the farmer often result in slow implementation which is the major drawback to this approach. However, the advantages are several: costs are reduced, available resources are fully utilized, imports are reduced and the farmer is intimately involved in the work; the latter results in better maintenance of the on-farm works.
This approach is particularly suited to be combined with training in irrigation practices by establishing an IAS that, during its first years, would undertake the guidance and supervision of the on-farm work and, once that was completed, would be responsible for irrigation extension activities.
7.5 Tertiary canal system improvement
7.5.1 Public sector approach
7.5.2 Participatory approach
Main systems are usually the responsibility of the public administration and the on-farm work a direct concern of the farmer. However, tertiary canal systems are often in no-man's-land as far as O&M responsibility is concerned (see Chapter 3), a situation which inevitably leads, in a short time, to a state of disrepair and unserviceability.
Improving a tertiary canal system implies basically two different tasks: one is the physical rehabilitation of the tertiary canal system and the other is the establishment of the institutional responsibility for the O&M of the canals thereafter. As in other instances, the physical improvements can be attained without major problems but to ensure the appropriateness of the works to the farmers' needs and their effective functioning afterwards is a much more complex matter. An institutional solution that is being tried out with relative success in several Far Eastern and Asian countries is the establishment of water users' associations for each tertiary canal.
Two main approaches are being followed for the establishment of these associations; one favours strong government action with the farmers being the somewhat inactive recipients of the government initiative, while the other tries to stimulate farmers into full participation in the planning and execution of the improvements and to take subsequent responsibility for the O&M of the tertiary canals. The second is often referred to as the "Participatory approach" so in contrast we have designated the first as the "Public sector approach".
7.5.1 Public sector approach
As in the case of on-farm development work, there is a centrally financed government programme to carry out the improvements and to establish the irrigation associations around the tertiary canals. A special office within the responsible government agency is often set up to execute the programme and it usually has a large degree of financial and operational autonomy.
A typical methodology for proceeding with this work is as follows:
a. selection of the tertiary canals to be rehabilitated in cooperation with local authorities;
b. formal establishment of the farmers' organization for the tertiary canals in question;
c. design by contractors of the new tertiary layout;
d. approval of the design by the tertiary canal farmers' organization;
e. construction work by the contractors;
f. approval of the work by the tertiary canal farmers' organization;
g. government staff assist the tertiary canal farmers' organization to take over the responsibility for O&M.
In many cases, the intense pressure to execute programmes in a short period means that consultation with farmers is inadequate. There is rarely time to establish the tertiary canal farmers' organization as an effective capable unit before consultation on design is due to take place. As a result, construction goes ahead and the new layout may bear little relation to the farmers' organizational requirements. The government agency concerned is then left with the unenviable task of persuading the farmers to operate and maintain a system which is regarded by many of them as the government's responsibility.
Some governments have begun to recognize that such programmes have limitations. A more participatory approach to the planning, design and rehabilitation of the tertiary system is likely to yield more lasting results, even though that very participation will slow down the pace of physical progress.
7.5.2 Participatory approach
In this alternative, the basic philosophy is that the farmers become responsible for the execution of the improvements and rehabilitation work, with some technical guidance and financial incentives provided by the public administration.
i. Promoting participation
Promoting the farmers' participation is the most difficult part of this approach. In areas where farmers are familiar with irrigation, the task is somewhat easier because they are already convinced of the benefits that equitable water distribution can bring them, although former government action may have accustomed them to the paternalistic approach.
The promotional efforts require considerable time and staff. Experience in the Philippines indicates that 6 to 9 months are needed before actual construction of new works or improvement to existing ones can commence. The method followed there is to send a community organizer or institutional officer to the village to identify the needs of the farmers through discussion with individuals, groups and local leaders. The officer is generally a young graduate from the area, familiar with the local situation and speaking the local language or dialect. He assists in the establishment of the Irrigation Association (IA) and in its legalization. Once it is established, he continues to guide and assist it for some time.
In Central Java (Indonesia), the irrigation associations, locally caled Dharma Tirta, are promoted by an extension worker at the village level, initially with small groups, until the different groups become conscious of the need for change. At this stage, visits are made to other successful Dharma Tirta in the region to help them visualize the benefits. The extension worker is of key importance in awakening a desire for change, and persuading the community that, by their own efforts, they can achieve a dramatic improvement in the productivity of their village lands. The extension worker sustains the self-confidence of the farmers 'by giving advice and, where necessary, by obtaining the help of skilled technicians and craftsmen from the public agencies concerned who assist the villagers to plan and implement the desired improvements to the tertiary irrigation system. During the construction period, the extension worker is at hand to provide any advice or supervision needed.
The village irrigation competition is another key factor in the success of the Dharma Tirta in Central Java. Very great popular interest is generated by this province-wide competition and the village associations are encouraged to draw on the technical support of extension staff for more improvements. About 30 villages enter this biennial event. The two best from each district go forward to the provincial level and the best two from each province then join a group of about 12 finalists. Criteria are judged as objectively as possible. Marks are awarded for:
a. organization and management, particularly the level of self help;
b. technical quality of the irrigation system;
c. operation and maintenance;
d. financial management and level of investment;
e. crop husbandry.
The winning village is entitled to a grant of about Rp 100000 per year (runners up Rp 90000) subject to ongoing improvements. The actual monetary value of the prize (US$ 170) is small beside the prestige enjoyed by the winning village which receives its award from the Province Governor.
ii. Establishment of the association
One typical problem that arises in the establishment of irrigation associations around the tertiary canals is whether the basis of the association is the command area of the tertiary canal or the villages that are under its command.
Where social ties among the people of one village are very strong or relations between villages not particularly good, there is little point in putting them together in the same association. In such cases, it would be advisable to have two, or more, irrigation associations (with some mechanism for exchange of information and coordination) within the tertiary canal area rather than a single association. Alternatively, when the tertiary canal layout is redesigned, consideration should be given to the possibility of serving each village's area with a tertiary canal.
The problem is particularly important in the 'participatory approach' since much of the promotional work is done through the village administrative and social structure, but the problem is also relevant to the so-called 'public sector approach' where the associations are established according to a fixed pattern without any possibility of deviating from existing rules.
However, particular care should be taken when establishing an association to preserve as far as possible the traditional social habits of the rural communities, if they are beneficial to the new situation. They should be carefully identified during the promotional period.
Chapter 3 and Annex I give some guidelines as to the establishment and functioning of the associations.
iii. Technical improvements
The basic idea is that farmers must finance most of the irrigation improvement works themselves and, where possible, participate in actual execution of the work. Lack of experience, combined with the technical difficulties occasionally lead to contracting part of the work to local small contractors. In certain cases, the government may provide some specialized machinery and material (e.g. in the Philippines) but the farmer has to reimburse the corresponding cost. Technical assistance from the concerned government agency is desirable. Quality control is sometimes done very effectively by farmers' committees.
Since the improvements are to be financed primarily by the beneficiaries, no work should be commenced until the new layout and respective cost are approved by the farmers' association. Successive improvements can be made as funds become available.
It is a good practice to give first priority to the construction of the association's physical premises because this helps to consolidate the concept of the association as an operative entity. In the case of the Dharma Tirta of Indonesia, high priority is given to the construction of a separate village turn out and the internal system is then rationalized. This may involve the consolidation of holdings, the construction of access roads, tertiary, quarternary canals, land levelling and the provision of farm turn outs.
As said earlier, it is sometimes difficult to separate on-farm improvements and those connected with the tertiary canals. In practice, this work is often carried out simultaneously in either of the approaches mentioned.
Promotion of the participatory approach and the execution of the work requires a considerable effort in terms of government staff, who must work at the local level. This is another argument in favour of establishing IAs at the project level or, if the projects are too small, at the district/province level.
7.6 Manpower requirements
There are large differences in manpower requirements and they depend on whether the Irrigation Assistance Service is for irrigation practices, on-farm development or tertiary canal improvement or any combination of them. The available data have been grouped, therefore, according to the cases described in the text and they are presented in Table 8. There may be cases where one type of assistance is applicable, or there may be cases where any combination of the three may apply. The staffing for irrigation assistance programmes also depends on the approach followed. Table 8 gives some indication of the kind of expertise needed, depending on whether the physical improvements are carried out by the public sector or the farmers. Due to the wide variation in complexity and circumstances of programmes, it does not seem practical to give job descriptions for the staff mentioned.
Table 8 MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS FOR IRRIGATION ASSISTANCE SERVICES
National/Regional Plans
Irrigation Scheduling Services
Project area based units
Number of farmers covered by one officer
(per year)^2
on permanent basis
1. Irrigation practices improvement^1
Field Irrigation Worker
Irrigation Extensionist
Agricultural Technician
Computer Operator/Programmer
2. On-farm Development
By Public Sector
By Farmer
Number of hectares per officer
2.1 Promotional efforts:
Communication Specialist
2.2 Design and Implementation of Works:
Irrigation Engineer (MSc)
Assistant Irrigation Engineer (BSc)
Topographer
Assistant Topographer
Construction Supervisor
Overseer
Credit Specialist
Irrigation Practices Specialist
Agricultural Technician
3. Tertiary Canal Improvement
By Public Sector
By Farmer
Hectare is covered per year
3.1 Promotional efforts:
Community Organizer
3.2 Design and Implementation of Works:
Irrigation Engineer
Assistant Engineer
Topographer
Assistant Topographer
Construction Supervisor
Overseer
^1 Data refer only to the actual implementation of the plan and not to the studies needed for it.
^2 The standard refers to the numbers of leading farmers with whom the officer deals directly. The area of influence is obviously greater.
^3 One irrigation extensionist can supervise the work of 5-7 field irrigation workers. The standard therefore refers to the number of leading farmers supervised indirectly through the field extension worker.
^4 There is a great variation in available figures. Actually the standards will depend greatly on the communication facilities and confidence of farmers in the system.
^5 Large variations in standards depend on the amount of help needed by the farmers to undertake improvement work.
In general, the manpower requirements are greater when the Irrigation Assistance Service is established at the project level than when it is part of a national or regional plan. This appears to be a consequence of the need for greater care and attention when acting at local level.
<section>c</section>
8. Administrative service
8.1 Main functions
8.2 Water rates
8.3 Financial viability of the organization
8.4 Staffing of the administrative service
8.5 Organizational alternatives
The main purpose of an Administrative Service is to provide support for the technical services in order that the whole water management organization may operate smoothly. The complexity of an Administrative Service depends on the size of the scheme and the number of technical services provided; for instance, when the organization of an irrigation scheme includes activities related to crop production, marketing and social aspects, the Administrative Service may be quite complex. The latter situation will not be covered here because only water management organizations are considered.
8.1 Main functions
8.1.1 Accounting and financial control
8.1.2 Procurement of supplies and warehousing
8.1.3 Legal matters
8.1.4 Personnel matters
8.1.5 Various
The Administration Service of a water management organization usually undertakes the following main functions:
- accounting and finance control
- supply procurement and warehousing
- legal matters
- personnel matters
- various.
The main activities within these functions are discussed below.
8.1.1 Accounting and financial control
The accounting of a water management organization is relatively simple because most of the transactions are within the scheme and those outside it are generally limited to purchasing a few supplies. In fact, the accounting in many small irrigation associations is handled by the Secretary of the irrigation association who often has only a limited knowledge of accountancy. In public irrigation schemes the accounting system is more complicated as the services provided are more numerous and complex, but it is still less involved than that of commercial enterprises of similar size.
Generally, accounts are organized by major item of expenditure or purchase as indicated in the vertical list of accounts given in the example in Table 9. However, that type of accounting does not provide sufficient information for the scheme manager on expenditure incurred by the main organizational units. It is therefore advisable to subdivide the accounts further according to the main units, as indicated in the titles of the columns in Table 9.
Additionally, in many irrigation schemes it has been found most helpful to keep an account for each farmer in which all the transactions between him and the scheme are registered. This is particularly useful for controlling water payments.
Besides the set accounts, a Day Book or Diary must be kept as is usual in good accounting; all financial operations are registered in it daily with an indication of the account to which the movement must be charged.
Accounting is normally done by a professional accountant and supervised by the Chief Accountant (large irrigation schemes), or by the Chief of the Administrative Service in medium-size schemes.
Table 9 EXAMPLE OF ACCOUNTS INDEX SHEET
No.
Account
Number of Account
General
Manager's Office
Operation Service
Maintenance Service
Irrig. Assist. Service
Admin. Service
Amortization
01-A
01-B
01-C
01-D
01-E
01-F
Daily subsistence allowances
02-A
02-B
02-C
02-D
02-E
02-F
Depreciations
03-A
03-B
03-C
03-D
03-E
03-F
Equipment (minor)
Fellowships and training
Fuel and lubricants
Inputs demonstration farms
Inspection and vigilance
Maintenance building and offices
Maintenance equipment
Maintenance vehicles
Materials (construction)
Office supplies
Other salary allowances
Outputs demonstration farms
Power consumption
Public relations
Rents
Salaries
Spare parts
Transport
Various
Wages
23-A
23-B
23-C
23-D
23-E
23-F
There are two types of financial control: one internal, exercised as a routine operation by the Chief of the Administration, with its main purpose being to control that expenditure on the scheme does not exceed the available resources. The other, external control, is often carried out by external auditors; its main purpose is to control that all financial operations are according to established rules and regulations.
Internal control is exercised by periodic review of the accounts, suitable budgeting and timely allocation of funds. This is sometimes difficult because all too "often funds are considerably less than expected and arrive too late to carry out intended programmes. Much of a manager's success depends on his ability to continue operating the scheme's activities under such difficult conditions. The Administration Service must provide him with early warning of possible adverse financial situations so that he may make decisions that will minimize repercussions.
A key question in the financing of a scheme is the relevance of the water fees. This subject has already been mentioned in several instances in Part I, and because of its importance is discussed in more detail later in the text.
External control is normally by a Government Auditor. He also audits all schemes where the operational funds are provided by the government, and where water fees must be deposited in the accounts of the National Treasury.
The auditor has the function of supervising that all the organization's transactions are made according to established rules and existing laws. He should never be an employee of the same ministry or institution to which the water management organization belongs; normally he should belong to the National Treasury or Ministry of Finance. Some irrigation schemes have a permanent auditor retained throughout the year, but more often auditing is done during periodic visits to the scheme.
Sometimes the irrigation associations are audited at the request of the Board of Directors or the General Assembly. In such cases, the audit is by one or several independent people working ad honorem, and their conclusions must be presented to the General Assembly.
8.1.2 Procurement of supplies and warehousing
Most maintenance as well as the normal operations in a scheme require materials, spare parts, fuel, lubricants and some other supplies that should be in stock when needed. A unit, or person (depending on the size of the irrigation scheme), is normally made responsible for this task. The most recurrent supplies, or those particularly difficult to obtain (spare parts), should be bought at the most favourable prices and stocked in sufficient quantity in warehouses. No material should enter or leave the warehouse without the signature of the warehouseman on the stock card and the authorization of the person in charge of the supply unit or the Chief of Administration. Stringent control should be kept of changes in stock in order to produce clear statements of the stock situation at any given moment. Stocks represent immobilized capital, and to allow for their establishment it is necessary to build an 'extra contribution' into the water fees. This is one of the purposes of the
so-called 'reserve fund'.
On rare occasions the water management organizations buy agricultural inputs or sell agricultural products. One of the few instances in which this occurs is when the scheme is responsible for an agricultural demonstration or practical trial of applied r research, as pointed out in Chapter 7. In these cases the Procurement Unit may be responsible for purchasing or selling, but at the least it should control these activities.
The scheme's by-laws sometimes forbid that the scheme management enters into transactions for any other input than water. Although there could also be good reasons to maintain this principle, it should be remembered that unless the farmer is helped to maximize his agricultural income, the purpose of irrigation may not be fully realized. Therefore, in such cases, a change of the scheme's by-laws will be needed to undertake supporting activities aimed at improving the purchase of inputs and the sale of agricultural products. The procurement unit could well cooperate in such a venture.
Equipment (tractors, pump sets, land planes, etc.) is sometimes leased to farmers within the scheme. The entity of these operations is usually small and mostly of an emergency nature (dewatering a flooded field, repairing large field canals, etc.). This kind of service should be supplied whenever possible provided that it does not interfere with the regular operation and maintenance activities; however, it should not be encouraged because not all the farmers may get the same chances to use the service. The Maintenance Service should approve the request to use the equipment, but the financial aspects should be controlled by the procurement unit.
Whenever equipment and labour is leased to farmers on a regular basis, as in the case of land levelling, a special unit within the Administrative Service is established to look after this major activity.
8.1.3 Legal matters
Legal queries may arise among the management of the scheme, the users, the farming community, the suppliers, the National Water Administration and others. The scheme manager and/or the Chief of Administration must have proper advice on these matters. Only large schemes can afford a permanent legal adviser. For medium-size schemes periodic consultations with a local legal adviser may suffice. The legal adviser is sometimes linked directly to the Manager's office and sometimes to the Administration Service. It depend? on the type of problems whether one or the other place is more appropriate; for instance, if most of the discrepancies are expected to come from land property issues and indemnifications, the Administration Unit is a more suitable location for the permanent legal adviser.
8.1.4 Personnel matters
Any formal organization of a certain magnitude needs a section to deal with personnel matters, such as recruitment of permanent and temporary staff, establishment of salaries, social security and insurance of the staff, training, preparation of payrolls, control of leave, safety measures, preparation of working instructions and of contracts, when a considerable labour force is involved.
There is usually a personnel officer if the scheme or the labour force is large; otherwise the functions of personnel are shared by the different people in the organization with the ultimate responsibility on the Chief of the Administrative Service. If the water management organization is responsible to a central authority, there is a personnel officer only at the Headquarters office and he serves a number of irrigation schemes, or regions.
8.1.5 Various
In all large organizations there is a heterogeneous collection of functions that do not fall obviously under the jurisdiction of a particular service, mainly because their duties are common to all services or by the very nature of the work. The tendency in these cases is to put them in the Administrative Service. The most common ones are registry, library, radio communications and first-aid, but there may be others connected with specific situations.
All official incoming and outgoing mail should be registered in a log book and properly filed. One of the secretaries or clerks in the Administrative Service is usually responsible for this operation.
All pertinent reports, documents and designs related to project development and operation should be kept in an orderly manner and up-to-date. A small technical library is very useful, especially in remote places where access to technical information is limited. The library material should be controlled by only one person, usually the secretary of the Chief of Administration.
A good communication system between the head office and the water guards, gate keepers and other maintenance personnel is an indispensable means of work. Radio communication is in this sense the best possible means and it is not expensive. In remote areas, radio may be the only way to communicate between the project office and the central or regional offices located in major towns.
First-aid assistance is extremely important where urban centres are far from project offices. In remote places, a person properly trained in first-aid and health matters should be in charge of this assistance, and the first aid room should be well equipped. The scheme manager should ensure that safety measures are adhered to by all the staff on the scheme.
Most auxiliary staff are placed under the responsibility of the Administrative Service; they may include: telephonist-receptionists, messengers, watchmen, storekeepers and others. Transport staff also frequently come under the responsibility of the Administrative Service, although some of the drivers permanently attached to other units or persons may depend hierarchically on that unit.
8.2 Water rates
8.2.1 Determination of water rates
8.2.2 Method of payment
8.2.3 Monomial and binomial rates
8.2.4 Increasing or decreasing rates
Water rates are the sum paid by the farmer as his contribution to government investment in the engineering works for the storage and distribution of water and to cover the expenses related to the operation, maintenance and administration of the scheme.
The Administrative Service is involved in the setting of the water rates for its organization's irrigation schemes, bearing in mind the expenses. It is also responsible for the receipt of sums thus raised.
Water charges sometimes include other elements such as: (a) an amount for the formation of an operating fund that will absorb the deficits of particularly difficult years and provide suitable stocks of materials and spare parts; (b) a payment that covers the cost for surveillance that water permits at the basin level are adhered to; (c) contributions for flood protection work, drainage systems, and other items.
8.2.1 Determination of water rates
There are several methods for determining the amount to be paid as the water fee. They are based on different economic theories and are described in detail in many publications (see references). In some countries, the water rates actually correspond to a theoretical calculation (France, USA, Spain, etc.) but in many others the water rates paid bear little or no relation to the calculated fees. To a large extent this is due to the fact that water rates are often a political issue rather than a technical one. To illustrate this point, Table 10 gives an idea of the financially linked incentive (which could also be regarded as a subsidy) offered by the government in some selected countries.
8.2.2 Method of payment
There are different ways of calculating the water rate charged to the farmer; the main methods are:
i. payment per unit of water used (volumetric method);
ii. payment per hectare or acre of irrigated land;
iii. payment by a fixed share (percentage) of harvested crops.
Their main characteristics are described below.
i. Payment per unit of water (volumetric method)
This is the most desirable method of payment since it encourages efficient water use by maintaining a constant relation between the amount of water used and the payment to be made. In order to apply this method effectively, every farm must have a measuring device (meter) recording the amount of water used. Regular periodic readings of these meters should be made in order to check the amounts used. In spite of the desirability of this method, its introduction often meets resistance and difficulties. On one hand, the farmers are suspicious of the devices and soon find ways and means to block them, especially in open canal systems; on the other hand, the cost of each device, its installation and subsequent monitoring may not compete advantageously with a less efficient system (payment per unit of land). Although the economic advantages of this system are open to discussion, there is no doubt that it has the great advantage of allowing the measurement of the water used. Only by
measuring the water can the farmer know the volume consumed and if it was suitable for the plant's needs. Recording measuring devices can be expensive (US$ 300-400 per unit) and are susceptible to manipulation; this can be counteracted by using simple devices that measure the amount of water passing through and having someone to take account of the duration of flow so as to determine the volume consumed. This is a more suitable solution, especially if labour is not too expensive.
ii. Payment per hectare or acre of irrigated land
A fixed amount is paid annually per hectare as a water rate. This would be a fair method if all the farmers of a given irrigation project consumed more or less the same volume of water. However, investigations carried out in several places (Pakistan, Mexico) indicate that more than 50 percent of the farmers deviate by more than 10 percent of the average depth of water applied in the scheme. Since this is the prevailing situation on many irrigation schemes, it is obvious that such a method of payment is not equitable for many of the farmers. Furthermore, this method disassociates the commodity (water) from the rate paid which does not encourage the efficient use of water. The great advantage of the method is its simplicity for billing, charging and accounting. This has made the method very popular and has caused its extension to many countries of the world. In an attempt to reduce the unfairness of the previous method, the payment per hectare or acre of crop grown is
sometimes introduced, especially when the crops have large differences in water consumption. Crops with a high water consumption rate (rice, sugarcane, etc.) pay more, at prefixed rates, than the other crops.
Table 10 INCENTIVES TO IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT IN SELECTED COUNTRIES^1
Afghanistan
No interest charged on repayment of capital costs (50-year period). Operation and maintenance are fully subsidized but farmers pay a fixed tax per hectare.
Australia
All capital construction costs and part of operation and maintenance costs.
Canada
More than 50% of capital construction costs.
Democratic Kampuchea
100% of capital costs.
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
70% of capital construction costs.
Vietnam
Eastern Europe
100% of capital construction and operation and maintenance costs. A tax on the land is paid.
India
80% or more of annual equivalent costs of construction (major projects).
Indonesia
100% of irrigation works.
Japan
40 to 80% of capital construction improvement and reclamation costs.
Malaysia
100% capital construction and over 50% operation and maintenance costs.
Peru
All capital costs of major irrigation projects.
China
50 to 70% of capital construction costs.
Saudi Arabia
100% for large irrigation works. 50% of irrigation pumps and farm equipment.
South Africa
100% of capital construction works and an average of 69% of annual O&M costs.
Spain
Up to 50% of major works including main and primary canals. Secondary canals are paid for by farmers.
Sudan
100% of irrigation works. However, interest (6%) is paid on capital cost. Government receives part of the farm income through fixed shares in the capital cost.
Tunisia
30 to 60% of main construction works and farm development costs.
United Republic of Tanzania
USA
Up to 60% in US Bureau of Reclamation projects, mostly by other uses, mainly power. No interest was charged on repayment loans until recently.
USSR
100% irrigation infrastructure and operation.
Democratic Yemen
100% for large and small works.
^1 Information extracted from various sources.
iii. Payment by a fixed share (percentage) of harvested crop
This payment method is practised in some areas where monoculture prevails. There are two main ways of establishing the share to be paid: one is by fixed weight -for example, 10 kg of rice per unit of land of the harvested crop, which is paid annually, regardless of the production obtained. The other way is to establish a fixed percentage of the harvested crop - for example, 5 percent of the total weight of rice. The first modality has characteristics very similar to the payment per hectare, the only difference being that the payment is in kind and not in cash-; the sole advantage over the per hectare transaction is that payment in kind adjusts better to inflation. The second modality offers, in addition to adjustment to inflation, the great advantage of being commensurate with the farmer's production; thus, whenever production is low,, the payment is also low and vice versa. On the other hand, it has the disadvantage that the farmer's production must be evaluated annually,
and this is often a controversial issue because farmers tend to disagree with the evaluation made. Furthermore, the method is highly susceptible to misapplication.
These modes of payment are the most common but there are other indirect ways of recovering the investments made and O&M expenditures. Many socialist countries have special land taxes for irrigated agriculture, though there is an increasing tendency to price water for agriculture by some of the methods mentioned. In other countries, recovery is made only through the personal revenue taxes paid by the farmers, but because most of them are in the low income strata they are frequently exempted from payment of the tax. Water pricing is contrary to the religious principles of the Moslem countries and direct payment through some of the above mentioned methods is rarely exercised. However, investments and O&M costs are often recovered through taxation procedures or other indirect methods of a varied nature. The case in Egypt is interesting: farmers do not pay directly for water but, because the irrigation canals are below the ground surface, water must be lifted to the farm with the
traditional norias (sakhia) or with modern pumps. Since excavated canals are much cheaper and easier to maintain than those above ground, the government saves (hypothetically) on the investments that would have been needed and on O&M expenditure. Those savings are partially compensated by the farmer lifting the water, because this is an expensive operation no matter what method is used. Thus the farmer contributes indirectly to irrigation development.
8.2.3 Monomial and binomial rates
Annual rates are made through monomial or binomial rates. A monomial rate is a single sum paid for the water received. Sometimes this payment covers only O&M expenses, while others cover part of the repayment of the investments. This type of billing is normally associated with payment per unit of land or harvested crop.
The binomial rate is made up of two components: one fixed rate, which is constant for a number of years, and a variable rate which changes from year to year. This type of billing is normally associated with the volumetric method of payment. The fixed rate is a quota paid annually to repay part or all of the investments made in the irrigation system and to cover some fixed costs. Once repayment of the investment is completed this quota is normally cancelled, although in some cases it is continued as a smaller amount to cover part of the fixed operating costs. The variable rate is meant to cover the variable expenses (mainly O&M) and therefore changes from year to year.
Binomial rates are preferable to monomial because technically it is a more precise method of billing, although it is not always fully understood by the farmers.
8.2.4 Increasing or decreasing rates
Some countries using the volumetric method have variable rates according to the consumption (block rating). Up to a certain volume the rate is constant, when this is exceeded a new rate is applied to a given additional volume; when this second rate is again exceeded a new rate applies. Thus the greater the consumption the higher the rates so as to discourage users from applying too much water. There are a few cases when the reverse has been assayed, especially during the first years of a new irrigation scheme when farmers are sometimes fearful of using too much water.
Although this method of increasing water rates can be justified in extreme conditions of water scarcity, its application must be carefully considered especially where the level of the farmers' education is low and they might not understand the principle of the method.
8.3 Financial viability of the organization
The most widespread cause of poor operation and maintenance is the lack of sufficient funds to undertake this work adequately. This issue is extremely important since the capacity of the organization to carry out work effectively depends on it. The question of insufficient funds is a rather complex one because many factors - social, organizational, economic and political - interact and it is often difficult to determine the real origin of the problem and how to break the existing vicious circle.
All the expenditure for running the water management organization should in theory be covered by the water rates, and the Administrative Service should control that income and expenditure are in equilibrium. However, there is often a large gap between the funds collected from this source and the actual expenditure on the scheme. This gap is sometimes bridged with a subsidy from the government, particularly in public irrigation schemes (see Table 10), or more commonly by not undertaking the necessary maintenance.
In the case of Irrigation Associations, where all funds come from the farmers' community, there cannot be a gap between the income arising from water rates and the actual expenditure. Therefore the tendency in these associations is to reduce the services to a minimum so that water rates are kept as low as possible.
The fact remains that in most instances the water fees are insufficient to cover the services which the water management organization should provide. As long as this situation prevails, poor O&M will be widespread and the return on investments in irrigation will be below expectations. Increases in the water fees are needed in many instances although this measure will certainly be unpopular. A continuous drain on public funds to help part of the agricultural sector is unlikely to continue or be allowed to continue for long in many countries. Furthermore, international loan agencies insist more and more on the need to use sound economic policies in the agriculture sector and, consequently, consider that expenditure on O&M should be totally self-financing and at least some recovery made on the initial investment.
Increasing water fees is quite a delicate matter which requires a serious analysis before a decision is made. It will not be the first time that a substantial increase has been suggested in an irrigation scheme and failed because the farmers have refused to pay it. Some of the critical issues which need careful consideration in this analysis are:
i. Is the existing public irrigation organization of the project efficient? In other words, are all the existing manpower, equipment and administrative procedures really needed? Criteria to evaluate the irrigation management needs have been developed by Bottrall and others (see references).
ii. Are the funds collected through the water rates utilized on the same project? Very often the fees collected (see Chapter 4) go to the Central Treasury and the recurrent funds made available to the project by the Central Administration for O&M bear no relation to the fees paid by the farmers. This kind of administrative procedure does not stimulate the farmers to pay since they do not see a direct relationship between their contribution and the services they receive.
iii. Are the farmers informed about what they are paying for? Do they participate in any way in the determination of the water rates? In many instances the water fee represents for the farmer another tax that he has to pay. They are seldom aware what it is for and how it is used.
iv. To what extent do water fees reduce the income arising from the production? In other words, what is the weight of the cost of the water in the total production costs? Obviously, in schemes where water fees are already a sizeable portion of total production costs any increase would meet considerable resistance. A careful analysis of production costs and income from the main crops produced in the irrigation scheme should precede any attempt to change water rates.
v. How large are the contributions made by the farmers, in terms of indirect taxes, to the irrigation development? Added value taxes on irrigated land are quite significant in many instances. Total repayment of the investment in these circumstances' would not be justified because part of the investment is already paid through the taxes.
vi. Is there malpractice in the collection of fees? Some of the payment methods -especially the volumetric one - are more susceptible than others to malpractice in the collection of fees. This needs careful investigation. There have been schemes with low payment records and after investigation it was found that farmers paid constantly and regularly but a good part of the water fees collected never reached the Central or Project Administration.
The above issues illustrate how delicate the question of increasing water rates can be if all the pertinent data are not to hand.
Some water management organizations are allowed to levy water rates for uses other than farming, for instance small industries, water supply to villages, washing of minerals, small hydropower units, the watering of gardens, etc. Although the number of these users is generally small, the income arising is not negligible because of the much higher rates paid. Although this is a desirable feature that helps finance the organization, care should be taken to establish sound priorities for use. The question of whether a water management organization should be allowed to bill users other than the farmers should be clearly defined in the by-laws of the scheme and in the national water laws.
Reference has already been made to the establishment of applied research or demonstration farms and the convenience of their being self-financing activities. If this is not the case, these costs should not be borne by the farmer because they are extension and research activities, which are services normally provided by the Public Administration. The same applies to the Irrigation Assistance Service which basically has a training function.
Although water rates are often below the actual needs of a water management organization, increasing them is not the only answer to solving the financial viability of the organization. Careful scrutiny of the costs may disclose that many of the corresponding activities are not so necessary or can be done at lower cost. A typical example is desilting. All too often unsuitable methods are employed for this kind of work which results in low productivity and high costs. The project management should study carefully the unit cost of their basic operations and compare these costs with those of the private sector or suitable machinery. This will provide a good indication of the need for improving productivity. The same can be applied to the other cost components: staff, physical facilities and supporting costs.
8.4 Staffing of the administrative service
The administrative service is a supporting unit whose main aim is to control the financial and economic aspects of the scheme for the manager of the organization. Therefore its size and staffing depend largely on the services that are offered (operations, maintenance, irrigation assistance, etc.) and how they are provided. Given this wide variation in circumstances, it is difficult to provide reasonable standards of manpower rates which fit all the existing situations. Nevertheless, the standards in Table 11 will give some guidance. They correspond to public irrigation schemes, with heavily centralized irrigation institutions and are used mainly in middle-income countries. Some of the factors affecting the staffing of an administrative service are discussed below:
i. Complicated procedures for data processing: in many irrigation schemes the procedures for calculating water distribution are unnecessarily complex which has raised the need for additional supporting staff. This point can be well illustrated by the following example from Indonesia: a study on O&M has been carried out by Sir M. MacDonald & Partners who have concluded that one of the main limitations of the existing water distribution systems is the excessive data collecting and the complicated procedure for processing. It is reported that some of the data originating from the gate-keeper had to go through more than 30 different forms before it was processed and returned to him for the operation of the gates. Simplifying the procedure has speeded up the processing of information and resulted in a considerable reduction or relocation of staff.
ii. Degree of decentralization: heavily centralized organizations tend to retain much of the administrative control at the headquarters and only a minimum of administrative staff is kept at the project site.
Table 11 MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE^1
Size of Irrigation Scheme (ha)
number of people
Executive Officer/Chief of Administration
Accountant (Admin. Officer)
Cashier (Admin. Officer)
Records and Statistics (Aux. Admin. Officer)
Secretary
Receptionist/Telephonist
Legal Adviser
^1 Data are derived from the EMESIRE Improvement Study of existing schemes in Peru (1981), local information from Bolivia (1978/79) and Spain (1978).
(-) The corresponding function is undertaken by someone else in the scheme but there is no full-time incumbent.
iii. Income and employment: in countries with a low per capita income and high unemployment rates there is a tendency to establish numerous posts which are not indispensable. This poses quite a problem because in many instances government policy implies that employment is more important than economic efficiency. Although good account should be taken of such policies by having some flexibility in the staffing of an organization, it should be kept in mind that non-productive employment is of no benefit to the country.
iv. Water payment methods: payment per unit of land is a simple method requiring little administrative work, while the volumetric method with binomial rates is much more complex and requires a considerable amount of additional work and staff.
v. Use of calculators and mini-computers: calculators and particularly minicomputers can be very useful tools to accelerate data processing and to store data. With a good mini-computer and someone familiar with its programming and operation most administrative matters can be handled effectively for a large scheme (20000 to 50000 ha) by just one person. It is worth mentioning that in Mexico most of the administrative data are centralized in a large computer of the SARH (Secretaría de Agricultura y Recursos Hídricos) and many of the big irrigation schemes are connected with it through terminals. This has permitted a considerable reduction in the administrative staff for the schemes and reliable storage and processing of data.
The smaller the scheme the greater is the concentration of functions in the few people who have to carry out the administrative work. This may lead to some inefficiencies because it is difficult for any one person to master several different functions, but it is unavoidable in small schemes. There is a need to develop simple administrative procedures which can be easily understood by lower-level staff.
It does not seem opportune here to provide job descriptions for the different people responsible for the major administrative tasks in view of the complexity of the tasks they may have to carry out according to the characteristics of the scheme. Standard job descriptions for the more usual positions (cashier, accountant, etc.) can be obtained from many enterprises or institutions dealing with agricultural administration.
8.5 Organizational alternatives
There are two main alternatives for organizing the administrative services: one, which is the most common, consists of having all the administrative activities centralized in a single unit providing its support to the other services. Such an Administrative Unit or Service is normally under the direct supervision of the scheme manager. The other alternative is to out-post one or two administrative officers to each of the Services (operations, maintenance, etc.) in order that continuous administrative support is provided for each of these Services. Only the cashier and the Principal Administrative Officer support the whole scheme.
Concentrating administrative activities in a single unit allows for better control by the scheme manager and reduces conflicts between the other units.
The administrative control in traditional irrigation associations is minimal since, as previously mentioned, the services provided are, in most circumstances, fewer than those in public irrigation schemes. The standard arrangement is that the secretary of the association keeps the record - either he himself or through an accountant - of the water payments and expenditures. In many instances, the administrative unit does not exist as such but is part of the functions of the members of the Board of Directors. Exceptions to this are the Water/Irrigation Districts of the USA (see Annex I) and those of Spain where large administrative units exist.
<section>d</section>
Annex I - Associations of irrigation water users^1
^1 Based on a paper presented by the author at a Workshop on Irrigation Management (1976), in Canterbury, England.
1. Origins
2. Types of associations and their establishment
3. Legal character
4. Water use rights
5. Functional bodies
1. Origins
Associations of irrigation water users are among the oldest institutions established by man and still continue to be a useful means of developing and managing irrigation schemes. It is remarkable that some of the concepts developed by these ancient institutions remained in use for centuries and some of them are still valid.
Ruins throughout the world bear testimony to the efforts made by man to use water collectively. However, little written evidence has come down to us describing the organizational arrangements under which these works were constructed or used. The Hamnurabi Code (2300 BC) is one of the few documents from those early times that casts some light on the arrangements for the operation of the irrigation systems. Several texts describe the punishments applied to transgressors of the established rules governing the operation and maintenance of the irrigation canals. Thus, for example, article 55 states that "he who opens his canal to take water without care and damages his neighbour's field shall provide grain from his own harvest equal to his neighbour's loss" (Driver and Miles 1952). Other references from the same epoch can be found in the "Code of Manu" referring to the organizational structure which developed in the Indus Valley. Here also severe punishments were established to
ensure proper utilization of water and its control was entrusted to a high official vested with full and undisputed powers.
Most of the ancient references indicate a strong water administration system, in which kings, emperors and pharaohs were the owners of the land and the irrigation facilities, and levied from the farmers at least partial repayment in produce from the cultivated lands. In these cases, one cannot speak of true associations of people undertaking an enterprise in common for their own benefit.
It is only in the 3rd century BC that documents refer to the existence of some kind of irrigation association in a context similar to that understood at present. Vishugupta Kantilya (300 BC) refers to the existence in India of privately and commonly owned reservoirs. But perhaps the most complete description of a water users association comes from an inscription found at Lamasba (near Batna, Algeria) from the time of Elgabalo (200 BC). It gives details about the distribution of water by rotation among 52 owners, and the most interesting aspect of it is that these rules were established by the users but they were formally ratified by the local senate (Click 1970).
In the 8th century AD, when the Arabs extended their empire throughout the Mediterranean lands, irrigation achieved its maximum political and social momentum. Though the Arabs may not have invented much about irrigation and its organization, they probably enhanced and promoted the practices and technologies inherited from their ancestors. Under their influence, the institutional structure for the administration of irrigation water attained an extraordinary complexity and refinement, constituting an integrated part of the administration of urban cities and conquered lands.
The statutes and by-laws of some of the irrigation associations existing in Spain, such as "Comunidad de Regantes de la Acequia Real del Jucar", contain rules originating in the time of the Arab domination that have been in use for more than 700 years.
2. Types of associations and their establishment
There are considerable differences in the irrigation associations of the countries where they are institutionalized and even within a given country. Authors choose different criteria to group them, such as size of the membership, financial responsibilities and voluntary/compulsory formation. The criterion chosen in this text is the financial responsibility with regard to the repayment of the investments made in the irrigation infrastructure. Two main groups can be differentiated:
i. users associations bearing responsibility for repayment of the hydraulic works, their maintenance and the distribution of the water to the farmers. These groups are generic ally designated as "modern associations";
ii. users associations with their main responsibility being the distribution of water among the farmers. Eventually, the maintenance of canals within the boundaries of the area managed by the associations can also be their responsibility. These associations are generically designated as "traditional associations".
An association can be established voluntarily or compulsorily. A certain evolution of the voluntary to the compulsory system can be noted, as the need for greater administrative control of the water resources appears parallel to a higher demand.
i. Modern associations
Modern users associations have important financial responsibilities; they include, generally: repayment of the loan for the execution of the works, operation and maintenance costs, establishment of a reserve fund and administrative costs. These costs are normally recovered from the members of the association by way of taxes and/or fees imposed on the land and/or water.
Of special interest is the case of the irrigation districts in the USA. The majority of these, covering a large extent of land, issue shares or obligations to raise funds for the construction of the irrigation work. These shares contain a clause with the promise to pay a certain amount plus accrued interest at a given date. The interest does not usually exceed 6/7 percent per year and the mortgage period oscillates between 30 and 50 years. Nominal values are not less than US$ 100 or greater than US$ 1000. The obligations are backed by the district's capacity to exact levies from district members for the payment of interest and loaned amounts. Selling these obligations enables the districts to raise necessary funds for construction.
In general, the capital required for the hydraulic work is provided by the government through national or international banking institutions. When the government takes this initiative, it is unusual to claim from users the total payment of the amounts anticipated during the construction of the system (see Table 10, Chapter 8).
This type of association is generally voluntary, because the construction of the system stems from the desire of some interested individuals to obtain water for their properties. A distinction should be made between voluntary creation and the desire of a majority which is imposed on a minority. In the USA the establishment is voluntary, but when: (i) a majority of landowners whose lands constitute a major portion in value, or (ii) at least 500 electors, residents or proprietors owning as a minimum 20 percent of land value, have decided to establish a district, they can impose the formation of the district on the opposing minority. No member can leave the association once it is established without a previous and total renouncement of the utilization of water.
However, there are some countries where the establishment of an association is compulsory, as is the case in Spain and others where any irrigation system having more than 20 owners or more than 200 ha must form an association. In some other countries, compulsory associations coexist with the voluntary ones, as in Italy.
Coexistence of both systems tends to indicate that the associations were originally of a voluntary nature but the need to accelerate and increase farmers' participation in the development of irrigated agriculture later caused the establishment of the compulsory system.
ii. Traditional associations
Traditional users associations have much less financial responsibility because, one way or another, the irrigation work has been amortized in the past. Their responsibilities are generally limited to some maintenance work, which is often undertaken as communal work. In other cases, where operation and maintenance is undertaken by the board of directors, farmers are liable for the payment of the corresponding cost.
These associations are formed voluntarily. All farmers owning a plot of land at a certain distance from the water source undertake joint work to bring the water to their fields; by this mere fact they become members of the association.
Maintenance work is carried out in turns by groups of the community, or through some similar arrangement. Should a farmer be unable to render his share of the work, he is committed to equal its amount with agricultural products or cash.
These traditional associations usually have two types of members: active and inactive. The active members are by right, those who meet all the requirements as full members and their contribution to the association is generally provided through their personal work. Inactive members do riot meet the established requisites, for instance, they do not own their land but are tenant farmers, or their plots are too small, etc. Inactive members do not have a right to vote but pay a contribution to the association in kind or cash for the water received.
3. Legal character
The nature of the functions of a users association implies the existence of a juridical character, independent from its members. This character is sometimes explicitly recognized by the law in the so-called modern associations but not in most of the traditional associations. The lack of recognition of this juridical nature is a major drawback to the associations when entering into any transaction: buying, selling contracting, administering, etc.
It should be noted that the nature of these associations is generally considered public, although it is difficult to ascertain the differences between public and private entities. By reason of their primary purpose - water distribution - which is basically public, and the fact that they are often endowed with administrative characteristics pertaining to the State, like regulations, managerial or legal powers, etc., the opinion is strengthened that they are public entities.
4. Water use rights
Though there are some similarities between the water rights of the association and that of the individual members, it is advisable to treat them separately.
i. Water use rights of the association
The appropriation of water by the association takes place under one of three systems: riparian, prior association or administrative permit. Generally, every country uses one of these three systems, but in a few, like the USA two of these systems - riparian and prior appropriation, coexist.
When the association is legally recognized, the statutes generally specify maximum quantity of water allowed, detailing the characteristics of intake, or intakes, and the river or natural source of supply. When the association takes the water from a canal, the total capacity of the canal limits the amount that the association may utilize but, even in such cases, the quantity the association is authorized to utilize is stipulated.
When governments exercise administrative control of the water use, the administrative bodies take special care that the requests for water within a given watershed do not exceed the minimum flow in a recurrent period, to avoid possible disputes among the different associations and private users.
This problem is even more relevant in countries where riparian rights are customary and where recognized right of use - by practice or by law - is higher, at least in dry years, than available water. The solutions adopted to solve this problem have a common denominator: the different groups of users - agricultural or others - have to decide jointly how to divide the existing resources. In Chile, for instance, the presidents of the associations of users and private individuals utilizing the water resources in the same basin hold meetings to decide the best distribution of the available water. These meetings are called Juntas de Vigilancia.
ii. Water rights of the members
The right of each associate to the water follows different patterns. The majority of the associations recognize the right of their members to use the water but the quantities allowed are rarely mentioned; there is a certain flexibility in this respect, except in cases where water is scarce. The following are the most common modes:
a. Water can be used without any limitation. This is done "on demand" in irrigation systems where the user has available as much water as needed but has to pay for every unit. The only limitation derives from the maximum capacity of the canals or pipes transporting the water. Naturally, when the farmer pays for water units waste is prevented and the demand will be proportionate to his needs. A variation of this modality is found in irrigation systems where the irrigation works have been repaid; in this case, a certain amount of water - 3 acre feet in USA - is granted to the farmer almost free, and for quantities used beyond this amount he has to pay the established fee.
b. Every member has a right to a fixed amount of water. This implies that the right to use water is not linked to the land but to the landowner who previously invested in the works. Generally, these amounts are proportionate to the contributions made to finance the works, in which case the beneficiary has a right to use an amount of water, equivalent to a number of shares that he can exchange or sell totally or partially to others.
Theoretically, this system cannot be followed in countries where the water is a public resource, as the right to water of a legal group or private person is not transferable; in practice, it is utilized even in these countries, especially when a group of farmers associate to finance the construction of a well for the exploitation of groundwater. They are co-proprietors and have a right to the number of "water shares" commensurate with their contribution. This applies to Spain and Chile.
c. Each plot of land has a right to a fixed amount of water. Contrary to the above, this method implies that the quantity of water is tied to the area of land to be irrigated. As in the case mentioned above, the water volume for the association is divided into equal parts and each plot receives a number of shares proportionate to its surface. Spain and Chile use this method in addition to the former one.
d. The member has the right to use water. The characteristic of this method is the concession of the right to use the water, without any specification as to the quantity. This method is used frequently by the traditional associations mostly in the Asian region. Thus for example, in the Subak system in Indonesia, the quantity or the time are not defined when the right to use water is granted. The quantities to be distributed are allocated during periodic meetings - every one or two months - by the members of the association and distribution is according to the individual needs. Thus, the quantities of water are proportionate to the amount of rice (paddy) cultivated. These systems admit certain priorities commonly accepted by the users: crops planted in November-December have irrigation priority over January/February crops, and these over crops planted in March/April. The plots closer to the water intake also have a higher priority than those situated further away.
In all traditional associations the water master has great influence over the farmers and his decisions regarding water allocation are usually considered unappealable.
It should be pointed out that the above methods appear more rigid than they are in reality. Except in cases where scarcity of water imposes a very strict rotation and distribution, there is generally great flexibility in the latter. Furthermore, many irrigation systems lack adequate hydraulic structures for exact measurement and distribution of water.
5. Functional bodies
The main functional bodies of an irrigation association are: the General Assembly, the Board of Directors, the manager's office, the Executive Units and the Irrigation Juries, as described in the text. Their main characteristics are given below:
i. The General Assembly
The General Assembly is the highest authority in a water users' association; it is composed of all the members and its nature is mainly ordinative.
The tasks of the General Assembly are traditionally to: (i) elect the board of directors, (ii) decide on proposals presented by the board of directors, (iii) approve the statutes of the association, and (iv) approve the annual budget.
a. The right to speak and vote:
The right to Speak and vote varies in general assemblies depending on the type of association.
The "Communidades de Regantes" in Spain grant the right to speak to any member of the community, whilst the right to vote is conditioned by the surface of land owned. The Water Law prescribes that "...each community shall establish a way to compute the votes in accordance with the properties represented by the interested individuals...". This is similar to certain dispositions followed in the Subak associations of Indonesia.
In the USA the right to vote is one of the factors that differentiates the diverse types of "districts". Thus, in 'irrigation districts' the vote is limited to registered members of the district on the basis: one vote, one landowner. In 'water districts' the owners have the right to vote for each dollar's worth of land benefitting from the district's water. Finally, in 'county water districts' all immovable properties, in addition to land, of the prospective members may be included in the overall evaluation to apportion the votes.
Normally, the number of votes is proportional to the land or other properties of individual members within the confines of the association. However, in some cases restrictions are imposed on the owners of large areas in order to avoid a few individuals controlling the association. This happens in Mendoza, Argentina, where canal inspectors are elected according to a scale of votes inversely proportional to the land owned.
b. The right of association:
The right of association is usually restricted to the owners of the land, the reason being that tenants are rarely interested in any permanent improvements to the system. However, there are countries where tenants are granted the right to vote on a temporary or permanent basis.
c. Operation of the Assembly:
The general assembly meets once or twice a year, but in cases of emergency the board of directors may convene an extraordinary meeting. In the Subak system meetings are held once a month but it should not be forgotten that the purpose of these meetings is to assign the water to the users, consequently they should be frequent
In irrigation systems where the number of owners with voting rights is very high, it is occasionally difficult to conduct the general assembly in an orderly and effective way. To solve this problem, sometimes each group of 20 or 30 owners nominates a representative to attend the assembly.
ii. The Board of Directors
This is the executive body of the association, that is, it carries out the tasks recommended and approved by the general assembly. In the "Comunidades de Regantes" in Spain this body is called the "Sindicato de Riegos".
The functions and responsibilities of the board of directors differ considerably according to the type-of association. In the USA the board of directors is a body which controls the administration and operation of the system although it actually does not do this itself. A project manager is appointed for this purpose and he is in charge of the implementation of the decisions taken by the Board · (Figure 14).
Whether the board executes tasks itself or delegates to other people, it generally undertakes the following functions: operates the irrigation network, contracts personnel to execute the work, exacts payment of water fees, negotiates credits for the execution of work, issues shares (USA) to raise capital, convenes the general assembly and all other functions inherent in the adequate administration of the system. These attributes are generally described in detail in the statutes of the association.
The board consists of a chairman elected from the directors, and a number of directors; these vary from three to ten. There are also cases, like the Subak system, where only one director or water master is elected. It is desirable that the directors represent the different interests existing within the association. For instance, when there are severe drainage problems in an area the statutes may prescribe that one of the members of the board be from the owners affected by that situation. The norm exists in the Spanish "Comunidades de Regantes" that at least one of the members of the board shall be from the area most distant from the main intake and which obviously receives less water than those located at the head.
It should be noted that some associations have a president of the community and a chairman of the board of directors. As both jobs imply similar functions, there is often friction between the people in these two posts, thus causing complications for the community. In general, the role of president does not seem necessary, as far as executive functions are concerned, because these can be carried out by the director of the board of administration.
iii. The Irrigation Juries
Two types are distinguishable within the water tribunals: those dealing with any kind of dispute originating on water matters, such as those existing in South Africa, Italy and some other countries, 'and those concerned with problems emerging from the irrigation systems. Of particular interest are the "Tribunal de las Aguas" in Valencia, and the "Jurados de Riego", also in Spain, briefly described below:
Fig. 14 Organigram of an Irrigation District in USA
a. The "Jurados de Riego" (Irrigation Jury)
This body consists of a chairman and a variable number of jury members. The election of the chairman depends on the "Sindicato de Riegos" (Board of Directors) and he must be a member of the board. The jurors are elected by the general assembly and, as in other jobs within the users associations, the term of office is limited. The number of jurors is generally 4-5 but in some irrigation systems it may be higher.
The functions of the jury are: (i) to be aware of the facts related to irrigation in any dispute between interested parties, and (ii) to impose sanctions on transgressors of the association's statutes. This executive power vested in the "Jurados de Riego" is recognized by the Law of 1966. The procedures of the "Jurados" are public and oral. Their verdicts are executive and enforced immediately. Appeals to higher authorities can be made, if desired.
b. The Water Tribunal of Valencia
This tribunal has been in operation uninterruptedly for over nine centuries and it served in fact as a model for the "Jurados de Riego" mentioned above. This tribunal is composed of a representative (síndico) from each of the eight associations of water users included in the old irrigation zone of Valencia. These representatives meet weekly in the Apostles' Gate of Valencia Cathedral.
Judgements are oral and public. The sentence, equally oral, is unappealable and immediately enforced. The costs of the tribunal are very low because the judges do not receive any remuneration for their services. The only charge is the cost of the juridical summons, which is barely US$ 2 per summons.
The formal jurisdiction of the tribunal covers all members of the eight associations represented by the tribunal but in practice it can take action against any person, individual or group, that has wrongly used community water. In reality, the tribunal has no jurisdiction over the non agricultural users but although up to now it has taken action against these, no record exists of counter claims.
The main advantage of this tribunal and that of the "Jurados de Riego" is the expediency of action and low costs. Expediency is a decisive element because decisions regarding irrigation matters cannot wait months or years as happens with other court processes; the immediate decisions are necessary to avoid damage caused becoming more serious as time goes on. This is the reason why the "Jurados de Riego" and water tribunals represent a valuable element in the smooth operation of an irrigation system.
A less effective alternative to these juries is the inclusion of a series of sanctions to penalize the most common infractions against the statutes of the association, the board of directors being empowered to enforce these sanctions.
<section>e</section>
Annex II - Irrigation scheduling
1. Introduction
2. Rotational supply with limited water
3. Rotational scheduling under full water supply conditions
1. Introduction
The purpose of this annex is to illustrate rotational supply in two specific situations:
Case A when there is insufficient water to meet crop water requirements
Case B when there is sufficient water to meet crop water requirements.
These two cases have been selected because the suggested approach for situation A is quite innovative and is the result of recent findings in the study of the relationship between water and crop yield. Situation B has been selected to illustrate some of the practical problems associated with rotational distribution when based on technical calculations.
There are many other cases that could be considered in irrigation scheduling but technical literature is reasonably abundant on the topic and their consideration here is not appropriate.
2. Rotational supply with limited water
2.1 Theoretical base
2.2 Determining the rotational supply
2.3 Example
2.4 Related design considerations
The question often arises of how to modify a rotational supply during water shortages so that crop yield reductions can be kept to the minimum.
The most commonly adopted solution is to reduce the quantity given at each irrigation in proportion to the relationship:
or, more commonly, to stretch the interval between irrigations in proportion to the relationship:
However, neither of these practices is fully satisfactory since they are not in accordance with the physiological development of the plant. It is known that water stress at certain periods of crop growth adversely affects the crop yields while at other times the effect is much less significant. Therefore, water savings should be made predominantly during those periods when the plant is less sensitive to water stress and reduced to the minimum during the sensitive periods. The critical periods are different for each crop and have variable lengths of time depending on the climatic characteristics.
2.1 Theoretical base
Much research has been dedicated to the investigation of water-yield relationships during recent years. Although researchers continue to investigate the subject, some of the results already obtained offer a satisfactory level of reliability for planning purposes. FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper No. 33 (Yield response to water) gives a description of the current methods used to estimate crop yields as a function of the water supply. One of the most practical and simple methods indicates that there is a linear relationship between relative yield decreases (1 - Ya/Ym) and relative evapotranspiration deficit (1 - ETa/ETm) for each characteristic growth period, i.e. establishment (0), vegetative (1), flowering (2), yield formation (3) and ripening (4). This constant is called "yield response factor" (ky) and its value is given by the relationship:
where:
Ya = actual yield
Ym = maximum yield
ky = yield response factor
ETa = actual evapotranspiration
ETm = maximum evapotranspiration
The values of ky for each growing period and many crops have been calculated from experimental data, and are given in Table 12. Once these values are known formula {1} can be utilized to predict yields for given deficits of evapotranspiration (which reflect the water deficits). For details of how to calculate ETa and ETm the reader is referred to the cited Irrigation and Drainage Paper.
The application of formula {1} to two or more growing periods:
gives the following relationship:
and assuming that the tolerable yield decreases (Ym[1] - Ya[2]) and (Ym[2] - Ya[2]) are equally distributed among the main periods, relationship {2} can be written as:
or
Since the evapotranspiration in each period (Etm[1] Etm[2]) is proportional to the water supply in those periods (V[1] V[2]), formula {3} can be written as follows:
where:
V[1] and V[2] = water applied when full supply available for growing periods
Va[1] and Va[2] = water applied with limited supply for growing periods 1 and
V[1]-Va[1 ]= water deficit in growing period 1 = WS[1]
V[2]-Va[2] = water deficit in growing period 2 = WS[2].
and
SW[1] = water saved in period 1
SW[2] = water saved in period 2
Table 12 YIELD RESPONSE FACTOR (ky)
Crop
Vegetative period (1)
Flowering period
Yield formation
Ripening
Total growing period
early (1a)
late (1b)
total
Alfalfa
Banana
Bean
Cabbage
Citrus
Cotton
Grape
Groundnut
Maize
Onion
Pea
Pepper
Potato
Safflower
Sorghum
Soybean
Sugarbeet
beet
sugar
Sugarcane
Sunflower
Tobacco
Tomato
Water melon
Wheat
winter
spring
2.2 Determining the rotational supply
The rotational supply which minimizes reductions in crop yield can be determined by applying formula {4}. The main steps in the calculation procedure are as follows:
a. Basic data
b. Critical periods for water deficits
c. Amounts of water to be saved
d. Available water per month
e. Case a: Determination of the extended irrigation interval
f. Case b: Determination of the depth of irrigation
a. Basic data needed are:
Net irrigation requirements
Available annual water supply
Cropping pattern
Irrigation interval under full supply (it can also be calculated if soil moisture parameters are known)
b. The critical periods for water deficits are given in Table 12. High ky values indicate a sensitive period for water shortage and savings should be reduced in that period otherwise a considerable yield decrease will occur.
c. The total amount of water to be saved is the difference between needed supply and available supply. In no case should the saving be greater than 50 percent of the full supply, because under such conditions formula {4} may not be valid. The allocation of the savings over the periods can be calculated according to formula {4}, whereas the savings per months can be calculated by the following relationship:
where:
WS month = water to be saved in a given month
WS period = water to be saved in the chosen growing period
V month = water applied in the month under full supply
V period = water applied in the chosen period under full supply
d. The available water (Va) per month is the difference between the water applied under full supply (V) and water savings (WS) under limited supply.
e. Case a: consists in extending the irrigation interval but keeping the depth of irrigation constant. The extended interval can be calculated taking into account the interval under full supply, which is determined through the traditional procedures and the ratio V/Va or:
(limited supply) = (full supply). V/Va
After determining the optimum irrigation interval, some practical changes may be introduced in scheduling in order to facilitate the operation, e.g. the introduction of a fixed interval throughout a part of the irrigation season.
f. Case b: consists in keeping the initial (full supply) interval but reducing the depth of irrigation. Although this is not a very practical measure, it is done in some instances. The volume of each irrigation is calculated by the relationship;
2.3 Example
a. Basic data:
Cropping pattern: sugarcane (ratoon) throughout the year
Crop water requirements: ETm = 21700 m^3/ha year distributed as indicated in Table 13
Available water supply: 17400 m^3/ha year
Irrigation interval, under full supply: as given in Table 13.
Length of growing periods: establishment - 30 days; vegetative - 180 days; yield formation - 60 days
b. Critical periods:
Table 12 indicates that the ripening period (ky[3] = 0.1) is the most appropriate for making water savings, followed by yield formation (ky[2] = 0.5) and then the vegetative period (ky[1] = 0.75).
c. Amount of water to be saved per period:
The total amount to be saved per period is 21700 - 17400 = 4300 m^3/ha year.
The total amount of water to be saved in each period can be determined according to formula {4}.
Assuming that the savings should be made only in the two more favourable periods (ripening and yield formation), the corresponding water savings would be:
WS[2] + WS[3] = 4300 m^3/ha
V[2] = 3000 + 2200 + 2000 = 7200 m^3/ha
ky[2] = 0.5 (Table 12)
V[3] = 1000 + 600 = 1600 m^3/ha
ky =0.1 (Table 12)
Replacing these values in {8} and solving the equations results in:
WS = 2260 m^3/ha
WS = 2039 m^3/ha
However, WS[3] (2260 m^3) is greater than V[3] (1600 m^3) which is not possible. This indicates that water saving cannot be limited to growth periods (2) and (3). The savings should be made over a longer period and include period (1) as well. Since period (1) is the least appropriate for undertaking water savings, only the last three months (May, June and July) have been included. Hence the distribution of the water savings is recalculated as follows:
WS[1] + WS[2] + WS[3] = 4300 m^3/ha
where:
V[3] = 1600 m^3
ky =0.1
V[2] = 7200 m^3
ky =0.5
V[1] = 2500 + 3000 + 3000 = 8500 m^3
ky - 0.75
replacing values and solving the equations:
WS[2] = 1484 = 1500 m^3/ha
WS[3] = 1648 = 1600 m^3/ha
WS[1] = 1168 = 1200 m^3/ha
d. Amount of water to be saved per month (M):
(see Table 13)
e. Volume of water to be applied monthly:
May
2500 - 353 = 2147 m^3/ha
June
3000 - 424 = 2576 m^3/ha
(see Table 13)
f. Irrigation interval (Case a):
(see Table 13)
The distribution of the water according to these intervals leaves the amounts of each irrigation the same as they were initially under full supply conditions. The proposed method only stretches the irrigation intervals during those periods when the plant suffers least and therefore yield reductions are minimized.
g. Amount per irrigation (Case b):
As said in the main text, one can also maintain the irrigation interval and reduce the amount per irrigation gift. The application of this solution is not advisable because farmers do not understand why they receive different amounts of water every time and it is susceptible to malpractices. Nevertheless, to complete the example, the procedure is also illustrated.
Table 13 EXAMPLE OF ROTATIONAL SUPPLY WITH LIMITED WATER
^1 (0) = establishment, (1) = vegetative period, (2) = yield formation, (3) = ripening
^2 Figures rounded off to a full day
The irrigation dose is therefore:
(see Table 13)
2.4 Related design considerations
The benefits of the methodology just described are not limited to conditions when supplies are limited, but it can as well be used advantageously under conditions of full supply.
The advantages can best be illustrated by an example. Let us assume that there is one irrigation scheme that can irrigate 10000 ha, under full supply but the area could be increased if water were available. For reasons of simplicity it will be assumed that the only crop grown is sugarcane. Average annual yield (full supply) is 80 t/ha. The net crop water requirements are 21700 m/ha year and the gross irrigation requirements, with a 50 percent overall efficiency, are 43400 m^3/ha year. We will suppose that the management decides to save 20 percent of the crop water requirements and utilize the water saved to extend the irrigated area. The consequences of such a decision are analysed below.
a. Amount of water to be saved:
b. Expected reduction in yield due to water shortage:
The reduction in yield can be calculated according to the formula {l}^1, i.e.
^1 For greater detail and information on how to calculate expected yields when water supply is limited, the reader is referred to FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper No. 33, Chapter IV.
where:
ETa = 21700 - 4300 = 17400 m^3/ha
ETm =21700 m^3/ha
ky = 1.25
Ym = 80 t
replacing values in the equation one obtains:
Ya = 60.2 t/ha
c. Incremental irrigated area and production:
The water saved will allow irrigation of:
The sugarcane production arising from this additional area would be:
2471 ha x 60.2 t/ha = 148705 t
d. Total production:
10000 ha x 60.2 t/ha + 148705 = 750705 t
whereas the production under full supply conditions was:
10000 ha x 80 t/ha = 800000 t
This measure has permitted to increase the irrigated area by nearly 25 percent and consequently those who benefit from it. If the intention is to maximize the number of beneficiaries, while keeping a reasonable income per farmer, the above methodology can be used to design the system. However, it should be noted that under such assumption the farmers will never be able to obtain the potential yield of the crop.
The suggested procedure can be improved by using some more sophisticated mathematical calculations or the trial and error method, if the economic optimum is desired.
3. Rotational scheduling under full water supply conditions
There are many books and references illustrating how to calculate rotational supply according to the technical principles involved. However, such calculations can lead to water distribution patterns which are often impractical and therefore rarely applied. Simplification of the calculated irrigation scheduling is often necessary but oversimplification can lead to wasting large amounts of water. In order to visualize some of these problems, an example has been worked out in detail.
Example:
a. Basic data
The exercise is to calculate the rotational schedule for a farm with the following characteristics.
a1) irrigable area: 3,7 ha
a2) cropping pattern by type of soil:
tomato
1.5 ha in soil A1
tomato
0.8 ha in soil A2
maize
0.25 ha in soil A1
pepper
0.50 ha in soil A1
pepper
0.50 ha in soil A2
beans
0.15 ha in soil A1
Total
3.7 ha
a3) hydraulic characteristics of soils:
soil A1: W
water holding capacity
93 mm/m
depth of soil
0.8 m^1
soil A2: W
water holding capacity
87 mm/m
depth of soil
0.8 m^1
fraction of available soil water = p
^1 Depth of soil limited by hard clay pan.
a4) ET crop^2 (in mm):
^2 Figures correspond to a real location, Sansirisay in Guatemala.
Tomato
Maize
Pepper
Beans
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
b. Depth of irrigation water
The depth of irrigation to be applied is given by the formula:
d = p. W. D
where:
p = fraction of available soil water
W = water holding capacity in mm/m
D = rooting depth in m
d = depth of irrigation (mm)
replacing values gives:
soil A[1]
d[1]
0.65 x 93 x 0.8^3
48 mm
soil A[2]
d[2]
0.65 x 87 x 0.8^3
45 mm
^3 It is assumed that the rooting depth is limited by the hard pan and therefore equal to the soil depth.
c. Irrigation intervals
The irrigation intervals (I) are calculated with the following relationship:
where ETcrop is mm/day and I in days.
The irrigation intervals for tomato in soil A[1] are calculated as follows:
For the next interval:
The application of formula {l0} to the following month gives a discontinuity in the intervals because October cannot be divided into equal intervals by the 22 day period. Therefore, in order to have a continuous irrigation schedule, the remaining days in October must also be considered:
2.10 mm/day x (31 - 23) days + 3.03 x 6 days = 48
d =10.3 days
therefore I[2] = 8 + 10.3 » 18 days
The next interval is all within November, i.e.:
The next interval is in part of November and December:
d = 8.97 » 9 days
I[4] = 4 + 9 = 13 days
The other intervals are calculated similarly and they are reflected in the bar diagram of Figure 15.
It has been assumed that crops are planted at the beginning of the 1st, 2nd or 3rd 10 day period in order to extend the harvest period and to suit labour availability.
A farmer who has free access to a water supply (well, continuous flow in the canal, etc.) could follow the irrigation schedule given for each crop in Figure 15. Such a schedule would allow him to use the water in a highly efficient manner, but it would be highly impractical since the schedules of the crops do not coincide, nor even those of the same crop in different soil. Hence the farmer would have to repeat the irrigation on many days (30 times in our example), and this would certainly conflict with other agricultural operations. Furthermore, it is difficult for the average farmer to keep track of such schedules.
If we now consider that a tertiary canal serves a large number of farms (sometimes 100 or more) of different sizes and with slight variations in the soils, planting dates and crops, the application of a rotational schedule in the canal to satisfy the individual schedules on every farm would mean that it would become almost impossible to operate.
Other alternatives must be sought, and one of them is to introduce some simplification in the irrigation scheduling, so that it becomes more manageable.
Fig. 15 Example of irrigation scheduling under the rotational supply method
d. Simplification of the irrigation schedule
The simplifications to be introduced in a calculated irrigation schedule are, to a great extent, a matter of personal judgement. A compromise must be found between an oversimplification of the schedule (which sometimes bears little relation to the actual needs of the plant), and the calculated one which is often impractical.
In the example three levels of simplification have been considered which could correspond to reality.
First level of simplification
A common irrigation schedule with variable intervals is adopted for all crops. The fact that some crops are planted earlier than others is taken into consideration in the irrigation schedule.
To calculate the common schedule the following steps are taken:
- The intervals are fitted to the planting dates (in the example, every 10 days).
- For a given month the shortest interval falling within that month is selected. For intervals falling between two months the shortest of those is adopted.
The common irrigation schedule is represented by the line h) in Figure 15.
The procedure can either be applied to a farm or canal serving many farms.
Second level of simplification
This consists of introducing slight modifications in the "common irrigation schedule" so that intervals are as similar as possible in duration. In the example, the last five intervals have a duration of 13, 11, 11, 12 and 12 days and they have been replaced by 5 intervals of 11 days. The advantage of such a simplification is that the intervals can be more easily remembered by the farmers and the operation of the canal is more regular.
Third level of simplification
This consists of adopting a constant interval - which may or may not include the planting dates - throughout the irrigation season. The length of such an interval is the shortest of the "calculated" ones (11 days in the example).
The application of such a constant interval, keeping the depth of each irrigation constant, leads to great water infiltration losses because the soil cannot hold that much water. Alternatively, the depth given in each irrigation can be different to fit the water holding capacity of the soil, but again the system may not be easily understood by the farmer. Experience shows that farmers become more skillful in managing a constant depth of irrigation water rather than a variable one.
Therefore, in most cases, the first and second levels of simplification are the most practical approach to irrigation scheduling under the rotational method.
<section>f</section>
References
Agricultural Economics Department. 1973 Design and management of irrigation systems for improved water management. Saturday Seminar, 10 November 1973. IRRI, Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines.
Alien W.H. and Lambert J.R. 1971 Application of the principle of, the calculated risk to scheduling of supplemental irrigation, I. Concepts. Agricultural Meteorology 8:193-201.
ASCE 1971 Committee on Operation and Maintenance of Irrigation and Drainage Systems. Organization for Operation and Maintenance. J. Irrig. and Drainage Division 97:601-633. ASCE, IR 4.
Bagadion B. et al. 1980 Promoting participatory management on small irrigation schemes: An experiment from the Philippines. Network Paper 2/80/2. Agricultural Administration Unit, Overseas Development Institute, London.
Bartley T.R. 1976 Investigations of copper sulfate for aquatic weed control. Water Resources Technical Publication, Research Report No. 27. Bureau of Reclamation, US Department of the Interior.
Bartley T.R. 1974 and Gangstad E.O. Environmental aspects of aquatic plant control. J. Irrig. and Drainage Division, ASCE, September.
Beal G.M., 1971 Coward E.W. Jr. and Brooks R.M. Some effects of intangible goals on resource development programs. J. Community Development Society 2(1):48-58.
Belshaw D. and Chambers R. 1973 A practical management system for implementing rural development programmes and projects. Institute for Development Studies, University of Nairobi. Discussion Paper No. 162, 35 p. Nairobi.
Benor D. and Harrison J.O. 1977 Sistema de capacitación y visitas. Extension Agricola, Banco Mundial, Washington DC 20433.
Benton A. Jr., James W.P. and Rouse J.W. Jr. 1978 Evapotranspiration from water hyacinth in Texas reservoirs. Water Resources Bull. 14(4):919-930.
Blackburn R.D., Sutton D.L. and Taylor T. 1971 Biological control of aquatic weeds. J. Irrig. and Drainage Division 97(5): 421 - 432. Proc. ASCE, IR 3.
Boaz M. 1968 The irrigation and soil field service in Israel. Seminar on Sprinkler Irrigation, Verona, 16 March 1968. International Study Center for Irrigation, Verona.
Bos M.G. 1977 Some influences of project management on irrigation efficiencies. In: Arid Land Irrigation in Developing Countries. Worthington (ed.). ILRI, Wageningen.
Bottrall A. 1978 Evaluating the organisation and management of irrigated agriculture. Meeting on Management and Institutions in Agricultural Development, ODI, London.
Bottrall A. 1978 The management and operation of irrigation schemes in less developed countries. In: The Social and Ecological Effects of Water Development in Developing Countries, pp. 309-322. Widstrand C. (ed.). Pergamon, New York.
Bottrall A. 1981 Comparative study of the management and organization of irrigation projects. World Bank Staff Working Paper No. 458. World Bank, Washington DC 20433.
Buras N., Nir D. and Alperovits E. 1973 Planning and updating farm irrigation schedules. J. Irrig. and Drainage Division 99:43-51. ASCE, IR 1.
Carruthers I. 1978 Contentious issues in planning irrigation schemes. In: The Social and Ecological Effects of Water Development in Developing Countries, pp. 301-308. Widstrand C. (ed.). Pergamon, New York.
Carruthers I.D. and Clayton E.S. 1977 Ex-post evaluation of agricultural projects - its implication for planning. Wye College, University of London. 13 p.
Chambers R. 1969 Settlement Schemes in Tropical Africa, A Study of Organizations and Development. Rout ledge and Keg an Paul, London.
Chambers R. 1977 Men and water: The organisation and operation of irrigation. In: Green Revolution? Technology and Change in Rice Growing Areas of Tamil Nadu and Sri Lanka, pp. 340-363. Farmers B.H. (ed.). Westview, Boulder, Colorado.
Chambers R. 1978 Identifying research priorities in water development. In: The Social and Ecological Effects of Water Development in Developing Countries, pp. 389-398. Widstrand C. (ed.). Pergamon, New York.
Chambers R. 1980 In search of a water revolution: Questions for managing canal irrigation in the 1980s. Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex, Brighton. 28 p.
Chambers R. and Moris J. (eds.). 1973 Mwea: An Irrigated Rice Settlement in Kenya. Welforum Verlag, Munich. 539 p.
Chimonides S.J. 1979 Irrigation efficiency as related to the operation of irrigation projects. Department of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture, Nicosia. 37 p.
Convenio DGA - IICA. 1975 Manual para la operación de riego. DGA, Ministerio de Agricultura del Perú y el Instituto Interamericano de Ciencias Agricolas, Lima.
Coward E.W. Jr. Institutional and social organizational factors affecting irrigation: Their application to a specific case. International Institute of Rural Reconstruction, Cavite, Philippines. 12 p.:
Coward E.W. Jr. 1972 Irrigation and organization: Research in Progress. Philippine Socio-logical Review 20: 171-176.
Coward E.W. Jr. 1974 Water runs down hill and evaporates: Human organization and the management of water environments. Paper prepared for the Mekong Development Seminar, 20-23 August 1974, Pattaya, Thailand.
Coward E.W. Jr. 1976 Irrigation institutions and organizations: An international bibliography. Cornell International Agriculture Mimeograph 49, Ithaca, NY.
Coward E.W. Jr. 1978 Research methodology in the study of irrigation organization: A review of approaches and applications. Seminar Report No. 18, Agricultural Development Council Inc., New York, NY 10019.
Coward E.W. Jr. 1980 Irrigation development: Institutional and organizational issues. In: Irrigation and Agricultural Development in Asia: Perspectives from the Social Sciences, pp. 15-27. Coward E.W. Jr. (ed.). Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
Coward E.W. Jr. (ed.). 1980 Irrigation and Agricultural Development in Asia: Perspectives from the Social Sciences. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY. 369 p.
Davison V.E., Lawrence J.M. and Compton L.V. 1975 Waterweed control on farms and ranches. Farmers' Bull. 2181, US Department of Agriculture, Washington DC 20402.
Driver S.R. and Miles -. 1952 The Babylonian Laws. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Dutt G.R. and Booher L.J. Corrosion of irrigation structures. University of California Agricultural Extension Service, Pub. AXT-109. 8 p.
Easter K.W. 1975 Field channels: A key to better Indian irrigation. Water Resources Research 11(3):389-392.
Easter K.W. 1977 Improving village irrigation systems: An example from India. Land Economics 53(1):56-66.
El Hallani. 1979 Organisation de la gestion, de l'exploitation et de l'entretien des réseaux dans le périmètre de la Tessaout-Amont. Hommes, Terre et Eaux, Revue Marocaine des Sciences Agronomiques et Vétérinaires 9t33):53-55. Rabat.
FAO. 1961 Methods and machinery for cutting and cleaning irrigation and drainage channels. Agricultural Engineering Informal Working Bulletin No. 13, Land and Water Development Division, Rome. 35 p.
FAO. 1968 Handbook of utilization of aquatic plants. A compilation of the world's publications. P1:CP/20. Plant Production and Protection Division, Rome.
FAO. 1968 Successful irrigation: Planning, development and management. Hagan R.M., Houston C.E. and Allison S.V. Rome. 53 p.
FAO. 1970 Land and water use and management in the Chambal irrigated area, Rajasthan. Aquatic weed control. Blackburn R.D. AGL:SF/70/30. Rome. 15 p.
FAO. 1971 El desarrollo del plan nacional de irrigación. Informe al Gobierno de Guatemala. AT 2916. Rome.- 59 p.
FAO. 1972 Farm water management seminar Manila. Irrigation and Drainage Paper 12. Rome. 342 p.
FAO. 1972 Water use seminar Damascus. Irrigation and Drainage Paper 13. Rome. 312 p.
FAO. 1973 Pilot irrigation development scheme, Asutsuare, Ghana. Farm management and settlement. AGL:SF/GHA 14, Technical Report 2. Rome. 97 p.
FAO. 1974 Training extension workers in newly irrigated areas. Maalouf W.D. and Horning H.M. Rome. 17 p.
FAO. 1976 Papers for EGA Sixth Session of the Working Party on Water Resources and Irrigation, Seville, Spain, 10-16 May 1976.
- Kempen H. Maintenance of watercourses with special reference to chemical control of weeds.
- Ortiz J.A. and Urrutia F. Conservation of watercourses by the control of aquatic weeds.
- Robson T.O. and Fillenham L.F. Weed control in land drainage channels in Britain.
- Siniscalchi D. Watercourses management with special reference to weed control.
FAO. 1978 Farm Management Notes for Asia and the Far East. Regular Issue No. 5. Regional Office Bangkok. 64 p.
FAO. 1979 Yield response to water. Irrigation and Drainage Paper 33. Doorenbos J. and Kassam A.H. Rome. 193 p.
FAO. 1979 Water management in the Gezira, The Sudan. TCP/SUD/6701. Rome. 22 p.
FAO. 1979 Training programme for irrigation engineers, Malawi. TCP/MLW/6702. Rome. 45 p.
FAO. 1981 Irrigation and water management briefs. Collected Papers. Branscheid V. Investment Centre. Rome. 66 p.
FAO. 1982 Farmers' participation and organization for irrigation water management. Inter-national Support Programme for Farm Water Management, Land and Water-Development Division, Rome. (April) 30 p.
Freeman D.M. and Lowdermilk M.K. 1981 Sociological analysis of irrigation water management - A perspective and approach to assist decision making. In: Public Choice and Rural Development, pp. 153-173. Russell C.S. and Nicholson N.K. (eds.). Resources for the Future, Washington DC.
Gallagher D.R. and Robinson R.W. 1977 Influence of metering, pricing policies and incentives on water use efficiency. Australian Water Resources Council, Technical Paper No. 19. Department of National Resources, Canberra. 138 p.
Glick T.F. 1970 Irrigation and Society in Medieval Valencia. Harvard University, Princeton. (ISBN-0-674-46675 Beknap Pr.)
Grassi C.J. 1977 Operación y conservación de sistemas de riego. Centre Interamericano de Desarrollo Integral de Aguas y Tierras, Mérida, Venezuela. 233 p.
Gustafson W.E. and Reidinger R.B. 1971 Delivery of canal water in North India and West Pakistan. South Asia Series. Center for South and Southeast Asia Studies, Institute of International Studies, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720. (Reprint No. 395, 6 p.)
Haissman I. 1971 Generating skilled manpower for irrigation projects in developing countries: A study of Northwest Mexico. Water Resources Research 7:1-17.
Hellinga F. 1960 Local administration of water control in a number of European countries. Publication 8, ILRI, Wageningen. 55 p.
Hutchins W.A. 1952 Irrigation institutions - Part I. Irrigation organizations. Division of Irrigation, College of Agriculture, University of California, Davis CA 95616. 40 p.
Hutchins W.A. 1952 Irrigation institutions - Part II. Irrigation water rights. Division of Irrigation, College of Agriculture, University of California, Davis, CA 95616. 65 p.
ILRI. 1968 Agricultural extension in the developing countries. A bibliography. De Vries C.A. (comp.) ILRI, Wageningen. 125 p.
Ingrain H. 1972 The changing decision rules in the politics of water development. Water Resources Bulletin 8(6):1177-1188.
I-pai Wu and Tung Liang. 1972 Optimal irrigation quantity and frequency. J. Irrig. And Drainage Division 98:117-133. ASCE, IR 1.
IRRI. 1973 Water management in Philippine irrigation systems: Research and operations. Water Management Workshop, 11-14 December 1972. IRRI, Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines. 270 p.
IRRI 1974 Annual Report 1974. Irrigation water management, pp. 236-248. IRRI, Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines.
IRRI. 1978 Irrigation policy and management in Southeast Asia. IRRI, Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines. 198 p.
IRRI/Agricultural Development Council. 1976 Bibliography on socio-economic aspects of Asian irrigation. Singapore University Press Pte. Ltd. 80 p.
Japan International Cooperation Agency. 1976 Subak system in Bali, Indonesia. JICA, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo. 44 p.
Jayaraman T.K. 1980 Implementation of warabandhi: A management approach. Workshop on Rotational System of Canal Supplies and Warabandhi, 23-26 April 1980. Administrative Staff College, Hyderabad.
Jensen M.E., Robb D.C.N. and Franzoy C.E. 1969 Scheduling irrigations using climate-crop-soil data. ASCE Irrigation and Drainage Division National Meeting on Water Resources, 3-7 February 1969, New Orleans, LA. 21 p.
Johnson S.H., Early A.C. and Lowdermilk M.K. 1977 Water problems in the Indus food machine. Water Resources Bulletin 13(6):1253-1268.
Kemper W.D., Clyma W. and Ashraf M.M. 1976 Improvement and maintenance of earthen watercourses to reduce waterlogging and increase water supplies for crop production. International Conference on Waterlogging and Salinity, 13-17 October 1975, Lahore, Pakistan. Department of Civil Engineering, University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore.
Lee Chow. 1960 Development of rotational irrigation in Taiwan. J. Irrig. and Drainage Division 86:1-12. ASCE, IR 3.
Leuenberger R. 1976 Water delivery by rotation as an integral part of irrigation water administration and water management. Command Area Development Project IND/74/-088. Working Paper No. 3. Government of India and UNDP/FAO.
Levine G. 1980 The relationship of design, operation and management. In: Irrigation and Agricultural Development in Asia, pp. 51-62. Coward E.W. Jr. (ed.). Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
Levine G., Capener H. and Gore P. 1973 The management of irrigation systems for the farm. An Interpretive Summary of the ADC/RTN Irrigation Seminar, 16-18 October 1972, Cornell University. Agricultural Development Council, New York, NY 10020.
Levine G. and Hart H.C. 1981 Mobilizing local resources for irrigation. Report No. 22, Agricultural Development Council, Bangkok. 16 p.
Lowdermilk M.K. 1981 Promoting increased food production in the 1980s: Approaches to agricultural extension in different production systems. Symposium 5-9 January 1981, World Bank, Washington DC. 63 p.
Lowdermilk M.K., Early A.C. and Freeman D.M. 1978 Farm irrigation constraints and farmers' responses: Comprehensive field survey in Pakistan. Water Management Technical Report No. 48-A, Vol. I. Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO. 100 p.
Luque J.A. and Paoloni J.D. 1972 Manual de operación de riego. Ediciones Riagro, Punta Alta, Prov. Buenos Aires. 238 p.
Macdonald Sir. M. & Partners. 1981 East Java irrigation operation and maintenance. Vol. I. Main Report. Overseas Development Administration, UK. 75 p.
Malik M.B.A. 1974 Maintenance manual for irrigation works. Technical Note No. 40, UNDP/FAO Greater Mussayib Project. UNDP/FAO. 35 p.
Malik M.B.A. 1978 Maintenance of irrigation systems. Question 35.2, ICID Tenth Congress, Athens, Greece. ICID, New Delhi. 44 p.
Martin - Retortillo S. 1969 Water resources administration in Spain. Interregional Seminar on Current Issues of Water Resources Administration, January-February 1973, New Delhi. ESA/RT/Meeting V/Background Document 1, UN, New York. 115 p.
Medici G. 1976 I consorzi di bonifica nella regione. Associazione Nazionale delle Bonifiche, delle Irrigazioni e dei Miglioramenti Fondiari, Bologna. 20 p.
Milligan T. 1973 Scheduling irrigations with high-speed data from a computer. Irrigation Age, May.
Milligan T. 1973 Class 'A' pan and irrigation scheduling. Irrigation Age. May. pp. 12-17.
Ministerio de Obras Publicas. 1974 Zona regable de Orellana, Memoria de Explotación Campaña 1974. Dirección General de Obras Hidráulicas, Confederación Hidrográfica del Guadiana, Madrid. 88 p.
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation. 1975 Irrigation rates and betterment levy - A critical study. Directorate of Statistics, Central Water Commission, Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, New Delhi. 88 p.
Ministry of Food and Agriculture. 1978 Proc. Seminar on Water Users Associations for Improving Irrigated Agriculture, 24 June 1978, Islamabad. Government of Pakistan, Islamabad. 62 p.
Muspratt M.A. 1971 Optimal distribution of water to irrigation canals. J. Hydrol. 14:19-21.
Neghassi H.M. and Seagraves J.A. 1978 Efficiency in the use of water for irrigation: The role of prices and regulations. Natural Resources Forum 3:53-72. United Nations, New York.
Norero A. 1977 Calculos agronomicos relacionados con el reigo. CIDIAT, Mérida, Venezuela. 25 p.
OCDE. 1978 La participation paysanne sur les périmètres villageois d'irrigation par pompage de la zone de Matam au Sénégal. Expériences de Développement Rural, Document Spécial No. 4, C.D./R (78)12. Centre de Développement de l'OCDE, Paris. 85 p.
Oxby C. and Bottrall A. The role of farmers' in decision-making on irrigation systems. Overseas Development Institute, London. 26 p.
Palmer Jones R. and Carruthers I. 1977 Agricultural water use. Economic Commission for Western Asia, Seminar on Technology Transfer and Change in the Arab Middle East, 10-14 Oct. 1977, Beirut. E/ECWA/NR/SEM.1/17. UN ECOSOC, New York. 39 p.
Philippine Society of Agricultural Engineers. 1979 Communal irrigation. J. Philippine Agricultural Engineering X (2). 46 p.
Plummer A.W. 1964 An analysis of functional services required in water resource development especially as required for irrigation agriculture. Fifth Near East/South Asia Regional Irrigation Practices Seminar, March 1964, New Delhi, India. (Mimeograph, unpublished document). 20 p.
Quiroga E.R. 1950 El distrito de riego Zapotitan: Caso de estudio sobre la transformación de la agricultura de subsistencía mediante riego en El Salvador. Thesis (in Spanish). Post-graduate School, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 24 p.
Reidinger R.B. 1974 Institutional rationing of canal water in Northern India: Conflict between traditional patterns and modern needs. Economic Development and Cultural Change 23 (I):79-104.
Reyes Morquecho J.R. Instructive para operaçao e manutençao dos perimetros irrigados (Manual for the operation and maintenance of irrigated areas). Projecto UNDP/FAO/BRA/74/008 (Mimeograph). 38 p.
Ritchie I.J., Dent J.B. and Blackie M.J. 1978 Irrigation management: An information system approach. Agricultural Systems 3:67-74.
Robles Espinosa J. and Espinosa de Leon E. 1972 Utilización de la experiencia obtenida de la operación de los distritos de riego - para su planeación y mejoramiento. Tema No. 4, Simposio Internacional sobre Planificación de Recursos Hidráulicos. 4-8 de Diciembre de 1972, México DF. 30 p.
Sagardoy J.A. 1971 Irrigation organizations. In: FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper 13. Rome. pp. 254-266.
Sagardoy J.A. 1974 Water administration and management of irrigation schemes. FAO, Rome. (unpublished document)
Sagardoy J.A. 1980 The role of water pricing and metering in promoting efficient irrigation water use. Seminar on Economic Instruments for Rational Utilization of Water Resources. WATER/SEM.7/R.9. UN ECE, Geneva. 16 p.
Saint W.S. and Coward E.W. Jr. 1977 Agriculture and behavioral science: Emerging orientations. Science 197:733-737.
Schutjer W.A. and Coward E.W. Jr. 1971 Planning agricultural development - the matter of priorities. J. Developing Areas 6(1):29-38.
Secretaría de Recursos Hidráulicos. 1958 Instructivo para la formulación de planes de riego en los distritos nacionales de riego. 2nd ed. Instructivo Técnico No. 12. Dirección General de Distritos de Riego, Departamento de Planeación Investigación y Estadistica. México DF. 21 p.
Secretaría de Recursos Hidráulicos. 1958 Instructivo para la operación y conservación de los distritos de riego. Instructivo Técnico No. 24. Tomo Primero. Jefatura de Operación, Departamento de Planeación, Investigación y Estadistica. México DF. 93 p.
Secretaría de Recursos Hidráulicos. 1972 Programa de capacitación permanente. Material Técnico, Nivel Técnico Superior. DOS volúmenes. México DF. 600 p.
Shaw D.J. 1965 The Managil South-western Extension: An extension to the Gezira scheme. ILRI Bull. 9. Wageningen. 37 p.
Sims D.A. 1973 The aquatic weed problem in the Chambal scheme. Appendix 2 of Agricultural Engineering Aspects of Command Area Development. UNDP/FAO Soil and Water Management Project. IND. 72(020) Working Paper 1 (mimeograph, unpublished document). FAO, Rome.
Smith R.A. 1970 Management structure for irrigation. J. Irrig. and Drainage Division, ASCE IR 4. pp. 475-488.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission. 1969 Water Bailiffs Manual. State Rivers and Water Supply Commission, Victoria, Australia. 101 p.
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission. 1975 Catalogue of mechanical plant used in channel and drain maintenance. Plant Section of State Rivers and Water Supply Commission, Victoria, Australia. 40 p.
Steinberg D. et al. 1980 Philippine small scale irrigation. AID Project Impact Evaluation Report No. 4. USAID, Washington DC.
Swales G.H. 1977 Maintenance of irrigation/drainage systems in Victoria, Australia. FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin 28, Rome. 404 p.
Tabbal D.F. and Wickham T.H. 1976 The effect of location and water supply on water shortages in an irrigated area. Saturday Seminar, 26 June 1976. IRRI, Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines. 16 p.
Takes C.A.P. 1975 Land settlement and resettlement projects: Some guidelines for their planning and implementation. ILRI Bull. 14, Wageningen. 44 p.
Taylor D.C. 1976 Agricultural development through group action to improve the distribution of water in Asian gravity-flow irrigation systems. Teaching and Research Forum. The Agricultural Development Council, Singapore. 23 p.
Taylor D.C. and Wickham T.H. (eds.) 1970 Irrigation policy and the management of irrigation systems in Southeast Asia. The Agricultural Development Council, Bangkok. 198 p.
Technical Committee of the Water Resources Research Centers of the Thirteen Western States. 1974 Water resources planning, social goals, and indicators: Methodological development and empirical test. Utah Water Research Laboratory, Logan, Utah 84322. 261 p.
Thornton D.S. 1974 The organization of irrigated areas. Paper No. 14. Policy and Practice in Rural Development. Hunter G., Bunting A., Bottrall A.H. (eds.). Proc. 2nd Int. Seminar on Change in Agriculture, September 1974, Reading, pp. 147-157.
Tineo Diaz C.A. 1968 Experiencias en la operación del sistema de riego Las Majaguas. Tema IV. Construcción, Desarrollo y Funcionamiento de las Obras de Riego. V Seminario Latinoamericano de Irrigación. III Jornadas Venezolanas de Riego. Comité Coordinador del Sistema de Riego Cojees, Sarape, Venezuela. 21 p.
UN. 1980 Efficiency and distribution equity in the use and treatment of water: Guidelines for pricing and regulations. Natural -Resources/Water Series No. 8. ST/ESA/103. United Nations, New York. 175 p.
UN CAFE. 1972 The application of modern management techniques to the operation and maintenance of water resources projects. Regional Conference of Water Resources Development, 18-25 September 1972, Manila. E/CN.11/WRD/Conf. 10/L.529 p. ECOSOC, New York.
Unesco. 1974 Aquatic Vegetation and Its Use and Control. Mitchell D.S. (ed.) Unesco, Paris. 135 p.
UNITAR. 1977 The water hyacinth: Foe or friend? Important for the Future, 11(1):2-3.
USDA. 1964 Tolerance of certain crops to several aquatic herbicides in irrigation water. Tech. Bull. 1299. ARS, USDA, Washington DC. 21 p.
USDA. 1975 Inspecting and 'cleaning subsurface drain systems. Farmers' Bull. 2258. ARS, USDA, Washington DC. 16 p.
Valera A. and Wickham T. 1976 Management of traditional and improved irrigation systems: Some findings from the Philippines. Choice in Irrigation Management Workshop, 27 September - 1 October 1976, University of Kent, Canterbury, England. Irrigation and Water Management Department, IRRI, Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines. 15 p.
Valera A., Tabbal D., Reyes R. and Barker R. 1975 The effect of improved water control in irrigation canals on crop production. FAO/NIA Two National Seminars on Water Management and Control at the Farm Level, 6-11 October, Iliolo and 13-18 October 1975, Quezon City. Irrigation and Water Management Department, IRRI, Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines. 31 p.
Von Chong Sánchez G. 1968 Experiencias de la Finca Escuela experimental de Las Majaguas. V Seminario Latinoamericano de Irrigación. III Jornadas Venezolanas de Riego, 20 al 31 de Octubre 1968. Comite Coordinador del Sistema de Riego Cojedes, Sarare, Venezuela. 9 p.
Wade R. 1979 Collective responsibility in construction and management of irrigation canals: Case of Italy. Economic and Political Weekly, Review of Agriculture XIV (51&-52):A155-A160.
Widstrand C. (ed.) 1978 The Social and Ecological Effects of Water Development in Developing Countries, Part 1. Vol. 7 Water and Society: Conflicts in Development, pp. 279-340.
World Bank. Operation, maintenance and repair of selected irrigation systems. AGR/T/1, Agricultural and Rural Development Department, Central Projects Staff, World Bank, Washington DC. 38 p.
FAO IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE PAPERS
1. Irrigation practice and water management, 1971 (Ar* E* F* S** - E Rev. 1,1984)
2. Irrigation canal lining (New edition (1977) available in E, F and S in the FAO Land and Water Development Series)
3. Design criteria for basin irrigation systems, 1971 (E**)
4. Village irrigation programmes - a new approach in water economy, 1971 (E* F*)
5. Automated irrigation, 1971 (E* F* S**)
6. Drainage of heavy soils, 1971 (E* F* S**)
7. Salinity seminar, Baghdad, 1971 (E* F*)
8. Water and the environment, 1971 (E** F* S*)
9. Drainage materials, 1972 (E** F *S*),
10. Integrated farm water management, 1971 (E*** F* S*)
11. Planning methodology seminar, Bucharest, 1972 (E** F**)
12. Farm water management seminar, Manila, 1972 (E**)
13. Water-use seminar, Damascus, 1972 (E* F**)
14. Trickle irrigation, 1973 (E** F** S**)
15. Drainage machinery, 1973 (E* F*)
16. Drainage of salty soils, 1973 (E** F** S**)
17. Man's influence on the hydrological cycle, 1973 (E* P** S**)
18. Groundwater seminar, Granada, 1973 (E** F* S*)
19. Mathematical models in hydrology, 1978 (E*)
20. Water laws in Moslem countries. Vol. 1,1973 (E* F*) Vol. 2,1978 (E* F*)
21. Groundwater models, 1973 (E*)
22. Water for agriculture, 1973 (E** F* S**)
23. Simulation methods in water development, 1974 (E* F* S**)
24. Crop water requirements (Revised), 1977 (E* F* S**)
25. Effective rainfall, 1974 (E** F** S**)
26. Small hydraulic structures (Vols 1 and 2), 1975 (E* F* S*)
27. Agro-meteorological field stations, 1976 (E** F* S*)
28. Drainage testing, 1976 (E* F* S**)
29. Water quality for agriculture, 1976 (E** F* S** - E Rev. 1 in preparation)
30. Self-help wells, 1977 (E")
31. Groundwater pollution, 1979 (E* S*)
32. Deterministic models in hydrology, 1979 (E*)
33. Yield response to water, 1979 (E* F* S*)
34. Corrosion and encrustation in water wells, 1980 (E*)
35. Mechanized sprinkler irrigation, 1982 (E* F* S***)
36. Localized irrigation, 1980 (Ar*** E* F* S***)
37. Arid zone hydrology, 1980 (E*)
38. Drainage design factors, 1980 (Ar*** E* F* S*)
39. Lysimeters, 1982 (E* F*** S***)
40. Organization, operation and maintenance of irrigation schemes, 1982 (E* F*** S***)
41. Environmental management for vector control in rice fields, 1984 (E* F*** S***)
Availability: February 1986
Ar - Arabic
* Available
E - English
** Out of print
F - French
*** In preparation
S - Spanish
The FAO Technical-Papers can be purchased locally through FAO sales agents or directly from Distribution and Sales Section, FAO, Via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
