<title>National Forestry Action Programme - Dominica: Executive Summary</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
This document comprises two parts:
Executive Summary
Project Profiles
The Executive Summary is based on that which was included in the main report of the Country Mission Team (CMT). It has been revised to include more factual background information so that this document can suffice as a working document for the Roundtable III meeting. Where necessary, reference should be made to the main report for further detail on specific points.
There are sixteen Project Profiles proposed for implementation over a five year period at a total cost of US$ 12,456,220. Of this, the Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica will provide US$ 2,014,420 and donor funding of US$ 10,441,800 is being sought. It is recommended that a rolling format be used involving annual revision and updating of programmes and projects.
Reference is made to related documents:
Regional Overview of the CARICOM/FAO Tropical Forests Action Programme in the East Caribbean. CARICOM/FAO/BDDC-ODA, July 1993.
Forestry development initiatives at the regional/subregional level - regional project proposals 01 - 05.
The Status of Mangrove Conservation in the CARICOM Islands of the Eastern Caribbean. Report to the Commission of the European Communities as part of the TFAP for the Caribbean Region. P. Bacon, 1991.
Report on Forest Research - special report as part of the TFAP process. C. Buford Briscoe, 1991.
Map 1. General map of the East Caribbean showing the location of Dominica
Source: Country Environmental Profile, Dominica. CCA/IRF/USAID 1991
<section>2</section>
Executive summary
Background Information
1. Dominica has been heralded as the region's premier nature island. Its terrain is very rugged and steep with any flatter areas restricted primarily to river valleys, the coastal areas of the north east and Bell's Wet Area in the centre of the island (Map 2). There is little reasonably flat land available for expansion of human settlement. The geology is volcanic, but is now relatively stable.
2. The climate is humid tropical marine with little seasonal or diurnal variation, and strong steady trade winds. Dominica is one of the wettest islands in the Caribbean and hence has very lush vegetation.
3. The soils are unconsolidated and friable and hence are readily erodible, especially on steep slopes denuded of their tree cover. The undisturbed forests have been identified as the most extensive in the Lesser Antilles, while its rain forest is considered the finest in the Caribbean.
Forestry Sector and the National Economy
4. The forest sector GDP, as a percentage of total GDP, has been in general decline since 1983. Two recent sawmill enterprise failures have resulted in the total loss of mechanized industrial capacity. Forest sector employment is about 0.3% of the employed labour force.
5. There is a large trade imbalance in forest-based products, dominated by the import of cardboard boxes, about 50% of the total forest imports. These are used for the export of bananas. An increase in the import of finished and semi-finished wood products is likely. Total lumber imports have risen to about double the maximum production of the 1980s, with coniferous lumber imports now four times their volume in 1981. Export earnings from the forest industry are insignificant, but there is opportunity for increased revenue from the export of value-added secondary manufactured products.
Domestic Consumption and Production of Wood-based Products
6. The roundwood equivalent annual per capita consumption of forest products is well below other comparable forest producing less developed countries. Domestic production has collapsed with the closure of the sawmilling industry. However, if it were to be revived, domestic lumber production could probably be increased to about 15% of demand by the early 21st century.
Map 2. Location map for Dominica
Source: Country Environmental Profile, Dominica. CCA/IRF/USAID 1991.
Governmental Revenue and Investment in the Forest Sector
7. The average annual inflation rate 1978-1990 was 9.2%. Revenue data is not clear, but in 1983/4, the Forest and Wildlife Division's revenue contribution to the government amounted to less than 0.03%. Royalty rates were increased in 1988, but no royalty is collected on the felling of private timber. Revenues from the forest are only a fraction of the required investments. An increase in royalty rate is recommended, and this would have the added incentive of reducing wastage, which is currently a problem.
8. From 1980-1990, recurrent expenditure on forestry field operations kept pace with inflation; it was more or less constant in forest administration, research and extension, and utilisation and promotion; whilst recurrent expenditure on National Parks ceased at the end of 1981/2. Since 1984, government has provided the funding for national parks at more or less a constant rate that has not kept pace with inflation.
Tourism
9. Stay-over visitors account for the major portion of revenue earnings from tourism. Cruise ship arrivals have increased steadily over the past five (5) years and Government has invested heavily in cruise ship docking facilities. The usage of the National Parks has grown to such an extent that the "Saturation point" is being exceeded at two specific sites.
10. While Government has invested heavily in infrastructural improvement to facilitate the cruise ship arrivals, this has proven to be the low end of tourist trade. Government has therefore recognised the need to extract more spending from cruise tourism and expand stay-over tourism. Government needs to exercise caution in its planning to ensure that further tourism expansion does not adversely impact on the island's fragile environment.
Plantations and Industrial Production
11. A predicted worldwide shortage of fine hardwood over the next few decades is a niche which Dominica could fill. White (1990) has identified some 4680 ha of forest reserve, i.e. 6.5% of the country, as land remaining with any potential for industrial development. A full feasibility study, coupled with the need for road construction and logging trails is suggested.
Forest Development Fund
12. To address the need for increased revenue, suggestions are made to impose levies on certain sectors e.g. water, tourist carriers and agricultural production. These fees would be deposited in a 'Forest Development Fund' for the benefit of the forest environment.
Forest Resources Policy
13. A Forestry, Wildlife and National Parks Policy was prepared (Gane, 1988) with 'imperatives' considered as critical for the future development of the forestry sector. This wide-ranging policy is detailed in the main report and is recommended for acceptance by government. Relevant legislation has been revised and improvements suggested. Enforcement is an area of weakness. Legal and policy areas that require attention include: forestry and wildlife; national parks and protected areas; environmental impact; and planning. Specific recommendations with respect to amendments to legislation in all these areas are made.
14. For forestry, wildlife and national parks, two recommendations for early implementation are:
(i) the development of more effective measures to safeguard threatened and endangered species
(ii) strengthening of the institutional capability of the Forestry Division.
Additional amendments to the National Parks and Protected Areas Act are necessary for the protection of marine areas within Dominica's territorial waters.
15. Legislation is proposed requiring the preparation of EIAs for all major projects especially those within the coastal zone, within designated protected areas, or affecting other critical areas. Coupled with this, there must be the creation of an appropriate unit with the technical capability for executing and interpreting these EIAs. Logically, this unit might be in the Physical Planning Division.
16. The physical planning structure and process need to be strengthened, and new planning legislation is reportedly being formulated which will address many of the issues raised. The creation of a National Environmental Coordinating Committee (NECC) with responsibility for coordinating all national environmental activities is proposed.
Administration
17. The Forestry and Wildlife Division is one of five divisions within the Ministry of Agriculture. There are, however, serious institutional weaknesses which must be addressed, including the lack of formal mechanisms for systematic and regular coordination with other government departments. Recommendations for restructuring the Forestry and Wildlife Division are made. A significant component will be staff training, and training needs are detailed.
18. Two regional project proposals are also relevant - project profile 01 'Establishment of OECS Forestry, National Parks, Wildlife Service' and project 02 ^'Forestry and Related Training Needs'.
Land Use
19. Broad categories of land use are presented. Dominica depends directly on agriculture and agriculture-based industries, with agriculture contributing 30% of GDP and processing (mainly of coconut) contributing about 6%. Bananas and coconut dominate exports; dasheen dominates the local market. However, with the change in EC policy towards Caribbean banana exporters from 1992, diversification is essential. The major issues and problems associated with banana cultivation are described (Section 3.7.2). Improved agroforestry techniques for banana and other crop production are proposed (project 1.07). This is recommended as being crucial to achieve sustainable land use, and effective watershed management.
20. The absence of a national land use plan is a serious drawback to the rationalisation of current land use in the country. It is recognised that the problems of land use in Dominica are numerous and in some cases intractable. It is recommended that a GIS containing resource data, an economic model and a mathematical model of all or part of the economy be utilised to solve these land use problems.
Watershed Management
21. Background details to Dominica's water resources and watershed management are presented in the introduction to project document 1.04. Serious watershed degradation has occurred as a result of the banana industry. This has been accompanied by a large increase in the incidence of soil erosion and landslips, an increase in flash floods and sedimentation, and a reduction in base flow. The lack of consistent rain fall data has made it difficult to make accurate analyses and predictions of future trends. Some defunct rainfall stations should be re-established. Extensive flow data gathering is also essential. A survey of watersheds to determine their relative status is required as a long-term planning tool. Project 1.04 also includes rehabilitation of water catchments, whilst project 1.07 on agroforestry provides for rehabilitation and subsequent management of whole catchments in sustainable agroforestry systems.
Silviculture and Forest Management
22. Plantations were established in the 1960s and currently comprise 600 ha of mainly blue mahoe (Hibiscus melatus) and to a lesser extent Caribbean pine (Pinus caribaea) and teak (Tectona grandis), but these were badly damaged by Hurricane David in 1979. A 'Programme for Reconstruction' was initiated in 1981, and the plantations have since been tended. Current silvicultural activities include plant propagation, plantation maintenance and agroforestry plot maintenance. Some enrichment planting has been done using mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla) and local hardwoods. Under the NFAP, a vastly expanded programme of tree planting is proposed, hence construction of a new nursery is recommended (project 1.01) to produce approximately 100,000 plants per year.
Tree planting projects are proposed - project 1.02 'Establishment of Industrial Plantations', and project 1.03 'Multi-purpose Tree Planting Project'. Incentive programmes to encourage plantation forestry are recommended.
23. Deforestation results from a wide variety of causes and is considered to be one of the most crucial issues confronting Dominica. Recent forest inventories have given conflicting estimates of the growing stock. Five species contribute 86-88% of the total volume: gommier, chataignier, carapite, mahot cochon and bois diable. It is essential that management plans for the Northern and Central Forest Reserves are prepared, and project 1.05 addresses this need.
24. Demarcated forest reserves and national parks comprise 20% of forest lands which is considered to be insufficient for resource management purposes. Suggestions for increasing this percentage are made, with a target of 38% of the land area, according to the National Structure Plan. Wetlands account for less than 1% of the land area, but are threatened by development. Recommendations are made for their future management.
Agroforestry (crops)
25. It is considered that agroforestry can contribute considerably to more ecologically sound cultivation practices and counteract some of the negative effects of banana cultivation. An estimated 50% of the 5,000 ha under bananas are suffering from soil erosion. Contour stripping practices for soil protection of banana fields on slopes of more than 20% are recommended. However, decreasing production and increased economic inputs are feared. The national policy aims to concentrate banana production on larger farms and enhance diversification of the smaller farms. DBMC's extension service should be involved. Diversification with cocoa, mango, avocado and passionfruit is recommended. Suggestions are also made for the utilisation of marginal steep lands by planting firewood plantations. This will reduce pressure on existing forests for charcoal production and firewood which is used in the distillation of bay oil.
26. The potential for organic farming in Dominica and for more processing of local agricultural products is evaluated, and considered to be good.
27. To coordinate all the efforts within this broad field of agroforestry, it will be necessary to set up a new Agroforestry Unit within the Ministry of Agriculture. Research should be coordinated regionally by CARDI. Marketing should be more efficiently coordinated locally.
Agroforestry (livestock)
28. Agroforestry involving livestock is also considered. This can help solve some of the problems including soil erosion. Livestock product imports into Dominica (other than poultry) are relatively low. Self-sufficiency in pork, lamb. goat meat and beef should be easily obtainable. There appears to be a good potential export market for meats to the French West Indies and CARICOM countries.
29. The introduction of multi-purpose trees of which one output is fodder is suggested. A 'Three Strata Forage System' (TSFS) is described which refers to planting and harvesting forage so that a source of feed is available year round. The potential for wildlife farming for small farmers would appear to lie mainly in the breeding of agouti.
30. Recommendations are made to safeguard the suggested expanded agroforestry ventures by reviewing the praedial larceny act, making available from the Government Stock Farm more top quality livestock, controlling damage done by stray livestock, compensating farmers for damage done and setting up farmers organisations.
Fuelwood and Charcoal
31. With regard to charcoal production, feasibility studies should be undertaken into the use of various species. Forests in Dominica have fantastic potential for biomass energy.
Industrial Forest operations
32. The problem of a lack of an industrial sawmill operation is considered. Independent sawyers use Alaskan type chainsaw mills and use practices that minimise environmental damage. Transportation problems do arise because of the terrain, but proper road location and engineering control could eliminate many environmental and maintenance problems. Before large industrial operations are initiated, the conflict with ecotourism has to be addressed. The National Structure Plan is recommended as a good starting point from which to approach this problem. Three approaches to commercial forestry are presented and evaluated. However, forest based industrial development does not appear to be high on the agenda of the government. Forest based industrial development should be planned for, and recommendations with regard to log supply, road construction, lumber drying, wood preservation, efficient utilisation, rattan and bamboo. Cottage Forest Industries (CHI), financial incentives and
public involvement are made.
Forest Research
33. A report on Forestry Research for Dominica (Buford Briscoe, 1991) was used by the Mission for the preparation of this Section. The report was commissioned by FAO as part of the CARICOM TFAP.
Constraints
34. The constraints to forestry research are:
1. Inadequate funding.
2. Lack of trained professional officers in the required field.
3. Minimum monitoring or evaluation of the few past research programmes.
35. Partly for these reasons, additional constraints on the long-term viability of forestry and agroforestry are:
1. Trespass and deforestation on forest reserves and parks. This is at least partially because of inadequate forestry legislation, lack of surveys and boundary demarcation on the ground, increasing population and shortage of manpower and transportation in the Forestry Division.
2. Illegal tree cutting and charcoal production appear to be a minor direct problem overall, but they constitute a continuing species selective drain on forest reserves and private lands and the assumption that round wood is a free product discourages any private or public inclination to manage forests for sustainable yields.
4. Destruction of the biological patrimony. There is a need to identify, demarcate and preserve representative stands of remaining local ecological systems. There is urban and some rural recognition of the importance of natural resource management.
5. There is an appreciable primary forest industry based primarily on Alaska mill chainsaws, using Dacryodes excelsa and other well-formed native species, plus mahogany, blue mahoe and white cedar (Tabebuia spp.) for construction, furniture, boat building and fuelwood/fence posts/charcoal. There is also one small sawmill, and there have been others at various times. Secondary forest industries consist of small enterprises making furniture and specialty items, plus construction.
Research Needs
36. As with most of the other islands, action programmes have been suggested by a number of individuals and organizations. A brief list is given below, with comments.
1. Determining growth and yield by establishment of a dynamic inventory system, equivalent to simple Continuous Inventory Plots, is a fundamental need in the management of all perennial tropical vegetation and should be initiated as soon as locating and demarcating forest reserves and conservation areas is well underway.
2. There are more than a dozen useful tree species now being utilized for timber and other products and services. Utilization information on others is lacking and could perhaps best be obtained as part of a regional network, as described by Maeglin.
3. There exists a variety of agroforestry practices, applied with varying degrees of skill but mostly at a rather low level. Vegetative barriers to control erosion, for example, are rare and tend to be discontinuous; instead, most lemongrass (Cymbopogon citratus) is in irregular patches, for which it has little conservation value. The few live fence posts are rarely managed for green manure production or high quality fodder. Windbreaks were barely observed. A programme of on-farm verification/extension would appear to be an important, perhaps the most important, possible step toward increasing the value of both products and services from trees around homes, around and in fields, along roads, along streams, and on private or leased lands in general. On-farm verification and demonstration need to be carried out with local landowners and organizations. An experienced agroforestry researcher should be helpful in study planning and in the review of methods and results at
critical stages.
4. Seed trees should be selected rigorously for any artificial regeneration, for all species but especially for mahogany (Swietenia spp.) red cedar (Cedrela odorata) and white cedar (Tabebuia spp.).
5. A start has been made in cooperating with non-government organizations. The programme should be expanded as possible.
37. Support for forest research may come from the proposed regional project 04 'Meeting Regional Research Needs in Forestry and Related Areas'.
National Parks
38. There are at present no areas in Dominica designated specifically as Wildlife Sanctuaries or Nature Reserves. An assessment is made of two existing national parks, Morne Trois Pitons and Cabrits. Management plans are already in place for these and for the proposed third park, Morne Diablotin National Park. These national parks are important in affording some protection to wildlife and other biological resources. However, there are currently some non-compatible uses including quarrying within the Morne Trois Pitons National Park. Recommendations to address such incompatible uses are given.
39. There is discussion on how park lands are affected by human and environmental factors, and on policy and legislation. Suggestions and recommendations throughout the section deal with the interactions of the various governmental bodies, or lack of interaction; and the need for enhancing the relations between the Forestry and Wildlife Division and the Dominica Conservation Association (DCA), international governmental organisations and international NGOs. Solid waste, water pollution from human sewage, soil erosion, sedimentation in water courses and wildlife habitat encroachment are all issues warranting the concern of government and the international funding community.
40. It is suggested that Dominica should focus future conservation activities in four prime areas: freshwater swamps along the north coast; on the Indian River and along the surrounding area; on the Trafalgar Falls area (to ensure that it receives protected area status in view of the continued threats from hydro-electric power activities); and at Scotts Head in the south.
Wildlife and Biodiversity
41. The new challenges presented by ecotourism are described and considered. Ecotourism fits in well with Dominicans initiatives thus far to protect natural resources, and Dominica has the potential to earn significant revenue from ecotourism. However, greater research is recommended into Dominicans wildlife, fisheries, vegetation and ecosystems. There is a particular dearth of information about threatened, endangered and sensitive species. Particular recommendations are made pertaining to the two endemic parrots, the black-capped petrel, the leatherback turtle, the green turtle and the hawksbill turtle. The loggerhead turtle is considered rare.
42. It is reported that rainforests and other vegetation zones, particularly those in coastal regions, such as littoral and dry scrubland, have been considerably reduced in the past thirty years (Evans, 1988). Additional areas which are threatened or are vulnerable include elfin woodland, fumarole vegetation communities, freshwater swamps, mangroves, seagrass beds and coral reefs. The threats to each are analysed and recommendations made.
43. Hunting and fishing are considered. Both seasons last six months and both present major threats to wildlife and fish respectively. Legislation is inadequate, fees and fines are low. Neither resource is managed on a scientific basis and little is known about the extent of the resource or safe exploitation levels. Recommendations are made separately for hunting and fishing, and the increased involvement of NGOs in the development and implementation of Dominicans wildlife and fisheries policy is seen as being vital. Efforts should continue for Dominica to become a signatory to CITES.
Social Forestry
44. Ideas are presented for meeting critical rural socio-economic needs which include establishment of woodlots, horticulture and training in, for example, rattan furniture manufacture. There are many possibilities for recreational activities to involve rural, forest-dependent communities.
Public Education
45. Several agencies are already involved in public education, though there is no Forestry Extension Service. The extension service of the Division of Agriculture targets farmers. The Dominica Conservation Association (DCA) is potentially the key organisation for undertaking programmes in environmental education. It suffers from a lack of funds to expedite its proposed programmes involving newsletter, video and poster production, and the organisation of educational seminars, workshops and conferences. Project profile 4.03 specifically addresses the need to strengthen DCA's capability to undertake environmental education and conservation programmes. This would complement the significant interest shown by the local media in environmental issues.
46. There are also regional initiatives such as the proposed regional project 05 'Public Education/Awareness in Forestry and Related Areas'. The FAO video production unit is located in Dominica and will continue to have a significant role to play in future forestry and environmentally related public education campaigns throughout the region.
Priority Areas
Forestry in Land Use
47. The role of forests in Dominica's socio-economic development is threefold:
(i) as a source of wood raw material for industrial use, construction and energy
(ii) as an ecological entity primarily for the protection of watersheds, as a provision of wildlife habitats and the preservation of genetic resources and biodiversity
(iii) as a source of recreation in particular for the nation's urban population but also for visiting tourists.
This threefold role should continue in the long-term development of the forestry sector.
48. Projects which have been proposed in this area are:
1.01 Construction of a New Nursery
1.02 Establishment of Industrial Plantations
1.03 Multi-purpose Tree Planting Project
1.04 Watershed Rehabilitation and Management
1.05 Preparation of Management Plans
1.06 Wildlife Farming
1.07 Agroforestry Development
1.08 Petit Savanne - Point Mulatre Feeder Road.
Forest-based Industrial Development
49. A sustainable forest industry is possible based upon the conversion of 4680 ha of forest into plantations. However, for this to result in a viable industry, investment in road construction amounting to EC$ 160,000/km will be necessary. A training course in safe and effective felling techniques will also be required. At present, timber felling is very difficult for a variety of reasons including thick growth of vines and lianas, asymmetrical crowns, steep and wet slopes. The furniture industry is currently only small and is hampered by poorly seasoned lumber and a lack of wood preservation treatment facilities. The handicraft industry suffers in a similar way, and the growing of rattan and bamboo should be encouraged. This could well provide suitable employment for rural, forest-dependent communities (particularly women) and take advantage of the tourist trade in souvenir handicrafts.
50. Projects proposed in this priority area are:
2.01 Logging Roads for Cottage Forest Industry (CFI)
2.02 Establishment of Handicraft and Furniture Workshop and Handicraft Plantations.
Fuelwood and Energy
51. This is not a high priority area in Dominica. However, there is some dissatisfaction with the use of metal kilns, and it is recommended that new kiln designs be explored.
52. The project proposed in this area is:
3.01 Fuelwood and Charcoal Production
Other relevant proposed project:
1.07 Agroforestry Development
Conservation of Forest Ecosystems
53. The overriding issue of defining exactly what type of park system is most desired by the Dominican people has not been addressed at the policy-making level of government. Other matters which must also be addressed include park infrastructure, access system, adequate park management and staffing to ensure a good standard of visitor services, resource protection and interpretation, and a reasonable application of recognised protected area land management.
54. Wildlife habitat reduction, closely associated with deforestation, has resulted from the expansion of agriculture into forest lands. It is important that specific areas of importance to wildlife should be protected. Public education must play an important role in sensitising the population about the value of wildlife protection, preservation of biological diversity and proper conservation of forest ecosystems. DCA must take a leading role.
55. Projects which have been proposed in this priority area are:
4.01 Upgrading and Management of Parks, Recreation Areas and Other Attractions
4.02 Development of an Environmental Information Base for Dominica
4.03 Protection of Mangroves and Other Wetlands
Other relevant proposed project:
1.06 Wildlife Farming
Institutions
56. This is becoming the most important priority area for Dominica. Without action on relevant institutional matters, it will not be possible to advance forestry to any appreciable extent.
57. Projects proposed in this priority area are:
5.01 Strengthening and Upgrading the Forestry and Wildlife Division
5.02 Legislation for Natural Resources Management
National Forestry Action Programme
Long-term Strategies
The long-term approach to forestry development in Dominica involves the implementation of the new Forestry, Wildlife and National Parks Policy and Legislation which, along with other activities, make up the following strategic elements (summarised by topic):
POLICY AND PLANNING
- Evaluation and improvement, where possible, of the contribution of the forestry sector to the national economy.
- Revision of forest and forestry development policies to keep them in line with technological advances and changes in the overall development policies of the country.
- Establishment of a land use policy.
- Repeal of the Forest Industries Development Act.
FUNDING
- The establishment of a forestry development fund.
- An increase in government revenue from forestry through increases in royalty rates, compounding fees, temporary visitor licences, hunting licences and penalties, an entrance fee into National Parks and a access on water obtained from forests.
- Provision of adequate funding in the national budget for forestry development.
INSTITUTIONAL CAPABILITY
- Provision for adequate local staffing both at the professional and sub-professional levels.
- Restructuring of the Forestry and Wildlife Division.
- Provision of adequate transport and telecommunication equipment for field staff.
TRAINING AND EDUCATION
- Provision of short-term consultants with specialist skills to supplement long-term technical assistance staff in implementing specific projects.
- Training of both professional and technical staff in all aspects of forestry.
- The preparation, implementation, monitoring and periodic review of a social forestry and public education programme to meet the needs of the country.
FOREST MANAGEMENT
- Increase in the size of the forest resource base.
- Preparation, implementation and revision of ten-year management plans for the Forest Reserves and National Parks.
- Undertaking of periodic forest inventories.
- The development over a twenty-year period of at least 2000 ha of plantations to provide furniture timber, charcoal and handicraft.
UTILISATION
- Improvement of timber felling techniques.
- The introduction of cable systems for the extraction of logs.
- The construction of well designed roads to facilitate timber exploitation and the establishment of industrial plantations.
- Provision, where possible, of adequate supplies of logs to the industrial operators.
- The introduction of seasoning and wood preservation facilities.
- The exploration of new kiln designs and models for use in charcoal production.
WATERSHED MANAGEMENT
- The rehabilitation of at least 1000 ha of degraded watersheds over a twenty year period.
- Cooperation with other agencies in obtaining hydrological data such as rainfall and stream flow.
AGROFORESTRY
- Encouragement of the practice of agroforestry.
- Promotion of organic farming in agroforestry.
CONSERVATION AND NATIONAL PARKS
- Promotion of ecotourism.
- Introduction of coastal zone management.
- Protection of wetlands.
- Institution of the necessary mechanisms to allow Dominica to become a signatory of CITES.
- Development of an environmental ethics plan for the national parks.
- Acquisition of baseline data on wildlife species as well as population monitoring.
- Establishment of a National Parks Advisory Council to assist in the administration of national parks.
- Promotion of the organisation of a hunting association.
- Reduction in the length of the hunting and fishing season.
- Introduction of wildlife farming.
ENVIRONMENT
- Harmonization and rationalization of current environmental legislation.
- Development of legislation which mandates environmental impact assessments on major projects proposed for state and private lands.
PRIVATE SECTOR
- Encouragement of the private sector and NGOs to get more involved in forestry, agroforestry, wildlife, national parks and watershed management.
- Development and implementation of a package of incentives to encourage the private sector to invest in forestry, agroforestry or wildlife development.
RESEARCH AND COOPERATION
- Initiation of a suitable forest research programme and cooperation with sub-regional, regional and international agencies on matters of interest to the country.
- Support for the establishment of a Caribbean International Institute of Forestry and the Environment (CIIFE) at the St. Augustine Campus of the University of the West Indies.
- Support for the implementation of the Technical Cooperation Network in Forestry and Related Environmental Matters for the English-speaking countries of the Caribbean and Suriname.
- Cooperation with national, regional and international organisations in forestry and other related national resource management activities.
Short-term Action Programme
It is recommended that a rolling format be used for this involving an annual revision and update of programmes and projects. This is the best method of achieving the long term programme.
These projects are summarized below by priority areas:
Summary of Projects
Project No.
Priority Area and Title of Project
Duration in Years
Cost in US$
Total (US$)
Donor
Gov't
I. FORESTRY IM LAND USE
Construction in New Nursery
Establishment of Industrial Plant
Multipurpose Tree Planting Project
Watershed Rehabilitation and Management
Preparation of Management Plans
Wildlife Farming
Agroforestry Development
Petite Savanne - Point Mulatre Feeder Road
SUB-TOTAL (I)
II. FOREST BASED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
Logging Roads for Cottage Forest Industries
Establishment of Handicraft and Furniture Workshop
SUB-TOTAL (II)
III. FUELWOOD AND ENERGY
Feasibility study on Biomass Production for fuelwood and charcoal
Nil
SUBTOTAL (III)
Nil
IV. CONSERVATION OF FOREST ECOSYSTEMS
Upgrading and Management of Parks, Recreation Areas and Other Attractions
Protection of Mangroves and Other Wetlands
Development of an Environmental Information Base for Dominica
Nil
SUB-TOTAL (IV)
V. INSTITUTIONS
Strengthening and Upgrading the Forestry and Wildlife Division
Legislation for Natural Resources Management
Nil
SUB-TOTAL (V)
ALL PROJECTS
TOTAL
The sixteen projects proposed in the National Forestry Action Plan involve a total expenditure of US$ 12,456,220 over a five-year period. Of this total, US$ 10,441,800 (84%) is to be obtained from donor agencies while the remaining US$ 2,014,420 (16%) is to be funded by the Government of Dominica. Detailed project costs are provided in the project profiles.
Prioritisation of Projects
The project which must be given the highest priority is the "Strengthening and Upgrading of the Forestry and Wildlife Division" (Project Document 5.01). This project must start as soon as possible if the Division is to carry out the additional responsibilities expected of it. The ranking of the other projects is as follows:
<section>3</section>
List of Projects Selected and Prioritized for NFAP
Project profile
Number
Title
Rank
Strengthening and Upgrading the Forestry and Wildlife Division
Preparation of Management Plans
Agroforestry Development
Watershed Rehabilitation and Management
Upgrading and Management of Parks, Recreation Areas and Other Wetlands
Construction of Nursery
Establishment of Industrial Plantations
Development of an Environmental Information Base for Dominica
Legislation for Natural Resources Management
Establishment of Handicraft and Furniture Workshop
Petite Savanne - Point Mulatre Feeder Road
Logging Roads for CFI
Wildlife Fanning
Protection of Mangroves and Other Wetlands
Feasibility Study on Biomass Production for Fuelwood and Charcoal
Multipurpose Tree Planting Project
<section>4</section>
Project number: 1.01
PRIORITY AREA
Forestry in land Use
PROJECT TITLE
Construction of New Nursery
LOCATION
D'Leau Gommier
DURATION
One Year
BENEFICIARIES
Forestry Division and the general public
BACKGROUND
The two nurseries maintained by the Forestry Division are located at Pond Casse and D'Leau Gommier. They produce approximately 12,000 seedlings per year. Species include Mahogany, Cupressus, Blue Mahoe and a variety of local hardwoods. A lack of space prevents the expansion of these nurseries to produce approximately 100,000 seedlings per year. It is therefore recommended that a new nursery at D'Leau Gommier be constructed to produce this number of seedlings.
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
To construct a new nursery at D'Leau Gommier in order to provide sufficient plants for an expanded forestry/agroforestry programme.
ACTIVITIES
(a) Construct nursery (30 x 20m) with storage area etc.
(b) Purchase seeds, polythene bags etc.
(c) Purchase minor equipment and supplies
(d) Purchase 1,000 gallon storage tank
INPUTS
Equipment/Infrastructure
Personnel
Building materials
1 Assistant Forest Officer
Saran netting
6 Labourers
Irrigation system
1 Clerk/typist
Seeds, polythene bags etc
Minor equipment and supplies
OUTPUTS
Fully functional nursery capable of producing 100,000 plants per annum for an expanded forestry/agroforestry programme.
OBSERVATIONS
Project must commence in Year I if other projects are to be on schedule.
BUDGET
(a) Donor Contribution
US$ 80,000
(b) Government Contribution
EC$ 77,000
(c) Total Contribution US$
DONOR CONTRIBUTION
US$
Nursery shed, storage area etc
Other construction materials
Irrigation system
Storage tank
Wages of daily paid staff
Total
Total Donor Contribution US$ 80,000
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTION
EC$
1 Assistant Forestry Officer
1 Clerk/typist
Office supplies and equipment
Purchase of seeds, polythene bags etc.
Total
Total Government Contribution EC$ 77,000 (US$ 29,000)
DOMINICA NATIONAL FORESTRY ACTION PLAN PROJECT PROFILE
<section>5</section>
Project number: 1.02
PRIORITY AREA
Forestry in Land Use
PROJECT TITLE
Establishment of Industrial Plantations
LOCATION
Morne Plaisance, Fond Figure
DURATION
Four Years
BENEFICIARIES
Forest workers, general public, Forest Industries Sector
BACKGROUND
No plantation programme currently exists for the establishment of high quality timber in Dominica. Such a programme is necessary to save foreign exchange, to contribute to making the country self-sufficient in timber supplies, to develop the forest industries sector and to provide employment in the rural areas. These plantations will also have important environmental benefits in particularly reducing soil erosion, improving conditions for agricultural development and improving water supplies.
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
(a) Saving in foreign exchange
(b) Contribution towards making the country self-sufficient in its timber supplies
(c) Development of forest industries
(d) Protection of the environment
(e) Provision of employment
ACTIVITIES
(a) Produce 85,000 seedlings per year
(b) Plant 75 ha of Swietenia macrophylla, Cedrela odorata, Tabebuia pallida per year
(c) Tend and supply plants
(d) Prepare for Phase II (Year 6-10)
OUTPUTS
(a) Production of 340,000 seedlings for planting programme
(b) Establishment of 300 ha of plantations
(c) Preparation of Phase II action plan
(d) Construction of 8 km of roads
INPUTS
Equipment/Infrastructure
Personnel
Office accommodation
1 Forest Engineer (Consultant)
1 4-WD vehicle
1 Assistant Forest Officer
Plantation tools
1 Clerk/typist
Seedlings
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
The Forestry and Wildlife Division of the Ministry of Agriculture.
OBSERVATIONS
(a) Project to commence in Year 2
(b) Project to be linked to Project 1.01 - Construction of Nursery.
BUDGET
(a) Donor Contribution
US$ 881,000
(b) Government Contribution
EC$ 236,000 (US$ 87,000)
(c) Total Contribution
US$ 968,000
DONOR CONTRIBUTION (US$)
Equipment/Infrastructure
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Seedlings
One 4-WD vehicle
Maintenance of vehicle
Plantation, Tools and equipment
Road Construction/Maintenance
Sub-total
Personnel
1 Forest Engineer (Consultant)
Sub-total
Total Donor Contribution US$ 881,000
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTION (EC$)
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Office accommodation and supplies
1 Clerk/typist
1 Forestry Officer
Total
Total Government Contribution EC$236,000
<section>6</section>
Project number: 1.03
PROJECT AREA
Forestry in Land Use
PROJECT TITLE
Multipurpose Tree Planting Project
LOCATION
Steep banana fields and root crop plantations, wind-exposed banana stands, roadsides endangered by erosion, banks of streams throughout Dominica
DURATION
Five years
BENEFICIARIES
Farmers
BACKGROUND
Traditionally, Dominicans have planted trees for fruits, nuts, timber, shade, windbreaks, ornaments etc. Recently the practice of planting trees has been slowly disappearing, as a result of a practice of intensive agriculture, especially banana cultivation, geared towards producing for export markets. As a result of laminar soil erosion, the soil fertility has been so greatly diminished that large sums of money have to be spent on fertilizers and the agricultural production in the future is endangered. Bananas are damaged as a result of lack of windbreaks. Springs of great importance for the population are reported to be dry as a result of converting watersheds into agricultural land, and streams are contaminated by the spraying of pesticides close to the embankments. Roads suffer from landslides. Timber, as well as firewood for the distillation of bay oil and for burning charcoal, is becoming scarce in various areas so that local people complain about the further distances
they have to travel in order to collect wood.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
These problems of growing importance shall be tackled by a multipurpose tree planting programme. Farmers are aware of the problems and many show interest in projects of soil conservation and environmental protection. Planting will be realized by farmers, the project will be responsible for promotion, organizing, transport and assistance.
In order to give impetus to this project it is necessary to involve the extension workers of the Dominica Banana Marketing Board and the Ministry of Agriculture who are most closely in contact with the farmers and whose recommendations are essential for the practices of land use. Training shall be given to these officials in order to integrate tree planting for conservation objectives into the existing extension structure. Trees used will be of economic value in the form of fruits, nuts, spices, timber, firewood or nitrogen fixation, so that farmers will respond positively to this project. Existing diversification projects shall be integrated by the Agroforestry Unit in the efforts of soil and environmental protection.
OBJECTIVES
(a) Control soil erosion
(b) Protect watersheds and streams
(c) Improve microclimate for agricultural crops
(d) Reduce risks of hurricane damage
(e) Diversify production
(f) Improve environmental awareness of farmers and extension workers
OUTPUTS
(a) Windbreak, shelterbelt, roadside and streamside plantation with double rows of different trees: 10,000m in first year, increasing to 26,000m in fifth year.
(b) Plantation of 50 acres with contour strips of legume trees and vetiver grass for soil conservation in the first year, increasing to 200 acres in the fifth year.
(c) Environmental education for extension workers, farmers, etc.
(d) Coordination of efforts of Agriculture and Forestry Division.
ACTIVITIES
(a) Training of Ministry of Agriculture and Dominica Banana Marketing Board extension workers in conservation measures
(b) Production of video for extension workers
(c) Yearly selection of priority areas
(d) Promotion of programme through extension workers and media
(e) Lining of contour lines and windbreak location
(f) Transport of seedlings from nurseries to fields
(g) Assistance to farmers for planting
(h) Provision of materials for the protection of plants from livestock
(i) Production of video for farmers during first year's activities
(j) Coordination with diversification programmes
(k) Species to be planted:
- for windbreaks, shelterbelts etc: avocado, cashew, mango, tamarind, cinnamon, cloves, cocoa, galba, white cedar, mahogany, teak.
- for contour strips (soil conservation): Calliandra, Sesbania, Gliricidia, Leucaena, Vetiver grass.
Seedlings and plants required per year:
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th year
5th year
legume trees
timber trees
fruit trees
spice trees
cocoa
depending on cocoa project
Vetiver grass growing demand: approximately 1000m^2 multiplication area
Another part of contour legumes will be sown directly (Leucaena)
BENEFITS
(a) Maintenance and improvement of soil fertility
(b) Long-term increase of agricultural productivity through wind protection and soil conservation
(c) Production of firewood and timber
(d) Production of fruits, nuts and spices
(e) Creation of favourable conditions for wildlife
(f) Improvement of water supplies
(g) Enhancement of beauty of the country
INPUTS
Equipment/Infrastructure
Personnel
1 4xWD vehicle
2 Forestry Assistants (part-time 50%)
1 truck
1 Clerk/typist
material and staff for video production
1 Driver
fencing material for plant protection against livestock
seedlings and vetiver plants (from forestry nursery and MOA)
seeds (Leucaena) and cuttings (Gliricidia, galba)
tools
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
Agroforestry Unit, Forestry and wildlife Division, Ministry of Agriculture in cooperation with Dominica Banana Marketing Corporation and Ministry of Agriculture Extension Services.
LINKAGES
- Nursery project for supply of seedlings
- Agriculture Division for training of extension workers and promotion of programme and supply of vetiver grass plants
- Tropical Fruits and Spices Project for coordination
- Agricultural field stations for supply of tree crop seedlings
- Rural Communications Centre for video production
- Dominica Banana Marketing Corporation for training of extension workers and promotion of programme
- Agroforestry Development Project for utilization of experiences of trial and demonstration plots
- Cocoa and Tropical Tree and Spices Projects for coordination
BUDGET
(a) Donor Contribution
US$ 186,500
(b) Government Contribution
US$ 231,600
(c) Total Contribution
US$ 418,100
DONOR CONTRIBUTION (US$)
ITEM
YEAR
1 x4-WD vehicle
Maintenance
1 Truck
Maintenance
Video production
Seeds, cuttings
Fencing materials
Tools/equipment
Sub-total
TOTAL US$ 186,500
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTION (US$)
ITEM
YEAR
2 Agroforestry Assistants
1 Clerk
1 Driver
Office facility
Seedlings (fruit and spice trees)
Sub-total
TOTAL
TOTAL US$ 231,600
<section>7</section>
Project number: 1.04
PROJECT AREA
Forestry in Land Use
PROJECT TITLE
Watershed Rehabilitation and Management
DURATION
Five (5) years
LOCATION
Throughout Dominica
BENEFICIARIES
(1) People of Dominica, especially those in catchments with poor water supplies at present
(2) DOWASCO
(3) Forestry Division
(4) Farmers who will be compensated for relinquishing land or the right to use certain practices.
(5) Forest wildlife within catchments
BACKGROUND
Dominica receives an abundant rainfall, averaging about 4445 mm (175 inches) per annum over the whole island, but varying from a low of about 1270 mm (50 inches) in parts of the west (leeward) coast, to over 7600 mm (300 inches) in parts of the interior, according to 30 year means established in 1961. There is a seasonal variation, with December to April generally drier and rainfall peaks in July and October, but excepting unusual years and the driest parts of the west coast, there is no dry month. The island is exceptionally steeply sloping with less than two percent of the area under 10% slope, and about 64 percent in excess of 30% slope. Much of the land is forested and until recently all streams were perennial with a few minor exceptions.
Over the last 35 years, the development of the banana industry and necessary road system has seen the development of a very large number (8-9,000 farmers registered) of mainly very small multi-parcel banana farms. These have been penetrating steadily further into the higher rainfall steep lands of the interior and replacing earlier mixed, low intensity farms and well-developed forest. This has been accompanied by a large increase in the incidence of soil erosion and landslips in the upper areas which have been well-protected by the forest cover in the past. Other consequences of this appear to be an increase in flash floods and sedimentation, and a reduction in basal flow. The information for these conclusions is largely anecdotal, since despite several attempts to start river flow measurements, only in the last two years has the new DOWASCO, in association with the Forestry Division, been able to commence regular observation.
The unanimity of the sources testifying to lower flows seems quite clear (a pattern which is repeated in other OECS territories) but there also seems to be evidence of the complete drying up of streams in some areas. This suggests either a reduction in total rainfall or a change in regional watertable, perhaps caused by road cutting or similar excavation. Whichever is the case, the failure of a water supply in the Carib Reserve has been one result.
The banana industry has also brought prosperity and a great increase in the area devoted to urban, suburban and village lands with impervious surfaces (broad roads and yards, bigger houses, shaven lawns, fewer trees).
Overall, the consequence for runoff in Dominica is a much more irregular pattern and one which will continue to become more variable until there is again a more stable distribution of land use.
DOWASCO, a relatively new company, which took over the water supply functions of the Central Water Authority in 1989, is wholly government-owned, and is exclusively licensed to develop and control water and sewage facilities in Dominica (the sewage function is not yet under the control of DOWASCO). The Water and Sewage Act (1989), under which DOWASCO was licensed, requires DOWASCO, in cooperation with the Ministry responsible for Agriculture, Forestry and Lands, to take such action as may be necessary or expedient for Agriculture is empowered by the Act to compulsorily acquire lands for these purposes and may vest them in DOWASCO.
Theoretically, all existing catchments (gathering grounds) "shall either be retained as forest reserves or protected forests or be declared controlled areas". In order to protect catchments from deforestation or animals, DOWASCO may either request the Ministry responsible for Forestry to take action under the Forestry ordinance or request the Ministry of Health to take action under the Public Health Act (Ministry of Health is responsible for the quality of water supplied). Where no action is taken, DOWASCO may restrain, impound or shoot animals which are a threat to storage capacity. However, DOWASCO has responsibility for a large number of catchments (established much earlier by antecedent bodies), many of which are partly or even wholly occupied by other land users.
There are over forty separate water supply systems in Dominica within DOWASCO's ambit, and a number of other systems in the Carib Reserve which were developed by non-government bodies, but which will eventually become integrated with the DOWASCO system. Of the forty-plus systems, all but a handful are gravity fed, and two of the handful are pumped by hydraulic ram, leaving only two requiring separately powered pumps. A few are fed by springs and the area of provenance of the supply is not clearly understood, but the majority are runoff river supplies fed from intakes constructed in the river bed with simple gross-filtering systems. The size of the catchment tapped is extremely variable, from less than 10 ha to about 700 ha.
Except in periods of prolonged heavy rain, and in unstable areas, runoff from untouched forest in Dominica is mainly through the upper soil layers, which are extremely porous, and produces little sediment. Most water supply intakes were initially constructed when river water was generally very clear. As it is, the intakes are very susceptible to damage or blockage given excessive sediment loads which result from:
(1) road construction;
(2) landslips;
(3) widespread sheet erosion; and
(4) some methods of timber extraction.
The sedimentation problem, provided that it does not cause blockage, is simply dealt with at present. The residence time of water in the system is very short (in the Roseau supply, two hours), so that when water is very muddy, it is generally avoided by consumers. However, this is a strategy which cannot work as sedimentation periods become lengthy, rather than discrete storm events, and high sediment rates add to the difficulty of giving adequate chlorination.
Two other problems are present', resulting from present land use systems. These are:
- poisonous agrochemicals and fertilizers;
- poisonous materials from road spills; and
- excessive quantities of faecal matter from domestic animals and human habitations.
It is doubtful whether any of these present a major problem at present, but there have been witnessed events leading to river fish death and the potential for the production of carcinogens as a result of chlorinating some agricultural chemicals is well known. There is also a risk of discharges of faecal matter exceeding the level at which the regular chlorine use is effective. In both these cases, the rapidity with which water clears the system is a disadvantage (because it will not be detected, and damage will be done) and an advantage (because each "event" will be short lived).
PROJECT JUSTIFICATION
1. Dominica has apparently abundant year round water supplies, although both present rainfall and present river flows are insufficiently known in relation to distribution in time and space.
2. Some river flows are much reduced according to anecdotal information. Since this is not only a change from even flow, but in some places to lower than normal flows and periods of complete failure, there is reason to question whether total rainfall has diminished or changes in hydrogeology have occurred.
3. Forty, mainly very simple, gravity-fed systems (based on river intakes) under very high pressure approaching equipment limits, are used to supply villages and towns. They use very small storage, if any, and have system residence times of only a few hours.
4. Some systems are reaching their limits both in terms of capacity and state of equipment, while others are capable of considerable expansion.
5. A large proportion of the water catchments are compromised by the presence of:
- agricultural enterprises
- roads and trails (old and under construction)
- housing
leading to much increased sedimentation at intakes and risks of contamination of the water by agricultural chemicals and fertilizers, oil from vehicles, and faecal matter.
6. DOWASCO, a recently created private corporation, presently wholly owned by the government, and successor to an earlier government body (Central Water Authority), is empowered to purchase land or take steps to control land use within its surveyed catchments, in order to assure water resources, and the Forestry Division is designated as the operating arm to carry out any necessary work.
7. Only a few catchments are, as intended, forestry reserves or protected areas.
8. Water supply planning is not fully integrated into the Dominica planning process.
DELIVERABLES
1. Observation programmes on sufficient streams and rivers to obtain clear indications of flows throughout the year and at sufficient rainfall stations to give a realistic picture of actual rainfall within catchments. (A number greater than that possible under the present CIDA arrangements.)
2. A programme of observations on water quality, including presence of agricultural chemicals, in a representative sample of streams.
3. A base of information to permit better understanding of total water availability and quality and indicate rates of change.
4. An outline plan for the probable and necessary redevelopments of the water system over the next 20 years, indicating where obsolescent and inadequate or inefficient systems will be amalgamated/replaced by expanding other systems and prioritizing the measures for control of the catchments.
5. A set of water catchments which are mainly free of compromising uses, or with these under control and a plan for eventually eliminating all agents of pollution and reliability in any remaining needy catchments. (Some catchments returning to forest under a purchase agreement, others under carefully planned land use with effective vegetation barriers to minimize sedimentation).
6. A set of water systems with much reduced problems of inadequate capacity, leakage, etc.
7. A system of monitoring inspections and maintenance of the watersheds will have been set up under the joint direction of the Forestry Division and DOWASCO and be in the course of implementation by Forestry Division.
8. Forestry Division staff of the Watershed Management and Conservation Unit will have been trained in, and routinely carry out, the rainfall and stream observations and monitoring the catchments.
9. Forward planning by DOWASCO will be integrated with overall planning by the Economic Development Unit.
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
1. DOWASCO will provide overall administrative and technical direction to a review of the catchments and supply systems and to the provision of new observing systems, through a project manager responsible to DOWASCO. The same project manager, or a forest officer will be responsible for the remaining work.
2. DOWASCO will also be responsible for the prioritization of action and will provide in both matters for liaison with the Economic Development Unit (EDU) and on a basis which should be formalized as EDU develops its capacity for overall planning.
3. A Water Resources Centre may need to be set up to provide advice to Government and to DOWASCO, with members from DOWASCO, EDU Forestry Division, Agriculture Division, and the Health Ministry. If that is done it should provide a review body capable of advising on the course of the project.
4. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry Division under its director should set up a unit to take responsibility for dealing with DOWASCO's needs. It seems probable that a suitable arrangement would see the present Protection/Conservation group expanded and perhaps renames Watershed Management and Forest Protection Unit to emphasize its role.
5. The group set up to carry out the project should be comprised of DOWASCO engineering/planning staff and Forestry Division conservation staff with assistance from the agroforestry unit as found necessary. The project manager will need to be full time and either seconded from DOWASCO/Forestry Division or recruited separately.
OVERALL OBJECTIVE
The establishment and maintenance of potable water supplies of good guality and in sufficient quantity for the foreseeable future through rehabilitation, conservation and management of suitable water catchments and the monitoring of chosen and substitute catchments.
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
1. Outline water supply strategy and determination of the need for specific catchments (nine months)
1. Activities
1.1 Review existing data on present water catchments and consider where additional data is required for a full analysis of land use and occupancy.
1.2 Use recent photography and site inspection to map, at first approximation, present landuse and determine current land use problems of the existing catchments and potential substitutes.
1.3 Investigate land tenure where unclear and claim land formally for the Crown where it cannot be identified. Estimate costs of purchases of non-government land.
1.4 Develop guidelines for the methods (mainly agroforestry) and crops to be used in rehabilitation/controlling catchments under agriculture, and outline costs. Note also the degree of natural instability of land in the catchment.
1.5 Analyze at first approximation the yields, running costs and potential purchase costs of each catchment. Determine likely costs of rehabilitation following guidelines. Consider also the effects of likely environmental change to provide sensitivity analysis of these data.
1.6 On the base of existing DOWASCO ideas, expand consideration of the possibilities for rationalizing the water supply system, especially where costs per gallon are high and likely to increase, or the present system is obsolescent or nearing inadequacy.
1.7 Propose a set of sites for stream gauging and rainfall recording, restoring some abandoned rain gauges to permit comparisons, and implement.
1.8 In cooperation with the Planning Unit, consider likely demographic, infrastructural and other expected/planned changes which will influence water requirement over the foreseeable future to an expected equilibrium, if that is possible.
1.9 Propose an outline (catchments, area served, type of system) of a suitable (reliable, low cost) water supply system for the future. Discuss with all interested parties and revise if necessary.
1.10 Prioritize the rationalization of catchments and supply systems, so as to define the most cost-effective plan for water catchment/watershed control by rehabilitation over the next five years, and then subsequent management.
2. A Programme of Rehabilitation
2.1 Commence arrangements for purchase of land (including land in other areas for exchange with catchment lands) where that has been chosen as the most effective option. Give definite notice to current proprietors who should have been warned during Phase I and start any necessary legal action.
2.2 Use the guidelines developed earlier to prepare detailed plans for areas of controlled husbandry and agree them with lands users. Where agreement is not possible, determine whether purchase, change or compulsion over husbandry is most feasible.
2.3 Implement the planned changes in agriculture, demarcation of controlled zones, etc., in planned sequence using perhaps two groups of extension workers, and allocate a permanent extension officer to each area.
2.4 Monitor the level of conformity with required changes of practice and the technical effectiveness of the changes. Make any necessary adjustments to the overall plan to cover these.
3. A Plan of management for the water catchments and development of the service to provide management
3.1 The Forestry Division will plan a system for managing the water catchments, as the operating arm of DOWASCO in relation to water. A Watershed Management and Conservation Branch as the principle fields service will provide the regular and basic overall inspection, management, and data collection using the services of agroforestry extension specialists and others, as required, and providing waterflow and rainfall data to the natural resources and information group and DOWASCO.
3.2 The detailed plan for each catchment will be used to predict change over a specified period and provide the basis for monitoring. Divergence from expected results will be an input to modify the management plan.
3.3 Data collected on rainfall, catchment yield, progress of demand and reliability of the system will be used to update the system plan and make necessary changes in the management plan.
INPUTS
Equipment/Infrastructure
Personnel
5 recording rain gauges
Project Manager - full time 1 year, part-time thereafter?
25 simple rain gauges
Forestry Officer/Deputy Manager - part-time
20 sets stream gauging equipment
Forestry Division, Agroforestry Extension officer - part-time for planning and monitoring
2 x 4-WD vehicles
Forest Assistants/trainees (contracted?) Part-time for data acquisition
Nursery facilities
Labourers
Tools and equipment
Typist/clerk, full-time 1 year
Office supplies
Cost of land purchase
OUTPUTS
1. Data on rainfall, water supply and water quality and a system for continuing to gather data.
2. A system for integrating water resource planning with overall planning by the EDU.
3. A prioritized plan for rehabilitating water catchments and introducing a system of maintenance operated by the Division of Forestry.
4. A set of rehabilitated water catchments, some converted to protected forest/forest reserve, some with restricted agriculture.
5. A system of monitoring for activities contrary to the integrity of the catchment.
PROJECT REVIEWS AND REPORTS
1. A short inception report must be produced after six weeks, producing a more detailed plan of work for the first nine months and indicating any necessary modifications.
2. A short preliminary report should be produced after six months, indicating progress, any administrative difficulties, the area probably available for purchase, and a budget proposal, for discussion.
3. After nine months, a final report on this first phase should be produced, with a clear programme for the data gathering, the rehabilitation work and subsequent management and monitoring.
4. A short annual report detailing progress, expenditure and explaining unit costs should be produced in each year.
All reports should proceed to all participant members of the Water Resource Centre, representing government and interested agencies.
BUDGET
(a) Donor's Contribution
US$ 1,442,000
(b) Government's Contribution
US$ 251,000
(c) Total Contribution
US$ 1,693,000
DONOR CONTRIBUTION (US$^'000)
ITEM
YEAR
1. Equipment/Infrastructure
2 x 4-WD vehicles
Cost:
Maintenance:
Rain Gauges
Stream Gauges
Land Purchase
Miscellaneous
2. Personnel
Project Manager
Labour
Clerk
Sub-total (US$)
(Contingencies included)
Sub-total (EC$)
TOTAL US$ 1442
TOTAL EC$ 3893
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTION (EC$'000)
ITEM
YEAR
1. Equipment/Infrastructure
Tools and Equipment
Rain Gauges
2. Personnel
Forestry Officer
Agroforestry Officer
Forestry Assistants (3)
Sub-total US$
Sub-total EC$
TOTAL US$ 251
TOTAL EC$ 677
<section>8</section>
Project number: 1.05
PRIORITY AREA
Forestry in Land Use
PROJECT TITLE
Preparation of Management Plans
DURATION
Two (2) years
BENEFICIARIES
Forestry Division and the general public
BACKGROUND
A previous FAO project on Forest Management in Dominica was expected to produce forest management plans for the Northern and Central Forest Reserves. While a considerable amount of inventory information was collected, unfortunately no such plans were prepared. These plans are of immense importance to the sustained development of forestry.
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
To prepare a ten-year management plan for each of the Northern and Central Forest Reserves.
ACTIVITIES
(a) Collect all available information pertaining to the Forest Reserves.
(b) Prepare ten-year management plans for each reserve.
INPUTS
Equipment/Infrastructure
Personnel
One 4-WD vehicle
Forest Management Specialist
Miscellaneous tools equipment
1 Forestry Officer
3 Labourers
1 Driver
1 Clerical Assistant
OUTPUTS
Preparation of ten-year management plans for the northern and Central Forest Reserves.
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
Forestry and Wildlife Division of the Ministry of Agriculture.
OBSERVATIONS
Highest priority: should begin in Year I.
BUDGET
DONOR CONTRIBUTION (US$)
Equipment/Infrastructure
Year I
Year II
One 4-WD vehicle
Operational cost of vehicle
Miscellaneous tools and equipment
Computer software
Sub-total
Personnel
Forest Management Specialist
3 Labourers
Sub-total
Total Donor Contribution US$ 198,000
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTION (EC$)
Office equipment and supplies
1 Clerical Assistant
1 Forestry Officer
1 Driver
Sub-total
Total Government Contribution EC$152,000
<section>9</section>
Project number: 1.06
PRIORITY AREA
Forestry in Land Use
PROJECT TITLE
Wildlife Farming
DURATION
Five (5) years
LOCATION
Settlements on state lands
BENEFICIARIES
Small farmers
BACKGROUND
There are a number of small farmers in the rural areas who are earning a living working banana farms on very steep slopes. This type of farming is leading to significant erosion of the hill sides and is not a sustainable type of agriculture, particularly as the future of bananas on the European market is not assured after 1992. The use of a diversified agroforestry approach would better guarantee sustainability. Wild meat is relatively scarce and demands a higher price. The introduction of wildlife farming as the livestock component on some of the agroforestry plots would accomplish two objectives:
(a) It would make the plot more profitable;
(b) It would take the pressure off the wild populations in the forest.
GENERAL/SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
(a) To develop intensive integrated farming systems which are sustainable.
(b) To make the farming of small plots of about 5 ha profitable.
(c) To produce food for the farmer and the nation, making maximum use of local resources, so as to save scarce foreign exchange.
ACTIVITIES
(a) Obtain the services of a professional Wildlife Scientist who has experience in wildlife farming in the Caribbean.
(b) Set up wildlife unit at Government Stock Farm.
(c) Regularise land tenure to provide collateral for the farmers.
(d) Provide credit on long term at low interest to bona fide farmers.
(e) Establish effective and efficient extension services, to provide the farmers with the new technologies needed.
(f) Create marketing cooperatives to effectively market farmers produce.
(g) Support the formation of farmers cooperatives, which will in turn be members of the national farmers organization, such as a Dominica Agricultural Society.
INPUTS
(a) Government Livestock stations must be equipped to supply farmers with the necessary livestock breeding animals.
(b) A Wildlife Section in the Livestock Department of the Ministry of Agriculture, must be set up to produce breeding stock - agouti, manicou, mountain chicken, etc for sale to farmers.
(c) A credit scheme to provide long term (15) years credit, at not more than 6% interest, to be set up preferably within a private sector organization, such as one of the livestock cooperatives.
(d) All imports of equipment, and other inputs for farmers, should be free of duty and other taxes.
OUTPUTS
(a) Reduction of wild meat for sale to public, restaurants, hotels, etc.
(b) Reduction of significant amounts of meats now imported.
(c) Production of fruit and vegetables, some of which may be exported.
(d) The protection of the environment.
(e) The creation of a stabilised rural community of land-owing farmers, practising sustainable agriculture and agroforestry.
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
Jointly - Forestry Division and Livestock Division of the Ministry of Agriculture.
BUDGET (EC$)
Personnel
Duration
Cost
Consultant Wildlife farming
1 man month
One Chief Extension Officer
60 man months
Two Extension Officers
120 man months
One Marketing Specialist
12 man months
Secretarial etc
60 man months
Credit
Granted to credit scheme (revolving)
Equipment
2 Jeeps 4-WD
Office equipment, etc
Local cost - operating expenses and supplies (5 years)
Total Cost EC$
<section>a</section>
Project number: 1.07
PRIORITY AREA
Forestry in Land Use
PROJECT TITLE
Agroforestry Development
LOCATION
Petite Savanne/Bagatelle, Salisbury region, Carib Territory, Castle Bruce
DURATION
Five (5) years
BENEFICIARIES
1000 farmers in target areas
BACKGROUND
The Forestry Division of the Ministry of Agriculture has in 1987-89 realized agroforestry extension and trial plots in an effort to increase the productive potential of the resources while maintaining a balance with the environment. Especially in Bagatelle and Petite Savanne, the population accepted the need for new agroforestry techniques to solve social and economical problems.
However, initial steps to establish agroforestry programmes were restricted by lack of necessary funds to provide training for extension staff and farmers, transportation and material necessary for its implementation. In the Carib territory, the Dominica Conservation Association (DCA) started an agroforestry project, but needs support for its successful implementation, as resources are very limited.
Target areas were chosen according to the pressure to find solutions to existing problems:
(a) on the East coast (Carib territory and other regions) running rivers which provided pipe born water to villages have dried up due to deforestation and inadequate agricultural practices;
(b) in Bagatelle and Petite Savanne the production of bay oil decreased by 13% from 1989 to 1990 due to shortage of firewood for the distillation process. Bay trees were cut to obtain fuel;
(c) in steep hills around Salisbury pure stand banana cultivation on recently cleared land produced severe soil erosion and decreasing banana yields (a special regional project for Salisbury might be presented separately);
(d) in Castle Bruce estate existing agroforestry systems were destroyed giving way to banana monoculture, expanding to the hills which surround the estate.
OBJECTIVES
This project aims to introduce improved agroforestry techniques in the target areas and support the marketing of its products, as the lack of marketing for products other than bananas has been found the main reason for banana monoculture, even on inadequate soils. Specifically, activities in these areas shall:
(a) Increase availability of firewood
(b) Increase bay oil production
(c) Control soil erosion
(d) Increase soil fertility
(e) Protect watersheds and springs
(f) Diversify production for marketing and home consumption
(g) Promote techniques of organic farming and reduce utilization of inputs by organic manure and legumes
(h) Improve the marketing of non-banana products
(i) Increase farmer's income
(j) Maintain cultural identity and biodiversity of utilized plants
In the beginning, special attention will be given to the building-up of an Agroforestry Unit within the Ministry of Agriculture and training of agricultural and forestry personnel in this relatively new field. In a later phase this staff will expand and develop agroforestry techniques in other areas.
OUTPUTS
(a) Improvement of socioeconomic situation of farmers in target areas
(b) Ecologically sound land use
(c) Functioning Agroforestry Unit in the Ministry of Agriculture
(d) Agroforestry extension service in 4 target regions
(e) Development of improved agroforestry systems
(f) Increase and diversification of production
(g) Reduced use of agricultural inputs
(h) Reduced soil erosion
(i) Increased and rehabilitated water supplies
ACTIVITIES
(a) 4 demonstration plots (2 acres each)
(b) 2 trial plots (1 acre each)
(c) Continuous assistance to farmers in target areas
(d) Supply of interested farmers with appropriate seedlings and seeds by 3 flying nurseries and cooperation with agricultural plant propagation units and forestry nursery
(e) Training of agroforestry personnel
(f) Support of marketing activities of the Carib Farmers Association
(g) Production of videos and leaflets
(h) Establish Agroforestry Unit
INPUTS
Training of extension workers in agroforestry
Transport - 1 x 4-WD vehicle Office facilities, equipment, literature and journals for Agroforestry Unit
Materials and tools for trial and demonstration plots:
- seeds of Leucaena for direct sowing
- vegetative planting material of vetiver grass, bananas, plantains, Gliricidia
- wire for support of passionfruit
- fertilizer
- fungicides
- tools
Materials and seeds for 3 flying nurseries in Carib territory (already existing) Petite Savanne and Salisbury:
- polythene bags 7 x 5
- fencing wire
- garden forks and spades
- seeds of Leucaena, Calliandra, Sesbania
Personnel
1 Agroforestry Officer
2 Agroforestry Assistants
4 Field Assistants
1 Clerk
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
Agroforestry Unit, Forestry and Wildlife Division, Ministry of Agriculture in cooperation with Dominica Conservation Association, Agroforestry Project and Agriculture Extension Services.
LINKAGES
- Forestry Nursery project for supply of seedlings
- Agriculture Division for training of extension workers and cooperation in extension
- Dominica Conservation Association/Agroforestry project for project implementation in Carib territory
- Tropical Fruits and Spices project for coordination
- Agricultural field stations for supply of tree crop seedlings
- Multiple Tree Planting project for transport of seedlings and communication about trial results
- Rural Communication Centre for video production
- CARDI for communication of research results
TRAINING
To include:
- participation of agroforestry personnel in agroforestry courses held by CATIE/Costa Rica and ICRAF/Kenya
- training of field assistants in organic agriculture in Dominica (by Mr. Andrew Royer)
- visits to agroforestry projects in the Caribbean
TRIAL PLOTS
In Salisbury region:
1 acre of existing banana cultivation on slope
plantation of hedges of Gliricidia septum, Sesbania grandiflora, Calliandra calothyrsus, Malphigia punicifolia in combination with vetiver grass on contour lines
Spacing between plants: 1. 5 ft.
Spacing between hedge rows: 16 ft.
Several rows of bananas without hedge rows as control
Utilization of legumes as mulch material for bananas
Survey of the 5 different varieties covering
growth of tree species
mortality of tree species
banana production
erosion
labour requirement
The trial should be surveyed for a period of at least two years.
In Petite Savanne:
1/2 acre of existing bay plantation
1/2 acre plantation of legumes for firewood utilization:
Gliricidia sepium
Sesbania grandiflora
Calliandra calothyrsus
Leucaena leucocephala
Plantation of legumes in contour lines, spacing 3 ft. between plants and 8 ft. between rows or alternate rows of legumes and bay trees, if possible
Survey of:
- bay leaf production with different harvesting interval (9/12/15/18 months).
- growth, mortality and firewood production of legume species.
- efficiency of firewood species in bay oil distillation (quantity required per batch of bay leaves).
DEMONSTRATION PLOTS
Bagatelle:
2 acres of steep slope
contour planting of alternate rows of fruit trees and firewood species in combination with vetiver grass strips
land clearing only on contour strips to avoid erosion
spacing between rows 20 ft., within rows 3 ft. for firewood species, 10-20 ft. for fruit trees, depending on species, vetiver strip 1 ft. above firewood row
firewood species: Leucaena, Gliricidia
fruit species: grafted mango, avocado, sugar apple, soursop, West Indian cherry (spaced 2 ft. within rows) cashew
Carib territory:
1 acre of steep slope, 1 acre of moderate slope
on steep slope alternate rows of fruit trees and legume/vetiver strips as in Bagatelle, but use of legumes as support for passionfruit, planted with a spacing of 10 ft. within rows
on moderate slope contour hedges (spaced 1 ft. within rows, 16 ft. between rows) + bananas/plantains + root crops + vegetables + 1/2 acre of cocoa
use of legume contour hedges for mulching
use of animal manure for fertilization of annual crops
Salisbury:
2 acres of existing banana plantation on steep slope
windbreak plantation with mahogany, red cedar, mango, avocado, and spice trees
contour hedges of legumes/West Indian cherry (spaced 2 ft. within rows) and vetiver grass for mulching as in Carib territory, spaced 32 ft. between hedges
cocoa plantation in banana rows, halfway between bananas, shadow trees in the centre between contour hedges
Demonstration plots will be installed on the land of interested farmers who will receive all the benefits of these plots.
EDUCATIONAL MATERIAL
(a) 1st year: video "Ecological, economic and social development with agroforestry systems", to give a general introduction to existing problems and possible benefits from agroforestry systems
(b) 1st - 3rd year: video "Improvement of agroforestry in Dominica", accompanying the development of the demonstration plots in the first 3 years (establishment, maintenance, effects, etc.)
(c) Preparation of leaflets about:
agroforestry in soil conservation
fertilizing with organic manure and legume mulch
firewood trees - plantation and management
multiple tree cropping on hillsides
REQUIREMENT OF SEEDLINGS
(a)
1st year: 7,000 legume trees (Calliandra, Sesbania, Gliricidia, Leucaena) and 100 forest trees (mahogany, red cedar) from central nursery
300 fruit trees (mango, avocado, soursop, sugar apple. West Indian cherry, cashew), 50 spice trees (nutmeg, cinnamon, cloves) and 1500 cocoa plants from agricultural field stations
(b)
2nd - 5th year: 15,000 legume trees from 3 flying nurseries approximately 1000 fruit trees, 200 forest trees, 200 spice trees and 3000 cocoa plants per year
BUDGET
DONOR CONTRIBUTION (US$)
ITEM
YEAR
1 4xWD vehicle
Maintenance
4 Field Assistants
Training and travel allowances
Office equipment
Literature and periodicals
Educational material
Material for demonstration and trial plots
Material for 3 flying nurseries
Marketing support
Sub-total
TOTAL US$ 202,600
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTION (US$)
ITEM
YEAR
1 Administration Officer
2 Assistants
1 Clerk
Office facilities
Seedlings
Sub-total
TOTAL US$ 179,020
GRAND TOTAL US$ 381,620
<section>b</section>
Project number: 1.08
PRIORITY AREA
Forestry in Land Use
PROJECT TITLE
Petite Savanne - Pointe Mulatre Road
DURATION
Probably 3 years and partial absorption into the longer Agroforestry project
LOCATION
Petite Savanne - Morne Paix Bouche - Pointe Mulatre
BENEFICIARIES
(1) Farmers and people of Petite Savanne
(2) People of Delices Pointe Mulatre and other villages north to La Plaine
(3) Forestry Division, Agroforestry Unit
(4) Tour operators
BACKGROUND
The district around Petite Savanne is among the steepest and most difficult terrain in Dominica. The village itself is small but sprawling and the population is mainly concerned with agriculture, although a fishing village is nearby, at Fond St. Jean. In much earlier times, the road for horse traffic from Roseau through Geneva continued through Petite Savanne to Pointe Mulatre as part of the coastal road circling the island. In the 1950s, the only route between La Plaine and Roseau available to a motor vehicle was through Pointe Mulatre and Petite Savanne (the Paix Bouche section), and for some years, that section of the road was improved and maintained by PWD and Pointe Mulatre Estate, although it was a very difficult, slow route, because of acute corners, hairpin bends, which were only negotiable by reversing out. During this period, the road was used for banana transport, but it was never satisfactory. After the extension of the La Plaine road, with great difficulty, to
Delices the Paix Bouche section was left unused except for foot traffic, and it remains so.
The Geneva - Petite Savanne road section is now well surfaced, and despite the problems of landslips and erosion, which are a constant threat in this area, the road is well maintained. However, Petite Savanne remains as a village at the end of the road with no real access if there are major slips. There was a major slip and loss of life a mile away at Bagatelle in the 1970s.
Within the area of the village, the major cash crop and export is bay oil. The trees cover hillsides of varying slope and firewood for the distilleries now has to be hauled in from some distance. There are other fruit trees and food crops, but bay is the most significant crop from the viewpoint of the island economy. Bay production is centred in this area, and although little more than 10% of the value of the banana, and giving a low return to labour and to land, it remains the fifth-largest export value, at $1.2 million/year.
However, the bay crop is insufficient to support the villagers, who, perhaps because of the remoteness of the village, are very attached to remaining there, and have been developing gardens in unused, steep hillside land high above the village in an area they consider suitable for banana production. Moreover, the problem is likely to increase because of continued population growth.
The land into which the farmers have expanded cannot, for several reasons, be permitted to be in continuous use for this purpose. First, it is not actually suitable for continuous clean cultivation of the banana, although it was suitable under former shifting cultivation. It is extremely steep (Class VI land), with major risks of landslip and excessive erosion under clean cultivation after tree roots have rotted. Second, access for cultivation is difficult, for pest control measures (leaf spot control, eg.), and for hauling the crop very difficult, making the whole enterprise of low financial and possibly negative economic benefit. Above all, however, the land is within the designated limits of the Morne Trois Pitons National Park.
The farmers have of their own initiative formed a group to introduce agroforestry methods into the area, and are working with a forestry officer on developments to suit their area, including the need for fuelwood for the distillery.
As recognition of their initiative and to provide them with an adequate opportunity to implement their ideas, 16 of the group - have been allocated 5 acres each on the former Pointe Mulatre Estate. However, since access is only by foot for 5 km, or by a journey of perhaps 50 km through Roseau, Pont Casse and La Plaine, they are unable to make much progress.
Consequently, the development of a motorable road in the Paix Bouche section has been proposed. The road is subject to special difficulties of instability of slopes so that a road causing minimal disturbance is proposed, since relative costs, damage to farms and risk of instability increase at least as the square of the width of the roadcut.
PROJECT JUSTIFICATION
Farmers
1. The National Park is being encroached upon by land-hungry farmers because access to land otherwise available to them is too difficult.
2. The land being encroached on is unsuitable and will be severely damaged if they are not removed.
3. For economic reasons the farmers badly need access to more land.
4. The farmers have demonstrated that they are innovative and are developing agroforestry systems.
5. The old road from Petite Savanne to Pointe Mulatre which could solve their problems is unusable.
Other Interests
6. There is at present no alternative route to Petite Savanne or Pointe Mulatre. Providing a link would reduce the costs of many journeys and open up some opportunities for internal trade (between Fond St. Jean and Delices - La Plaine, for example).
7. The area has spectacular scenery which can only be visited on foot. In the vicinity of the col on Paix Bouche, there are breathtaking views and the whole area is of interest. Some tourists make the journey on foot, but it could form the basis for an adventure jeep trip.
DELIVERABLES
1. The National Park will be clear of encroachment.
2. The farmers of Petite Savanne will have adequate access to their allocated land and there will probably be additional land available for others.
3. The farmers^/standard of living will be improved. They will have more land and less difficulty in transporting bananas safely.
4. A community initiative in agroforestry will have been made possible which will be a fine example to other Dominican communities.
5. An alternative route into Petite Savanne and Delices/Point Mulatre will be available to offset the ever present possibility of the villages being cut off by major landslip.
6. A route suitable for tourist adventure journeys by 4-wheel drive (and on foot along Paix Bouche ridge into the National Park) will be available.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
1. It will be essential to carry out an Environmental Impact Assessment on the proposed redevelopment of the road and to use construction methods proposed by the EIA to minimize damage to surrounding land and avoid compromising the stability of the area.
2. There are alternatives which may be considered from both the purely environmental and the cost-effectiveness viewpoints, and which may need to be reconsidered during the commission of the EIA, but at first approximation the present proposal appears to be most suitable.
The three alternatives examined were:
(1) Feeder road (3.6m carriageway) following more or less the old alignment.
(2) Jeepable road (1.8m carriageway) following the old alignment, with minimal further excavation.
(3) Feeder road from Pointe Mulatre through Foundland to Perdu Temps and thence Geneva.
Of these, the second appeared most practical.
OVERALL OBJECTIVES
1. Improve motor vehicle access between Petite Savanne and Pointe Mulatre enabling farmers to work their holdings effectively.
2. Enable and encourage a demonstration of community-led agroforestry as a stimulus to agroforestry development in Dominica.
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
1. Assessment of the most cost-effective method of achieving improved access with minimal environmental impact.
Activities
1.1 Consider alternative alignments and road types and propose several for evaluation at first approximation.
1.2 Consider environmental effects and costs of fully/acceptably mitigating them for each alternative, both in terms of capital and recurrent costs and risks of major landslip (considered as beyond cost analysis).
1.3 Evaluate and grade the alternatives and offer assessment by cost and risk.
1.4 GOCD representative determines choice of option or if necessary requests more detail.
2. Implementation of chosen option
Activities
2.1 Detailed survey on route and determination of methods for impact mitigated construction, schedule of work, schedule of compensation for disruption.
2.2 Make necessary purchases and provide any necessary/agreed sweeteners to farmers to be affected by construction.
2.3 Ensure that sufficient drains and sumps are provided in advance of main construction.
2.4 Construct and determine maintenance need.
2.5 Improve stabilization by tree planting along roadsides.
3. Implementation of chosen agroforestry methods
Activities
3.1 Continue experimental agroforestry in Petite Savanne area.
3.2 Link up with regional agroforestry demonstrations if these are contemporary, and use their techniques.
3.3 Provide farmers with adequate inputs including credit to enable them to put agroforestry into practice.
3.4 Continue in association with regional agroforestry scheme.
INPUTS
Equipment
Personnel
1 x 4WD vehicle
1 Project manager, full-time 6 months, part-time for 2  years after
1 charcoal kiln
1 EIA consultant - 3 months; 1 geologist consultant - 1 month
Office equipment
1 road building contractor with expertise in low impact methods
Site office at Point Mulatre Seedlings for roadside trees
1 agroforester part-time (Forestry Division)
1 surveyor, part-time (one year?)
OUTPUTS
1. An EIA with assessment of alternative and proposals for mitigation of impact.
2. A jeepable road over the Paix Bouche section, with lowest possible landslip risk and maintenance costs.
3. Land around Point Multare in profitable production and demonstration of community initiated agroforestry.
4. Trees cleared along route or on farmland used for charcoal.
5. Trees replanted along roadside.
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
Ministry of Communications, Housing and Works, with input from Forestry Division
RISKS
There is a risk that there may be no plausible method of constructing the road without including landslides and damage to the surrounding area, of sufficient scale to necessitate reconsideration. It is for this reason that a geologist/geotechnologist skilled in landslip analysis and prevention is required for the first month. Should his report be unfavourable to the proposed alignment, and another alignment is found to be more suitable, the cost is likely to rise appreciably.
BUDGET
The budget is based on an estimated cost of $200,000 per kilometre of road fully mitigated construction methods, using a contractor, and has been estimated as a proportion of the cost of a feeder (12') previously assessed at about $700,000/km without full mitigation, for the same proposed road.
(a) Donor Contribution
US$ 833,000
(b) Government Contribution
US$ 120,000
(c) Total Contribution
US$ 953,000
DONOR CONTRIBUTION (US$'000)
ITEM
YEAR
Equipment
1 x 4WD vehicle:
Cost
Maintenance
1 Charcoal kiln
Office supplies/Miscellaneous
Personnel
1 Project Manager
1 EIA consultant
1 Geologist consultant
Compensation etc
Contract: Road construction
Sub-total
TOTAL US$ 833,000 (incl. 20% contingencies)
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTION (US$'000)
ITEM
YEAR
Vehicle maintenance
Office supplies
Office accommodation
One agroforester
Sub-total
Contingencies (10%)
TOTAL US$ 120,000
<section>c</section>
Project number: 2.01
PRIORITY AREA
Forest Based Industrial Development
PROJECT TITLE
Logging Roads for Cottage Forest Industries (CFI)
DURATION
Two (2) Years
LOCATION
Terreferme-Bois Diable
BENEFICIARIES
C.F.I.
BACKGROUND
One of the essential ingredients for maintenance of biological diversity in Dominica's wet tropical forest is the development of a sustainable forest industry. The implementation of this carries with it many difficulties. The terrain is rugged, wet and inaccessible. In the case of the Cottage Forest Industries (a corporation of small sawyers which aims to demonstrate the economic and ecological viability of a sustainable, community-based, labour-intensive, dispersed approach to timber utilisation in Dominica) extraction of forest products is becoming too strenuous and risky. Assistance is required for the building of a road to a site which is in the process of being leased to the corporation, by Government, for harvest and application of timber stand improvement techniques.
The members of the C.F.I, are the major suppliers of sawn lumber to the furniture manufacturers in Dominica. They provide employment for an estimated 300 predominantly rural people.
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
(a) To alleviate the intensity of labour by improving the productivity of the small sawyers who are members of the C.F.I.
(b) To build a forest road at the proposed government allocated site at Terre Ferme, approximately 8 km long.
ACTIVITIES
(a) Prepare an Environmental Impact Assessment of area proposed for road.
(b) Conduct a survey of the proposed road.
(c) Build approximately 8 km of all-season road.
(d) Utilise wood products for lumber, charcoal, posts.
INPUTS
Equipment/Infrastructure
Personnel
1 x 4WD vehicle
1 Licensed surveyor
D-8 Bulldozer (part-time)
1 Bulldozer operator and greaser
Monitoring equipment
1 Engineer
Office supplies
1 Clerk
Dump trucks
6 Labourers
OUTPUTS
(a) Environmental impact assessment on completed road project.
(b) Road designed and cut.
(c) Higher productivity from small sawyers.
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
The Forestry Division and Wildlife Division of the Ministry of Agriculture.
OBSERVATION
To begin in year two.
BUDGET
(a) Donor Contribution
US$ 491,000
(b) Government Contribution
EC$ 118,000
(c) Total Contribution
US$ 535,000
DONOR CONTRIBUTION (US$)
Equipment/Infrastructure
Year 2
Year 3
1 x 4-WD vehicle
Maintenance of vehicle
Road construction
Road maintenance
Equipment
Sub-total
Personnel
Year 2
Year 3
1 Licensed surveyor (part-time)
1 EIA consultant (part-time)
1 Driver
Sub-total
Total Donor Contribution US$ 491,000
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTION (EC$)
Year 2
Year 3
Office accommodation and supplies
1 Engineer
1 Clerk/typist
Sub-total
Total Government Contribution EC$ 118,000
<section>d</section>
Project number: 2.02
PRIORITY AREA
Forest Based Industrial Development
PROJECT TITLE
Establishment of Handicraft and Furniture Workshop and Handicraft Plantation
LOCATION
Carib Territory
DURATION
Five (5) years
BENEFICIARIES
General public and Forestry Division
BACKGROUND
Over the years the production of furniture and other related handicraft products in Dominica has been very limited, which has resulted in the retardation of such an economically viable industry. This has been attributed to a lack of skills and raw materials which are available in other tropical countries. As a result, handicraft furniture and other related products are being imported. Handicrafts are being made in the Carib Territory and other scattered areas but with little variety and poor quality. Furniture is being made mainly from lumber products. Importation of skills and raw materials from other countries is being suggested for the survival and expansion of this industry. This project therefore, sees the need to build an institution to house a workshop in which imported skilled workers can share some of their inherited skills with Dominicans. Another area this project emphasizes is the growing of both imported and locally available plants needed for this industry.
A considerable quantity of products which include furniture, fencing, scaffolding and screens can be produced for both local and export markets. Technical advice for such a project can be obtained from countries such as Haiti and the Philippines which are well ahead in such an industry. Revenue and employment will be among the many benefits from such a project.
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
(a) Building of handicraft institution.
(b) Establishing plantation of Bamboo/Rattan and other raw materials for the industry.
(c) Making available products for tourists and local and regional markets.
ACTIVITIES
(a) Construction of handicraft building.
(b) Establishing nursery and plantations.
(c) Employing skilled workers in educating and designing and growing necessary plants.
(d) Purchasing equipment necessary for workshop, nursery and plantations.
(e) Training workers.
OUTPUTS
(a) Handicraft workshop for training in design of handicraft and furniture.
(b) Handicraft plantations
(c) Large variety of handicraft and furniture products.
(d) Trained Dominicans in proper handicraft and furniture design.
(e) Less importation of handicraft and furniture.
(f) Revenue from exports
(g) Employment
INPUTS
Equipment/Infrastructure
Personnel
Handicraft building for workshop and display
1 Assistant Forestry Officer
Tools and equipment for designing and planting
4 Labourers
Nursery stock
2 consultants for training in design and planting
Equipment for education and planting
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
Forestry and Wildlife Division of the Ministry of Agriculture.
OBSERVATION
To begin in Year two.
BUDGET
(a) Donor Contribution
US$ 684,000
(b) Government Contribution
EC$ 188,000
(c) Total Contribution
US$ 754,000
DONOR CONTRIBUTION (US$)
ITEM
YEAR
Equipment/Infrastructure
1 Handicraft Building
Maintenance of building
Tools and equipment
Nursery stock
Teaching equipment
1 x 4-WD vehicle
Vehicle maintenance
Sub-total
Personnel
2 Consultants
4 Labourers
Overseas training
Sub-total
TOTAL US$ 684,000
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTION (EC$)
ITEM
YEAR
Office accommodation and supplies
1 Assistant Forestry Officer
1 Clerk/typist
Sub-total
TOTAL EC$ 188,000
<section>e</section>
Project number: 3.01
PRIORITY AREA
Fuelwood and Energy
PROJECT TITLE
Biomass production for fuelwood and charcoal
DURATION
Six months
LOCATION
Dominica
BENEFICIARIES
Government and people of Dominica
BACKGROUND/PROBLEM
There appears to be an opportunity for Dominica to produce energy from biomass based on its extensive existing forest resources and from energy plantations of forest trees. However, there is a need to carry out a technical and economic feasibility study to determine the cost of energy from this source compared with hydro-electric and diesel powered sources.
GENERAL OBJECTIVE
To produce energy on a sustainable basis and at the lowest possible cost.
ACTIVITIES
Obtain the services of an Alternative Energy Consultant, preferably from the Caribbean, with experience particularly in Biomass Energy Production and Utilization.
INPUTS
Terms of Reference of the Consultant
The Consultant shall carry out:
(a) A survey of the existing fuelwood and charcoal industry in Dominica.
(b) A survey of the energy usage in Dominica and determine the future needs for a period up to twenty years.
(c) A study of the economics of various forms of energy production and determine trends for the future.
(d) The preparation of various economic models with recommendations for:
i. the species of trees to be planted
ii. systems production and harvesting
iii. systems of converting biomass to energy.
(e) Examine the market locally, regionally and internationally for fuelwood and charcoal and make recommendations.
OUTPUT
A study for the use by the Government
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
Forestry Division of the Ministry of Agriculture
CONDITION FOR SUCCESS
Employment of appropriate consultants
OBSERVATION
To begin in year 2.
COST
Biomass Energy Expert
Forest Utilization Expert
Economist
Assuming 6 man weeks for each including fees, overseas travel, local and per diem.
TOTAL COST (to donor)
EC$ 180,000
US$ 66,000
<section>f</section>
Project number: 4.01
PROJECT AREA
Conservation of Forest Ecosystems
PROJECT TITLE
Upgrading and Management of Parks, Recreation Areas and Other Attractions
LOCATION
National Parks and Recreation Areas
DURATION
Four (4) years
BENEFICIARIES
General public and visitors/ecotourists
BACKGROUND
Dominica's main tourist attractions, unlike other Caribbean islands with white sandy beaches, are its scenic forested national parks and freshwater lakes, rivers, streams and waterfalls. Some of the most spectacular features include Freshwater Lake, Boeri Lake, Titou Gorge, Boiling Lake, Valley of Desolation, Trafalgar Falls, imperial and redneck parrot habitat, Fort Shirley historic site and the freshwater marsh at Cabrits. Morne Trois Pitons and Morne Diablotin are the two highest peaks with mature and montane rainforest as well as elfin woodland zones.
In order to support the ever increasing needs of foreign and domestic visitors to Morne Trois Pitons National Park, Cabrits National Park and to the proposed Morne Diablotin National Park a significant amount of basic health and safety concerns must be immediately addressed by the GOCD particularly the National Parks Section, Forestry and Wildlife Division, Ministry of Agriculture. There are only three officers in the National Parks Section with one of them on study leave in the United States. Inadequate staffing of the National Parks Section must be immediately addressed. There is a need for onsite staff in all the national parks of Dominica on a permanent basis. In order to implement site protection and management, to offer visitor safety and security, and to begin basic resource interpretation and environmental education, the following systematic three-part project is proposed.
THE PROBLEM
Dominica has no National Parks Service, no on-site visitor or resource management, no visitor support facilities available, and a great need to host an ever increasing level of visitors and resulting visitor impacts to the National Parks System. There are two national parks in Dominica. Park management plans exist in their basic formulation but there is no staff, no equipment and no field support infrastructure to permit the government to implement even the basics of national parks management on-the-ground. These deficiencies must be addressed immediately if the Forestry and Wildlife Division is to begin to provide sustainable resource management while supporting associated economic development through the development and management of a Dominica National Park System.
OBJECTIVES
The overall objective of the project is to provide a basic capital investment programme over a four year period to enhance the capability of the Dominica National Parks to safely and securely host and educate increasing numbers of international and domestic park visitors while developing a basic resource management programme through the creation of a functional National Parks Service within the Forestry and Wildlife Division.
In order to accomplish this broad, comprehensive objective, the following specific goals and objectives are suggested:
1. Correction of immediate visitor and staff health, safety and security needs by providing basic support facilities and on-site staffing at all critical locations within the national parks.
2. Provide educational support and employment opportunities for a basic national parks system staff organization of 3 naturalists, 3 ecologists, 1 archaeologist, 6 maintenance and security staff and 3 park superintendents together with headquarters support of a National Parks Section head, clerical support and 4 drivers (one for each park and one for the headquarters staff).
3. Provide for basic technical equipment and staff training needs to implement utilization of visitor user survey data collection procedures.
4. Design and place visitor information centres at each national park with on-site staff officer.
5. Conversion of the existing Forestry and Wildlife Division office at the Roseau Botanical Gardens into gardens, visitor centre and visitor comfort station when the Forestry and Wildlife staff is placed in a new and up-to-date office complex.
6. Mitigation or restoration efforts must begin to off-set effects from incompatible uses at all locations, including those caused from quarrying, agriculture, hydro-electric site development, construction of roads, commercial activities and natural causes.
7. Implementation of a user fee and donations collection system.
8. Development of a National Parks Nature Association in cooperation with the Dominica Conservation Association.
9. Development of a guide service, and concessionaire training and licensing system with built in monitoring of performance. To be done in cooperation with the Division of Tourism.
10. Sedimentation protection for the Emerald Pool (originating from the quarry site nearby).
11. Development of a resource interpretation programme by appropriate means including signs, publications, guided tours, naturalist talks, cassette auto tours, etc.
12. Creation of a national parks applied research and environmental education organization based on the Archbold Centre and Clemson University activities.
13. Develop and implement regulations governing uses and activities of the National Park System.
14. Implementation of zoning systems for intensive public use areas, resource protection areas, and extensive public use areas.
15. Permit nature association concessions at park visitor centres.
16. Develop a "Dominica - the Nature Island" parks pass.
17. Explore the development of a programme to utilize United States Peace Corps or other international volunteer support to supplement Forestry and Wildlife Division staff in the management of the national parks.
The overall purpose of these specific objectives is to provide Dominica with a basic infrastructure and foundation to operate the national parks in a long-term sustainable manner. The means for generating annual revenue return to the government of Dominica will be developed. The operation and maintenance of park recreational and interpretive facilities could, however, be best handled by an autonomous government corporation to ensure adequate returns on investments which many not typically occur via direct governmental management of "commercially" focused facilities and operations.
ACTIVITIES
The project is a four year capital investment and organizational building programme leading to key improvements for visitor health and safety, resource protection and interpretation, implementation of park management plans and monitoring for the years 1992 to 1995.
The activities which the project would carry out are as follows:
1. Provide fellowships for training at the professional level and technical level for sixteen individuals in resource conservation and ecology, parks management, archaeology, and technical support in the field.
2. Upgrade the existing vehicular access for the Laudat-Freshwater Lake Road, installation of a vehicular access road for site maintenance over the old Fort Shirley access trail, and the existing Syndicate - Dyer Estate - Morne Plaisance parrot viewing trailhead access roads.
3. Upgrading the surface and alignment, and provide directional signing, on the existing hiking trail system.
4. Provide nonslip surfacing treatments to the rock entry-way at Cabrits National Park.
5. Installation of permanent visitor observation sites at Emerald Pool (2), Boiling Lake, Middleham Falls, parrot observation sites (2), and Trafalgar Falls.
6. Relocate vehicular parking at Emerald Pool trailhead out of the road curve to provide for 30 vehicles.
7. Eliminate wild, free roaming dogs in parks and forests reserves.
8. Upgrade parking at all new visitor centres.
9. Construct and place two floating docks on the Freshwater Lake.
10. Continue the stabilization and restoration of historic structures at Fort Shirley in Cabrits National Park.
11. Implementation of guided tours at the Roseau Botanical Gardens together with an introduction to the National Parks System.
12. Construction of an elevated walkway through a section of the Cabrits freshwater swamp with the construction of an underwater trail for divers in Douglas Bay.
13. Complete the purchase of private land inholdings, provide reasonable compensation and account for needed right-of-ways and legal fees for completion of the National Parks System.
OUTPUTS
Education and Training
(a) Ten (10) individuals will receive professional degrees in Forestry, Ecology/Conservation Biology, Wildlife Recreation Management, and Archaeology.
(b) Training on visitor use survey sampling will be provided to over fifteen forest rangers, guards and officers.
(c) Interpretative materials, signs and educational materials will be developed for all national parks.
User Needs
(d) Creation of visitor comfort facilities for the long-term management and enjoyment of park users.
(e) A useable trail system, accessible without guides.
Resource Protection Capabilities
(f) Implementation of functional management plans for each national park.
(g) Resource impact mitigation, particularly relating to incompatible uses and activities occurring within the national parks.
Research and Environmental Education
(h) Implementation of an applied research programme in cooperation with the Archbold and Clemson University programmes in Dominica.
National Parks System Development
(i) Opportunity for revenue generation and the development of a self-supporting national park programme.
(j) Protection and enhancement of cultural and historic resources.
(k) Increased employment opportunities for local and rural communities in park areas.
(l) Entry into the nature tourism destination circuit of world travellers and cruise ship tourists.
(m) Enhance self pride in the National Parks System by the people of Dominica and the Caribbean community as a whole.
INPUTS
From the Government of Dominica
In Dominica, the government is not presently able to provide basic support other than the lands of the national parks and labour support for facilities construction related to activities previously mentioned. Direction will be provided by the National Parks Section director together with current Forestry and Wildlife Division support staff - which is minimal and barely able to keep up with daily demands now placed upon them.
Governmental Financial Contribution
Dominica is requested to contribute an average of 20% of the financial capital for the implementation of this project to supplement donor organization contributions. This may occur as one time legislative allocations or by logistical support from existing sources within government (i.e. engineering design, tax waivers, human labour and more).
Input from Donor Organization(s)
International Staffing and Technical Support
- One Project Manager (Civil Engineer) for 48 months
- One Environmental Education expert for 36 months
- One Conservation Biologist (Ecologist) for 12 months
- One Archaeologist for 36 months
- Specialized consultants in wildlife management, forest information management, electronic communications, and marine/freshwater biology - 36 months
Equipment and Materials
- Non-expendable materials including vehicles, research equipment, radio communications, educational materials, all construction materials and finishing materials, etc.
- Expendable materials including supplies, site designs, printing and reference needs.
Donor Organization Overview (Missions)
- Site reviews shall be taken by the donor agency or agencies biannually during the life of the project.
PROJECT WORK PLAN AND TERMS OF REFERENCE
1. A detailed work plan for the implementation of the project will be prepared by the Project Manager within one month of assumption of duty. It shall have the concurrence of the Director of the Forestry and Wildlife Division, the donor organization(s) and shall become a part of the project document.
2. Close liaison shall be made between the Project Manager, the Director of the Forestry and Wildlife Division, donor organization(s) and the FAO Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean.
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
The Forestry and Wildlife Division, Ministry of Agriculture shall be the implementing agency for the Government of Dominica. Support shall be provided by the Division of Tourism, National Development Corporation.
REPORTING MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Reporting
The donor organization(s) shall stipulate reporting and review requirements for the life of the project. Monitoring and implementation requirements shall be included as well.
Evaluation
The project shall be evaluated in accordance with the policies and procedures established by the donor organization(s) in agreement with the Government of Dominica.
The organization, terms of reference and timing of the evaluation will be decided in consultation between the government, the donor organization(s) and the executing organization(s).
A summary report based on monitoring, and final evaluation shall be provided by the Project Manager based on an agreed time frame acceptable to all parties involved. The report will assess the extent to which the project has met its scheduled activities, met its objectives, accomplished outputs and will make recommendations to future needs arising out of project implementation.
PROJECT DURATION
The project will be of four (4) years duration and may be implemented in three phases over the four (4) year period as follows:
Phase 1: Years 1 and 2 to address visitor health, safety and security concerns.
Phase 2: Years 2 and 3 would address infrastructural park facilities.
Phase 3: Years 3 and 4 - these would be the final site development needs for interpretation of resources and for facility and resource protection.
BUDGET (US$)
ITEM
YR 1
YR 2
YR 3
YR 4
TOTAL
1.0 Personnel Services
a. Project Manager 48 months
b. Env. Educational Expert 36 months
c. Ecologist 12 months
d. Archaeologist 36 months
e. Consultants 36 months
f. Staff support 48 months
2.0 Contractual Support
Report production
3.0 Fellowships
a. M.S. for 3 Park Superintendents
b. B.Sc. for three Naturalists
c. B.Sc. for three Ecologists
d. B.Sc. for one Archaeologist
National Parks Infrastructure Needs - 4.0 Health, Safety and Security Needs - Phase I
a. Laudat-Freshwater Lake Access Road (3/4 mile total)
b. Cabrits interior access road (1/3 mile total)
c. Syndicate Morne Plaisance and Syndicate to Dyer Estate roads (2 miles total)
d. Emerald Pool Parking area for 30 vehicles
e. Trail system upgraded (7 miles)
f. Nonslip surfacing for Cabrits access rock walkway
g. Permanent site observation decks (6 locations)
h. Elimination of wild dogs
i. Park Vault type toilets (6 locations)
j. 5 rain shelters
k. 15 tables and 30 benches
l. Drinking water wells and pumps (5 locations)
m. Freshwater Lake floating docks with strobe lites
n. Utilities for 3 future visitor centres
o. Garbage collection and disposal system (3 locations)
p. 6 staff field work huts with 3 located as future fee collection stations
q. Vehicles - 3 x 4-WD
r. Water crafts - 1 motor boat and 2 canoes
s. Botanical Gardens Forestry Office washroom addition and Upgrade (for future visitor centre conversion)
t. Mobile radio communication system (base and vehicles with installation)
SUB-TOTAL PHASE I
Suggested Division of Support:
Government 20% or 404,800
Donor 80% or 1,619,200
5.0 Resource Interpretation and Protection Needs - Phase II
a. Stabilization and complete restoration of Fort Shirley structures
b. Interpretive trails for Cabrits swamp and Douglas Bay, with parking and toilets
c. Interpretive signs for all major features
d. Guided tour programme for the Botanical Gardens
e. Sediment catchment basins for Emerald Pool area with scheduled cleanouts
f. Rehabilitation of Cabrits Trail at Emerald Pool with const. of parallel hiking trail. Construction of stone walkway at Cabrits entry to the Fort Shirley site
SUB-TOTAL PHASE II
Suggested Division of Funding:
Government 25% or $110,500
Donor 75% or $331,500
6.0 Site Facilities and Park Management Programme - Phase III
a. 3 Visitor centres
b. Development of a user sampling and survey system
c. Development of a "Dominica - The Nature Island" park and recreation pass
d. Land use and visitation regulation system development
e. Survey, design, construct and equip 3 camping sites with 5 units each including all support facilities
f. Formulation of cooperative environmental education and applied research programme with Archbold Centre of Clemson University
g. Zoning system for all parks
h. Design and implementation of nat. res. Management agreement with US Peace Corps and other international volunteer organizations for park management support, environmental education and interpretive planning
i. Future land purchase and exchange with compensation and legal fees
SUB-TOTAL PHASE III
Suggested Division of Funding:
Government 20% or $161,500
Donor 80% or $646,000
TOTAL COST
<section>g</section>
Project number: 4.02
PROJECT AREA
Conservation of Tropical Forest Ecosystems
PROJECT TITLE
Protection of Mangroves and other Wetlands
DURATION
Four (4) years
LOCATION
Cabrits, Salbury, Hamstead, Woodford Hill, La Plane, Anse Demai, Wesley
BENEFICIARIES
Forestry Division, Dominica Conservation Association (DCA) Public at large
NOTE: This proposal was written before the results of the regional study on Mangroves (Bacon 1991) were available.
BACKGROUND
The study of Dominica's mangroves and other wetlands (swamps and marshes) is relatively new and, until recently, botanists published statements to the effect that mangroves species did not exist in the island. On the contrary, the opposite is true. It is clear that because of the fragility of this ecosystem, its importance in the protection of inland vegetation, its role as a habitat for wild life and as a tourist attraction, there is a need to protect these areas from disappearance. However the Forestry Division has limited information on the exact resources of the island's wetlands.
Except for students of botany, the general public knows very little about the importance of swamps and other wetlands.
The project seeks to amend the existing Forestry Ordinance to include swamps and other wetlands. By the enactment of legislation and its enforcement, the Forestry Division will be better able to demarcate the areas of important swamps and mangroves as protected areas.
The project will use public environmental education to heighten awareness of the importance of swamps and wetlands and the need to preserve them as national monuments.
Where possible Government should seek to acquire the lands which support such ecosystems in order to provide a more effective conservation programme.
The mangrove sites located in Dominica present a departure from the traditional concept of mangrove, and this phenomenon deserves study and research.
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
(a) To highlight the importance of mangroves and other wetlands in Dominica's diverse ecological systems.
(b) To preserve the mangrove ecosystems.
(c) To collect data on the wetland resources of the country in order to protect and manage these resources.
ACTIVITIES
(a) Regional workshops on mangroves to be held in Dominica.
(b) National campaign on importance of swamps and wetlands.
(c) Investigate resources and prepare a list for each habitat.
(d) Acquire lands supporting swamps and other wetlands.
(e) Conduct census on important wildlife species.
(f) Erect visible signposts in areas where mangroves are located.
INPUTS
Equipment/Infrastructure
Personnel
One (1) boat
1 Wildlife consultant
Materials for signposts
1 Wetland consultant
Audio visual teaching aids
1 Assistant Forestry Officer
1 TV monitor
1 Secretary
1 VCR machine and tapes
2 Labourers
Computer and software
Training accessories
OUTPUTS
(a) Wetlands wildlife habitats surveyed and inventories taken.
(b) Awareness on importance of wetlands.
(c) Regional workshops on wetlands convened.
(d) Signposts erected to indicate important sites.
(e) Officers trained in wetlands and wildlife management.
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
Forestry and Wildlife Division of the Ministry of Agriculture.
OBSERVATIONS
To begin in year two (2).
BUDGET
(a) Donor Contribution
US$ 230,000
(b) Government Contribution
EC$ 252,000
(c) Total Contribution
US$ 323,000
DONOR CONTRIBUTION (US$)
ITEM
YEAR 2
YEAR 3
YEAR 4
YEAR 5
(a) Equipment/Infrastructure
1 4xWD vehicle
Maintenance of vehicle
One (1) boat
Teaching aids
Tools and equipment
Computer and software
Sampling equipment
Chemicals
SUB-TOTAL
(b) Personnel
2 consultants
1 Driver
SUB-TOTAL
Total Donor Contribution US$ 230,000
GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTION (EC$)
ITEM
YEAR 2
YEAR 3
YEAR 4
YEAR 5
Office accommodation
1 Clerk/typist
1 Assistant Forestry Officer
2 Labourers
TOTAL
Total Government Contribution EC$252,000
<section>h</section>
Project number: 4.03
PRIORITY AREA
Conservation of Tropical Forest Ecosystems
PROJECT TITLE
Development of an Environmental Information base for Dominica
DURATION
Five (5) years
LOCATION
Dominica Conservation Association (DCA) Head Office
BENEFICIARIES
Conservation Association, Forestry Division, Tourism Division Springfield Research Centre and other NGOs and the general public
BACKGROUND
Dominica possesses a rich diversity of tropical ecosystems. Due to a lack of funds, very little has been done to record what is available in these areas. Recently it has become apparent that decisions have been taken which affect the environment without knowing the extent of the damage done because of lack of knowledge. Work done in areas such as the Morne Trois Pitons National Park and Cabrits National Park are clear indicators that ecological considerations are not taken into account. Therefore, the environment is paying the price of development due to ignorance in ecological matters.
The DCA and other environmental groups are well intentioned in the call for preserving and conserving important landmarks in Dominica. These associations are not able to describe the current status on any of these areas, nor give an accurate picture of what exists or existed in these areas. This project seeks to make environmental information on Dominica more readily available.
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
(a) Conduct inventories and develop natural resources as well as historical and archaeological data bases.
(b) Strengthen the DCA information centre.
(c) Establish a herbarium and insect collection.
ACTIVITIES
(a) Carry out biological surveys throughout Dominica.
(b) Take a leading role in organising baseline inventories of selected natural and archaeological resources.
(c) Establish the biological monitoring programme.
(d) Maintain and expand the present library at DCA Environmental Information Centre.
(e) Develop a special section on Environmental Education materials.
INPUTS
Equipment/Infrastructure
Personnel
1 IBM compatible 286 computer
1 Project Coordinator
Video camera, VCR and monitor
2 Field assistants
Bookshelves, filing cabinet, etc
1 4xWD vehicle
1 Camera
Herbarium supplies
Insect collection supplies
OUTPUTS
Development and expansion of Environmental Information Base for Dominica.
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
The Dominica Conservation Association
BUDGET
(a) Donor Contribution
US$ 271,000
(b) Government Contribution
EC$ Nil
(c) Total Contribution
US$ 271,000
DONOR CONTRIBUTION (US$)
ITEM
YEAR
a. Equipment
Computer
Video
Herbarium supplies
Insect collection supplies
Office equipment
Training material
Display cases
1 4XWD vehicle
Maintenance
SUB-TOTAL
b. Personnel
1 Project Coordinator
2 Assistants (Field)
SUB-TOTAL
TOTAL US$
Total Donor Contribution US$ 271,000
<section>i</section>
Project number: 5.01
PROJECT AREA
Institutions
PROJECT TITLE
Strengthening and Upgrading the Forestry and Wildlife Division
LOCATION
Botanic Gardens
DURATION
Five (5) years
BENEFICIARIES
Forestry and Wildlife Division and the general public
BACKGROUND
On account of the uniqueness of the composition of the forests of Dominica, the Forestry and Wildlife Division of the Ministry of Agriculture is called upon to provide a variety of services. In order for the Division to enforce existing legislation and enact new ones as well as take up additional responsibilities in the areas of environmental protection, recreation, social forestry and other programmes developed under the National Forestry Action Plan, there must be a significant upgrading and strengthening of the Division.
The Division is currently housed in two separate buildings which is not conducive to efficient and effective management. The conditions at the main office in the Botanic Gardens are deplorable. The working environment is characterized by noise, open offices, desks cramped together and dust. Droppings from the roof have created a very unhealthy environment with many workers suffering from allergies.
Transport for the Division's staff to perform their duties is minimal and this is seriously affecting their effectiveness. Equipment, in particular the absence of a telecommunications system, hinders rapid communication among the staff. Staff training and retraining are also vital to the 20-year development plan prepared by FAO/TFAP for the country.
OBJECTIVES
The general objective of the project is to upgrade and strengthen the Forestry and Wildlife Division of the Ministry of Agriculture in order to enable it to successfully implement the NFAP.
In order to achieve the general objective, the project shall have the following specific objectives:
(a) Construct a new office building at the Botanic Gardens.
(b) Provide adequate equipment, transport and facilities for the Division.
(c) Provide one fellowship for a member of staff to pursue an M.Sc. Degree in Forestry or Natural Resources Management and six fellowships for B.Sc. Degree in Forestry or Natural Resources Management.
(d) Provide fellowships for 15 officers (or scholars) to obtain the Diploma of Forestry at the Eastern Caribbean Institute of Agriculture and Forestry and 9 Forest Rangers to obtain the Certificate in Forestry at the same institute.
(e) Organize training courses to train professional and technical staff in subject areas such as nursery and plantation techniques, natural forest management, agroforestry, watershed management, wildlife and parks management and environmental education.
ACTIVITIES
(a) Construction of a new office building with adequate furniture, equipment and other supplies.
(b) Provision of adequate transport for the Division's staff.
(c) Provision of 31 fellowships for professional and technical training of staff.
(d) Provision of 6 one-week courses in nursery and plantation techniques, natural forest management, agroforestry, watershed management, wildlife and parks management and environmental education.
(e) Recruitment of an experienced tropical forester to assist the Division in the implementation of projects development under TFAP.
OUTPUTS
(a) One officer with M.Sc. Degrees
(b) Six officers with B.Sc. Degrees
(c) Fifteen officers with Diploma in Forestry
(d) Nine officers with Certificates in Forestry
(e) Training of professional and technical staff in nursery and plantation techniques, natural forest management, agroforestry, watershed management, wildlife and parks management and environmental education.
(f) Construction of new office building with adequate furniture, equipment and supplies.
(g) Provision of adequate transport for the Division.
INPUTS
Inputs from Government
Government will provide adequate secretarial and support staff for the Division as well as necessary office equipment and supplies.
Inputs from Donor Agency
(a) One experienced tropical forestry consultant to assist the Division in the implementation of this and other NFAP projects. (36 months)
(b) New office building complete with furniture equipment and supplies.
(c) Four (4) four-wheel drive vehicles.
(d) Provision of 31 fellowships for professional and technical training.
(e) Funds for hosting six one-week training courses.
PROJECT ORGANIZATION AND OPERATION
A detailed work plan for the implementation of the project will be prepared by the forestry consultant within six weeks of assumption of duty. This work plan will be attached to the Project Document as Appendix I and will be considered as part of the Document.
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
The Forestry and Wildlife Division of the Ministry of Agriculture will be the Government implementing agency. This Division will collaborate with other Ministries and Departments on matters of interest to the project.
The Government will provide at least one officer to assist the consultant in the discharge of his responsibilities.
PROJECT REPORTING, REVIEWS AND EVALUATION
Reviews
The project will be subject to reviews as required by the Donor Agency for monitoring project and programme implementation.
Evaluation
The project will be subject to evaluation in accordance with the policies and procedures established for this purpose by the Donor Agency.
The organization, terms of reference and timing of the evaluation will be decided in consultation between the Government, Donor Agency and Executing Agency.
Reports
(a) The work plan will be prepared within six weeks of assumption of duties of the Consultant.
(b) Progress reports will be prepared every three (3) months by the Consultant for transmission by the Executing Agency to the Donor Agency and the Government. These reports will describe the scheduled activities and provide information on the progress of the project.
(c) The consultant will be required to prepare a final report of his work together with recommendations three months prior to the termination of his assignment. This will be subject to review, finalization and submission to the Government and Donor Agency at the conclusion of the project. This report will assess in a concise manner the extent to which the projects activities have been carried out, its outputs produced and its objectives achieved. The report will also make recommendations for any future work arising out of the project.
LENGTH OF PROJECT
The project will be of five (5) years duration but may be extended if required.
BUDGET
The total cost of the project is US$ 1,540,000 (10 years). The budget for the first five years is US$ 1,284,000.
BUDGET FOR DONOR AGENCY (US DOLLARS)
ITEM
YEAR
TOTAL
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
1.0 Personnel
Tropical Forestry Consultant
2.0 Support Staff
Secretary
Driver
3.0 Contractual Services
Preparation of reports
4.0 Fellowship
a. M.Sc. Degree
b. B.Sc. Degree
c. Diploma in Forestry
d. Certificate in Forestry
5.0 Training Courses
Six training courses
6.0 Building
New building (5,000 sq. ft)
Furniture and equipment
Computer and software
Telecom system (1 base station and 10 sets)
7.0 General Operation Expenses
8.0 Transport
Four 4xWD vehicles
9.0 Contingencies
TOTAL
BUDGET FOR GOVERNMENT (US DOLLARS)
ITEM
YEAR
TOTAL
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
mm
1.0 National Staff
Forestry Officer
Drivers
2.0 Maintenance of Vehicles
3.0 Office supplies
4.0 Contingencies
TOTAL
<section>j</section>
Project number: 5.02
PROJECT AREA
Institutions
PROJECT TITLE
Legislation for Natural Resources Management
DURATION
2 months
LOCATION
Roseau
BENEFICIARIES
Forestry Division and the general public
BACKGROUND
Many reports and studies on Dominica have identified the need for the improvement in various areas of natural resource management legislation. Among these reports are the Gane and McHenry Report and the Dominica Country Environmental Profile (1991). In most cases legislation is needed to strengthen the mandate of the Forestry Division and also to ensure that regulations are in place for the operation of national parks.
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
(a) To draft amendments to the National Parks and Protected Areas Act.
(b) To draft amendments to the Forest Ordinance.
(c) To draft Regulations for the National Parks and Protected Areas Act.
(d) To amend the Forestry and Wildlife Act so as to ensure greater protection for wild animals and plants and to facilitate Dominica's accession to CITES.
(e) To draft appropriate orders and regulations under the Fisheries Act to protect mangrove areas in Dominica.
ACTIVITIES
(a) Review reports on natural resource management legislation in Dominica including Gane and McHenry Report and the Dominica Country Environmental Profile.
(b) Research existing Dominican law on natural resource management.
(c) Review draft Fisheries Regulations.
(d) Prepare draft legislation and review with officials of the Ministry of Agriculture, other relevant Government officials and the Attorney General's Department.
INPUTS
1 Legal Consultant (2 man months)
1 Secretary (2 man months)
OUTPUTS
(a) Amended National Parks and Protected Areas Act.
(b) National Parks and Protected Areas Regulations.
(c) Amended Forest Ordinance.
(d) Amended Forestry and Wildlife Act and Regulations.
(e) Promulgation of orders under the Fisheries Act and Regulations to include protection for mangroves.
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
Forestry Division of the Ministry of Agriculture.
OBSERVATIONS
The project should begin in year 1.
BUDGET
1 Legislation Consultant (2 man months)
US$ 18,000
1 Secretary
US$ 2,000
US$ 20,000
<section>k</section>
Appendix I
Country Mission Team, local counterparts and areas of special study
Area of study
Member of Country Mission Team
Local Counterpart
Forestry Economics
Conrad Smith
Eisenhower Douglas
Forest Policy
Narine Lackhan (Team Leader)
Felix Gregoire
Forestry & Related Legislation
Winston McCalla
Ray Harris
Forest Administration
Narine Lackhan
Felix Gregoire
Silviculture
Narine Lackhan
Albert Gallion
Forest Management
Narine Lackhan
Michael Zamore
Agroforestry (Crops)
Geuder Jilg
Donovan Robinson
Agroforestry (Livestock)
Keith Laurie
Errol Harris
Social Forestry & Public Education
Tom Henderson
R. Lecointe
Ronald Charles
National Parks
John Witherspoon
David Williams
Ashton Lugay
Wildlife and Biodiversity
Ernesto Garcia
Adolphus Christian
Lloyd Pascal
Engineering and Logging
Tom Campbell
Hon. Edgar Jerome
Forest Based Industries
David Schumann
Michael Zamore
Land Use and Watershed Management
David Lang
Damian Shillingford
<section>l</section>
Bibliography
CCA/IRF/USAID 1991: Country Environmental Profile for Dominica. Caribbean Conservation Association/Islands Resources Foundation/USAID. 200 pp.
McHenry, T.J.P.; Gane, M. (1988): Report to the Government of Dominica on Forestry, Wildlife and National Parks Policy and Legislation. Rome, FAO, 34 pp. TCP/RLA/661 (A).
<section>m</section>
Abbreviations
CARDI
Caribbean Agricultural Research and Development Institute
CARICOM
Caribbean Community
CFI
Cottage Forest Industries
CITES
Convention of International Trade in Endangered Species of Fauna and Flora
CMT
Country Mission Team
DBMC
Dominica Banana Marketing Corporation
DCA
Dominica Conservation Association
EIA
Environmental Impact Assessment
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GIS
Geographic Information System
NECC
National Environmental Coordinating Committee
NGO
Non Governmental Organization
OECS
Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
TFAP
Tropical Forests Action Programme
TSFS
Three Strata Forage System
