<title>Inter-Regional project for participatory upland conservation and development (Field Document 3) - Bolivia, Burundi, Nepal, Pakistan and Tunisia. A Review of project practice in planning, monitoring and evaluation - Learning from experience</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The study described in this document focuses on one of the most challenging and delicate aspects of the overall experience developed by this inter-regional project over the last five years: the design and implementation of a system for planning, monitoring, and evaluating (PME) systems at both the project and community-levels.
Obviously, project-level and community-level PME must be as closely interconnected as possible. In fact, the rationale of the participatory approach adopted by the project implies a direct exchange and a mutual control between: i) plans and activities developed by concerned user groups/interest groups and communities, and ii) the assistance and services provided by the project.
Project design has entailed performing this task with the fewest human and financial resources as possible, so that achievements of pilot experiences developed in the framework of the project can be expected to be more easily replicable by local actors without international assistance. Though this approach has helped preventing the creation of artificial, project-led mechanisms, it has also entailed some limitations inherent to any real-life, low-budget condition.
In this framework, some weaknesses have been identified in the overall PME experience developed by the project to date. However, the study also clearly shows how an innovative PME practice is being progressively adopted by project field teams, collaborating institutions and grassroots organizations.
This process will be further strengthened and developed during the remaining life of the project, to support local partners in an area whose importance has been universally recognised, but where concrete, positive experiences are still strongly needed.
Luca Fé d'Ostiani - Project Manager, GCP/INT/542/ITA
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
This document is the outcome of collective efforts made towards re-thinking the PUCD Project's experience in project- and community-level planning, monitoring and evaluation, started during the Internal Technical Review Meeting, held in Hammamet, Tunisia, in December 1996. Special thanks go to the colleagues who participated in that initial discussion: Luca Fé d'Ostiani, Antonella Tomassin, Simone Borelli, Frits Ohler, Helle Qwist-Hoffman, Javier Escobedo, Paolo Mori, Shah Rehman, Marylee Kane, Lamine Toumia, Andrea Ambroso, Ali Ben Mabrouk, and Asma M'hamdi.
Together with field-staff and selected members of local communities, most of the above individuals took part in the self-assessment exercise in June and July 1997, on which most of the facts and opinions presented in this document are based. A preliminary draft was reviewed in-depth by Luca Fé' d'Ostiani, Victor Mol, and Frits Ohler, whose comments helped to improve both the content and form of the document. Mark Kanieff provided steady and accurate editorial assistance.
ACRONYMS
APO
Associated Programme Officer
CAP
Community Action Plan (in Nepal)
CTA
Chief Technical Advisor
FAO
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
FRAMES
Focused Rapid Assessment of Monitoring and Evaluation Systems
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
ITRM
Internal Technical Review Meeting
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation
NFT
National Field Team
NGO
Non-governmental Organization
NPD
National Project Director
OTB
Organización Territorial de Base (local grassroots organization, in Bolivia)
PME
Planning, Monitoring, and Evaluation
PRA
Participatory Rural Appraisal
ProDoc
Project Document
PUCD
Participatory Upland Conservation and Development (Project)
SWOL
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Limitations Analysis
<section>3</section>
Executive summary
Since its inception, the FAO/Italy Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development (PUCD Project) has been a pilot, process-oriented, learning initiative, based on an iterative process of assessment, planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation, and re-planning Based on the preliminary experiences of the project's National Field Teams (NET), a specialist consultant developed, in 1994, a framework for designing and operating a comprehensive planning, monitoring, and evaluation (PME) system. NFTs in four participating countries (Bolivia, Nepal, Pakistan, and Tunisia) have used this framework to develop a PME system fitting local needs, assets, and constraints.
Discussions held at the 1996 PUCD Project's Internal Technical Review Meeting revealed some strengths and weaknesses of this ongoing experience, as well as significant differences in the NFTs' experience with the system and in opinions about its actual performance, usefulness, and adaptability to the local environment It was thus deemed necessary to conduct a more in-depth review of the PME practice in each country, so that areas for improvement could be identified.
The present study is meant to contribute to fulfilling this need by pursuing the following objectives:
1 To describe the initial design of the project- and community-level PME systems and the variants actually implemented by each NET.
2 To assess the implementation of the PME systems in terms of their overall performance, usefulness, and adaptation to the local institutional and social environment, according to the opinions of project management, staff and participants (i.e. self-assessment);
3. To discuss common problems in PME practice elicited from the above mentioned self-assessment exercise; and
4. To develop technical recommendations for improving the design and operation of the PME systems.
The methodology of the study is based on an adapted version of the Focused Rapid Assessment of Monitoring and Evaluation Systems (FRAMES), developed in the early 1990s by the Evaluation and Research Department of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). A twofold method strategy has been adopted, including:
a) a review of all relevant documents produced by the project's NFTs and the Coordination Unit (mainly for achieving objectives 1 and 3); and
b) interviews with project management, field-staff, and local participants (for achieving objective 2).
In this report, research findings have been organized into three chapters.
Chapter 1 provides an overview of the PUCD Project's PME systems, covering:
· the identification of the managerial needs the PME systems are meant to address;
· a "normative" description of the framework of the PME systems, including the different components (i.e. project- and community-level PME) and modules (i.e. planning, monitoring, process evaluation, and result evaluation);
· a review of the variations in the design and operation of the PME systems developed by each national component, according to local needs, assets, and constraints.
Chapter 2 summarises the results of the self-assessment exercises in the form of four detailed self-assessment profiles, one for each national component. These profiles are meant to provide detailed diagnostic indications for future improvement of critical aspects of each local PME system.
Chapter 3 provides a comparative discussion of major self-assessment findings, whose main conclusions can be summarised as follows:
1) During the second phase of the project, the four NFTs made major efforts towards developing sound project- and community-level PME systems.
2) All NFTs positively evaluated the usefulness of outputs of both project- and community-level PME practice, as well as the adaptation of the overall system to the local environment.
3) There are some general problems regarding the functioning of the different components and modules of the PME systems, specifically:
· Priority-setting mechanisms built into project-level planning have not always succeeded in preventing over-planning (i.e. planning commitments could not be fulfilled with the available resources and time).
· Most NFTs have encountered difficulties in using time allocation indicators, as suggested by the consultant, for project-level process evaluation, and some NFTs have questioned the relevance and validity of these indicators.
· To date, project-level PME systems have paid insufficient attention to assessing the project's environmental, social and economic impact.
· According to project management, the field workers' insufficient skills in data collection have been a major constraint in implementing project-level monitoring and evaluation (M&E) practice. This has often been complicated by the field-staffs misunderstandings about the function and meaning of M&E.
· Project managers have also reported difficulties in terms of the field staff's ability to act as facilitators of community-level PME exercises
· All NFTs have found that the analysis and application of project-level M&E information were inadequate.
· The field-staff in Bolivia and Nepal have reported that time requirements are a major constraint in community-level PME practice.
· According to all NFTs, local participants and communities are not skilled or motivated enough to begin organizing and implementing autonomously their community-level PME practice This opinion, however, contradicts the participants' perception of their own performance in this area.
· Based on these conclusions, the following operational recommendations have been developed with the aim of improving the PME practice of the PUCD Project:
Stricter priority-setting mechanisms should he built into the project-level planning module. To this end, information on cost-effectiveness and time required for different activities should he elicited from evaluation exercises and considered, together with technical, social and institutional factors, in assessing the actual feasibility of each activity to he included in local workplans.
Project-level process-evaluation techniques should he simplified. When needed, time-allocation analysis should be replaced by simpler qualitative exercises, such as the Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Limitations analysis.
The Coordination Unit and the NFTs expected to participate in the third phase of the project should reconsider the possibility of including an impact evaluation module in the project-level PME system.
The supervision of data collection by field workers should be strengthened. This supervision should have a "formative" orientation (i.e. offering field workers the opportunity to consolidate and upgrade their knowledge, skills, and attitudes).
Higher priority should be given to the processing of M&E data. Whenever possible, this responsibility should he assigned on a full-time basis to one member of the NFT, who should possess the necessary skills or receive appropriate training. If this is not feasible, well defined M&E data processing tasks should be included in the terms of reference of the CTA or other senior staff, and the time needed to perform these tasks should he properly considered in project workplans and individual agendas.
All M&E reports, whether formal or informal, should include a number of operational recommendations for re-planning relevant activities. After thorough discussion with the concerned staff, these recommendations should he fully taken into consideration in designing, programming, and implementing subsequent activities.
Staff members contributing to data collection should receive timely feedback of the findings of evaluation in special sessions or workshops. Appropriate facilitation techniques should he used to stimulate field workers to interpret this information and to improve its implementation
The Coordination Unit, in collaboration with centres of excellence in this area, should facilitate the preparation of a comprehensive training package on community-level PME. This training package should address the learning needs of both field-staff and leaders of selected grassroots organizations.
· During the third phase of the project, the role of project staff in the operation of community-level PME exercises should he progressively re-oriented. Less work and time should he invested in organizing and implementing community-level PME events, while more emphasis should be placed on providing training and formative supervision on participatory PME to local interest groups and grassroots organizations.
The responsibility for organizing and implementing community-level PME events should he progressively handed over to trained community members. However, methodological backstopping should continue to he provided to interest groups and grassroots organizations. Arrangements should also he made with national centres with relevant expertise, to ensure that they will continue to provide their assistance after the project's termination.
<section>4</section>
Introduction
Background and rationale of the study
Objectives of the study
Methodology
This report
Background and rationale of the study
The FAO/Italy Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development (PUCD Project) aims at identifying and field-testing strategies, methods and techniques for promoting and consolidating people's participation in the integrated management of upland watersheds The project was begun in 1992 and, until 1997, was implemented in two phases in selected watersheds of Bolivia, Burundi, Nepal, Pakistan and Tunisia A two-year third phase is currently being conducted in the three countries that the Tripartite Review Mission indicated as the most promising for institutionalising the project experience at the national level (Bolivia, Nepal and Tunisia)
Since its inception, the PUCD Project has been a pilot, process-oriented, learning initiative It was designed to be flexible in terms of the nature and type of activities and outputs An iterative process of assessment, planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation, and re-planning has been developed to ensure that field activities and specific outputs are consistent with the needs of participating communities and the capabilities of local counterparts and partner institutions^1.
^1 See COO/94/1. For the sake of brevity, all references to project materials included in this paper are denoted using the following code: the PUCD field component (COO = Coordination Unit; PUB = publications; BOL = Bolivia; NEP = Nepal; PAK = Pakistan; and TUN = Tunisia); the year of preparation (94, 95, 96, etc.); and the month of delivery (1 = January; 2 = February; 3 = March; etc.). The list of documents consulted is presented in Annex II.
During the second phase of the project (1994-97), a specialist consultant (the author of the present report) provided technical support to National Field Teams (NFTs) and the Coordination Unit in developing systems for internal planning, monitoring and evaluation (PME). Based on a needs-assessment, and following a preliminary reconnaissance to Bolivia, the specialist consultant prepared a framework for these systems in 1994 ^2. This framework was meant to be structured enough for establishing a common PME practice among the different field components of the project, yet flexible enough to be adaptable to the variety of institutional and social environments
^2 See COO/94/8.
From 1994 to 1996, a number of field missions to Bolivia, Nepal, Pakistan and Tunisia allowed this framework to be adapted to each specific national component ^3 During these missions, interaction with the NFTs facilitated the development of several amendments to the consultant's initial proposal. Further suggestions for improvement were provided by discussions held during yearly Internal Technical Review Meetings (ITRM) and informal exchanges among NFTs. The PME systems implemented in each country can thus be considered as the outcome of a joint elaboration process.
^3 Unfortunately, it was not possible to directly involve the NFT in Burundi in this process. In fact, two missions of the consultant to this country were canceled due to prevailing security conditions. Consequently, the NFT in Burundi autonomously developed its own project-level PME practice. However, the unique conditions in which the Burundi NFT's PME experience developed and the lack of substantial documentation of this experience led to the decision to not include Burundi in this review.
Discussions held at the 1996 PUCD project's ITRM allowed common strengths and weaknesses of this experience to be identified ^4. The following strengths were identified; high flexibility and adaptability to local conditions; progressive improvement through experience; contribution to better planning; involvement of field-staff; improved availability of information on the functioning of the project and its achievements; contribution to local capacity-building; and support to the dissemination of the project's approach. The main weaknesses included: technical problems in the operation of the system; controversial value of certain key indicators; limited reliability and validity of data from monitoring and evaluation (M&E); uncertain sustainability at the institutional level; insufficient investment in the operation of the system, unsatisfactory performance in processing and applying M&E data, and inconsistent community involvement.
^4 Se COO/97/7.
Discussions also revealed significant differences in the NFTs' experience with the system and in opinions about its actual performance, usefulness and adaptability to the local environment It was thus deemed necessary to conduct a more in-depth review of the PME experience carried out to date in each country in order to identify areas for improvement. This review was found to be especially urgent in view of the termination of Phase 2 of the project and the start-up of Phase 3, aimed at replicating the project's approach on a wider scale and at it institutionalising it. Establishing a PME system adapted to the institutional culture and operational capability of national counterparts was, in fact, identified as a basic task to be carried out by the project after August 1997 (the termination date of Phase 2).
The present study is meant to contribute to this endeavour by reviewing the NFTs' experience to date with PME in Bolivia, Nepal, Pakistan and Tunisia, based on the opinions of actors in the field-projects (managers, staff and members of participating grassroots organizations). Its main purpose is to develop technical recommendations (covering both amendments in the system's design and operational requirements) for improving the NFTs' PME practice during the forthcoming third phase
Objectives of the study
This study focuses on the PME experience gained by four NFTs (i.e. Bolivia, Nepal, Pakistan and Tunisia) from 1994 to 1997.
The specific objectives of the study are as follows:
1. To describe the initial design of the project- and community-level PME systems and the variants actually implemented by each NFT involved.
2. To assess the implementation of the above PME systems in terms of their overall performance, usefulness, and adaptation to the local institutional and social environment, according to the opinions of project management, staff, and participants (i.e. self-assessment).
3. To discuss common problems in PME practice elicited from the above mentioned self-assessment exercise.
4 To propose technical recommendations for improving the design and operation of the PME systems
Methodology
The methodology of the study is based on an adapted version of the Focused Rapid Assessment of Monitoring and Evaluation Systems (FRAMES), developed in the early 1990s by the Evaluation and Research Department of the International Fund for Agricultural Development ^5 A twofold research method has been adopted, including:
^5 See O. N. Feinstein. 1993. Focused Rapid Assessment of Monitoring and Evaluation Systems (FRAMES). IFAD M&E Division Special Studies. Report N° 0449. IFAD: Rome.
a) a review of all relevant PME documents (mainly for achieving objectives 1 and 3); and
b) interviews with NET management, field-staff, and local participants (for achieving objective 2).
a) Review of PME documents
The documents reviewed included the following PME materials produced from 1993 to 1997 by the four NFTs and the Coordination Unit:
* PME design documents;
* mission reports by consultants;
* relevant materials submitted or produced during the 1995 and 1996 ITRMs;
* PME manuals and guidelines prepared for/by NFTs; and
* internal monitoring and evaluation reports prepared by NFTs.
Based on these materials, the overall framework of the PUCD Project's PME was outlined, and profiles of the systems actually implemented in each field-project were prepared. This review also contributed to identifying elements to be considered in the discussion of self-assessment findings.
b) Interviews with PME actors
These interviews were conducted to obtain the opinions of project management [Chief Technical Advisers (CTAs), National Project Directors (NPD), and the staff in-charge of M&E activities (M&E Officers)], and of a sample of field-staff and participants, on the following aspects of the PME system:
· functioning (i.e performance related to the collection, storage, analysis, feedback, and use of PME information).
· usefulness (i.e. relevance of PME information to project- or community-level decision-making); and
· adaptation to the local environment (including participation of different PME actors and replicability of certain elements of the system without assistance from the project).
Different means of data collection were used with each of the above categories of respondents. A questionnaire, including both scoring-scale questions and open-ended questions, was submitted individually to CTAs, NPDs, and M&E Officers. The perceptions of field-staff were collected through group exercises in strengths and weaknesses analysis. The participants' opinions were obtained through focus-group interviews (involving at least two different groups of project participants for each national component).
Processing of interview data included;
· a quantitative analysis of scoring-scale questions included in the questionnaire for project management. Average scores were calculated for each item of the questionnaire and for the overall performance and usefulness of project-level and community-level PME ^6; and
^6 Quantitative data generated by scoring-scale questions are presented in table format in Annex I.
· a qualitative analysis of answers to open-ended question and statements from strengths and weaknesses analysis group exercises and focus-group interviews. To this end, several techniques were used, including cross-referencing of statements, identification and classification of key themes, and validation by triangulation.
Based on this information, self-assessment profiles of the PME practice developed by each NFT were created. Subsequently, these profiles were compared with the aim of identifying and resolving technical problems affecting PME practice
This report
In this report, research findings have been organized into three chapters.
Chapter I provides an overview of the PUCD Project's PME system design, covering:
· the managerial needs the system was meant to address;
· a "normative" description of the different components and elements of the system;
· a review of the variations in the design, subsequently developed for adjusting the system to the specific needs, assets and constraints of each national component.
Chapter 2 summarises the results of the evaluation exercise in the form of four self-assessment profiles, one for each national component. These profiles are meant to provide detailed diagnostic indications for future improvement of critical aspects of each local PME system, This detailed presentation addresses the specific needs of the concerned NFTs. Certain readers of this document may not be interested in such an in-depth analysis and are advised to move on to Chapter 3.
Chapter 3 describes the main comparative findings of the study and provides general recommendations.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 1 - Design and implementation of the PUCD project's PME systems
1.1. General framework of the PME systems
1.2. Bolivia
1.3. Nepal
1.4. Pakistan
1.5 Tunisia
1.1. General framework of the PME systems
To comply with the open-ended and flexible design of the Project Document (ProDoc), the PUCD Project's PME systems should be able to:
· enable local staff to prepare sound and detailed workplans, focusing on specific micro-outputs to be pursued in a given period of time, relevant actions and organizational aspects;
· ensure timely monitoring of the progress made towards achieving the micro-outputs specified by the workplans;
· extract lessons learned from implementation, through simple "formative" evaluation exercises;
· promote application of lessons learned to further planning.
Further requisites are posed by the participatory approach. These include:
· enabling the participating communities and interest groups to identify relevant and feasible activities to be carried out with assistance provided by the project (or other partners);
· supporting local participants in ensuring the appropriate follow-up of the implementation process;
· contributing to participants' "learning-by-doing process" by facilitating self-evaluation and re-planning practices.
To meet both sets of requisites, the general framework of the PME system prepared by the consultant in 1994 included both a project-level and a community-level component.
a) Project-level PME
This component aims to support NFTs in planning, following-up, and assessing the project's performance and the achievement of micro-outputs. Project-level PME is based on simple conventional PME techniques and tools and is organized into the following four modules:
· The planning module facilitates the identification of micro-outputs to be achieved, major steps in implementation, and tentative deadlines for achievement. It includes exercises for priority-setting, feasibility analysis, logical-framework (means/end) analysis, and programming.
· The monitoring module facilitates the continuous adjustment of the project's workplans to the constraints encountered in implementation. It also allows for the assessment of timeliness in implementation. It is based on regular monitoring meetings during which the project staff analyses the progress made and the causes for delay.
· The process-evaluation module facilitates the periodical assessment of implementation. It allows the project's and the partners' inputs to be reviewed in terms of both quantity (based on lime-allocation indicators, see Box 1) and quality (as perceived by staff and participants). Its main output is the identification of strengths and weaknesses in implementation.
BOX 1 - Time-allocation indicators for quantitative process evaluation
INDICATORS
PROXIES FOR
Average no. of staff involved
Project's commitment to implementation
Total hours contributed by staff
Project's work input
Average no, of participants involved
Participation in implementation
Total hours contributed by participants
Participants' work input
Ratio of staff to participants in terms of total hours (total hours staff/total hours participants)
Efficiency of the participatory process
· The result-evaluation module facilitates the assessment of the preliminary achievements of project implementation. Based on the specific needs of each NFT, which may vary by location and time, this module may include exercises for evaluating the following results, based on relevant indicators:
- environmental changes (e.g., re-vegetation of rangelands; see example from Pakistan in Box 2);
- social changes (e.g., capacity-building of grassroots organizations, women's participation);
- changes in people's competence or behaviour (e.g., adoption of "conservation-by-use" practices, management of community nurseries).
- financial results of income-generating activities and technical results of field trials (e.g., introduction of new species or varieties, innovative measures for natural resource management).
These exercises may be carried out just once or repeated several times during the project. Their main output lies in distinguishing those aspects of the project's technical contributions that work best
BOX 2
Indicators for assessing environmental changes related to project activities identified by the NFT in Pakistan (February 1995)
Agricultural land protected by bunds (surface)
Agricultural land serviced by cemented channels
Depth of the water table in selected wells
Surface of plots afforested with Tamarix
Survival rate of Tamarix plantations
Surface of plots afforested with saltbush
Survival rate of saltbush plantations
No. of trees planted (by species) in special locations (roads, irrigation channels, compounds)
Survival rate of trees planted (by species)
% cover by species under different treatments
% composition of vegetation under different treatments
% overall cover under different treatments
Biomass (kg) per acre under different treatments
b) Community-level PME
Community-level PME aims to support interest groups and communities in learning how to better orient and implement their initiatives. It is based on participatory action-research methods similar to Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA).
Community level PME is organized into the following three modules
· The planning module, is based on the initial participatory appraisal or the subsequent participatory-evaluation exercises It is meant to facilitate the identification of priority needs, the design of relevant activities, the assessment of their feasibility, and the preparation of a simple workplan answering the basic planning questions of "What?", "What for?", "How?", "By whom?", and "By when?". The participatory techniques and tools for this module include: problem-tree analysis, priority-ranking participatory feasibility analysis matrixes, and participatory planning matrixes
· The participatory monitoring module includes exercises conducted during implementation for facilitating participants awareness of the progress made and of the difficulties met in putting into practice initial planning decisions, and for adjusting the process accordingly The main technique used is participatory monitoring meetings
· The participatory evaluation module allows participants to review the work process and results, to extract lessons learned from implementation, and to plan the continuation of activities accordingly. Relevant techniques and tools include: Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Limitations (SWOL) analysis; Problems, Causes and Solutions analysis; observational walks; slide; language; community-based experiments; participatory mapping of changes; scoring of key indicators; and ex-post participatory cost-benefit analysis
Since 1994, the above general framework of the PUCD Project's PME systems has been progressively adjusted according to the specific needs, assets, and constraints of each project field component. ^7 As a result of this process, the individual PME systems that have been actually implemented significantly differ among the four field components. The key features of each of these systems are summarised in the following sections. Some examples of the techniques, tools, and procedures adopted are provided in boxes.
^7 Adjustment of the system's framework to local conditions was facilitated through start-up and follow-up consultancies. During start-up consultancies, the system's framework was discussed in detail with project management and staff, and upgraded on the basis of their suggestions. Paper and computerized tools were developed for data collection and storage, as were procedures for data analysis, and for the feedback and subsequent use of information, taking into account users' preferences. The outcomes of these activities were presented to the NTT in training workshops, aimed at clarifying the rationale and objectives of each exercise included in the system, and at transferring the relevant skills for data collection and processing. In subsequent follow-up missions, the experience undergone in the six to twelve months following the start-up mission was reviewed with project management (including, when appropriate, staff members in-charge of coordinating PME operations) and
staff. The system's shortcomings were identified, and amendments were made, according to users' demands and suggestions. When appropriate, original ideas developed by NFTs were integrated into the system. Furthermore, the staff in-charge was provided with additional training on how to design project- and community-level exercises addressing specific evaluation needs not covered by the initial design.
1.2. Bolivia^8
^8 The summary of the PME system established by the NFT in Bolivia is based on observations made by the consultant during his last visit to the project (June 1997) and on the following sources: BOL/93/10; BOL/93/11; BOL/94/2: BOL/94/7; BOL/94/10b; BOL/95/1; BOL/95/6; BOL/95/8; BOL/95/12a; BOL/95/12b; BOL/95/12c; BOL/96/4; BOL/96/6b; BOL/96/10a; BOL/96/11a; and BOL/96/11d.
Bolivia was the site of the preliminary field-testing of the PUCD Project's PME framework; thus the Bolivian version of the system most closely resembles the initial design.
Project-level planning is carried out every six months during evaluation and re-planning workshops with the NFTs and representatives of local communities. During these workshops, staff members assess the possibility of continuing established activities and of beginning new ones, according to the findings of evaluation exercises (see below). Priorities are established, together with micro-outputs to be achieved in the subsequent six-month term. For each micro-output, a list of relevant actions is prepared, and tentative deadlines are set. Responsibilities for implementation are shared among team members, according to the specific content and location of each activity. This information is entered a micro-output file (see example in Box 3), and all of these files are entered into a workplan database.
To facilitate project-level monitoring, the staff in-charge of each micro-output provides the M&E Officer with a monthly progress report on the work completed. Relevant data are entered into the workplan database, and the updated file is printed.
Box 3 Example of a filled-out micro-output file (NFT, Bolivia, 1997)
MICRO-OUTPUT FILE
Micro-output: Coverage of a 0.25 ha fruit tree orchard parcel
Location: Floripondio
Staff in-charge: Sixto Hernandez
Support staff: none
Start-up date: October 1997
Expected date of completion: March 1998
Interested farmers
Working area
Beginning
End
Beginning
End
Cayo Martinez
Cayo Martinez
0.25 ha
0.25 ha
Date
Action
Staff
Participants
Costs
N
Hrs
Tot
N
Hrs
Tot
Cash
Input
Sept 97
Site identification and implementation agreement
Sept 97
Site inspection and soil analysis
Oct 97
Soil preparation and clearing
2 kg of soya seeds
Jan 97
Sowing
Mar 98
Weeding and evaluation of the plantation
Process-evaluation summary:
Expected date of completion:
31 March 1998
Actual date of completion:
29 March 1998
Number of initial participants
Number of final participants:
Hours spent by staff:
Hours spent by participants:
Efficiency:
Cash input:
None
Material input:
2 kg of soya seeds
Micro-outputs suffering from significant delays are highlighted. A monthly monitoring meeting is held to review this information. The staff in-charge and the managers analyse the problems and the causes for delay and identify remedial actions. The overall workplan is adjusted accordingly.
Process-evaluation is conducted during biannual evaluation and re-planning workshops, focusing on the degree of completion of micro-outputs and the time invested by staff and community (as per time-allocation indicators collected through the above micro-output planning and monitoring file; see Box 3). The M&E Officer analyses field-data for each type of activity and location and, using simple computer-generated graphs, summarises findings in a process-evaluation report, which includes open-ended questions to be answered by workshop participants (i.e. field-staff and representatives of grassroots organizations). Based on these questions, a discussion takes place, during which qualitative elements of project activities observed by field-staff and other workshop participants are used to interpret quantitative data. The results of this discussion are applied to re-planning for the subsequent six-month term.
One specific project-level result-evaluation exercise is carried out every six months, covering different types of project outcomes, such as: capacity-building; functioning of rotating funds; community participation; acceptability and effectiveness of conservation measures for soil and other natural resources; use of incentives for adoption of conservation measures; and women's participation in project activities ^9. The design of these exercises begins with the identification of key indicators. Data collection tools are prepared, and data analysis procedures are defined. The staff in-charge carries out data collection for relevant micro-outputs. Findings are discussed during the evaluation and re-planning workshops, following the same procedure used for process-evaluation.
^9 A case study on the acceptability of the project's approach in a pilot community was also carried out in 1996 (see BOL/96/10a).
Community-level evaluation and planning are usually jointly carried out during a one-day annual workshop held in selected communities of the project area. The workshop is attended by members of interest groups, staff in-charge, and community members at large The interest group members present the work done during the year; an SWOL analysis is carried in small groups assisted by project staff (see Box 4)^10.
^10 In the initial design, field tested in 1994, the initial presentation of the work done was meant to be backed-up by a slide-language exercise (see BOL/94/10b).
The results of this exercise are presented in a plenary session, during which the concerned interest groups make decisions on the continuation and/or modification of ongoing activities. New activities can also be proposed during this session. Eventually, a plan for the collaboration between the project and the community's interest groups is drafted by means of a participatory planning matrix This plan is submitted to project management, fine-tuned according to the results of a technical feasibility analysis (carried out by project resource-persons) ^11, and re-discussed with the concerned groups.
^11 With regard to income-generating activities, the project has developed a method to carry out ex-ante cost-benefit analysis in a participatory fashion.
Regarding participatory community-level monitoring, time constraints prevented the project from establishing a regular practice. However, several interest groups have autonomously developed some form of informal monitoring practice. Furthermore, the project extension staff provides technical follow-up to the implementation of activities on an individual basis. Only in cases of major operational problems or disagreements are meetings scheduled between the interest group, extension staff, advisors, and project management.
BOX 4
SWOL analysis of the experience with the potato seedlings rotational fund (Bella Vista, Bolivia, October 1997).
WHAT WAS DONE WELL?
WHAT PROBLEMS WERE ENCOUNTERED?
HOW CAN THESE PROBLEMS BE OVERCOME IN THE FUTURE?
WHAT CONSTRAINTS CANNOT BE CONTROLLED?
1. Income increased by 75%,
1. Production was affected by excessive rain.
1. Sow before the beginning of the rainy season. Look for parcels with better drainage.
1. Weather
2. Potato seed storage facilities (silos) were built.
2. Storage facilities were far from the field, making the carrying of the seedlings to the silos difficult.
2. Build smaller individual silos, close to the parcels.
2. The high cost of building individual silos
3. Soil conservation measures proved to be effective.
3. A lot of labour was needed.
3. Encourage mutual help among group members.
3. Time availability
4. Money borrowed on credit was paid back by most group members.
4. Some group members withdrew from the credit scheme.
4. Develop stricter rules.
4. Insufficient power to enforce the rules
1.3. Nepal^12
^12 The summary of the PME system established by the NFT in Nepal is based on observations made by the consultant during his last visit to the project (September 1996) and on the following sources: NEP/95/10a; NEP/95/10b; NEP/96/4c; NEP/96/10d; NEP/96/10e; NEP/96/12a; NEP/97/2a; NEP/97/2b; NEP/97/7; and NEP/97/10.
In Nepal, both project- and community-level PME focus on Community Action Plans (CAP), which consist of lists of activities developed by members of User Groups and field-staff according to findings of participatory appraisal or evaluation exercises ^13
^13 One major consequence of this approach is that PME focuses on field activities; little systematic PME is done for process-oriented activities such as PRA, research, training, and preparation of reports.
Project-level planning consists of assessing which CAP activities actually match the criteria for project assistance ^14. After this preliminary screening, an agreement for implementation is prepared for all major activities (i.e. those requiring fairly large amounts of input). The agreements specify mutual obligations, main steps in implementation, modalities for delivering inputs and an implementation schedule. Relevant information is eventually entered into a CAP database, which is used for facilitating the monthly planning of field-workers' activities and for monitoring (see Box 5).
^14 These criteria include: i) being promoted by "active" (properly functioning) User Groups, ready to engage in a cost-sharing arrangement; and (ii) being technically, socially, financially and environmentally feasible, according to a simple ex-ante assessment carried out by the project's field staff.
Information for project-level monitoring is collected by area facilitators from field assistants and group promoters during area-level meetings ^15 and entered into the CAP database. This information is reported to all project staff during meetings, which are the most important element in project-level monitoring. In these meetings, NFT members analyse field information on each activity included in the CAP database. Problems met in implementation are discussed, and adjustments are agreed upon on an as-needed basis. Finally, staff assignments for the forthcoming month are made according to the findings of the monitoring exercise.
^15 In Nepal, the project's watershed has been divided into a number of "areas" roughly corresponding to Village Development Committees (VDC administrative) territories. A team consisting of a coordinator, one field assistant and one or more group promoters is entrusted with the responsibility of facilitating implementation of project activities in each of these areas. See section 2.2.
Project-level evaluation takes different forms. Project-level process evaluation is carried out through exercises in Strengths and Weaknesses analysis in the framework of Project Self-Evaluation Workshops. Furthermore, based on monitoring information, the NPD and staff members monthly evaluate, in an informal and participatory fashion, the overall quality of the work performed in a particular area ^16. Systematic project-level evaluation of results includes the annual evaluation of overall project achievements and the evaluation of the functioning of User Groups. An in-depth evaluation of the most popular physical activity, water source protection/drinking water supply ^17, is also conducted.
^16 Use of time-allocation indicators for project-level process evaluation was not considered appropriate by the NFT in Nepal.
^17 Due to time and personnel constraints, it has not been possible to fully implement other result evaluation exercises designed with the support of external consultants (such as the "Technical evaluation of community plantation", the "Distributed planting material survey" and the "Economic evaluation of improved goat production").
BOX 5 - Planning and monitoring of participatory implementation in Nepal
The participatory planning exercise carried out in Bhusunde Khola in 1995/1996 allowed for the formulation of 26 CAPs including 226 activities. Of these, 96 physical activities and 33 training activities were assessed as feasible and became the subject of a project/User Group implementation agreement.
To ensure the timely delivery of technical assistance and material inputs consistent with the actual progress made in implementing each initiative, a simple CAP monitoring system was established. This monitoring system relied on a Community Action Plan database, designed by the staff member in-charge of M&E activities. It consisted of an Excel spreadsheet including the following main columns:
* Village Development Committees and ward in which the hamlet is located
* Name of the hamlet
* Name of the activity
* Number of expected beneficiaries
* Contribution of User Group(s)
* Contribution of the project
* Other line-agencies involved
* Total estimated cost
* Date of agreement
* Date of expected completion
* Monthly status of the activity
This information was integrated by a second database, developed by the project's Administrative Assistant, for the purpose of monitoring the financial aspects of implementation, such as the purchase and delivery of materials.
Both databases were updated every month on the basis of information collected by mid-level technicians, field assistants and group promoters, through meetings with concerned User Groups and on-site observations. Monthly cross-tabulation of data entered into the two spreadsheets allowed several monitoring tables to be prepared, the most important of which were the tables "status of on-going activities" and "delivery of inputs".
Although problems in information flow often affected the reliability of this information and increased the time needed to keep the databases up-to-date, this procedure was found to be instrumental in facilitating the proper management of the project's field operations at the community-level.
Community-level monitoring also focuses on activities being implemented. In addition to the informal monitoring carried out autonomously by all villagers, the following three aspects of implementation are followed-up by concerned User Groups and reported to project field-staff: the time required by each User Group member to complete a particular activity; the quantity of local material provided in the implementation of physical activities, and, whenever applicable, the income generated.
The NFT began to facilitate community-level evaluation in October 1996, based on the design of participatory evaluation and re-planning workshops jointly developed by local staff and external consultants. Participatory evaluation exercises carried out in these workshops start with an assessment of the effects of project implementation, based on the participatory mapping of the changes taking place in the community as a result of CAP implementation (see Box 6). This is followed by a Strengths, Weaknesses and Opportunities analysis also covering a self-assessment of the User Groups' performance. Based on the findings of these exercises, a re-planning session is held. Between November 1997 and January 1998, 40 User Groups went through participatory evaluation and re-planning workshops ^18.
^18 Significantly enough, after their first exposure to workshops facilitated by project staff, most User Groups preferred to facilitate these exercises themselves, with project staff acting as observers and resource persons.
BOX 6
Effects of project activities as identified by User Group members during a change-mapping evaluation exercise carried out in Majghaon (Bhusunde Khola watershed, Nepal, October 1996)
ACTIVITY
CHANGES
Forest management
easier access to fuelwood
more rational use of forest resources
increased group cohesion
increase in User Group's funds
Distribution and plantation of forest, fodder, and grass seeds and seedlings
increase in milk production
use of wasteland
more widespread concern, within the community, for tree planting
Compost-making and Vegetable gardening
increased awareness of the importance of women's self-organization
time saved (manure being available on the site)
supply of healthy and fresh vegetables
income generation, increase in User Group's savings increase in vegetable production
Water-source Protection
supply of clean water
decrease of diarrhoeal diseases
time saved
identification of a means of sharing the work according to the activity's expected benefits
increase in the quantity of water from the source
use of surplus water for livestock-watering and irrigation
1.4. Pakistan^19
^19 The summary of the PME system established by the NFT in Pakistan is based on observations made by the consultant during his last visit to the project (October 1996) and on the following sources: PAK/94/10; PAK/95/3b; PAK/95/8a; PAK/95/9; PAK/95/10b; PAK/95/11; PAK/95/12b; PAK/96/7b; PAK/96/11a; PAK/97/4; PAK/97/7a; and PAK/97/7h.
The PME system began to be implemented in February 1995, during the consultant's start-up mission. Difficulties met in implementation and ideas provided by the CTA led to the initial design being amended, as described below ^20
^20 With the end of Phase 2, the project experience in Pakistan is expected to conclude in October 1998.
As in other countries, project-level planning is carried out by breaking down the ProDoc outputs into a number of specific micro-outputs, to be achieved during the year (in some cases, extending beyond the year). Project management identifies key steps in achieving each micro-output and develops a tentative schedule with the staff in-charge. This practice is limited to "core" project activities, including activities related to natural resource management, income-generation, improvement of farming systems and development of basic services. A less detailed plan is prepared for "regular" activities related to the promotion of the participatory process (such as Monthly Village Meetings), staff development, research, publications, and networking
Project-level monitoring is carried-out in monthly staff monitoring meetings, focusing on qualitative information collected by field-staff through participant observation. During these meetings, planned sequences of actions and implementation schedules are reviewed in light of the progress made and the difficulties met
Based on an initial test period, project management concluded that process-evaluation using time-allocation indicators was too complex, not highly reliable, and only partially relevant It was thus decided to focus on qualitative elements of the implementation process (staff and villagers' perceptions)
In accordance with the initial PME design, several project-level result-evaluation exercises have been implemented, including a periodical assessment of Men's and Women's Village Associations ^21, a yearly assessment of the progress in the implementation of Village Upland Use Plans, and a continuous supervision of the functioning of community nurseries. Furthermore, a yearly monitoring of the ground-water level in the project area has been performed since 1994.
^21 The project has adapted the organization of its staff to the local custom of segregating women by operating through separate Men's and Women's Teams and promoting the formation of gender-based Village Associations.
Community-level planning is carried out by facilitating the preparation of comprehensive Village Action Plans. These include rangeland rehabilitation activities (the so-called "Village Upland Use Plan") and other development initiatives identified by the local people during the initial PRA and subsequent evaluation exercises. For each of these activities, detailed planning has been conducted, specifying the objectives, modalities of implementation, participants, cost-sharing and time schedule. Area conventions involving several communities collaborating with the project have also been organized to discuss and compare Village Action Plans.
Community-level monitoring is carried out in regular monthly monitoring meetings, whose main purpose is to identify the progress in implementation and solutions to problems affecting this progress. Simple visual record-keeping tools have been developed by the Women's Team in order to facilitate the involvement of illiterate participants.
Several community-level evaluation techniques have been developed by both Men's and Women's Teams in order to help villagers in assessing the process and results of the work done with the support of the project. These include: participatory cost-benefit analysis, (applied by the Women's Team to assess the results of income-generating activities; see Box 7); identification and scoring of key indicators (used by both Men's and Women's Associations to evaluate the of activities for rangeland development and the improvement of farming systems; see Box 8); problem causes and solution matrixes (applied to identify bottlenecks in the implementation process and relevant solutions (see Box 9), and results, comments and recommendations matrixes (used to identify ways of improving the relevance and effectiveness of the activities according to the villagers' perceptions)
BOX 7
Participatory cost-benefit analysis of a poultry rearing scheme (Pakistan, February 1995)
COSTS
BENEFITS
Netting
25 rupees
120 eggs/month x 12 months x 2 rupees each
2,880 rupees
Lime
40 rupees
Feeder Drinker 12 Chickens
65 rupees
10 layers to be sold x 100 rupees each
1,000 rupees
70 rupees
900 rupees
TOTAL INCOME
3,880 rupees
Service Fees (10% credit interest rate)
110 rupees
Feed
1,200 rupees
EARNINGS
Veterinary care
160 rupees
Total income
Labour (estimate)
530 rupees
Total costs =
780 rupees
TOTAL COST
3,100 rupees
Slide-presentations and interactive slide language sessions have also been organized by the Women's Team with the aim of visually demonstrating and discussing the impact of rangeland rehabilitation and water harvesting measures. Finally, a series of Village Workshops was organized in the final period of the project, with the aim of promoting the self-evaluation of the Village Associations' performance and the preparation of mid-term Village Action Plans. These exercises were designed and implemented by facilitators recruited from within the communities. They included the identification and scoring of "indigenous" indicators by a number of randomly selected groups of project participants and non-participants.
BOX 8 - Participatory evaluation of latrine demonstration through scoring of key indicators (Raw Mohammad, Pakistan, October 1996)
OBJECTIVES
INDICATORS
SCORE
To save time
Number of hours saved
5 (Very good)
One hour per day was saved because cleaning the compound has become easier.
To improve health conditions
Less flies in the compound
5 (Very good)
Achieved because the compound is now free from children's faeces and rubbish.
To increase privacy and provide shelter from rain and snow
Women's privacy and safety
4 (Good)
All latrine owners appreciated this improvement
Number of latrines built
To replicate the construction of latrines throughout the village
After an initial demonstration in two compounds, four more latrines were autonomously built in the village.
4 (Good)
BOX 9
Analysis of problems met in rangeland rehabilitation (Lehri, Pakistan, March 1996)
PROBLEM
CAUSES
SOLUTIONS
Illegal grazing in protected areas
A rumour spread that if plants were allowed to grow, then the Forest Department would seize the area.
Misunderstandings about Forest Department's policy should be clarified.
Parents were not aware that their children were bringing animals into the protected area.
A local community body should be appointed to ensure protection: five elders permanently living in the village would be entrusted with this responsibility
Since the protection of the area was not strictly enforced and animals were seen in the protected area, others felt authorised to do the same.
Fines should be applied to transgressors. Proceeds from the fines would be deposited in the Village Association's cash box.
The present watchman should be replaced by a new watchman.
1.5 Tunisia^22
^22 The summary of the PME system established by the NFT in Tunisia is based on observations made by the consultant during his last visit to the project (July 1997) and on the following sources: TUN/96/3a; TUN/96/3b; TUN/95/5; TUN/96/6b; TUN/96/7; TUN/96/8a; TUN/96/8c; TUN/96/9c; TUN/96/12a: TUN/96/12h; TUN/96/12c; TUN/97/la; TUN/97/1b; TUN/97/2B; TUN/97/6a; TUN/97/8a; and TUN/97b.
In Tunisia, the PUCD Project's field activities were started only in the second half of 1995. The PME framework was introduced to the NFT by the consultant in-charge in May 1996, after completion of the initial participatory appraisal exercises. The start-up mission provided the basis for project-level planning, monitoring, and process evaluation and some conceptual and methodological orientation for the development of community-level PME practice. Follow-up of this introductory work was limited to informal exchanges between the staff in-charge of M&E and the consultant. However, NFT members and national consultants significantly contributed to developing the result-evaluation module and the community-level component of the system.
The NFT conducts project-level planning on a quarterly basis. The ProDoc's workplan outputs and activities are broken down into micro-outputs. For each micro-output, a sequential list of actions is prepared and a tentative deadline is set A staff member is made responsible for the accomplishment of each micro-output
Project-level monitoring takes place in monthly monitoring meetings and consists of reviewing the progress in achieving the planned micro-outputs and identifying problems and constraints met in implementation and remedial actions. project-level process-evaluation focuses on lime allocation. However, to date, little use has been made of this information, whose relevance and reliability have been questioned by several NET members.
Due to the limited development to date of the project's field activities, project-level result-evaluation is still incipient. A comprehensive evaluation of the methods and the results of the initial participatory appraisal and planning phase was carried out in August 1996, with the consultant's support. An interesting method for assessing the effectiveness of soil conservation measures has been developed by the NET in collaboration with the Forestry Department of the University of Turin. A simple practice to assess the planting of fruit trees has also been established.
The NET and the national consultants have developed a method of community-level planning. To this end, based on problem-tree analysis and participatory mapping exercises, a number of solutions to problems identified during PRA are reported on simple planning matrices filled-out during a special meeting with the concerned communities. The results of these exercises are submitted to governmental agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGO) collaborating with the project to assess their feasibility and negotiate cost-sharing. Based on these elements, further meetings are held with the communities to identify interest groups and decide upon implementation modalities for the initiatives found to be feasible and acceptable by relevant agencies (see Box 10). For the time being, community-level monitoring is carried out only with women's interest groups. Meetings are held to review assets and constraints in implementation.
Community-level evaluation practice has been limited to a number of activities implemented by the Women in Development Team (namely, the distribution of tabouna oven covers and the poultry micro-credit scheme). To assess the acceptability of these initiatives, simple qualitative analysis of advantages and disadvantages has been successfully used.
BOX
10 Steps in participatory planning Followed by the NFT in Tunisia
OBJECTIVES
ACTIVITIES
To provide participants with feedback of the information collected during the initial appraisal
Presentation and discussion with participants, supported by visual aids, such as maps on land tenure, slope, erosion and soil use (prepared by technical experts)
To identify the main problems perceived by participants
Problem-tree building exercise, supported by visual aids (mobile charts)
Preparation of a short-list of problems to be addressed through collective action
To identify solutions to priority problems, as proposed by participants
Brainstorming with participants for matching problems with solutions
To assess, with institutional partners (decision-makers and experts), the feasibility of participants' proposals
Preparation of an executive report on findings from the previous steps of the participatory planning process
To negotiate modalities of implementation
Meetings among participants, project staff, decision-makers and experts; field visits with decision-makers and experts
To develop and agree upon a workplan
As above
To prepare and sign implementation contracts
As above
<section>6</section>
Chapter 2 - NFTS' And communities' self-assessment of the PUCD project's PME practice
2.1. Bolivia
2.2. Nepal
2.3. Pakistan
2.4. Tunisia
This chapter reports the findings of the NFTs' and communities' self-assessment of PME practice, with the aim of outlining a diagnostic profile of both the positive and negative aspects of the established PME systems. This information is meant to be used by each NFT to identify practical measures for improving its PME practice, according to local managerial needs and existing operational assets and constraints ^23.
^23 To this end, in this chapter, the information provided by each self-assessment exercise is reported and reviewed in detail, addressing the specific needs of each concerned NFT. Certain readers of this document may not be interested in such an in-depth analysis and are advised to move on to Chapter 3, which presents the main comparative findings of the study and general recommendations.
The chapter is organized into four sections, one per field component, each of which is divided into four subsections (designated by the letters a, b, c, and d). Each section's first two subsections address the NFT's analysis of the performance and usefulness of the project- and community-level PME practice; subsection © highlights the participants' perception of the community-level PME practice; and subsection (d) focuses on the adaptation of the overall system to the local environment.
The NFTs' self-assessment of project- and community-level practice takes into consideration the following three main sets of information:
i) average scores given to the closed-ended questions included in the questionnaires for project management ^24;
^24 These data are also presented in table format in Annex I. Scores referring to the PME system's usefulness should be interpreted as follows: 0 = not applicable; 1 = of no use; 2 = of little use; 3 = of adequate use; 4 = of great use. Scores referring to the system's functioning should be interpreted as follows: 0 = not applicable; 1 = unsolved problems; 2 = major problems, though being dealt with; 3 = minor problems; 4 = problem-free.
ii) lists of assets/constraints in the operation of the system and major/insufficient contributions of the system to managing the project (in the case of project-level PME), or to the self-reliance of communities/interest groups (in the case of community-level PME), as identified by project management; and
iii) lists of strengths and weaknesses of various project- and community-level components of the system, as identified by field-staff.
The description of the participants' perception of community-level PME practice is based on focus-group interviews.
The analysis of the adaptation of the overall system to the local institutional environment is based on answers provided in the relevant section of the questionnaire completed by the project management.
2.1. Bolivia
2.1.a. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of project-level PME
2.1.b. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of community-level PME
2.1.c. Participants' views on community-level PME
2.1.d Project management's views on the adaptation of the overall PME system to the local social and institutional environment
2.1.a. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of project-level PME
The project management's quantitative assessment of the performance of project-level PME is very positive, with an overall average score of 3.41 (out of a maximum of 4). The highest scores were given to the use of project- and community-level evaluation information for further planning (score: 3.5); M&E data analysis (all relevant items scoring 4), and quality (i.e. validity and reliability) of M&E data (scores ranging from 3 to 3.5) In general, data collection in the field was also positively assessed, with the exception of the collection of process-evaluation information (i.e. raw data for calculating time-allocation indicators), which scored the lowest (2.5).
Assets facilitating the start-up and development of project-level PME include both design features (such as user-friendliness, progressive adjustment to local conditions, and formative orientation) and operational features (appropriate allocation of responsibilities in managing the system, staff participation and commitment, and reliability of the established operational mechanisms) Constraints tend to focus on operational difficulties such as lack of relevant skills and attitudes of field-staff, and on problems in the use of forms for individual planning, monitoring and process evaluation.
Project management also perceives the overall usefulness of project-level PME as quite high (total average score: 3.6). The maximum score was given to planning items, with the exception of allocation of resources, which scored the lowest (2.5). The scores for monitoring and evaluation items range between 3 and 4. Usefulness of project-level PME system for reporting was rated 3.5.
The results of this scoring exercise are consistent with the lists, developed by the same respondents, of major/insufficient contributions to managing the project. Major contributions include detailed planning, timely identification of problems in implementation, feedback on project performance, documentation of achievements, and improved communication between management and field-staff. Insufficient contributions include insufficient attention paid to determining the costs of activities and to other financial information, and a need for fine-tuning the system through further experience.
Among members of the field-staff, there are greater differences of opinion as compared with project management, as demonstrated by the group strengths and weaknesses analysis exercise. According to field-staff, the main strengths of the system lie in the monitoring design, which allows for the continuous feedback of the progress in implementation and which results in the work being well organized. However, the mechanism for facilitating the allocation of individual responsibilities foreseen by the system's planning procedures was mentioned both as a strength (in terms of efficiency) and as a weakness (considered by some staff members as a factor negatively affecting team work).
Regarding project-level evaluation practice, project field-workers identified the following strengths: relevant contribution in assessing the overall progress of project implementation; support in analysing team performance; and provision of formative feedback. Weaknesses include the design of the evaluation module, which is considered to be too quantitatively-oriented and, at the same time, not sufficiently focused on the project's social and environmental impact
Other weaknesses concern the operation of the system, including inconsistencies in planning (excessively ambitious planning; unclear links between some short-term plan results and project objectives, and unexpected changes in planning decisions); inadequate use of monitoring and process evaluation tools (forms not filled-out in due time, different criteria used in estimating implementation time); insufficient duration of evaluation and re-planning workshops; and poor systematisation of lessons learned through implementation. Participation of community representatives in project-level evaluation and re-planning events (which began to be promoted in late 1995) was identified as a strength by some team members, while other colleagues found that it was still insufficient to be meaningful.
2.1.b. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of community-level PME
The project managers' quantitative assessment of the performance of community-level PME is less positive than that of project-level PME. The overall average score is 2.06. Higher scores were given to the functioning of community-level exercises for planning, monitoring and evaluation (2.5, 3.5 and 3, respectively). Use of community-level monitoring and evaluation information also scored quite high (score: 3). However, major problems were identified with regard to the consistency of the results of community-level planning with the project's mandate (score 1.5), and community self-reliance in operating the system (0.5, for all relevant items).
A rationale for this scoring is suggested by the project management's list of assets and constraints in community-level PME practice. According to this source, community-level planning (or re-planning) and evaluation have been facilitated by a simple and easily understandable methodology, by a good organizational and logistic support, and by the trust existing between the project and the community (which these exercises have contributed to build). The institutional environment created by the "Ley de Participación Popular" was also identified as a major asset ^25.
^25 Promulgated in 1995, the "Ley de Participación Popular" (People Participation Law) institutionalises grassroots participation in sustainable development. To this end, communities are provided with incentives to organize themselves into "Organizaciones Territoriales de Base" (OTB), entitling them to receive a small share of the State's fiscal revenue. These funds are meant to be spent for implementing activities identified and planned by the community according to local needs, which usually include the development of basic services. The PUCD Project has made major efforts towards promoting the integration of initiatives for natural resource management into the planning conducted by project-area OTBs.
On the other hand, lack of communities and user groups' self-reliance in running these exercises was identified as a major constraint. This can be attributed to insufficient methodological know-how, creativity and commitment by the staff in-charge, as well as to farmers' limited understanding of the usefulness of PME, lack of time, lack of relevant skills, and deceptive experience with other development institutions.
The project management's quantitative assessment of the usefulness of community-level PME also reveals dissatisfaction. The overall average score (2.44) is similar to the score for performance, with most items in the list scoring 2.5 or less. Identification of needs by local actors is considered to be totally sufficient. The project management's lists of major and insufficient contributions of community-level PME practice to communities' self-reliance portray a more positive picture. Major contributions include development of communities' problem-solving skills, involvement of community members in decision-making, strengthening of grassroots organizations, facilitation of the development of community plans (foreseen by the "Ley de Participación Popular"), increased ability to negotiate with local authorities, and increasing interest for natural resource management activities. However, the contribution to the understanding of PME and to the development of a self-reliant
monitoring, evaluation and re-planning practice is still assessed as insufficient.
The field staff's strengths and weaknesses analysis shows that almost all strengths of participatory planning and re-planning focus on design features, including: adjustment of participants' expectations to opportunities the project can actually provide, sharing of responsibilities, identification and prioritisation of results to be achieved, and exchange of experience among participants. Weaknesses tend to relate to poor performance, including over-commitment in project planning (over-planning), insufficient time allocated to the implementation of participatory planning exercises, insufficient attention to organizational aspects, and inadequate use of evaluation information for re-planning.
Field staff acknowledge that the project has not yet developed a true participatory monitoring practice.
Several design features were identified as main strengths in community-level evaluation. These include joint (participants/staff) analysis of field data, use of methods based on direct observation, and publicity of results (made possible by the workshop format). However, the methodology used for participatory evaluation is considered to be insufficiently developed Further weaknesses concern operations (including poor attitude and commitment of the staff in-charge, lack of an interdisciplinary approach, and excessive time needed for organizing the workshops).
2.1.c. Participants' views on community-level PME
Though the field staff criticised community-level PME practice, community members participating in focus-group interviews ^26 expressed their appreciation for the way in which the project has applied participatory methods to facilitate their own decision-making and action-taking
^26 Two focus-group interviews were earned out in Bolivia in the framework of this study. Both interviews involved randomly selected project participants belonging to different communities and different user groups. The first interview was conducted among farmers who were financially better-off, whereas the second interview focused on a more disadvantaged social group.
As suggested by the following statements on decision-making, project participants perceive initial participatory planning as a process in which community-felt needs are matched with technical solutions identified by the project
"We, the peasants of Paredones, identify our needs. Based on that, we took the decision to invite project staff to assist us. We did not know from where to start. So we tell them: This is what we need. How can we do it?' They told us 'you may do so and so, and we said 'OK, we are going to do it' We decided to do it and we are ready to continue."
"For instance, in Floripondio, the decision of improving our water supply did not come from some project staff telling us: 'You should do this'. Rather, it happens that project staff come to visit us during the dry season and we told them: 'Somebody has to come to assist us, to tell us how to improve the water supply situation.' In this way we decided together to implement a water scheme to supply water to households and to provide irrigation to the fields. This was not project staff decision; it was our decision".
Some project participants have highlighted the important role played by subsequent evaluation and re-planning workshops in creating awareness of the importance of improving both natural resource management practices and the consistency between community felt needs and project mandate. This sometimes took the form of discussion on a pre-set "menu" of working hypotheses proposed by the project, For instance, in Vallecito, during one of these workshops:
"The project sociologist came and asked us if we were interested in re-afforestation activities, if we need to build wells, if we were interested in pisciculture or in rangeland improvement. And, after discussion, those who were interested applied to these activities and started to work with the project as a group "
The focus group interviews also revealed that some interest groups were able to fill-in gaps in the project's support to participatory monitoring by developing their own procedures and tools:
"In Paredones we keep a record book in which we write down the decisions made. Project staff commitments are written, as well as farmers' commitments. And when somebody is not fulfilling what is written, we tell to the extensionist: 'You see, here there's an unfulfilled commitment'. This is our way to monitor because what is not written, cannot be claimed. When something is written we can immediately claim it to the extension worker. And the extensionist is obliged to discuss the issues with project management."
Finally, project participants emphasised the pivotal role played by participatory evaluation exercises in facilitating a "learning by doing" process, in which the points of view of the community and technical staff are identified and harmonised:
"Evaluation is done with the active participation of the community, of those who actually work and are in need of project support. There is also a technical part, which is carried out by the project. In this way. we, the participants, and project staff, see what has been done, if it has been done properly, if it has been followed up properly, if agreements have been accomplished or not. In case of poor achievement, we assess if this depended on bad luck or other factors. In this way, the project and us can find the reasons of success and failure and make better decisions for the future".
2.1.d Project management's views on the adaptation of the overall PME system to the local social and institutional environment
The project management provided its opinion on the adaptation of the overall PME practice to the local social and institutional context based on its assessment of the involvement in PME exercises of staff, counterparts, partner institutions, and communities.
The project management identified staff involvement as a major strength in the implementation of both project- and community-level PME practices, as indicated by the following statement of the staff in-charge of M&E:
"Staff participation is an intrinsic element of our PME system. This has been well understood by all staff members and has made everybody committed to providing reliable information and to fulfilling their data collection tasks (even though sometimes with some delay). In evaluation and re-planning workshops (both at the project- and community-level) participation is quite high. Everybody contributes with questions and suggestions"
Counterpart representatives other than team members have shown much less interest in participating in PME activities; on several occasions they have ignored the invitation to take part in project- and community-level evaluation and re-planning workshops. However, the NPD has pointed out that:
"Time has been insufficient to show to our SEARPI ^27 colleagues (not directly involved in the project) the relevance of community-level PME for overall community development. It seems that the conditions to promote interest in project- and community-level PME events are still not there. Sensitisalion of SEARPI to this issue will be carried out in the next phase of the project, during which enough time should be allocated to this task".
^27 SEARPI is the Piraí River watershed authority acting as project counterpart.
The involvement of other governmental and non-governmental partner institutions in project-and community-level PME has also been assessed as poor. However, the NPD points out that:
"In the last years, due to the socio-political changes on-going in the country through the 'Ley de Participación Popular', participatory planning has become a current need for most governmental and non-governmental local institutions, and the same will soon happen for participatory monitoring and evaluation"
This statement may also explain why, as stressed by the project's CTA, despite the technical difficulties and limitations identified by project staff, community members have "always played a very active role in community-level PME events" Furthermore:
"Participation of community representatives in project-level evaluation and re-planning workshops has been increasing since 1995. As shown by the relevant reports, their contribution focused on re-planning. However, there is a need to better define community representatives role in project-level evaluation. In particular, a way should be found to present evaluation information in a more easily understandable manner to our community partners, than the current one (based on display of quantitative and qualitative tables and graphs)".
Based on these considerations, CTA, NPD and staff in-charge of M&E are quite optimistic about the actual possibility of transferring the overall PME system to local institutions and grassroots organizations:
Staff in-charge for M&E: "So far the system has involved more than 20 staff and community members from different places, working on different subjects. Planning and evaluation exercises have proven to be effective. The system is flexible, easily understandable and easy to operate. For these reasons, it can be almost totally replicated. However, some adjustment should be made in order to make the system more relevant to specific institutional needs" ^28
^28 In particular, according to the opinion of the field-staff, "Too much time is needed to collect field data, process them and implement an evaluation workshop. Such an effort will not be sustainable in a 'without project situation'".
NPD: "In my opinion, the whole system could be transferred, with some adaptation and adjustments, according to user needs. This is possible because of the high flexibility built into the system".
CTA: "The overall design of the project-level PME system could be transferred with some adaptations. In particular, the methods for evaluating community participation and natural resource management conservation activities could be transferred. The community-level PME methodology is likely to be transferred, even though it has no(been fully adopted by all communities so far. This may need some lime. Up to now, community-level PME events still need the support of a project facilitator and are not perceived as a felt need by most community members. There is a need for training community facilitators who, in the future, may replace project staff. Perhaps the increasingly important role assigned to 'OTBs' and 'Comités de Vigilancia' in the implementation of the 'Plan Municipal' will create among community members the need for strengthening their PME practice".
2.2. Nepal
2.2.a. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of project-level PME
2.2.b. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of community-level PME
2.2.c. Participants' views on community-level PME
2.2.d. Project management's views on the adaptation of the overall PME system to the local social and institutional environment
2.2.a. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of project-level PME
The project management team's ^29 quantitative assessment indicates great dissatisfaction with the performance of project-level PME. The overall average score is 1.69 (out of a maximum of 4). Planning items scored higher than monitoring and evaluation items, and data analysis items have the lowest scores.
^29 In Nepal, the project management team includes the NPD, the CTA, the APO, the Assistant Soil Conservation Officer, and the National Expert in Sociology and Capacity-Building, who are jointly responsible for M&E and who thus all completed the project management questionnaire.
These results are validated by the lists of assets and constraints. Major constraints refer to operational aspects, including lack of consensus among project staff on the focus of M&E, poor management of the information flow, and inadequate data analysis. Two design features were identified as assets: planning and monitoring procedures and data collection tools.
The overall average score is slightly better for the usefulness of the system (score 2.53). The monitoring activities (including adjustment of the workplan to contingencies, allocation of resources, and time management) and preparation of progress reports (all scoring 3,2) are considered to be especially useful. Planning items scored between 2.2 and 2.4, whereas scores for evaluation items range between 1.8 and 2.
The lists of major/insufficient contributions to project management, developed by the same respondents, are highly consistent with the above results. Major contributions include resource allocation, adjustment of the yearly action plan to contingencies (by means of monthly plan revision), and use of community-level information for project-level planning (facilitated by the Community Action Plans Database). Insufficient contributions are analysis, reporting and use of field data.
According to the field-workers' analysis of strengths and weaknesses of project-level PME ^30, the strengths of project-level planning and re-planning seem to include: use of a participatory approach, decentralisation of the project's planning/decision-making at the area level ^31, and feeling of ownership by staff and participants. Major weaknesses include over-planning (i.e. planning beyond project's operational capability), farmers' difficulties in fitting the project's initiatives into their busy schedules, and lack of communication between project staff and other development institutions working in the area.
^30 In Nepal, two separate exercises in strengths and weaknesses analysis, focusing on both project- and community level PME, were carried out in the framework of this study. The former was carried out with mid-level technicians; the latter involved group promoters.
^31 See note 15.
Regarding project-level monitoring and evaluation, major strengths include: availability of data collection tools, good and frank communication among field team and project management, contribution to definition of workable implementation strategies, and orientation in re-planning. Major weaknesses include: difficulties and delays in data analysis and lack of involvement of participants in project-level evaluation exercises.
2.2.b. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of community-level PME
The project management team has expressed moderate satisfaction with the overall performance of the community-level PME, with an overall average score of 2.69. Particular appreciation (score 2.5 or above) has been shown for community-level planning (functioning, self-reliance and consistency of results with project mandate) and for community-level evaluation (functioning, self-reliance and use of relevant information for re-planning). Lower scores were given to community-level monitoring, particularly the use of relevant information (score 1.4). As pointed out by the CTA, this is due to the fact that "few formal links exist in monitoring between user groups and the project. User Groups organize their own meetings and do not feel that it is important to report to the project"
The main assets in community-level PME practice include its contribution to empowerment, establishment of democratic and transparent decision-making, technical and managerial capacity-building, and development of feelings of ownership, Establishment of an autonomous monitoring practice by some user groups is a further important asset.
Constraints in community-level PME practice include insufficient organization and managerial skills, excessively ambitious planning (risking discouragement), time needed to carry out PME exercises (possibly preventing more disadvantaged social groups from participating), and lack of comprehensiveness in user groups' M&E practice. All of these elements suggest the need for continuous input by highly experienced facilitators.
The project management team's scores for usefulness of community-level PME for community capacity-building substantially triangulate with the above quantitative and qualitative information. The overall average score is 2.75. All planning items scored 3, with the exception of negotiation with local institutions (score: 2). All monitoring and evaluation items scored around 2.5.
The project management's lists of major and insufficient contributions of community-level PME practice to communities' self-reliance further support the above perception. Major contributions include preparation of better and more realistic plans, improvement of decision-making capability, increased capacity to run PME exercises autonomously, and increased cohesion of user groups. Insufficient contributions refer to limited capability in focusing planning on integrated natural resource management, carrying out sound assessments of costs and benefits, managing funds, and facilitate mobilisation of resources from other local development agencies.
Regarding community-level planning and re-planning, the field staffs analysis of strengths and weaknesses of community-level PME shows that most strengths are related to intrinsic features of the participatory approach (empowerment, ownership, consensus building, "learning by doing", etc.). Weaknesses tend to focus on equity related aspects, such as the risk of exclusion and of a local elite playing a dominant role. Other weaknesses include difficulties in estimating costs and identifying institutional partners (other than the project). Once again, the pivotal role of skilled facilitators for the successful completion of participatory planning exercises was highlighted.
For community-level monitoring, the strengths and weaknesses refer almost exclusively to operational aspects. The main strengths include upgrading of user group managerial skills, allowing for proper use of resources and timely accomplishment of activities. The major weaknesses are insufficient motivation and skills of the communities, lack of commitment by staff (due to time constraints), and poor record keeping.
With respect to community-level evaluation, the strengths identified are the feedback of positive and negative aspects of implementation to both the user groups and project staff. Weaknesses include design features (little attention paid to quantification, and, more specifically, economic analysis of gains and losses), as well as operational aspects (low level of participation).
2.2.c. Participants' views on community-level PME
Regarding community-level PME, all groups of participants interviewed ^32 showed general satisfaction with participatory planning and re-planning established with the support of the project. Methodological support provided by the project's facilitator is found to be instrumental in developing decision-making skills. In the words of one member of the Pragati Women User Group:
^32 In Nepal, three focus-group interviews were carried out in the framework of the study with three different User Groups participating in the project. These included: the Janjagriti User Group, which was established more than four years earlier and was one of the first male, high-caste dominated groups formed during phase 1 of the project; the Pragati Women's User Group, established three years earlier and one of the first women's groups (high-caste dominated) formed at the beginning of phase 2; and the Bhawana Women's User Group, one of the recently formed women's groups of disadvantaged caste.
"The whole group decides about the plan that is to be implemented. Every member has equal say in the decision making process. (...) Initially, we could not make decisions. But after receiving training from the PUCD, we are now capable to make decisions, since almost all the members attend the monthly meetings"
An important finding of these interviews is that even though the project was not able to provide continued methodological support to participatory monitoring practice, two of the three groups interviewed organized themselves for ensuring the continued monitoring of their activities:
"At the monthly meetings, we review previous months' decisions and the attendance register. We also assess the progress. If everything is satisfactory, we take decisions for the next month. We are satisfied with this system" (Janjagriti User Group).
"At the end of each month, we hold a general meeting. The meeting reviews the mistakes made and the reasons behind the failure of the activities, and attempts to correct and not to repeat the same mistakes in the near future" (Pragati Women User Group).
One member of the Bhawana Women User Group identified the lack of participatory monitoring as a major shortcoming in group functioning:
"Due to the absence of monitoring, the programme has come to a halt now. The monitoring job is the responsibility of the group, but so far we have not been able to monitor. Yet, in the near future we expect to accomplish this task as well."
Participants provided only a few comments on community-level evaluation during focus group interviews. One member of the Janagriti User Group said that "evaluation after the completion of activities is not realistic" and recommended establishing an on-going evaluation practice, built into community-level monitoring. A member of the Bhawana Women's User Group pointed out that: "Evaluating any task through group discussion is beneficial". The following statement of one member of the Pragati Women's User Group demonstrates an appreciation of the project-promoted community-level evaluation and re-planning workshop:
"We evaluate each activity at the general body meetings; we carefully assess whether the activity (such as trail construction, water tap, vegetable farming, etc.) has benefited us or not; we also consider whether we are just wasting our time or invested time is giving fruitful results to us. If we feel that we have benefited from the project, then we continue the activities".
2.2.d. Project management's views on the adaptation of the overall PME system to the local social and institutional environment
The following statement, made by the project's APO, thoroughly describes the staffs involvement in PME operations:
"All staff (field and project management) are involved in a monthly staff meeting where status of field activities, problems encountered, ways to overcome them, and the implementation plan for the coining month(s) are discussed. Group promoters are the ones collecting the information for water source protection forms, user group assessment, etc. Both group promoters and area facilitators arc involved in community level PME."
According to the Assistant Soil Conservation Officer, Area Facilitators are playing a special and increasing role in the system's operation:
"Project staff involvement in project- and community-level PME is increasing. Area Facilitators are fully responsible for the overall monitoring of field-activities of their respective sites. They also facilitate community-level evaluation and re-planning workshops."
Furthermore, all local staff of the District Soil Conservation Office take part in major project-level planning, monitoring and evaluation events, though not all of them are official members of the NFT. By contrast, officers from the central-level Soil Conservation Department have so far not directly contributed to project planning, monitoring and evaluation.
As pointed out by the NPD and the APO, the local partner institutions have considered project-level PME as "PUCD Project's business" and have thus been only minimally involved. However, the APO has reported that, since 1996, representatives of line agencies and local NGOs have begun to take part in coordination meetings promoted by the project, These meetings are found to contribute significantly to the project-level planning process. In the APO's opinion, this practice is likely to continue after the completion of the project. Furthermore, the National Consultant in Capacity Building recalls that Village Development Committees have often been important actors in community-level evaluation and re-planning workshops.
The involvement of local communities has been limited to community-level PME meetings and workshops. Most members of the project management team agree that user groups and grassroots organizations are increasingly motivated to participate in these events.
Based on these considerations, respondents agree that most of the community-level PME elements (including PRA diagnostic tools and procedures) will likely be replicated by local institutions and user groups in a "without project" situation. According to the National Consultant in Capacity Building:
"The methodology for running evaluation and re-planning workshops, developed by the team in collaboration with consultants, is gaining much popularity in the project area (...). I think that this method can be widely used all over the country"
2.3. Pakistan
2.3.a. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of project-level PME
2.3.b. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of community-level PME
2.3.c. Participants' views on community-level PME
2.3.d. Project management's views on the adaptation of the overall PME system to the local social and institutional environment
2.3.a. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of project-level PME
The project managers ^33 have found the performance of project-level PME in Pakistan to be nearly acceptable (overall average score: 2.55, out of a maximum of 4). High-scoring aspects include the use of community-level information for project-level planning (3.67), collection of monitoring information (3), and collection and quality (i.e. validity and reliability) of information for evaluating results (3.33 and 3, respectively). Analysis and quality of information for process evaluation scored low (1.57), for which, according to the CTA, "no satisfactory solution has been found so far"
In their analysis of assets and constraints in project-level PME, the project managers found the planning and monitoring method based on identification of results and step-wise scheduling to be an asset. This method is considered easy to understand and follow, acceptable by field-staff, and helpful in better organizing the work. A further asset is the implementation of a number of evaluation exercises documenting project outcomes. Constraints focus on the overall complexity of the system and, in particular, on the limited relevance, poor reliability and low acceptability of process evaluation information (namely, time allocation indicators). The need for qualified personnel and the insufficient analysis of project-level M&E data are main constraints
^33 In Pakistan, the questionnaire for project management was answered by the CTA (who is also responsible for Men's Team's M&E activities), the NPD, and the staff-in-charge of the Women' Team's M&E activities.
The overall usefulness of project-level PME system is perceived as quite high, with an average score of 3.03. The highest score (3.67) was given to allocation of resources and preparation of progress reports. Planning and monitoring items scored 3 or above, with the exception of identification and planning of actions (i.e. steps in implementation, and time management (scoring 2.33 and 2.67, respectively). Like performance, the technical quality of results achieves sufficiency, while dissatisfaction (2 33) was once again expressed about the usefulness of process evaluation.
According to the same respondents, main contributions of the system to project management include provision of information on progress in implementation and control over field-staff performance. Insufficient contributions include inadequate quantification of outcomes of field activities and unsatisfactory evaluation of the quality of the participatory process.
The field staff's strengths and weaknesses analysis of the project-level PME system ^34 produced results consistent with the project managers' views. The main strengths in project-level planning include involvement of the entire staff in decision-making, appropriateness of step-wise planning, and progressive adjustment of the plan according to implementation contingencies. Lack of coordination with other line agencies is the only weakness reported.
^34 Strengths and weakness analysis exercises were carried out by a mixed group of extensionists, field technicians, and group promoters belonging to both the Men's and Women's Teams.
As far as project-level monitoring is concerned, one strength is the fact that planning and monitoring activities become progressively easier with experience. Other strengths include user friendliness and flexibility of the relevant forms. Weaknesses include the two-year delay in the start-up of project-level monitoring and irregularities and delays in the preparation of the monthly monitoring data base.
The field-staff found that project-level evaluation promotes the participatory approach by putting the project in the position of showing the results achieved through its application. It is also considered instrumental in extracting lessons learned from implementation and thus in improving re-planning. Weaknesses of project-level evaluation practice include technical difficulties in gathering data for determining indicators of time allocation; collection of these data is also time consuming.
2.3.b. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of community-level PME
The project managers showed moderate satisfaction with the performance of community-level PME. The overall average score is 2.96. All items score 3 or above, with the exception of communities' self-reliance in planning (2) and evaluation (2.67). The creation of Village Associations and of savings/credit schemes are identified as important assets for the development of an iterative and comprehensive PME process at the village level. This process is perceived as enhancing villagers' analytical skills and creativity and as promoting feelings of ownership towards the work done in collaboration with the project. The importance of community-level PME in orienting project-level planning is also acknowledged. Constraints include insufficient exposure of project staff to relevant methodological expertise, inequalities in local social structure, and poor attitude and skills of villagers. The validity of the results of community-level evaluation exercises is also questioned.
The project managers expressed satisfaction with the usefulness of community-level PME practice for the development of managerial skills among project participants. All items scored 3 or above, with an overall average of 3.33.
Regarding the major/insufficient contributions to project management of community-level PME, the CTA found that regular meetings and joint discussions promote the community spirit needed to work together towards a common goal. However, the CTA also found that Village Associations still have difficulties in networking and in autonomously approaching projects and institutions which could support them in reaching their objectives.
The field-staff's strengths and weaknesses analysis exercise showed that major strengths of participatory planning include promotion of villagers' self-reliance, building of the consensus necessary to implement activities, clarification of implementation modalities and responsibilities, project's adaptation to local culture, improved efficiency, and mobilisation of hidden resources. Weaknesses focus on relationships between project and communities, specifically: difficulties in clarifying to the people the limits of project mandate, risk of raising unrealistic expectations, difficulties in maintaining people's trust when faced with unexpected technical or financial difficulties, and risk of excluding village members not involved in interest groups.
The strengths of community-level monitoring practice, as perceived by field staff, are effectively conveyed by the following two statements:
"Progress can be checked step by step, and people can understand the scope and importance of the activity. The faith which they might have lost (due to non-completion of other activities) is regained."
"At the beginning of the project, a lot of people had volunteered to work. Gradually a few who were really interested remained. However, thanks to participatory monitoring, most people saw that something was really happening, and those who had left came back again."
Major weaknesses are related to social factors, including illiteracy, which acts as a barrier to understanding the importance of monitoring practice, and the pivotal role played by community's kinship system in shaping and orienting participation in Village Associations.
Regarding community-level evaluation, strengths include the contribution to communities' learning-by-doing process and improved re-planning, whereas a major weakness is expressed in the following statement:
"Evaluation exercises may lead to hold somebody responsible for failure. This is a sensitive issue. When somebody is held responsible for an en-or, the community can be divided and the activity is hampered."
2.3.c. Participants' views on community-level PME
With regard to community-level PME, focus group interviews with representatives of Men's and Women's Village Associations ^35 convey feelings of interest, commitment and satisfaction, as expressed by one participant who quoted the Urdu saying, "Working together attracts blessing" ('Ittefaq main barkat hai').
^35 Two focus-group interviews were carried out in the framework of this study with representatives of Men's and Women's Associations belonging to different villages.
Participatory planning is described by representatives of both Men's and Women's Village Associations as a process of joint decision making, in which the overall community's concerns and individual interests are harmonised:
"There are 32 members in our Association. All of them are contributing; all of them have an equal say in decision making and planning. Some activities are planned, regarding village's common land. Yet, if somebody is facing a special problem in agriculture or orchards, or is having financial constraints, or wants to open up a grocery shop, we discuss it in the Association meeting and, if feasible, give him loans. The project staff also help us in coming to a conclusion."
Though conflicts may arise, participants feel capable of managing them and of finding a "win-win" solution:
"There is a conflict on certain issues sometimes. I think it helps us also. If the majority has decided to do something and some are not willing we can make them understand."
Among Men's Village Associations, participatory monitoring is carried out during monthly ad hoc meetings, focusing on progress made and problems met in implementation. According to one member of a Men Village Association, this "step by step checking has really benefited us" According to another participant, this is because:
"When the association members are constantly asking each other about the progress, then the problems being faced come up. Discussions resolve the problem".
"Nothing can be finished without monitoring. In this way if there is a conflict within the members or there is a problem in the implementation, than it can be removed. If somebody needs guidance, than other members can help him"
Among Women's Village Associations, community-level monitoring is coordinated by an Association "monitor". According to one of the interviewed individuals, this arrangement has "made the work run smoothly and successfully."
Most statements on participatory evaluation from representatives of Men Village Associations are descriptive rather than judgmental. However, a good understanding of the rationale and importance of this practice can be elicited from the following quote:
"Some benefits (elicited by participatory evaluation) can be seen soon and some take time, maybe years. (...) The results of new ways of pruning or the use of proper medicines are now so obvious that everybody has started to adopt them. However, when the project staff did pruning in my orchard I was angry. I could not do anything and had to leave them to do it. They cut almost all the branches. My heart wept. But, when the season of the flowers came (and the evaluation was done) my heart was overjoyed".
The relevance of community-level evaluation is expressed by one woman who participated in the final evaluation of the work done by Village Associations during the second phase of the project:
"For the first time, we have evaluated all the project activities together. We have found results very encouraging, and we would like to continue this process in the future because it helps to know what are the weaknesses and what are the strong points of our activities."
2.3.d. Project management's views on the adaptation of the overall PME system to the local social and institutional environment
Major problems were met in the past in adapting the PUCD project's approach to the "top-down" approach prevailing among Pakistani institutions. However, the project managers' suggest that significant progress has been made in the past year, namely in terms of staff involvement in both project- and community-level PME. According to the project's CTA:
"There has been an increasing involvement of project staff in PME events (...). In 1996, for the first time all project staff participated in the planning workshop to prepare the yearly workplan for 1997. Planning/monitoring meetings are held weekly by the men's and women's teams and a joint PME meeting is held monthly by all field and senior staff. (...) Moreover, project staff participates regularly in all PME community-level events (such as planning workshops, monitoring and evaluation meetings, conventions)".
As far as the project's counterpart is concerned, only staff assigned to the project participate in PME events. However, the NPD has found that regional and local institutions are paying increasing attention to participatory planning, monitoring and evaluation. Officers from the Forestry Department started to regularly attend workshops and meetings at the district or 'tehsil' (sub-district) level.
Involvement of partner institutions in project-promoted PME events has been limited to the participation of local government leaders in Area Conventions. Recently, representatives from two FAO sister-projects and one local NGO (AURAT) have taken part in community-level evaluation exercises.
As indicated above, and according to all respondents, communities' participation in PME events seems to be increasing. In particular, the Village Association leaders are playing a more active role in organizing and implementing these exercises. However, community representatives are not yet involved in project-level PME.
Opinions differ with regard to the replicability of the overall PME practice developed by the project in a "without project" situation. According to the NPD:
"The PME system as a whole can be transferred to the counterpart institution. However, the PRA methodology (for need assessment) and the elements of conflict resolution and planning of natural resource management at the village level are key elements to be transferred".
By contrast, the CTA states:
"Most of the elements of PUCD Project's PME systems are also operated by the Forest Department staff assigned to the project. However, this system is far away from being institutionalised by the Department and at present no element can be realistically expected to be transferred. Some elements of the community-level PME system (PRA methodology, preparation of Village Upland Use Plans, and monitoring and evaluation meetings) could be transferred, provided that the Department moves towards a social forestry programme. In this case a simplified version of the stepwise monitoring system (project-level) could also be transferred".
Finally, in the opinion of the staff in-charge for M&E of the Women Team:
"None of the elements of PUCD project can be transferred to counterpart institutions".
2.4. Tunisia
2.4.a. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of project-level PME
2.4.b. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of community-level PME
2.4.c. Participants' views on community-level PME
2.4.d. Project management's' views on the adaptation of the overall PME system to the local social and institutional environment
2.4.a. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of project-level PME
The project managers gave an overall average score of 2.24 (out of a maximum of 4) to the performance of project-level PME system. They show moderate satisfaction (score 3) with the collection and quality (i.e. validity and reliability) of information for both project-level monitoring and result evaluation. Analysis of information for project-level process evaluation (score 1) and use of community-level evaluation information for project-level planning (score 0.67) suffer from especially poor performance. All other items have scores that are close to the overall average.
The project managers failed to identify any evident asset in the project-level PME, yet they did list many constraints). Some of these concern staff performance, such as limited understanding of the system's potential usefulness, perception of allocation of individual responsibilities as a means of control, and insufficient motivation for (and commitment to) project-level M&E practice. Other constraints include the affiliation of NFT members with different administrative bodies, time needed to operate the system and, as far as planning is concerned, insufficient capability to estimate the time needed to implement different activities.
The project managers express a more positive opinion regarding the usefulness of project-level PME system, which has a sufficient overall average score (3). Planning and monitoring score slightly above the overall average, whereas evaluation items are significantly below average (2.33).
Major contributions concern planning and monitoring issues, including: organization of work through quarterly planning, efficient use of human and financial resources, progressive adjustment of workplans to implementation contingencies, and availability of updated information on project implementation (also useful in preparing progress reports). No areas of insufficient contribution are identified.
The field-staff strengths and weaknesses analysis conveys differing). No strengths are identified in project-level planning. As far as weaknesses are concerned, some field staff feel that the system is too demanding and too detail oriented. Others think that it does not cover all the information needs of different staff and that identification of implementation responsibilities is not precise enough.
With regard to project-level monitoring and evaluation, the only strength identified is the provision of information on the schedule for expected/actual implementation. Weaknesses include poor interpretation and use of monitoring information and limited relevance to project objectives of process evaluation information (based on time allocation indicators).
2.4.b. NFT's assessment of the performance and usefulness of community-level PME
The average score of the project managers' assessment of community-level PME performance is 2.04, though the range (0 - 3.33) is too wide to make this figure truly meaningful. Contradictory opinions are expressed with regard to the functioning of planning, monitoring and evaluation exercises. Items describing the communities' self-reliance range around 2.5. Community-level has not been experimented to date.
The main asset is the planning approach focusing on felt needs of specific interest groups. However, working with interest groups and not with the community as a whole is also mentioned by one respondent as a constraint. Further constraints include: lack of field staff, insufficient importance given to participatory M&E, and little systematisation of participatory methodology.
The results of the assessment of usefulness of community-level PME for communities' capacity building are more consistent. The average score is 2.88. Most planning and monitoring items score above average, with the exception of usefulness for conflict resolution and joint decision making, which scores slightly below average. Evaluation items have the lowest scores (2.67).
The main contributions of community-level PME to communities' self-reliance include the facilitation of an exchange of views and opinions (namely among women), identification of activities and related needs for training and technical support, and progressive adjustment of activities to constraints met in implementation. An insufficient contribution is the development of an autonomous M&E practice.
The latter opinion is shared by field workers, who, for this reason, felt that they were not in the position to comment on community-level monitoring and evaluation practice. Therefore, their strengths and weaknesses analysis exercise focused on participatory planning. Main strengths include promotion of involvement of local people, facilitation of productive group dynamics among participants and start-up of implementation activities. An important weakness is the difficulties in matching national administrative procedures with needs expressed by project participants.
2.4.c. Participants' views on community-level PME
In general, the interviews with the men's and women revealed a positive view of the project's approach to involving local communities in analysing their situation and facilitating relevant decision-making ^36 In particular, women stressed that methods used for participatory planning have been highly instrumental in allowing them "to become aware of problems, identify our needs and make suggestions which may lead to improve our living conditions".
^36 In Tunisia, four focus-group interviews were carried out among both participating and non-participating Men's and Women's Groups, belonging to the different douars in which the participatory process was launched in late 1995. In accordance with the study design, and as done by the other NFTs, only the opinions of community members actually involved in project activities were taken into consideration. However, it is important to observe that the interviews conducted among non-participants convey a sense of discomfort about not having participated in project activities. The NFT in Tunisia should strive to understand the factors preventing these persons from participating.
As a major strength of the participatory planning process, both groups identify the consensus building process leading to the formation of interest groups for different activities. For instance, one participant in the women group interview points out that the selection of beneficiaries for the micro-credit programme:
"...has been done with our participation, following criteria which have allowed us to understand (the pros and cons of the initiative) and decide about the opportunity of get the credit. Final decision has been made by ourselves, according to our capacity of taking the responsibility to implement the project (for which the credit is given) and reimburse the credit."
A further strength of participatory planning, highlighted by a men's group, is the contribution given to improved communication among communities and local institutions. As stated by one of the participants:
"When the project started, there was a problem among the people and the Forestry Service concerning the conservation of the Sidi Salem forest. Discussions facilitated by project staff have allowed us to find out a different way to envisage this problem and to start up a negotiation. This has led to release strains and find out a practical solution, in which our point of view has been considered."
Unfortunately, due to the limited development of participatory M&E activities, the focus group interviews on the subsequent stages of the participatory process have provided few (and not very informative) elements.
2.4.d. Project management's' views on the adaptation of the overall PME system to the local social and institutional environment
According to the project managers, adaptation of the system to the local institutional environment is still in progress. In their opinion, a learning process has taken place in recent years, leading to increased staff commitment to PME activities. Project-level quarterly planning sessions are regularly implemented with the active participation of the entire team, including staff from the Water and Soil Conservation Department (the national counterpart) working with the project on a part-time basis. This has led to the planning practice being progressively adapted to the operational capability of the project (namely, to the human and material resources available). However, it was not possible to establish a regular follow-up routine, and project-level monitoring meetings are still carried out on an as-needed basis. Furthermore, in spite of efforts made by individual staff members, project- and community-level evaluation practice still needs to be systematised.
Despite these limitations, involvement of the local counterpart and partners in PME activities has been strengthened. During the past year, technicians and Service Managers from different branches of the CRDA (Regional Agriculture Development Authority, the project's local counterpart) have actively participated in some project-level and community-level PME events.
The participation of local communities in PME activities is promising, though not yet fully developed. This is basically due to the project's delay in establishing a proper monitoring, evaluation and re-planning practice. However, the response of some women interest groups exposed to participatory evaluation exercises is considered to be encouraging.
Obviously, the limited experience gained so far makes it difficult to assess which elements of the system are likely to be replicated in a "without project" situation. According to the staff in-charge of M&E, it is unlikely that the entire system in its current state can be transferred to local institutions. However:
"Some key elements of current PME practice should deserve special attention in view of the institutionalisation of the participator)' approach. These include the link to be established between community-level planning (as practised by the project) and CRDA's regional level planning, and the use of time allocation indicators (in terms of working days) for monitoring and evaluating the implementation process "
<section>7</section>
Chapter 3 - PUCD project's PME practice: common problems and recommendations
3.1. Project-level PME
3.2. Community-level PME
The self-assessment presented above portrays quite a heterogeneous and complex situation which allows little room for sound generalisations about the overall performance, usefulness and adaptation of the PUCD Project's PME practice, However, several common problems in the system's design and operation can be elicited.
In this chapter, these problems are analysed in light of both statements made during the self-assessment and the consultant's field observations. Based on the triangulation among perceptions of "users" and a "resource person", a number of operational recommendations are made to the Coordination Unit and the NFTs. The aim of these recommendations is to outline a general strategy for upgrading the system's design and operation, in view of the forthcoming third phase.
3.1. Project-level PME
3.1.a. Over-planning
3.1.b. Relevance and appropriateness of time-allocation indicators
3.1.c. Focus of evaluation practice
3.1.d. Skills and attitudes of field staff
3.1.e. Analysis and use of M&E information
Five main common problems in project-level PME practice can be elicited from cross-referencing constraints, insufficient contributions, and weaknesses, identified by project management and field staff:
a) over-planning (i.e. planning beyond capabilities);
b) relevance and appropriateness of time-allocation indicators;
c) focus of evaluation practice;
d) M&E skills and attitudes of field-staff; and
e) analysis and use of M&E information.
Each of these problems is briefly reviewed below, together with recommendations for facilitating their solution.
3.1.a. Over-planning
Only the field-staff in Bolivia and Nepal have identified over-planning as a weakness of project-level planning practice. However, the consultant's field observations suggest that matching workplans with actual operational capabilities (in terms of human and financial resources and available time) has been an important problem for all national components.
The risk of over-planning is indeed intrinsic to several features of the project's design, such as the open-ended "menu" of general outputs and activities foreseen by the ProDoc, the limited availability of funds for direct implementation of field activities, and the PRA-based start-up mechanism (leading to the formulation of long and very heterogeneous lists of felt needs). This risk is compounded by participatory implementation, which entails the continuous adjustment of field initiatives to the farmers' busy schedules.
To try to control over-planning, all field components have developed priority-setting mechanisms, based on a preliminary assessment of the consistency of field activities with the project's mandate and technical feasibility, and of the relevance to the felt needs of a significant part of the participating community. Furthermore, the project has, in certain cases, limited its coverage to communities settled within a "concentration area" (smaller than the official project area).
In spite of these measures, monitoring and evaluation exercises have, on several occasions, revealed a significant gap between planned deadlines and actual dates of accomplishment of field activities ^37. This suggests that the number of field activities planned for the period under consideration went beyond the capacity of staff and participants and/or project resources.
^37 Specific problems related to over-planning, such as delays and low rates of achievement, are described in the following documents: BOL/94/2; BOL/94/10b; BOL/95/8; BOL/96/6b; BOL/96/11a; NEP/96/10c; NEP/97/7; PAK/95/10b; TUN/96/8a; and TUN/96/12b.
Based on these observations, the following recommendations can be proposed with the aim of facilitating the formulation of sounder workplans:
Stricter priority-setting mechanisms should be built into the project-level planning module. To this end, information on cost-effectiveness and required time for different activities should be elicited from evaluation exercises and considered (together with technical, social and institutional factors) in assessing the actual feasibility of each activity to be included in the collaborative workplans.
3.1.b. Relevance and appropriateness of time-allocation indicators
The above recommendation raises a number of issues regarding the collection and use of information on staff and participants' time allocation. The consultant has recommended that all four NFTs systematically collect this type of information, with the aim of facilitating both process evaluation (by providing a concrete measure of staff and participants' involvement in the implementation process) and re-planning (by providing indications on the amount of time actually needed by staff and participants to implement a given activity).
The three NFTs who decided to follow this recommendation encountered several problems, including poor acceptability by field staff (who, especially at the beginning, perceived the request to report the amount of time spent on different activities as a means of control by project management) and technical difficulties in producing reliable estimates of the amount of hours needed to carry out a given step or achieve a given result. Furthermore, a controversy over the relevance and validity of time-allocation indicators for assessing the implementation process developed among and within NFTs. In Nepal, due to the large population in the project area and the number of User Groups involved in the project, this practice was perceived as unfeasible, after a brief (and quite incomplete) field test.
This situation is reflected by most of the opinions expressed on this subject during the PME self-assessment exercise. The NET in Bolivia was generally satisfied with the approach, though both the staff in-charge of M&E and the field-staff reported poor use of this information for re-planning. One member of the management team in Nepal stressed his disagreement (though the technique is no longer part of project-level PME practice in this country). Project management in Pakistan has questioned the relevance and usefulness of this technique, and the field-staff have identified practical problems in gathering relevant data. The Tunisian project management has stressed the need for relying on sound time-allocation estimates for planning, though the field-staff have questioned the relevance of these data. Finally, the project management of both Pakistan and Tunisia are uncertain as to the time needed to collect and analyse relevant data.
What conclusions can be drawn? The consultant still believes that time-allocation indicators are among the most valid and useful measures of implementation efforts for a project that spends about 80% of its budget on staff remuneration and that expects to rely on the participation of local communities to achieve its core objective (i.e. improved management of upland watersheds). As shown by the Bolivian experience, related operational and acceptability problems can be progressively solved by proper training and involvement of field-staff in data analysis and interpretation. However, it should also be acknowledged that these indicators are perhaps too abstract to be easily understood and that the suggested data collection and analysis techniques may appear to be too sophisticated for considering them for replication on a wider scale.
A compromise must thus be reached, which may help to satisfactorily meet the twofold need of (i) relying on timing estimates to be taken into account in the preparation of workplans and (ii) developing a more user-friendly approach to process evaluation. To this end, the following recommendations can be proposed to the NFTs willing to facilitate, and render more acceptable, the project-level process evaluation during the next project phase:
Whenever possible, standard estimates of working days needed to implement different activities, or steps, should be calculated on the basis of previous experience.
Process-evaluation exercises involving field-staff should be carried out on a regular basis by means of simple qualitative techniques, such as SWOL analysis.
3.1.c. Focus of evaluation practice
According to the ProDoc for Phase 2, "due to the process-oriented nature of the project, the review and evaluation exercises will focus primarily on the qualitative aspects of this process, while not disregarding quantitative physical outputs in terms of work accomplished, people trained, etc.". Together with a number of practical and contingent considerations, this orientation has led the consultant to recommend to NFTs the adoption of an evaluation approach, known by specialists as 'implementation assessment ^38.
^38 For the design of implementation assessment, see King, J.A., L. Lyons Morris, C.T. Fitz-Gibbon. 1987. How to Assess Program Implementation. Program Evaluation Kit of the Center for the Study of Evaluation, University of California, Los Angeles. Newbury Park: Sage Publications.
Implementation assessment focuses on the implementation process and on its preliminary results (including achievement, quality, and short-term effects). I cannot provide any measure of the degree of achievement of project's immediate or development objectives (i.e. of project's long-term effects and impact). Nonetheless, this approach presents several practical advantages in comparison with more sophisticated, impact-focused, evaluation designs. These include user-friendliness of procedures for data collection and analysis, rapidity of execution, and capability to provide actors with periodical feedback on their performance during the life-time of the project.
Discussions held among project management, field-staff, and the consultant during PME inception missions led to a general consensus on the suitability of keeping project-level evaluation practice within the limits of the implementation assessment approach. Nevertheless, during the present self-assessment exercise, some participants criticised the lack of concern for impact evaluation or for the assessment of the degree of achievement of project objectives at the project-level.
Though lack of sound baseline information (which is a basic condition for carrying out impact evaluation exercises), together with the technical and financial constraints affecting project PME practice, actually justify the initial design of the system, insufficient attention paid to the long-term effects of the project should be acknowledged as a major limitation ^39. Based on these considerations, the following recommendations can be proposed:
^39 The NFT in Bolivia has begun to address this problem with the establishment of a Geographic Information System (see BOL/97/8).
The Coordination Unit and the NFTs participating in the third phase of the project should reconsider the possibility of including an impact evaluation module in the project-level PME system, in light of the current assets and constraints. If the decision is made to include this module, then relevant action should be taken as soon as possible to facilitate impact evaluation exercises.
3.1.d. Skills and attitudes of field staff
The project management of all four NFTs indicated insufficient data collection skills of field workers as a major constraint in the implementation of project-level M&E practice. Moreover, project management in Nepal, Pakistan and Tunisia identified specific problems regarding the field workers' attitudes towards M&E.
Given that most field-staff had not been previously exposed to any kind of M&E practice, the development of data collection skills is considered to be directly related to the amount and quality of relevant training provided in the framework of the project. It should be stressed that during the start-up missions, the consultant provided inductive training on this subject to all NFT members. This included discussion of the relevance and practical use of the information to be collected and role-playing exercises for facilitating the acquisition of skills needed to gather and report the data to be recorded on the forms. Subsequent follow-up missions revealed that these inputs were effective only when field-staff were asked immediately to start using these tools in the field, and when, as recommended by the consultant, the project management ensured steady supervision of data collection. Unfortunately, these conditions could not always be met. The problem of the staffs attitudes
towards M&E is more complex. Specifically, the project management has identified the following two major difficulties: feelings of being controlled (Pakistan and Tunisia) and perception of M&E tasks as an additional burden (all four NFTs).
The first difficulty basically relates to the collection of data on staff time allocation data. As already pointed out, this is a sensitive aspect of the suggested process-evaluation practice and needs to be carefully addressed by project management. If strong evidence of poor acceptability continues to be a problem (as seems to be the case in Pakistan and Tunisia), discontinuing the collection of these data and shifting to a different approach to process evaluation, as suggested in paragraph b, should be considered.
The perception of M&E tasks as an additional burden is probably related to a poor understanding of the usefulness of M&E practice. In the consultant's opinion, the best and perhaps only way of changing this attitude is to provide systematic and timely feedback of M&E findings to field workers and to involve them in making sense and use of this information.
These considerations led to the following two main recommendations:
Field staff data collection activities should be regularly supervised by the staff in-charge of M&E and/or other senior staff. This supervision should have a formative orientation (i.e. aimed at providing field staff with the opportunity to consolidate and upgrade their relevant knowledge, skills and attitudes).
A timely feedback of the findings of the evaluation exercises should be provided to staff who contributed to data collection in ad hoc sessions or workshops. Their contribution in interpreting this information and in applying it to improved implementation should be promoted through appropriate facilitation techniques.
3.1.e. Analysis and use of M&E information.
All teams identified specific problems in the analysis and practical use of M&E information, including delays in processing field data (Nepal), insufficient analysis and reporting (Nepal and Pakistan), and inadequate use of findings for better re-planning (Bolivia and Tunisia).
The first two problems seem to be related to the difficulties met in Nepal and Pakistan in identifying a team member who could be entrusted with these tasks on a regular. As a consequence, M&E analysis and reporting had to be shared among managers and senior staff, leading to the overburdening of their already complex terms of reference. Underestimation of the time needed to carry out this task and, in some cases, the low priority given to its fulfillment, are likely to have contributed to slowing down the overall process.
A timely and steady feedback of M&E findings to the entire NFT has been ensured in Bolivia and Tunisia, where a better staffing situation allowed data analysis and reporting to be assigned to a single staff member, working on a full-time (or almost full-time) basis on this subject ^40. However, in both countries, practical use of this information is still found to be a problem by field-staff (Bolivia) or by project management (Tunisia). Comments specifically refer to the use of estimates of time needed to implement different activities which, according to respondents' opinions, are not taken into consideration in subsequent planning exercises. Indeed, over-planning is still a major problem for both of these national components.
^40 In Bolivia and Tunisia, reporting was facilitated by the fact that forms were filled-out in the official project languages (Spanish and French, respectively), whereas in Pakistan and Nepal, translating from Nepali and Urdu (respectively) represented an additional burden.
As stressed in the previous paragraph, provision of timely feedback on project performance allowing for improved re-planning is supposed to be one of the major advantages of the implementation assessment approach to project-level evaluation, However, this is possible only if arrangements are made to facilitate appropriate data analysis and use and if project management and staff commit to making consistent use of relevant findings.
Therefore, the following recommendations can be proposed, with the aim of improving M&E data analysis procedures and of ensuring timely application of relevant findings:
Higher priority should be given in the overall organization of the staff's work to the processing of M&E data. Whenever possible, this responsibility should be assigned on a full-time basis to one NFT member, who should possess the necessary skills or receive appropriate training. If this is not feasible, well defined M&E data processing tasks should be included in the official terms of reference of relevant staff, and time needed to perform these tasks should be adequately considered in project workplans and individual agendas.
All M&E reports (both formal and informal) should include a number of operational recommendations for re-planning relevant activities. After thorough discussion with the concerned staff, these recommendations should be fully taken into consideration in designing, programming and implementing future activities of the same kind.
3.2. Community-level PME
3.2.a. Availability of participatory PME expertise within the NFTs
3.2.b. Time requirements for community-level PME practice
3.2.c. Transfer of community-level PME skills to interest groups and grassroots organizations
Three main technical problems can be elicited from a comparison of the weakest aspects of community-level PME practice identified by NFTs.
a) availability of participatory PME expertise within the NFT;
b) time requirements for community-level PME practice; and
c) transfer of participatory PME skills to interest groups and communities.
As in the previous section, the following paragraphs present a brief discussion of each one of these problems, leading to the formulation of operational recommendations.
3.2.a. Availability of participatory PME expertise within the NFTs
The experience of all teams during the project's second phase shows that very specific expertise is needed to design, promote and facilitate community-level PME exercises. The key elements of this expertise include a clear understanding of the rationale and purpose of participatory action - research methods, the capacity to make sense of quantitative and qualitative information, strong organizational and communication skills (including fluency in the local language), and a creative and committed attitude towards the accomplishment of tasks.
Until recently, national academic and development institutions paid little attention to participatory methodology, thus finding local staff with the necessary qualifications has often been more difficult than expected. For this reason, project management has promoted in-service training initiatives. Specifically, participation of national senior staff in brief courses on PRA and participatory methods was facilitated. Brief seminars and workshops have been organized to address the training needs of extensionists and group promoters. Moreover, in Nepal and Bolivia, participatory PME field manuals have been prepared or translated
In spite of these efforts, project management has highlighted several difficulties in this area. In Bolivia, the field staffs lack of technical, organizational and communication skills for community-level PME is one of the main constraints to the development of this component of the overall PME system. In Nepal, the need for high quality PME facilitators is still felt. In Tunisia, poor performance and motivation of some staff have been identified as the most important factors affecting the development of community-level PME practice.
These findings confirm the consultant's impression that in-service training activities often have not been sufficiently relevant, effective or long to successfully address the staffs learning needs in this area. Considering the essential role that community-level PME is meant to play in the implementation of the project's approach, it can be concluded that major efforts must be made to allow NFTs to successfully face the challenges of replication and institutionalisation which will be posed by the forthcoming third phase.
To this end, the following operational recommendations can be forwarded:
Preparation of a comprehensive training package on community-level PME should be facilitated by the project's Coordination Unit in collaboration with centres of excellence in this area. Such a package should include: a community-level PME curriculum (to he developed according to learning needs identified by project management and field-staff); a series of guidelines for implementing training sessions; and a set of learning materials (including readings and self-assessment exercises).
Implementation of a solid in-service training course (with a duration of two or three months) based on the above package, should he considered as a priority activity, to he included in the third phase workplans. This course should be attended by NFTs and selected staff of local or national partner institutions. Coordination and facilitation of teaching/learning activities should be entrusted to a consultant hired ad hoc, with expertise in both training and participatory methods.
3.2.b. Time requirements for community-level PME practice
The NFTs' self-assessment exercises explicitly identified time requirements as a main constraint in community-level PME practice.
In particular, in Bolivia, insufficient availability of time has prevented the staff in-charge from establishing and operating a consistent participatory monitoring practice. In Nepal, the time needed to organize and implement evaluation and re-planning workshops has led this practice being limited to eight pilot villages (out of the 26 villages which prepared a Community Action Plan). In Tunisia, the length of the initial participatory planning process has contributed to the decision of limiting the number of douars involved in the project's first planning cycle.
Though the field-staff, through continued experience, may eventually increase their efficiency in dealing with this task, the situation is obviously not sustainable in the long-run and is thus incompatible with the objectives of institutionalisation and replication to be pursued during the project's third phase. In fact, it is unlikely that such a time-consuming practice could be successfully transferred to already under-staffed and over-committed national and local counterparts, or any other institutional partners.
In the consultant's opinion, to overcome this difficulty, a substantial change must take place in the strategy followed to promote community-level PME. In particular, greater emphasis should be placed on making interest-groups and other grassroots organizations responsible for the organization and implementation of community-level PME events, and the project should make a more solid commitment to implementing relevant capacity-building activities.
Based on the latter consideration, the following recommendation can be proposed:
During the third phase of the project, the role of project staff in the operation of community-level PME exercise should he progressively re-oriented. Less work and lime should he invested in organizing and implementing community-level PME events, whereas more emphasis should he given to providing training and formative supervision on participatory PME to interest-groups and grassroots organizations.
3.2.c. Transfer of community-level PME skills to interest groups and grassroots organizations
After a number of years of exposure to the project, are local participants skilled and motivated enough to autonomously begin organizing and implementing their own community-level PME practice? Based on the findings of the self-assessment exercise, the answer to this question seems to be "no" Project management gave rather low scores to questionnaire items related to community self-reliance. Moreover, though the NET members' statements on this subject are often controversial, the quantitative information collected indicates a lack of trust in the communities' ability to run PME exercises without the direct support of field-staff. According to members of the NFT in Bolivia, some progress has been made in participatory planning, yet the people still lack a complete understanding of the potential of community-level M&E exercises. According to the NFT in Nepal, for the time-being, communities and User Groups lack the proper capacity to assess their own activities in terms of
costs and benefits, and they are only erratically involved in M&E practice Some members of the NET in Pakistan feel that communities are not skilled enough to autonomously carry out PME exercises and that the validity of community-level evaluation is highly disputable
However, the negative opinions of project management and staff should be weighed against the rather different views conveyed by focus-group interviews with participants. Relevant statements reported in Chapter 2 suggest that in all countries, project participants have developed a rather good understanding of the rationale and purpose of the different elements of community-level PME practice; they have been able to deal autonomously with problems not solved by project staff, such as the establishment and operation of participatory monitoring in Bolivia and Nepal, and are actually interested in continuing to practice PME, as well as in learning more about the subject.
It is difficult to determined the reasons for the gap between the project staffs views and the outcomes of participant focus-group interviews. Nonetheless, it must be pointed out that, in most cases, the exposure of community members to PME practice has been limited to their involvement as participants in exercises designed and implemented by project staff. To date, little effort has been made by all field component (with the exception of Nepal) to train representatives of interest groups and grassroots organizations in running PME events or managing relevant techniques and tools. Obviously, this lack of training is the most important constraint in handing over community-level PME practice to project participants.
Based on these considerations, two main recommendations can be proposed:
A comprehensive training programme on community-level PME should he implemented for the entire duration of (he project's third phase, addressing selected members of interest groups and grassroots organizations of both new and old project areas. This training should include both residential events, in which basic PME facilitation skills will be transferred, and community-based activities, which will provide trainees with the opportunity to practice the new skills with the advice and support of qualified (or re-qualified; see above) pro/eel staff.
As soon as possible, the responsibility of organizing and implementing community-level PME events should he handed over to trained community members. However, a backstopping action aimed at controlling the quality of community-level PME practice and at providing relevant advice should be established and operated during the entire life of the project. Arrangements with local institutions should also he made, to ensure the continuation of this backstopping action after the project's termination
<section>8</section>
Annex I Project management's quantitative assessment of project-level and community-Level PME practice
Table 1 - RESULTS OF QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF USEFULNESS AND FUNCTIONING OF PROJECT-LEVEL PLANNING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION SYSTEM (PL-PME) BY CHIEF TECHNICAL ADVISORS (CTAs), NATIONAL PROJECT DIRECTORS (NPDs) AND MONITORING AND EVALUATION OFFICERS (M&E) OF PUCD FIELD COMPONENTS IN BOLIVIA, NEPAL, PAKISTAN AND TUNISIA
Table 2 - RESULTS OF QUANTITATIVE.ASSESSMENT OF USEFULNESS AND FUNCTIONING OF COMMUNITY-LEVEL PLANNING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION SYSTEM (CL-PME) BY CHIEF TECHNICAL ADVISORS (CTAs), NATIONAL PROJECT DIRECTORS (NPDs) AND MONITORING AND EVALUATION OFFICERS (M&E) OF PUCD FIELD COMPONENTS IN BOLIVIA, NEPAL, PAKISTAN AND TUNISIA
<section>9</section>
Annex - References Consulted
Publications
Coordination unit
Bolivia
Nepal
Pakistan
Tunisia
Publications
PUB/95/7. Olthethen, Theo. Participatory Approaches to Planning/or Community Forestry. Results and Lessons from Case-Studies Conducted in Asia, Africa and Latin America. A Synthesis Report. Community Forestry Working Paper 2. Rome: FTPP.
PUB/96/8, Fé d'Ostiani, Luca and Patrizio Warren, Steps towards a Participatory and Integrated Approach to Watershed Management. A Qualitative Interim Revaluation of the Inter-regional Project/or Participatory Upland Conservation and Development, Based on Results of the Internal Technical Review Meeting (Tunis, 1-20 December 1995) Field Report No 1. Tunis: GCP/INT/542/ITA, Coordination Unit.
PUB/96/10b Kane, Marilee Women's Role in Natural resource management. A Slide-show Competition. Project Bulletin, Special Issue No I; 9-12. Tunis: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PUB/96/10c M'Hamdi, Asma. From Diagnosis to Evaluation: Improved Tabouna Oven in Oued Sbaihya, Zaghouan. Project Bulletin, Special Issue No. 1: 12-13, Tunis: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PUB/96/10e. Ambroso, Andrea The Use of Visual Tools during the PRA Feedback and the Problem-tree Exercise. Project Experience in Ben Ameur and Ben Rejeb. Project Bulletin, Special Issue No. 1: 17-22. Tunis: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PUB/97/6 Fe d'Ostiani, L and Patrizio Warren Initial. Lessons Learned in Participatory Watershed Management. In Pren N. Sharma (ed.). "Participatory Processes for Integrated Watershed Management". PWMTA - FARM, Field Document No. 7. Kathmandu: GCP/RAS/161/NET - RAS/93/062.
Coordination unit
COO/91/9. Coordination Unit. Phase I Inter-regional Project Document "Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development". Rome: GCP/TNT/542/ITA.
COO/92/11. Oltheten, Theo Participatory Project Planning Guidelines for Case-studies in Community Forestry. Rome: FTPP
COO/93/4a. Fe d'Ostiani, Luca and Pieter Van Ginneken. Note on the general progress of the project and preliminary orientations for a follow-up phase. Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
COO/93/40. Van Ginneken, Pieter. Consultant's Mission Report on Participatory Watershed Management (January - April 1993). Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
COO/93/11. Coordination Unit. Phase II Inter-regional Project Document. "Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development". Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
COO/94/1. Coordination Unit. Phase III Inter-regional Project Document. Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA
COO/94/2. Fé d'Ostiani, Luca and Pieter Van Ginneken. Report on Project Internal Technical Review Meeting (29/11-10/12/1993). Rome: GCP/IN/542/ITA.
COO/94/3. Warren, Patrizio. Review of Project and Community-level Monitoring and Evaluation System. Rome: GCP/IN/542/ITA.
COO/94/8. Warren, Patrizio. Suggestions for Designing and Operating a Project and Community-level Monitoring and Evaluation System. Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA
COO/95/9 Tomasin, Antonella. Mission Report to Pakistan and Nepal (31/05-10/07/1995). Tunis: GCP/TNT/542/ITA.
COO/96/9 Tomasin, Antonella. Report of the mission to Bolivia (14-23/08/96). Tunis: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
COO/96/11b. Tomasin, Antonella. Participatory Cost/Benefit Analysis in Feasibility Assessment, Monitoring and Evaluation of Income Generating Activities: A Review of Project Experience. Paper submitted to the Internal Technical Review, Hammamet 1996. Tunis: GCP/INT/542/ITA;
COO/96/11c. Tomasin, Antonella, Monitoring and Evaluation System in Pakistan. A Review of Project Experience. Paper submitted to the Internal Technical Review, Hammamet 1996.
COO/97/7. Coordination Unit. Follow-up phase Project Document. Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development. Tunis: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
Bolivia
BOL/93/4. Van Ginneken, Pieter. Informe de la Misión del Consultor Internacional en Manejo Participativo de Cuencas Hidrográficas, Bolivia (17-27/3/1993). Samaipata/Roma: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/93/5, Coimbra, Andrés, Miguel Lino, Raúl Roca y Javier Escobedo. Diagnóstico y planificación participativa del área del proyecto (Fase I) - Informe Final. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/93/10, Warren, Patrizio. Informe de la misión del Consultor Internacional en Sistemas de Monitoreo y Evaluación Participativa, Samaipata (6/9-18/10/92). Samaipata/Roma: GCO/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/93/11. Pereira Lima, Luis. Taller de Evaluación Interna. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/94/2. Pereira Lima, Luís. Evaluación interna y programación de actividades para 1994. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/94/7, Pereira Lima, Luís Taller de Evaluación y Re-planificación Interna. Samaipata: GCP/INT 542/ITA.
BOL/94/9. Unidad de Coordinación y Equipo del Proyecto. Plan de Trabajo para la Fase de Extensión del Proyecto Interregional para la Participación en la Conservación y el Desarrollo de las Tierras Altas, Bolivia. Roma, Santa Cruz, Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/94/10a. Proyecto SEARPI/FAO Informe Interino de la Primera Fase del Proyecto: Junio 1992 - Agosto 1994 Samaipata/Santa Cruz: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/94/10b. Warren, Patrizio Informe de la Misión del Consultor Internacional sobre sistemas de seguimiento y evaluación participativa (22 de Agosto - 4 de Octubre ]994). Samaipata/Roma: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/95/1 Proyecto SEARPI/FAO. Evaluación económica del fondo rotatorio de semillas de papas. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/95/6. Departamento de Seguimiento y Evaluación. Funcionamiento del Sistema de Seguimiento y Evaluación del Proyecto SEARPI-FAO. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/95/8. Warren, Patrizio. Informe de la misión del Consultor Internacional sobre sistemas de seguimiento y evaluación y métodos participativos (12 de mayo - 4 de junio 1995). Roma/Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/95/12a. Pereira Lima, Luís, Miguel Lino Cárdenas, y Nelson Pacheco Rodríguez. Informe del Taller Interno de Evaluación y Replanificación (29 y 30 de Noviembre y 1 de diciembre de 1995). Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/95/12b. Roca Steveriynk, Ricardo. Como hacer un análisis participativo de costo/beneficio. Una guía para extensionistas. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA
BOL/95/12c. Roca Steveriynk, Ricardo y Javier Escobedo. Análisis participativo de costos/beneficios en un proyecto de manejo de cuencas. Experiencias en Samaipata, Bolivia. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/96/4. Roca Steveriynk, Ricardo (coordinador). Manual de seguimiento y evaluación de actividades conservacionistas. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/96/6b. Pacheco Rodríguez, Nelson, Luís Pereira Lima, Use van der Put, y Ricardo Roca Steveriynk. Informe del Taller Interno de Evaluación y Re-planificación. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA. (incluye resultados de la Primera Campaña Contra la Erosión del Suelo y Evaluación de Actividades Conservacionistas).
BOL/96/6c. Roca Steveriynk, Ricardo y Luis Pereira Lima, Material para la valuación de las actividades conservacionistas. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/96/9b. Escobedo, Javier. Sistemas cié producción sostenibles en las tierras montañosas del Oriente Boliviano: experiencia en Samaipata.
BOL/96/10a. Delnoye, Rick. Participation in Conservation: the Case of Bella Vista. A Case Study About an Experience in Participatory Upland Conservation and Development. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/96/10b. Escobedo Urquizo, Javier. El nuevo rol de los municipios en la gestión integral y participativa de las cuencas hidrográficas. Experiencia en la Cuenca Alta del Río Piraí, Municipio de Samaipata (Santa Cruz, Bolivia). Ponencia presentada en el IV Encuentro de la Red Nacional de Manejo de Cuencas (Piura, Perú: Octubre de 1996). Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA
BOL/96/11a. Pereira Lima, Luis. Informe del Taller Interno de Evaluación y Replanificación. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA (incluye Evaluación de la participación de la mujer).
BOL/96/11b. Proyecto SEARPI-FAO Estratificación Socioeconómica y Cultural de la Cuenca Alta del Río Piraí. Documento de Campo ?9. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/96/11d. Pereira Lima, Luís. Evaluación de la participación de la mujer en actividades que apoya el Proyecto en la Cuenca Alta del Río Piraí en el período Julio '95 - Septiembre '96. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/97/5a. Escobedo, Urquizo, Javier. La planificación participativa municipal y el manejo integral de cuencas. Experiencia en la Cuenca Alta del Río Piraí, Municipio de Samaipata. Documento presentado a la reunión de la Red Boliviana de Manejo Integral de Cuencas (Tarija, 15-16 mayo 1997). Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/97/5b. Scotto, Fabio. Ejemplo de Evaluación Económica de Prácticas de Conservación. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
BOL/97/7. Warren, Patrizio. Informe de la Misión del Consultor Internacional sobre Sistemas de Planificación, Seguimiento y Evaluación y Métodos Participativos. Samaipata (14 -29 de Junio 1997). Roma/Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA. (Incluye entrevistas, cuestionarios y otros documentos producidos a lo largo de la Misión).
BOL/97/8. Rojas, Arturo. Experiencia con el Sistema de Información Geográfica en el manejo de cuenca. Samaipata: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
Nepal
NEP/92/3. Coordination Unit and Project Team. Project Document. Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development, Nepal. Rome/Kathmandu: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/92/9a. Coordination Unit and Project Team. Indicative Workplan for the Assessment and Planning Phase (16 October 1992 - 15 January 1993) Gorkha GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/92/9b. Win, Sein, Hogan Rufelds, Goapl Upadaya and Deepak Amathya. Progress of Participatory Planning Phase. Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/93/lb. Shrestha, R.L. Joshi: Participatory Assessment and Planning Field Exercise on Gender Issues, Bhusunde Khola Watershed, Gorkha.Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/93/3. PUCD Project. Final Report of the Initial Participatory Assessment and Planning Phase. Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/93/4. Van Ginneken, Pieter Report on the Mission of the International Consultant in Participatory Watershed Management (9-20/1/1993). Gorkha/Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/93/7. Mori, Paolo. Mission report (6/5-5/7/1993). Gorkha/Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/93/12a. Mori, Paolo. Mission report (12/10-11/12/1993). Gorkha/Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/94/lb. SAGUN (Social Action for Grassroots Organization). Micro Planning for 1994. Gorkha/Kathmandu: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/94/3. PUCD Project. Conceptual Paper on Participatory Upland Conservation and Development. Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/94/9. Coordination Unit and Project Team. Three-year workplan. Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development, Nepal. Rome/Kathmandu: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/95/5. Ohler, Fritz and Chapa, Deepak R. Inter-group Linkages and Experience Sharing Workshop, Bhusunde Khola Watershed (5-13/02/95). Gorkha GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/95/10a. Warren, Patrizio. Mission Report of the Consultancy on Monitoring and Evaluation for the Field Component in Nepal (10/9 - 1/10/1995). Gorkha/Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/95/10b. PUCD Project. Project Team Building and Conceptual Workshop (16 -20/8/1995). Field Document 3/95. Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/96/3a. Bahadur Singh, Surya. Participatory Livestock and Agro-forestry Development Plan for Bhusunde Khola Watershed. Field Document 1/96- Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/96/3b. NEW ERA, Development Research & Training for Change. A Training Report on Participatory Rural Appraisal. Field Document 2/96. Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/96/4a. Rimal, Basanat Kumar. A Concept Paper Prepared/or Review Mission Aimed at Strengthening arid Improving the Participatory Planning Process and Management Skills in Watershed Management for Nepal. Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA
NEP/96/4c. Qwist-Hoffman, Helle Community Action Plans Database/or Bhusunde Khola Watershed. Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA
NEP/96/10a. PUCD Project. User Groups Self-Reliance Training Workshops in the Bhusunde Khola Watershed From 1-6 May 1996. Field Document 5/96 Gorkha GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/96/10b. Fé d'Ostiani, Luca. Note on the Mission to Nepal. Gorkha/Kathmandu: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/96/10c. Warren, Patrizio. Consultancy on Monitoring and Evaluation for the Field Component in Nepal. Kathmandu. Gorkha and Bhusunde Khola Watershed, 18 September - 14 October 1996. Mission Report. Gorkha/Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA
NEP/96/10d. Rimal, B.K., B.R. Dhungana and F.M.J. Ohler (editors) Project Self-Evaluation Workshop. Gorkha 11-12 July 1996. Field Document 6/96 Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/96/10e. NEW ERA, Development Research & Training for Change Participatory Rural Appraisal Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Guidelines in Watershed Management. A Field Guide. Field Document 3/96 Kathmandu/Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/96/12a. Warren, Patrizio, Pushpa Lal Moktan, Deepak Raj Chapa. Strengthening the Participatory Process through Community Based Evaluation and Re-Planning Workshops. Report of a Pilot Experience Carried out by Local User Groups and Project Staff in Majghaon Village, Choprak VDC (Bhusunde Khola Watershed, 10-11 October 1996. Field Document 7/96. Rome/Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/97/2a. Andreasen, L; and H. Qwist-Hoffmann. A Framework for an Economic Evaluation of Improved Goat Production by Women's Groups in the Bhusunde Khola Watershed, Gorkha, Nepal. Gorkha. GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/97/2D. Ohler, Frits. Results of the 1996 Dry Season Evaluation of Water Source Protection Activities Completed in 1993 - 1995. Field Document 1/97 Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/97/50. Chapa. D.R., A. Pouydal, H. Qwist Hoffmann and F.M.J. Ohler Participatory Rural Appraisal and Planning in the Bhusunde Khola Watershed from October 1995 to January 1997. Field Document 3/97. Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/97/7. Ohler, Frits. Participatory Implementation in 1996 and 1997 of 26 Community Action Plans Formulated Between October 1995 and January 1996 in the Bhusunde Khola Watershed. Field Document 4/97. Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
NEP/97/10. Ohler, Frits. Monitoring and Evaluation of 83 User Groups in the Bhusunde Khola Watershed. Field Document 7/97. Gorkha: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
Pakistan
PAK/92/3. Coordination Unit and Project Team. Plan of Operations for the First Phase of the Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development, Pakistan. Quetta/Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/93/2a. Van Ginneken, Pieter. Report of the Mission of the International Consultant in Participatory Watershed Management. Pakistan: 21 January - 3 February 1993. Quetta/Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/93/2b. Miagostovich, Marco. Final Report of the Initial Participatory Assessment and Planning Phase. Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/93/5 Kane, Marilee Consultant's Progress Report. Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/93/9a. Palmeri, Paolo. Improving the Project's Participatory Approaches. Consultant Report 3 Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/93/9b. Jahangir, Arbab Mohammad. Case-Study on Participatory Planning of the Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development (GCP/INT/542/ITA. Pakistan) Quetta/Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA and FTPP
PAK/93/11. Kane, Marilee Final Report of the Initial Participatory Assessment/planning and Implementation by the Women's Programme. Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/94/9. Coordination Unit and Project Team. Three-year workplan for the Extension Phase of the Inter-regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development, Pakistan. Quetta/Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/94/10. Qureshi, Jalal-ud-din. Monitoring of Ground Water Levels in Kanak Valley, Mastung. Monitoring Report No. 1. Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/95/3b. Warren, Patrizio. Mission Report of the Consultant in Monitoring and Evaluation and Participatory Methods for the Field Component in Pakistan (28/1 -28/2 1995). Quetta/Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/95/6. Kane, Marilee. Convention 14 June 1995: Women's Voices. Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/95/9a. Miagostovich, Marco. Quantitative Data on Project's Activities and Outputs. Monitoring Report 2. Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/95/10b. Warren, Patrizio. Mission Report of the Consultant in Monitoring and Evaluation and Participatory Methods for the Field Component in Pakistan. Follow-up Mission. Quetta/Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/95/11. Project team. Three Years of Project Activities. Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/95/12a. Kane, Marilee. Village Development Planning as a Mapping Exercise. Paper submitted to the Internal Technical Review Meeting (Tunis, December 1995) Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/96/2a. Kane, Marilee. On the Natural resource management Slide Show. Field Notes. Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/96/7a. Mori, Paolo Second Phase. Mid-term Progress Report. Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA
PAK/96/7b. Kane, Marilee. A Slide Competition on Natural resource management in Noza, Kanak Valley. Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA
PAK/96/11a. Warren, Patrizio. Note on a Brief Follow-up Visit of the M&E Consultant to the Field Component in Pakistan (15 - 22/10/1196). Quetta/Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
PAK/96/11b. Mori, Paolo. Monitoring and Evaluation System at Community Level. Examples from Pakistan. Paper submitted by the NFT in Pakistan to the Internal Technical Review, Hammamet 1996 Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA
PAK/97/3. Kane, Marylee. The Credit Programme and Income Generating Activities of Brahui Women. Working Paper N° 3 Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA - Pakistan
PAK/97/7. Kane, Marylee. A Community Evaluation of the FAO Inter-Regional Project for Participatory Upland Conservation and Development. Working Paper N° 2. Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA - Pakistan.
PAK/97/8. Mori, Paolo and Shah Rehman. Range land Rehabilitation in Balochistan. The Experience of Kanak Valley. Working Paper N° 4. Quetta: GCP/INT/542/ITA -Pakistan.
Tunisia
TUN/94/9. Unité de coordination et Équipe du Projet. Plan d'Opérations du Projet Inter - régional pour la Conservation et le Développement à Caractère Participatif des Hautes Terres (GCP/INT/542/ITA), Tunisie. Tunis/Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/95/4. Warren, Patrizio. Plan de formation sur la mise en route du processus participatif pour l'équipe de terrain de la composante tunisienne. Rome/Tunis: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/95/11. Rossi, Massimo. Formation de l'équipe pluridisciplinaire et démarrage du diagnostic participant dans le bassin versant de l'Oued Sbaihya. Rapport de Mission. Zaghouan/Tunis: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/1b. Zighidi, Moncef. Proposition de Programme d'Intervention du Consultant en Sociologie. Zaghouan/Tunis: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/3b. Équipe du projet. Planification à la base douars Ben Ameur, Ben Rejeb, Dhouaya et El Agailia. Plans initiaux, mars 1996.. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/3c. Zighidi, Moncef. La trilogie diagnostic, planification, action.Mission d'appui en sociologie, développement communautaire et méthodes participatives. Note N° 3. Tunis: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/5. Ambroso, Andréa. Note sur l'application des outils visuels pendant la restitution des informations et la construction de l'arbre à problèmes dans les douars de Ben Ameur et Ben Rejeb. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA
TUN/96/6a. Rossi, Massimo. Formation de l'équipe pluridisciplinaire et planification participative dans le bassin versant de l'Oued Sbaihya. Rapport de mission Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/6b. Warren, Patrizio. Rapport de mission du consultant en méthodes participatives et systèmes de suivi et évaluation. Zaghouan 15 mai - 5 juin 1996. Zaghouan/Rome: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/7. Toumia, L., Ali Ben Mabrouk et Andréa Ambroso. Note sur la démarche appliquée pour la phase de programmation. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA
TUN/96/8a. Ambroso, Andréa. Réflexions sur l'application du système de planification, suivi et évaluation Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/8b. Ben Mabrouk, Ali. Diagnostic et planification participatifs: calendrier. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/8c. Ben Boubaker, Brigitte. Itinéraire méthodologique des phases planification et programmation. Zaghouan/Beja: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/9a. Warren, Patrizio. Auto-évaluation formative de l'expérience du diagnostic et de la planification participatifs (Oued Sbaihya, Septembre 1995 - Juillet 1996) Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/9c. Ambroso, Andréa. L'itinéraire méthodologique pour le DPP proposé pour le reste des douars de la zone de Oued Sbaihya. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/9d. M'Hamdi, Asma. Rapport mensuel d'activités (1-31/8/96). Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/10a. Équipe du Projet. Compte rendue de la réunion de re-programmation et d'évaluation du système de PSE (3 octobre 1996). Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/10b. M'Hamdi, Asma. Rapport mensuel d'activités (1-30/9/96). Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/11a. M'Hamdi Asma. Rapporte Trimestriel. Période de 1/8 au 31/10/1996. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/11b. M'Hamdi, Asma. Rapport mensuel d'activités (1-31/1096). Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/12a. Équipe du Projet. Premier rapport sur les diagnostic et la planification participatifs dans les bassin versant de l'Oued Sbaihya. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/12b. Compte rendu de la réunion d'évaluation du système de PSE et de re-programmation. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/12c. Hemda. Évaluation de l'acceptabilité des couvercles à tabouna par les Femmes de quatre douars (25 décembre 1996). Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/96/12d. M'Hamdi, Asma. Rapport trimestriel. Période du 1/11/96 au 31/1/1997. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA
TUN/96/12e M'Hamdi, Asma Rapport mensuel d'activités (1-30/1 1/96). Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA
TUN/97/1a. M'Hamdi, Asma Du diagnostic à l'évaluation. Action couvercle à tabouna. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA
TUN/97/1b, Équipe du projet Micro-résultats pour le premier trimestre 1997. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA
TUN/96/1e. M'Hamdi, Asma. Rapport mensuel d'activités (1-31/12/96). Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/97/2a. M'Hamdi, Asma. Rapport mensuel d'activités. (1 - 31 Janvier 1997). Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/97/2b. Équipe du Projet. La réorientation participative du programme de reboisement de la foret de Sidi Salem dans le bassin versant de l'Oued Sbaihya. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/97/6a. Ambroso, Andréa Indicateurs et mesure de l'érosion du sol dans le bassin versant de l'Oued Sbaihya. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/97/6b. Équipe du projet. Micro-résultats programmés pour les mois de juin, juillet et août 1997. Zaghouan: GCP/INT/542/ITA.
TUN/97/8. M'Hamdi, Asma. Projet avicole. Analyse de faisabilité participative. Enquête d'identification des bénéficiares. Zaghouan: GCP/IN/542/ITA.
Inter - regional Project Participatory Upland Conservation and Development - GCP/INT/542/ITA
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, FAO 00153, Rome, Italy
Ph.: 00 396 57055905 - Fax: 00 396 57056445 - E-mail: luca.fedostiani@fao.org
