<title>National Forestry Action Programme - Barbados: Executive summary. National Forestry Action Programme --  Barbados: Executive Summary</title>
<section>1</section>
List of abbreviations
ASL
- Above sea level
BADC
- Barbados Agricultural Development Corporation
BIDC
- Barbados Industrial Development Corporation
CCP
- Country Capacity Project
CIDA
- Canadian International Development Agency
CMT
- Country Mission Team
EIA
- Environmental Impact Assessment
FAO
- Food and Agricultural Organization
GIS
- Government Information Service
IDB
- Inter-American Development Bank
NCC
- National Conservation Commission
NGO
- Non Governmental Organization
NFAP
- National Forestry Action Programme
ODA
- Overseas Development Agency
SCB
- Soil Conservation Board
SCU
- Soil Conservation Unit
TCDC
- Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries
UWI
- University of the West Indies
<section>2</section>
1. Introduction
1. This document presents proposals for a National Forestry Action Programme for Barbados. The proposals are based primarily on the findings and recommendations contained in the Main Report of the multidisciplinary Country Mission Team (CMT - see Appendix I) supported by FAO/ODA, which visited the island between 11th February and 15th March, 1991, as a result of a request made by the CARICOM Secretariat to FAO in 1989, on behalf of the various CARICOM Governments.
2. The aims and objectives of the mission were to identify the principle causes of deforestation in Barbados and to facilitate preparation of a 20-year forestry development plan for the country.
3. The exercise was carried out in close collaboration and with active participation of national counterparts from relevant agencies in the public and private sectors, and NGOs. (Appendix I).
4. Eight working papers were prepared (list at Appendix II) in which the Barbadian situation was analyzed according to the five priority areas of the TFAP). These reports were subsequently used to integrate the main report which forms the basis for the proposed Barbados NFAP. The main areas treated were as follows:
- Forestry in Land Use,
- Forest-based Industries Development,
- Fuelwood and Energy,
- Conservation of Forest Ecosystems,
- Institutions.
5. The Main Report which was prepared by the CMT, was presented to the Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries in May 1991, from where it was circulated to various agencies/organisations, private individuals and landowners, for study and comments.
6. The Report was considered and discussed at the National Round Table in July 1991, where the extent and focus of the NFAP exercise was determined. Modifications were therefore required to the CMT report and proposals to bring these more in keeping with economic, social and institutional requirements and realities of the country.
7. The NFAP programme proposed in this document is nested within the framework of the national development objectives. Its basic aims are focussed towards the establishment and management of a national forest area on Government and private lands to ensure conservation of soil and water resources, protection of forest ecosystems and production of wood and related products, and towards the generation of social and economic benefits for the community on a sustainable basis.
8. Achievement of these goals is conceived through a balanced strategy of study, conservation, development and utilization of land and forest resources in the context of the national and sector objectives.
9. The proposed NFAP for Barbados includes strategies to attract technical assistance and investment to optimise the potential contribution of forestry and a tree cover to sustainable social and economic development for the country. The NFAP is now being incorporated into the Agricultural Sector Development Plan for 1993-2000.
10. Reference should be made to the following documents, which complement this NFAP:
Regional Overview of the CARICOM/FAO Tropical Forests Action Programme in the East Caribbean. CARICOM/FAO/BDDC-ODA. July 1993 (includes a summary of proposed forestry development initiatives at the regional/sub-regional level - regional project proposals 01-05).
The Status of Mangrove Conservation in the CARICOM Islands of the Eastern Caribbean, Report to the Commission of the European Communities, as part of the TFAP for the Caribbean Region. P. Bacon, 1991.
Report on Forest Research - special report as part of the TFAP for the Caribbean Region. C. Buford Briscoe, 1991.
Map of the Caribbean Region showing the location of Barbados
<section>3</section>
2. Background information/ecology
2.1 Natural regions and ecosystems
2.1 Natural regions and ecosystems
10. Barbados is the most easterly of the Caribbean Islands, located at about Latitude 13° 10'N and Longitude 59° 35'W. Its land surface area is approximately 431 km^2, measuring 34 km from north to south and 22 km from east to west at the widest point. The climate is tropical maritime, with temperatures varying from 23° to 29° C, moderated by prevailing 16 to 24 kph winds from the North-east Trades. The annual precipitation averages 1516 mm, rising from 1000 mm in coastal areas to approximately 2220 mm in central and north-eastern areas. The majority of this precipitation is received between the months of June and November.
11. Geologically, the island comprises a largely coral limestone cap, overlying almost impermeable but easily eroded basement material of mudstones, sands and shales, exposed by uplift in the north-eastern/central section of the island (Scotland District).
12. Topographically, the island rises from the south and west in a series of gently sloping coral terraces to reach its highest point at Mt. Hillaby in the north-central part of the island, at the edge of the Scotland District. The topography varies from the gently sloping coral terraces, dissected by gullies in the limestone areas, to steep broken slopes rising to 340m above sea level in the Scotland District, where the basement materials are exposed.
13. The soils of the island, generally, are derived from limestone and are shallow and alkaline except in the Scotland District, where they are developed from the basement materials of sandstones, shales and clays, and vary from neutral to slightly acid.
14. The island was completely wooded when "discovered". However, in the space of 30 years following European settlement in 1627, the land was almost totally deforested to make way for sugar cane agriculture, an activity which has dominated the island's landscape since then. The flora and fauna of the island were so severely affected by this activity, that today only vestiges of the original forest and wetland ecosystems, and very little of the original macrofauna, can be found. The most notable of the remaining floral ecosystems is the Turner's Hall Wood, an area of approximately 30ha, located in the north-central part of the island. Other major associations of natural/succession vegetation can be found in the existing network of gullies, along escarpments, on sheltered cliffs and along the sea shore (Appendix III). The network of revegetated gullies (formed by the collapse of the roofs of underground drainage channels of the coral cap) is an important reservoir of
biodiversity, and has been a focal point of local NGO attention.
15. The ecosystems of the island consist of:
- moist tropical forests and gullies;
- drought tolerant forests and littoral vegetation;
- mangroves, wetlands and artificial swamps;
- windswept sea cliffs and sand dunes; caves; agricultural lands;
- urban and rural parks and gardens.
16. The above mentioned systems provide a range of habitats for plant and animal life, and produce a number of interesting faunal/floral associations, some of which are sufficiently unique to merit protection (See Appendix III & IV).
<section>4</section>
3. Review of forestry sector
3.1 Role of forestry and trees in the national economy
3.2 Relevant development policies
3.3 Legislative and administrative framework
3.4 Constraints affecting the forestry subsector's development
3.1 Role of forestry and trees in the national economy
17. In the past the concept of forestry in Barbados was never considered outside of the context of its land stabilization and soil conservation benefits, and its advantages were never seriously explored to any extent. Official national acknowledgement of the potential benefits and effects of trees in the urban landscape and as a means of agricultural diversification only came in 1982, with the enactment of the Tree Preservation Act (1982), which was designed to protect large trees in urban areas dominated mainly by casuarina and mahogany.
18. However, there has been a long national interest in the establishment of fruit trees, as is witnessed in the several official projects launched by the government during the past decade to promote the growth of orchards, primarily to replace reliance on imports and to earn additional foreign exchange.
19. In spite of such programmes, Barbados still has only 2% of its land area, some of which supports a high volume of forest biomass, under tree cover. There is also a marked absence of an official forest policy statement, and although tree planting has been encouraged in the past, there was no mention of the role of forests in any of the Government's Development Plans.
20. The country has no forest industry. Tree harvesting for industrial purposes is conducted by one company integrated directly with the furniture industry. Harvesting consists of the selective removal of native mahogany trees, for which prior Town and Country Planning permission is obtained.
21. There are, however, approximately 57 companies on the island involved in the manufacture of wooden products, which contributed some BDS $8.4 million (US $4.2 million) to GDP and 5% of employment in the manufacturing sector in 1989. A significant handicraft industry, utilising wood and non-wood products, many of which are derived from natural vegetation habitats, also exists.
22. As a small, open economy with a need to dampen fluctuations from economic shocks occurring in the wider world and in the travel and tourism industry, the Government has pursued a policy of economic diversification based on agricultural and manufacturing projects, and aimed at high value-added and skilled-market niches, in order to increase foreign exchange earnings.
23. Efforts are being made to intensify and maximise the returns from these sectors, and in particular to ensure that idle lands are brought back into agriculture while maintaining a constant level of sugar production. Because of the uncertainty of the tourism and sugar industries, the country needs to pay serious attention to all opportunities for economic growth and for the optimal use of its natural resources.
24. Additionally, the need to conserve water supplies, to protect against the hazards of climate change due to global warming and to minimize the effects of frequent flash floods and droughts, makes it imperative for Barbados to adopt a forest policy and implement a programme of reforestation to deal with these areas. The value of such a programme can be measured against the real costs of investment in new water facilities, construction of shoreline defences and replacement of damaged property and dislocated services which would be incurred without such a programme.
25. Under such circumstances, in tandem with other national strategies, the role of forestry and trees should therefore be heightened to become an integral contributor to maintaining Barbadian living standards on a sustainable basis.
26. Additional benefits which would stem from the adoption of such a programme include:
i) provision of rural employment opportunities;
ii) shelter of croplands from the desiccating effects of the prevailing winds;
iii) land stabilization and soil conservation/amelioration;
iv) production of timber, fuel, fodder, fruits, nuts and other products;
v) protection of natural habitats and wildlife for recreation, scientific research and tourism;
vi) utilization of idle lands.
3.2 Relevant development policies
27. Details of the Government's land use and environmental policy, and outlines of the overall programme for the socio-economic growth of each of the sectors in the country, are presented in the Development Plan 1988-1993, the Agricultural Sector Plan 1988-1993, and the Physical Development Plan 1988-1993, for both the long and medium term.
28. The medium-term strategy of the Development Plan is focussed on the maintenance of stable growth by correcting the sluggish performance of agriculture, tourism and manufacturing, and on the provision of increased employment for the work force.
29. Forestry and trees could contribute significantly to the above-mentioned goals in the following areas/activities:
i) Manufacturing - promoting the development of small enterprises; maximizing the use of indigenous resources; giving priority support to the garment, furniture and handicraft industries; forging stronger linkages with tourism and other sectors.
ii) Agriculture - effecting the optimal utilization of the land; enabling the sector to meet a greater share of domestic demand for food; stimulating non-sugar agriculture and agro-industrial developments-implementing the rural development programme.
iii) Housing - encouraging construction for low income families; shifting the subsidized cost to lower cost options to benefit a larger number of persons.
v) Spatial Development - better planning in the location of service and other activities, while protecting the proper use of land and other resources.
v) Education and Culture - orienting individuals towards the knowledge, skills and attitudes necessary for productive living to enhance the quality of the labour force; deepening awareness and understanding of the Barbadian heritage; promoting cultural cooperation through collaboration and exchanges at sub-regional, regional and international levels.
vi) Environment - priority attention to coastal erosion, ground water pollution, soil erosion, destruction of important natural habitats, dwindling of rare flora and fauna; strengthening linkages with NGOs, Caribbean countries, regional and international institutions; updating of legislation; introduction of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA); initiation of educational programmes.
vii) Transport and Works - protecting and conserving the island's water resources and road network.
30. The Government has also stated its intention, in the Agricultural Sector Plan 1988-93, to halt the alienation of agricultural land, to reverse the trends in production of major crops, to increase the output of newer crops for export and for the domestic market, and to create new job opportunities through an intensified diversification programme. Resource conservation, including the planting of trees, particularly in the Scotland District, is also targeted for intensification and extension throughout the island.
3.3 Legislative and administrative framework
31. Barbados has no specific legislation on forests. Existing enactments are directed towards the conservation of trees and animals, rather than the management of forests. The existing legislation is moreover fragmented and uncoordinated and not rooted in any central theme (McCalla, 1991):
i) The Cultivation of Trees Act (1951) provides income tax incentives for the establishment of woodlots of approved tree species.
ii) The Tree Preservation Act (1981) prohibits the felling of trees generally, except under specified conditions, while the killing of certain birds is prohibited by the Wild Birds Protection Act (1907).
iii) The Soil Conservation (Scotland District) Act (1958), which is of particular importance in this context, provides for the protection of soil, and the protection and rehabilitation of the vulnerable soils in the Scotland District, a region known for its geological instability and soil erosion.
iv) Other legislation provides for the protection of water, beaches and natural beauty, the prevention of praedial larceny, infestations, cane fires, animal trespass and floods; and for the establishment of various authorities to manage the provisions of certain of these acts (McCalla, 1991).
32. The Soil Conservation Unit (SCU), which functions under the aegis of the Minister of Agriculture (1991) and of a Soil Conservation Board (SCB), has been carrying out small-scale tree planting programmes in the Scotland District since its inception in 1957. Such activities have been geared primarily towards the protection of pockets of woodlands, for soil conservation purposes. The SCU has also been active in the installation of engineering and deep drainage systems to combat erosion and to stabilise land movement in the District.
33. There is also a National Conservation Commission Act (1982), which established the National Conservation Commission (NCC) as a statutory body with overall responsibility for public parks, beaches and caves, as well as for conservation of sites and buildings in the national interest.
34. As the current legislation stands, many of the statutes touch and concern the same areas. However, many issues are not covered by any existing legislation. This situation has arisen due to the fact that legal development has tended to deal with single issues, an approach which has contributed to confusion among agencies, non-enforcement of regulations, and a dilution of responsibility.
35. The Government has nonetheless stated its commitment to halt environmental degradation and to improve the quality of life for its citizens. Intrinsic to the achievement of such goals, is the requirement for the Government to move urgently towards a rationalization of environmental legislation to ensure adequate provisions for the protection and development of forests, natural habitats and wildlife, in the interest of conservation of the environment and biological diversity.
36. Comprehensive legislation is required under the circumstances, to provide for the wide coverage of environmental matters and to provide for a monitoring/coordinating role for the Environmental Unit of the Ministry of Labour, Consumer Affairs and the Environment for example, the revamping of the draft Environmental Protection Act, 1986.
3.4 Constraints affecting the forestry subsector's development
37. A significant opportunity for forestry production was identified by the TFAP CMT as a result of the evaluation of the forest plantings carried out by the SCU at Joe's River Forest with the assistance of the Trinidad Forestry Division in the 1960s. From the assessment made, it was felt that continued plantings of such species on abandoned farmlands in the Scotland District over the years, could have allowed Barbados to have controlled the land instability and soil erosion problems that have plagued the Scotland District for more than three decades. It was also estimated that by now the country would also have been able to utilise such forests to supply its wood requirements for the furniture and handicraft industries, while reducing imports, providing additional opportunities for ecology-based tourism and enhancing the availability of its water resources. At the same time, new job opportunities would have contributed to the relief of the rural unemployment problem and to
the revitalization of rural villages. (Raj Kumar, 1991).
38. Notwithstanding the potential identified, there has been negligible growth and development in the country's forestry subsector over the years. The following factors were identified as contributors to this state:
i) The country's overwhelming reliance on the SCU, a unit with no trained ecological, silvicultural or arboricultural personnel, to oversee its activities of tree planting (undertaken primarily as a soil conservation measure), or for monitoring the security of the forest cover on Government lands in the Scotland District, and which furthermore has not been given a mandate to pursue the management of the properties on which it operates under the Soil Conservation Act.
ii) Inadequate management of the Government's agricultural properties by the body responsible, the Barbados Agricultural Development Corporation (BADC) due to its preoccupation with commercial priorities under severe financial constraints.
iii) The absence of environmental planning and management skills in the NCC, an agency which seems logically to be the one entrusted with a mandate for the management of a system of national parks and protected areas.
iv) The lack of a coherent land use policy, of adequate extension services, and of incentives designed to encourage optimal utilization of land on a sustainable basis, which has been further compounded by the reluctance of local labour to work in traditional agriculture.
iv) The existence of a profusion of laws which seems to cause confusion within agencies regarding overlapping areas of responsibility.
v) Failure to enforce enabling legislation although this and other facilities exist for example, for the control of stray livestock.
<section>5</section>
4. Overview of priority areas
4.1 Forestry in land use
4.2 Forest-based industrial development
4.3 Fuelwood and energy
4.4 Conservation of forest ecosystems
4.5 Institutions
4.1 Forestry in land use
4.1.1 Land use distribution
4.1.2 Use of idle lands
4.1.3 Watershed management
4.1.4 Agroforestry
4.1.5 Forest management and silviculture
4.1.1 Land use distribution
39. The landscape of Barbados is generally dominated by sugar cane lands, with tree crops, woodlands and natural vegetation occurring only in pockets, and with cotton and intensive vegetable farming areas widely dispersed. Developed urban settlements are concentrated mainly along the western and southern coasts, with industrial facilities, sub-urban housing and abandoned land scattered throughout the island.
40. With the decline of sugar cane cultivation, active arable acreages, particularly sugar cane acreages, have been declining at a rate of approximately 500ac/yr since the early 1960's, falling from 66,000ac (26,730ha) to approximately 54,000ac (21,870ha) in 1991. This trend has led to a proliferation of idle properties, and to a rise in land speculation for housing/tourism development and more lucrative purposes. Abandoned farm-lands have also been reverting to scrub and grass, a situation which has led to an increase in the level of uncontrolled livestock grazing.
41. There is no definitive statement on forestry in the current land use figures for Barbados. The Agricultural Sector Plan (1988-93), projects the following land use targets, which give no estimate for tree cover:-
Sugar cane
14,590 ha
Cotton
2,430 ha
Cut flowers
405 ha
Vegetables
810 ha
Fruits
405 ha
Pasture
3,610 ha
TOTAL
22,250 ha
4.1.2 Use of idle lands
42. In the 1980's, fiscal penalties were introduced to discourage landowners from keeping land idle. However, this policy approach did not prove successful, as no realistic range of economically viable alternate options was provided for the owners. Suitable and attractive alternatives are required in such circumstances to make such policies a success.
43. In the absence of a national land use policy, the incidence of idle lands associated with shortcomings in the agricultural policy is envisaged to continue to constitute a major problem at both the national and individual property levels.
44. The following suggestions, which include forestry/agroforestry options, were advanced for consideration in the solution of this problem:
i) lease of lots to small farmers for vegetables (over a suitable period which would not create problems for either lessee or lessor), since market gardening can improve self-sufficiency in food production;
ii) provision of incentives to integrate small farms in the diversification effort as a nucleus for expansion;
iii) encouragement for spontaneous efforts by youth groups in beautification and tree planting on idle lands;
iv) initiation of community/cooperative projects, involving schools.
4.1.3 Watershed management
45. Barbados depends solely on its ground water resources for all of its water needs. Existing resources are extremely limited and are threatened by excessive use, potential contamination from salt intrusion, chemical pollutants and inadequate sewage and waste disposal facilities.
46. While measures are currently being put in place to attempt to cope with these problems, attention needs to be paid to the exploration of measures that will facilitate increased recharging of the aquifer to cope with increased water demands by the year 2000, and to maintain the land in optimal condition for percolation and soil water retention. Reforestation and the development of trees can provide an effective means of achieving these goals, while at the same time reversing in some measure, the problems caused by historical deforestation and abuse of the land.
47. However, the use of forestry as a solution to the problems outlined above involves a gestation period of 20 - 30 years before any returns on investment. Under such circumstances, a compromise which would allow the land to be used for short-term returns at minimal cost and risk of erosion, would therefore be needed. Such a compromise is achievable through an integrated watershed planning and management programme which is compatible with the existing ecological conditions of the various watersheds.
4.1.4 Agroforestry
48. The concept of agroforestry (the production of agricultural crops in combination with trees), has been practised in Barbados on large and small holdings for a long time. It has been viewed as an excellent conservation practice for the sustainable use of land and the maximization of returns, while protecting soil and water resources. The strengthening and/or reintroduction of this concept with intelligent modifications adapted to local situations, is seen as an important strategy for the revitalization of a portion of the sluggish agricultural sector.
4.1.5 Forest management and silviculture
49. The most important areas of forest/natural/succession vegetation in the island are found at Turner's Hall Wood in the Scotland District, in the Undercliff Woods at Hackleton Cliff/Foster Hall, and in some of the gullies.
50. Turner's Hall Wood was studied some 46 years ago (Gooding, 1944), and was documented to be a valuable habitat for flora and fauna. An update is now opportune to determine whether there has been any change in its structure and composition over the years. This is a unique area which needs to be protected. Its protection should be facilitated through the establishment of a buffer zone around the area, with entry being restricted except for scientific purposes.
51. The performance of the various species of trees planted on reforested areas in the Scotland District has been remarkable. Not only has their growth been remarkable, but their successful development has revealed an unexpected potential for timber production which enhances the conservation benefit for this area.
52. Exotic and native species (including Whitewood, Pink Poui, Honduras mahogany, Eucalyptus, Saman, Teak, Cypre and Casuarina) planted at Joe's River Forest in 1963, have survived remarkably well with a minimum of silvicultural care and attention. The resultant stand is a closed high forest, with the appearance and structure of a tropical rain forest, rich in lianas and epiphytes. The micro-climate and ecology of the site also represent ideal conditions for the introduction of specialised economic tropical plants, like rattan, which do not occur naturally in the western hemisphere.
53. Preliminary estimates indicate that Honduras mahogany and Cypre could yield 170 m^3/ha on a 30-year rotation, a yield which compares well with current projections for Trinidad and Jamaica. However, a more detailed inventory of the stands is required to verify these initial findings which suggest that mixed hardwood species would be a viable proposition for reforestation and land utilization throughout the Scotland District and on suitable sites elsewhere in the island. As the area now stands, it offers exciting opportunities for silvicultural research, ecotourism and public education to promote forestry. Any intervention in this area should be carefully planned and properly executed to obtain the maximum benefit. While this area could form part of a national parks system, it is recommended for preservation as an example of a managed forest.
54. In the absence of a forestry authority, the SCU has been functionally responsible for the protection of pockets of forests on government estates in the Scotland District. It has made a commendable effort, within its limitations, in the establishment of trees as a conservation measure. Its influence has, however, been limited basically to the Scotland District.
55. In urban areas, the performance of West Indian mahogany has also been impressive, in particular, the large size of older specimens and the large number of specimens occurring on a wide range of sites around the country. The occurrence of this valuable timber tree in such great profusion is a feature unique to Barbados, as this species is now a rarity in most Caribbean islands. Indications are that it has hybridised with the Honduras mahogany and that certain sites are particularly favourable to its growth. Generally however, many trees are suffering from die-back, either due to over-maturity, root-rot or some other disease, and should be effectively utilised before their timber decays.
56. The organised harvesting of such trees, combined with an inventory and replanting programme, could provide an excellent opportunity for urban forest utilization to provide a sustained supply of high-value raw material for the furniture and handicraft industries, while maintaining in perpetuity this unique feature of the Barbadian landscape. (Priority Project 2.0).
4.2 Forest-based industrial development
57. Barbados has been a nett importer of wood products since the island was deforested in the 17th Century. The major portion of this has gone into housing and construction. Imports are currently valued at almost Bds $50 million (US $25 million) annually. The country also imports some Bds $32.3 million (US $16.1 million) worth of paper products plus a further Bds $6.4 million (US $3.2 million) of fruits and nuts, many of which are products of trees. In recent years there has been a trend away from the use of wood towards concrete in residential construction, but nevertheless, the requirement for wood is still sizeable.
58. In the furniture industry approximately 2,000 m^3 of mahogany, valued at Bds $1.8 million is imported annually, representing a volume which could be met from a production forest of 1,500ha, harvesting 50ha annually on a 30-year rotation. A multi-purpose reforestation programme is strongly recommended under the circumstances (see projects 1.1, 1.2) with the short-term objective of early cover and rehabilitation of the land, and with the long-term objective of timber production and ground water storage.
59. The roots and leaves of certain species such as rock balsam, pandanus, cabbage bark, wild cane, khus khus and coconut shell are also being increasingly used in handicraft production. Although these are not considered as forest products, they comprise a significant demand for the natural items which can be derived from forested areas, and can generate sustainable income within the economy. There is a shortfall in supply with respect to most of these materials. Exploitation of the potential for the development of these resources merits active pursuit through resource inventory, planning and controlled management, to supply the existing market demand.
4.3 Fuelwood and energy
60. During the Second World War, Barbados carried out widespread plantings of Casuarina to ensure supplies of fuelwood. However, since 1952 the country has been able to supply most of its energy requirements from petroleum and natural gas from local sources. Progressive improvements in living standards have now also almost eliminated the demand for fuelwood at the country level.
61. The Government is nevertheless aware of the continuing world energy crisis and the need to conserve its resources. Accordingly, studies have been conducted to explore alternative sources such as wind, solar and tidal energy. It has been suggested by the CMT that this policy should be extended to include fuelwood for industrial purposes, particularly as a replacement for bagasse in the sugar factories and to provide for a more valuable use of bagasse as chicken litter or livestock feed. An offshoot of such a policy would be the generation of energy, and the feeding of any surplus generated into the electricity grid, not only during the sugar harvest but throughout the year. Project 3.0 proposed by the CMT addresses this need via a feasibility study into the use of fuelwood for industrial energy.
4.4 Conservation of forest ecosystems
62. There has been a general perception in Barbados that the island has no forests nor wildlife, and that nature parks and recreational areas are largely for the enjoyment of foreign visitors.
63. However, despite its small size, the country possesses considerable wildlife and ecosystem diversity, much of which could enhance the growth of tourism, but which, more importantly, could awaken the society's consciousness and pride in its natural environment. The island has only four (4) endemic plant species but about twenty (20) endangered flowering plants.
64. The island is not rich in wildlife species, but population levels of some individual species are quite high. The Ministry of Labour, Consumer Affairs and the Environment has set up a working group on biodiversity to examine the whole question of the island's plant and animal resources and their conservation. The group's support will be invaluable to facilitate the work of the lead agencies in the planning and implementation of NFAP projects.
65. NGOs and environmental agencies with capable members are willing to play an active role in changing public perceptions to encourage preservation of the ecological heritage of the country. The Government has also indicated its commitment to halt environmental degradation.
66. The following ecosystems (See Appendix III for location map) were identified for priority attention in this context, under the NFAP Priority Project 4.0:
i) Mangroves and Wetlands - Graeme Hall Swamp, the largest area of mangroves on the island, which consists of magnificent stands of red and white mangrove, and is frequented by migratory birds.
ii) Batts Rock/Lazaretto Littoral Woodland - a scenic area of mangroves, which could be developed with trails and other facilities.
iii) The Gully Network - the system of coral limestone drainage channels colonized by natural vegetation, which now offer sanctuary for many endangered species, but many of which are being threatened by illicit dumping of garbage.
iv) Hackleton Undercliff Woods - the most extensive area of natural woodlands, consisting of some 280ha of semi-deciduous mesophytic forest dominated by whitewood and balsam.
v) Turner's Hall Wood - remnants of the original forest vegetation of the island, and which constitutes the most species-rich site for the island's flora, comprising some 100 species within a 30ha area. The middle of this wood is threatened by a massive landslip which requires stabilization by engineering works.
vi) Secondary forests of the Scotland District - emerging naturally on abandoned farmlands and demonstrating the benefit of tree cover for land stabilization, and which can be enriched by the introduction of valuable timber species, while hydrological and edaphic studies are carried out to determine the site changes which have taken place.
67. Barbados has also recently approved a programme for a National Conservation Strategy, aimed at public education and the dissemination of information regarding environmental management and protection. This approach is directed towards enhancing participation and interest in the preparation and implementation of projects like the NFAP that seek to achieve actual physical benefits from environmental management.
68. The Government has also stated its intention to establish a national park on the east coast of the island (Physical Development Plan (1988-93)), a measure which would go a long way towards the conservation and development of forests and other ecosystems (See Appendix IV). Enabling legislation and institutional strengthening is, however, required before this can be implemented.
4.5 Institutions
69. The conservation and development of forest resources requires capable resource management institutions, properly staffed and financed, and provided with the necessary authority for efficient execution of their responsibilities.
70. In Barbados, a number of government and private agencies have a potential role to play in the development of the forestry sector. These can be classified as follows:-
i) Lead Agencies - Soil Conservation Unit; Barbados Agricultural Development Corporation; National Conservation Commission; Environmental Unit.
ii) Planning Institutions - Public Investment Unit, Ministry of Finance; Town and Country Planning Authority; Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries; Ministry of Labour, Consumer Affairs and the Environment.
iii) User Groups - Barbados Industrial Development Corporation; Ministry of Tourism; Barbados Water Authority.
iv) Other Relevant Agencies - Barbados Agricultural Society; Barbados Information Service; Ministry of Education; Sugar Industry; Ministry of Energy.
72. Currently, the concepts of forestry, agroforestry, national parks, etc. have no home in the public sector. However, the potential exists in some Government agencies and autonomous, statutory bodies to carry out expanded mandates to encompass these areas, ie. the SCU, the BADC and the NCC, if given the required resources.
73. While there is a wealth of skills and manpower in the country, a shortage of personnel exists within specific institutions. The lead agencies are not adequately equipped at present in terms of funding, staff, or expertise, and will therefore need to be strengthened considerably to improve their management capability for a successful implementation of the NFAP process. The forestry subsector is unlikely to grow without the emergence of institutions with dynamic leaders who wish to achieve results. There would therefore be a need to harness and redirect the existing capabilities in a unified manner, while improving implementation mechanisms and imparting new skills, to ensure the success of the programme.
74. The BADC already controls land in the Scotland District and should be challenged to undertake management of such properties. With proper plans and staffing in place, this organisation should be able to attract project financing to initiate a comprehensive strategy for developing a long-term tree and optimal land use policy. Similarly, the NCC which has high visibility in caring for public parks and beaches, could expand its mandate, with added skills and finances.
75. The SCU has some experience in this area, and with adequate staffing and institutional strengthening, could also play a key role in ensuring the success of this programme.
76. The Ministry of Agriculture Food and Fisheries should be responsible for the co-ordination of the NFAP. As such, the necessary country capacity (See proposed project 5.0) should be developed in this entity as a matter of priority.
<section>6</section>
5. Plan of action
5.1 Relevant national development policies
5.2 Long-term subsector policy and objective
5.3 Medium-term priority area policies and projects
5.4 The national forestry action programme
5.5 Plan coordination and implementation
5.6 Immediate follow-up
77. Based on the results and review of the Main Report and the working documents prepared by the CMT, a plan of action for the development of Barbados' forestry subsector was formulated under which a long-term policy is proposed. It identifies priority area policies and objectives with specific action projects for a five-year period. The plan is estimated to cost a total of US $7.8 million, of which US $4.0 million would be contributed by international donors while the remaining US $3.7 million would be Barbados' contribution in local currency.
5.1 Relevant national development policies
78. The contribution of Forestry and trees to the socio-economic development and environmental stability of Barbados can be realised through the following stated facets of national development policies:
- the maximisation of the use of indigenous resources, particularly for the furniture and handicraft industries;
- the forging of stronger linkages with tourism and other sectors;
- the stimulation of non-sugar agriculture and agro-industrial development to meet a greater hare of domestic demand;
- the enhancement of rural development;
- the promotion of the optimal utilization of land;
- the protection and conservation of the island's soil and water resources.
79. In keeping with these guidelines, it is recommended that the NFAP be implemented as part of the Government's official development policy.
5.2 Long-term subsector policy and objective
80. The proposed objective of the NFAP is to establish and manage a national forest estate on Government and private lands to ensure conservation of soil and water resources, protection of forest ecosystems and production of wood and related products to achieve social and economic benefits on a sustainable basis. The long-term Forest Policy under this subsector would be the following:
(a) to foster the protection of natural forest resources;
(b) to promote the development of forest estates and tree cover where appropriate, including reforestation of suitable areas of the Scotland District;
(c) to encourage the application of agroforestry in land use islandwide and the utilization of urban trees for industrial raw material supply as well as for the enhancement - of the landscape and recreational purposes: and
(d) to undertake research on silviculture and uses of forest products.
5.3 Medium-term priority area policies and projects
81. In the medium term, the proposed programme for the various areas would be as follows:
82. Forestry in land use - recognising the multiple benefits which accrue from existing tree cover and the promotion of forestry and agroforestry as appropriate land uses for idle lands, abandoned farms and areas in need of conservation.
83. The aim will be to allocate a sufficiently adequate area of suitable land to forestry and agroforestry to ensure conservation of soil and water resources, sustainable income and employment for rural people, and increased production of crops and livestock. A strategy of land use survey, classification and planning will be required to produce effective policies, regulations, facilities and incentives towards encouraging greater tree coverage (i) in the Scotland District and (ii) islandwide, thereby increasing the occupation and utilization of land.
84. The two following specific projects were proposed for this area:
Project No. 1.1: Forestry Development and Watershed Management in the Scotland District
Overall objective: - To create a protective tree cover, comprising mixed hardwood forests, agroforestry/orchards/pastures, for soil amelioration, land stabilization and utilization, recreation and ecotourism, supply of timber, wood and non-wood products, rural employment and community development.
Strategy: - Appointment of a Scotland District Board, charged with preparation of a development/management plan and a suitable project document for obtaining IDB financing. The plan would be managed by a strengthened Lead Agency, with a new forestry and trees mandate and incorporating the SCU, aimed at exercising improved management of government properties and giving encouragement to private land owners.
Project No. 1.2: Promotion of Agroforestry on Idle and Abandoned Lands
Objective: - To improve soil fertility, increase ground water percolation and storage, reduce wind desiccation and exposure, increase utilization of idle lands, increase production of fruits and livestock products, facilitate land reform and redistribution.
Strategy: - Extension of the tree planting programme countrywide, through pilot demonstrations and farmer training, and introduction of community pasturage systems.
85. Forest-based Industrial Development - the proposed policy in this area, would seek to ensure production of future supplies of wood raw material and the utilization of existing mature timber for industrial purposes, while maintaining the scenic value of trees in urban areas.
86. The aim of this policy would be to secure sustainable indigenous timber supplies for local wood users and to develop economic uses of other raw materials derived from forests and trees. This will require inventory assessment of existing stands and the planned utilization of mature mahogany, followed by planting and restocking with trees of high value and improved genetic stock. Younger trees will be tended by proper weeding and pruning. Improved technology in wood utilization and processing will also be introduced and promoted.
87. The following project was considered of high priority in this area:
Project No. 2.0: Urban Wood Utilization
Objective: - To ensure the sustainability of mahogany and other valuable woods for industrial uses.
Strategy: - The NCC would be strengthened and assigned the responsibility for assessing and exploiting dying and over-mature mahogany trees, replanting and extending the planting of improved mahogany seedlings and saplings, caring and maintaining younger trees for shade, landscape enhancement and production purposes, supplying furniture/handicraft wood users with raw material in cooperation with BIDC, and utilising tree residues for mulch/compost/wood energy.
88. Fuelwood and energy - the proposed policy is aimed at exploring opportunities for utilizing fuelwood for energy purposes and promoting feasible wood energy applications in appropriate industries.
89. The aim would be promote the use of agroforestry products and to conserve other energy sources, whether as fuelwood or charcoal, both to promote the use of agroforestry products and to conserve other energy sources, and at the same time ensure the viability of using abandoned and idle lands for multiple conservation benefits, while contributing to social and economic development in rural areas. This programme proposes implementation by the BADC, requiring harvesting, chipping and transporting fuelwood for use by sugar factories with convenient in-feed capacity.
Project No. 3.0: Feasibility of Fuelwood for Industrial Energy
Objective: - To investigate and promote the utilization of agroforestry products as renewable indigenous fuel for use mainly in sugar factories, and to contribute to conservation of other energy sources.
This project was designated as a low priority. However, the consultants felt that it warranted early attention in view of the rapid fluctuations taking place in the international oil market. The full cooperation of sugar factories and estates would be essential for this to succeed.
Conservation of Forest Ecosystems
90. This proposed policy area seeks to maintain biological diversity and to protect forest ecosystems and natural habitats, while sustaining the flow of social, economic and environmental benefits derived from forests. Its aim is to promote increased public awareness of environmental problems and the need to conserve the natural resources of the island as part of the nation's heritage.
91. In the absence of a coordinated system of management of existing habitats, the following project was considered to be of extreme importance:
Project No. 4.0: Establishment of a National Parks/Protected Areas System
Long-term objective: - To ensure conservation and management of natural ecosystems and protected areas, to maintain biodiversity and to stimulate research in natural products and public appreciation for the environment.
Strategy: - One of the Lead Agencies i.e. NCC, BADC, SCU, will have to be strengthened with technical, scientific and managerial skills to plan and execute management plans for ecological sites, improve the skills and performance of the manual staff, ensure protection of designated areas, and involve NGOs and the public.
Institutions
92. The aim of this policy area is to provide effective environmental legislation and capable institutions for proper administration and for the sustainable development of forestry and related programmes, with the participation of local people and interest groups. Its purpose is to improve the environmental management capacity of the country and to install multisectoral and participatory mechanisms for the planning and monitoring of forestry and related programmes, a factor of the highest priority if the national long-term policy and objective is to be attained. In accordance with this goal, the following project was proposed for immediate attention:
Project No. 5.0: Country Capacity for NFAP Implementation
Objective: - To build capacity in the lead agencies to ensure initiation and coordination of NFAP implementation, effective natural resources administration and management, project preparation and management, public education and extension, and environmental management for conservation of natural resources.
5.4 The national forestry action programme
93. Of the six projects identified by the CMT for Barbados, Fuelwoods was not considered as relevant to the Barbados context and was therefore deferred. The revised NFAP programme for Barbados therefore comprises the following priority areas/projects:
1. Forestry in Land Use
Project No. 1.1 - Forestry Development and Watershed Management in the Scotland District
Project No. 1.2 - Promotion of Agroforestry on Idle and Abandoned Lands
2. Utilization of Forest Products
Project No. 2.0 - Urban Wood Utilization
3. Conservation of Forest Ecosystems
Project No. 4.0 - Establishment of National Parks/Protected Areas System
4. Institutional
Project No. 5.0 - Country Capacity for NFAP
94. The following areas were highlighted for attention:
(i) Forestry-related Legislation
(ii) Institutional Development
95. It was also recommended that the concept of Forestry be incorporated into the National Development Plan, and that comprehensive forestry-related legislation be introduced to assist in the long-term development of forest and tree-related areas.
96. The following recommendations were made by the CMT, as a follow up to the presentation of their country report:
i) The TFAP National Coordinating Committee be retained as steering committee to advise the Minister of Agriculture and the inter-ministerial council.
ii) The SCU be strengthened with staffing and training in environmental management skills for national parks and protected areas.
iii) The Environmental Unit should carry out public education in coordination with the BADC and NCC.
5.5 Plan coordination and implementation
5.5.1 Coordination
5.5.2 Implementation
5.5.1 Coordination
97. The Barbados NFAP consists of five projects. Because of the number of agencies involved and the need for intersectoral and public participation, the development and installation of a suitable coordinating mechanism would need to be put in place.
98. It was recommended that:
i) the TFAP National Coordinating Committee be renamed the NFAP Steering Committee and strengthened by co-opting additional members, if necessary.
ii) the steering committee's importance should be elevated by appointing the Permanent Secretary as Chairman, to clearly signal at this level the Government's commitment to the NFAP, and to ensure the opportunity for streamlining official decision-making and for harmonizing intersectoral and NGO participation.
99. Coordination of the NFAP would be necessary both at the national level and at the operational level.
At the national level
i) the steering committee would be responsible to the Minister of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries for directing project preparation, examining project documents and environmental assessments, steering their approvals through the Cabinet as necessary, and setting guidelines for timely project implementation.
ii) where desirable, the Chairman would set up subcommittees to review special subject matters so as to optimize the skills and contributions of committee members and their respective organizations.
At the operational level
i) the steering committee should be provided with special secretariat and follow-up services, and a NFAP Projects Section should be established in the Ministry of Agriculture, headed by a Project Coordinator and supported by a Project Planner and Rural Economist.
ii) As the focal point of contact, the Project Coordinator would be responsible to the Chairman for preparing the committee's agenda, while coordinating all inputs necessary at each operational stage of implementation of the NFAP.
100. The CMT felt that the development of institutional capacity for the forestry sector in Barbados could benefit enormously from technical assistance, by way of a Chief Technical Advisor, to assist in harmonizing the complexities and priorities of establishing forestry as a new discipline and providing for the special requirements of environmental management. It has therefore been suggested that the Government of Barbados should urgently examine its needs in this respect and initiate early contact with potential international and bilateral donors, particularly the ODA and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), the latter having already indicated its interest in the possibility of a project for development of the sector.
5.5.2 Implementation
101. Apart from the CCP, the other NFAP projects will be implemented by lead agencies which currently are inadequately equipped with the required expertise. Under such circumstances, the success of these projects will depend on the early installation of capacity by way of new mandates, staffing and training, equipment, funding and technical assistance, to get them off the ground.
102. The following action was recommended by the CMT as part of the strategy to assist in achieving such goals:
i) that the BADC's mandate be expanded to include responsibility for forestry and agroforestry activities;
ii) that the SCU and facilities be transferred to form the nucleus of the BADC's technical services arm;
iii) that the NCC be assigned responsibility for national parks and protected areas, as well as urban forestry, and be required to work closely with NGOs, UWI and BIDC in exercising its entire mandate.
103. The personnel and particulars proposed by the CMT for implementation of the priority projects, as a function of their evaluation of the skills currently available in Barbados and the opportunity to expand the capability of the SCU, BADC and the NCC, are found at Table 1:-
Table 1. Personnel required for priority project implementation
Personnel
Number
Project
Duration
(Man Months)
Foreign
Project Manager/Expert
30 mm
30 mm
24 mm
24 mm
60 mm
Forestry Inventory Spec.
18 mm
6 mm
6 mm
Foresters
48 mm
48 mm
48 mm
48 mm
Arborist
60 mm
Wood Utilization Spec.
12 mm
Timber Harvesting Spec.
6 mm
6 mm
Parks Planner
24 mm
Chief Technical Adviser
36 mm
Local
Agronomist
60 mm
Livestock Extension Specialist
60 mm
Soil Conservation Specialist
60 mm
60 mm
Economist
12 mm
6 mm
6 mm
Terr./Marine Biologists
120 mm
Landscape Architect
24 mm
Project Coordinator
60 mm
Project Planner
36 mm
Rural Economist
36 mm
Field Technicians
240 mm
240 mm
48 mm
120 mm
Secretaries
60 mm
60 mm
60 mm
60 mm
5.6 Immediate follow-up
104. In preparation for the Roundtable meetings, it was recommended by the CMT that:
i) the TFAP National Coordinating Committee immediately review the draft project profiles and obtain Government's endorsement of the Plan.
ii) informal contact be made at the same time, with potential donors regarding their likely interest in the proposed action projects, so that suitable adjustments may be made where desirable.
<section>7</section>
6. Draft project profiles
6.1 Summary of NFAP budget by priority areas
6.2 Proposed implementation schedule
6.3 Project profiles
Bibliography
6.1 Summary of NFAP budget by priority areas
Table: Summary of NFAP Budget by Priority Areas (US S'000)
Priority Area
Donor
Barbados
Total
Land Use (1.1, 1.2)
Industries (2.0)
Fuelwood (3.0)
Conservation (4.0)
Institutions (5.0)
Totals
%Total
6.2 Proposed implementation schedule
6.3 Project profiles
1.1 Forestry development and watershed management in the Scotland district
1.2. Promotion of agroforestry on idle and abandoned lands
2.0 Urban wood utilization
4.0 Establishment of a national parks
5.0 Country capacity for NFAP implementation
1.1 Forestry development and watershed management in the Scotland district
PROJECT NO:
PRIORITY AREA:
Forestry in Land Use
PROJECT TITLE:
Forestry Development and Watershed Management in the Scotland District
DURATION:
5-10 years
LOCATION:
St. Lucy, St. Andrew, St. Joseph, St. John, St. Philip parishes
TARGET BENEFICIARIES:
Watershed Inhabitants and Landowners
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
To plan and implement a reforestation programme and to introduce agroforestry systems and practices for stabilizing and utilising idle lands
ACTIVITIES
1. Update data base on land credibility, critical sites and rural sociology
2. Prepare comprehensive integrated land use plan
3. Obtain financing and commence implementation of reforestation, watershed management and agroforestry measures
4. Evaluate the effects of the measures
5. Establish agroforestry demonstrations on private lands, to include trees, fruits, fencing, fodder, and shelter for livestock
6. Organise field training days for farmers
7. Assess existing tree cover and orchards
8. Control straying livestock
OUTPUTS
1. Optimal land utilization plan covering Government properties, private lands, infrastructure and services
2. Analysis of agroforestry opportunities
3. 1 000 ha of reforested lands
1 000 ha of conservation treatments
4. Quantified effects of main treatments
5. 5 agroforestry demonstration sites
6. 250 farmers trained in agroforestry systems
7. Elimination of uncontrolled grazing
8. Evaluation of existing trees and forests
INPUTS
Equipment and Materials
Personnel
Microcomputer W. GIS
Project Manager/Forestry Expert
2 x 4wd vehicles
Arborist
Survey instruments
Forest Inventory Specialist
Aerial photography
6, Forester/Field Technicians
Maps
Livestock Specialist
Tools
Extension Agronomist
Planting materials
Soil Conservation Specialist
Economist
Secretary
Training
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
BADC, Scotland District Board
LINKAGES WITH OTHER PROJECTS
CIDA/FAO Land Use Planning; Promotion of Agroforestry (1.2); National Parks and Protected Areas (4.0).
OBSERVATIONS
This project will immediately focus the skills of the SCU to initiate a planned programme of reforestation and conservation in this well-documented area. The BADC will be able to take the lead in implementing affordable land use systems on its own land, while fulfilling its mandate.
PROJECT BUDGET
Contribution
Donor (US$)
Local (Bds$)
Equipment
Microcomputer
2x4wd vehicles
Survey instruments, etc.
Tools
Planting materials
Sub-total
Personnel
Project Manager
30 mm
Arborist
30 mm
F/Inventory
12 mm
Livestock Specialist
30 mm
Extension Specialist
30 mm
Soil Conservation Specialist
60 mm
Economist
6 mm
Foresters
48 mm
240 mm
Secretary
60 mm
Totals
1.2. Promotion of agroforestry on idle and abandoned lands
PROJECT NO:
PRIORITY AREA:
Forestry in Land Use
PROJECT TITLE:
Promotion of Agroforestry on Idle and Abandoned Lands
DURATION:
5 years
LOCATION:
Scotland District/Islandwide on Coral Soils
TARGET BENEFICIARIES:
Small and large land owners and landless farmers
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
To plan and implement a programme for stimulating application of agroforestry practices towards improved soil fertility, greater water retention, optimal utilization of land and increased farm output.
ACTIVITIES
1. Update land capability data, critical sites, and rural sociology
2. Prepare integrated rural development plan
3. Establish agroforestry demonstration sites and arboretum, to include windbreaks, fuelwood, fodder, fencing and pasturage for livestock
4. Organise field training for farmers
5. Evaluate the effect of measures
6. Assess existing tree cover, including orchards and gullies
OUTPUTS
1. Optimal land utilization plan
2. Increased soil water retention and fertility
3. Increased agricultural production
4. 250 farmers trained in agroforestry and conservation practices
5. Reduced soil erosion
6. Evaluation of the potential use of gullies
INPUTS
Equipment and Materials
Personnel
Microcomputer W. GIS
Project Manager/Forestry Expert
2 x 4wd vehicles
Arborist
Survey instruments
Extension Agronomist
Aerial photography
Livestock Specialist
Maps
Soil Conservation Specialist
Tools
Economist
Planting materials
Forest Inventory Specialist
Foresters/Field Technicians (6)
Secretary
Training
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
BADC, Ministry of Agriculture
LINKAGES WITH OTHER PROJECTS
CIDA/FAO Land Use Planning; Forestry Development/Watershed Management (1.1); Urban Wood Utilization (2.2); National Parks and Protected Areas (4.0).
OBSERVATIONS
This project will demonstrate the benefit of tree cover and tree crops as a means of utilising idle and abandoned lands on a sustainable basis.
PROJECT BUDGET
Contribution
Donor (US$)
Local (Bds $)
Equipment
Microcomputer
4wd vehicles
Survey instruments, etc.
Tools
Planting materials
Sub-total
Personnel
Project Manager
30 mm
Arborist
30 mm
F/Inventory
12 mm
Livestock Specialist
30 mm
Extension Specialist
30 mm
Soil Conservation Specialist
60 mm
Economist
6 mm
Foresters
48 mm
240 mm
Secretary
60 mm
Totals
2.0 Urban wood utilization
PROJECT NO
PRIORITY AREA
Forest Based Industrial Development
PROJECT TITLE
Urban Wood Utilization
DURATION
2 years
LOCATION
Bridgetown and Urban Areas
TARGET BENEFICIARIES
Furniture and handicraft industries
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
To promote development of a viable and constant supply of high value wood and handicraft materials through utilization and restocking of mature mahogany trees.
ACTIVITIES
1. Inventory of urban hardwood trees
2. Appraisal of existing processing capacity and demand
3. Prepare exploitation plan
4. Training in harvesting and tree care skills
5. Planting of fine hardwoods
6. Training in wood processing and equipment technology
OUTPUTS
1. Expanded furniture and handicraft industry
2. Increased foreign exchange earnings
3. Utilization of declining trees
4. New skills in tree harvesting and care
5. Establishment of sustained production system
6. New urban tree standard
INPUTS
Equipment and Materials
Personnel
Chainsaws and pruning saws
Project Manager/Urban Forestry Expert
Mobile log crane/hoist
Forestry Inventory Specialist
Wood Utilization Specialist
Timber Harvesting Specialist
Economist
Foresters(2)
Training
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
National Conservation Commission (NCC)
LINKAGES WITH OTHER PROJECTS
Promotion of agroforestry (1.2)
OBSERVATIONS
The cooperation and support of the Chief Town Planner and BIDC will be essential to implementation of this project.
PROJECT BUDGET
Contribution
Donor (US$)
Local (Bds$)
Equipment
Chainsaws, etc.
Mobile log crane
Protective gear
Sub-total
Personnel
Project Manager
24 mm
F/Inventory
6 mm
Wood Utilization
12 mm
Timber Harvesting
6 mm
Economist
6 mm
Foresters
24 mm
24 mm
Totals
4.0 Establishment of a national parks
PROJECT NO:
PRIORITY AREA:
Conservation of Forest Ecosystems
PROJECT TITLE:
Establishment of a National Parks/Protected Areas System
DURATION:
5 years
LOCATION:
Proposed sites islandwide, including Graeme Hall and Chancery Lane Swamps, Batts Rock/Lazaretto Littoral Woodland, Hackleton Undercliff Woods, Turner's Hall Wood, and gullies to be selected
TARGET BENEFICIARIES:
Nationals and Tourists
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
To plan and establish a system of nature reserves and protected areas for conservation of biodiversity, public education regarding the natural environment and for investment in ecotourism
ACTIVITIES
1. Demarcation and gazetting of proposed sites and buffer zones
2. Preparation of management plans
3. Training of professional and support staff
4. Development of interpretive and educational programmes
5. Collection of field data on biodiversity, etc.
6. Planning and layout of visitor facilities, trails
7. Specifications and maintenance prescriptions
OUTPUTS
1. Barbados National Parks Service
2. Improved management capability
3. More visitors and national environmental awareness
4. Increased revenues
INPUTS
Equipment and Materials
Personnel
Project Manager/Forestry Expert
Parks Planner
Terrestrial Biologist
Marine Biologist
Landscape Architect
4, Forester/Field Technicians
Secretary
Training
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
National Conservation Conservation (NCC)
LINKAGES WITH OTHER PROJECTS
Coastal Conservation; National Conservation Strategy; Forestry Development/Watershed Management (1.1); Promotion of Agroforestry (1.2)
OBSERVATIONS
This project should be monitored with the cooperation of NGOs and coordinated with similar projects in the Caribbean and Central American region.
PROJECT BUDGET
Contribution
Donor (US$)
Local (Bds$)
Personnel
Project Manager
60 mm
Parks Planner
24 mm
Terrestrial Biologist
60 mm
Marine Biologist
60 mm
Landscape Architect
24 mm
Foresters
48 mm
120 mm
Secretary
60 mm
Totals
5.0 Country capacity for NFAP implementation
PROJECT NO:
PRIORITY AREA:
Institutions
PROJECT TITLE:
Country Capacity for NFAP Implementation
DURATION:
5 years
LOCATION:
Islandwide
TARGET BENEFICIARIES:
BADC, NCC, SCU, MAFF
IMMEDIATE OBJECTIVES
To implement the steps necessary for successful initiation of NFAP projects, and to establish the appropriate institutional capacity and mechanisms for effective project implementation and management
ACTIVITIES
1. Preparation of implementation plan and project documents in keeping with donor requirements
2. Coordination of project inputs
3. Review and enactment of legislation
4. Public education, including herbaria, research
5. Selection and training of staff in lead agencies
OUTPUTS
1. Technical assistance and funding of projects
2. Clarification of environmental agency roles
3. Improved country capacity
4. NGO and public participation
INPUTS
Equipment and Materials
Personnel
Microcomputer w. GIS
Chief Technical Adviser
Vehicles
Project Coordinator
Project Planner
Rural Economist
Secretary
Training
NATIONAL LEAD IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries
LINKAGES WITH OTHER PROJECTS
CIDA/FAO Land Use Planning
OBSERVATIONS
This project is of the highest priority for the NFAP, and should be initiated as soon as possible
PROJECT BUDGET
Contribution
Donor (US$)
Local (Bds$)
Equipment
Microcomputer
Vehicles
Sub-total
Personnel
CTA
36 mm
Project Coordinator
36 mm
Project Planner
36 mm
Rural Economist
36 mm
Secretary
60 mm
Totals
Bibliography
Gooding, E.G.B (1944) "Turner's Hall Wood, Barbados" Caribbean Forester 5 153-170.
<section>8</section>
Appendix I
CMT Members, Local Counterparts, and Areas of Special Study.
CONSULTANT Telephone (Office)
Fax
ADDRESS
DISCIPLINE (S)
DURATION OF ASSIGNMENT
LOCAL COUNTERPART
G. SYMES
(i) (809) 92-78960
(ii) (809) 92-98351
C/o FAOR
Kingston,
Jamaica
Team Leader
Forest Management
Institutional Policy
Feb.10 - Mar.15
RALPH FARNUM (MAFP) NC
Mr. Ian King (Min. of Labour, Environmental Unit).
DR. D. RAJKUMAR
C/o Dept.Crop Sc.
UWI St. Augustine
Agro.Forestry/Crops
Feb.10 - Mar.15
Mr. Bewley Watson (SCU, MAFF)
DR. S. CARRINGTON
C/o Dept. Crop Sc. UWX Cave Hill Barbados
Conservation/ Herbaria
Biology Diversity
Feb.10 - Mar.15
(UWI)
Ms. Philippa Newton
Barbados Museum and Historical Society
W. McCALLA
(i) 9809)92-21217
22 Duke Street
Kingston,
Jamaica
Legislation
Feb.10 - Mar.15
(MOL-EU)
Dr. Mark Griffith
DR. C. JAMES
(i) (809)62-5114
Forestry Div. Private Bay 30 St. James
Trinidad and Tobago
Parks/Environment
Wildlife
Feb.13 - Mar.01
(NCC-Barbados)
Mr. Keith Neblett
DR. L. ISHMAEL
(i)(809)425-1310 ext 704
C/o FAOR
Bridgetown
Barbados
Social Forestry
Public Education
Feb.11 - Mar.01
(BKA/NATIOMAL TRUST)
Celeste St. Hill
Susan Mahon
K. LAURIE
(i)436-6680
B'dos Agri.Soc.
The Grotto
Beckles Road
Bridgetown
Agro. Forestry/
Livestock
Feb.11 - Mar.01
Mr. Clarence Bellamy (BAS)
L. GRAVELINES
(i)(705)945-6733
(ii)(705)945-9450
105 Princeton Drive
Sault Ste. Marie
Ontario P6B 5T4
Canada
Forestry
Economics
Feb.10 - Mar.01
Mr. T Beckles
Econ. Planning Unit (MAFF)
DR. G. ELLIOTT
Glanrafon House
Glanrafon, Llagoed
Gwnnedd LL58 BPH
United Kingdom
Utilisation
Feb.10 - Feb.22
Mr. Vernon Martindale
Mr. Villenueve Greaves
Mr. Vere Browne (IDC)
D. LANG
(i)
(ii)(416)628-6930
627 The Nest Hall
# 170S
ETO Bicoke
Ontario M9C 4x5
Canada
Land Use
Watershed Management
Feb.04 - Feb.15
(NCC - Barbados)
Mr. Edward Cumberbatch
S. RAMNARINE
Forestry Division
Private Bag 30
St. James
Trinidad and Tobago
Silviculture
Feb. 17 - Mar.08
(BEA/National Trust)
Mr. Hewley Watson
1) Scheduled
2) Actual
<section>9</section>
Appendix II: List of the reports of the CMT
Symes, G. (1991) "Main Report - A Proposal for a National Forestry Action Plan."
McCalla, W.J. (1991) "Report on Legislation and Institutions."
Raj Kumar, D. (1991) "Report on Agroforestry and Crops."
Laurie, K. (1991) "Report on Agroforestry and Livestock."
James, C. (1991) "Report on Wildlife and National Parks."
Gravelines, L.A. (1991) "Report on Forest Economics."
Ishmael, L. (1991) "Report on Social Forestry."
Carrington, C.M.S (1991) "Report on Biological Diversity, Herbaria and Conservation of Tropical Forest Ecosystems."
^*Lang, D.M. (1991) "Report on Landuse/Watershed Management."
[^*Report received after completion of Main Report.]
Ramnarine, S. (1991) "Report on Silviculture."
<section>a</section>
Appendix III: Map of Barbados
Figure
<section>b</section>
Appendix IV: Recreation and Conservation Policies and Proposal
Figure
