<title>Enhancing the income of small scale farmers and the landless through integrated natural resources management - Consolidated report of the SPPD Mission (SPPD-DP/MYA/98/003)</title>
<section>1</section>
List of abbreviations
CBO
Community Based Organisation
CFI
Community Forestry Instruction
CLEW
Community Level Extension Worker
CTA
Chief Technical Adviser
EM
Effective Microbes
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organisation
FD
Forest Department
FECU
Forest and Environment Conservation Unit
FIGG
Farmer Income Generation Group
GOUM
Government of the Union of Myanmar
HDI
Human Development Initiative
HDI-E
Human Development Initiative -Extension Phase
HDI-S
Human Development Initiative -Support Project
IPM
Integrated Pest Management
LEW
Livestock Extension Worker
LIGG
Livestock Income Generation Group
LPMO
Livestock Production and Marketing Organisation
MARDB
Myanmar Agricultural and Rural Development Bank
MAS
Myanmar Agricultural Services
M and E
Monitoring and Evaluation
NGO
Non-Government Organisation
NPD
National Project Director
NPPP
National Professional Project Personnel
PAC
Project Advisory Committee
PTD
Participatory Technology Development
RIF
Regeneration and Improvement Felling
SPPD
Support for Policy and Programme Design
TCP
Technical Cooperation Project
TLO
Township Liaison Officer
TM
Township Manager
TOR
Terms of Reference
TSS
Technical Sector Specialist
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
VDC
Village Development Committee
VEW
Village Extension Worker
VFCC
Village Forest Conservation Committee
VRMP
Village Resource Management Plan
WID
Women In Development
WIGG
Women's Income Generation Group
<section>2</section>
1. Background to the human development initiative programme
The greatest constraint on human development in Myanmar is poverty, which affects most of the country's rural population. The Human Development Initiative (HDI) is an integrated development programme, funded by UNDP, which seeks to respond to the humanitarian and basic needs of the people of Myanmar in carefully targeted areas. The programme has three main objectives:
I. to create a visible and measurable impact on human welfare and living standards in rural communities;
II. to involve local communities in the identification, design, and implementation of grassroots initiatives of direct benefit to them;
III. to strengthen local people's capacities for sustained community-focused development.
The first phase of the HDI ran from 1994 through late 1996. The second phase, HDI-E began in late 1996 and is just concluding. The third phase of the Programme is expected to commence in mid-1999. Ten projects comprise the HDI, grouped into thee thematic clusters of humanitarian needs, environmentally sustainable livelihoods and food security, and inter-sectoral activities.
Three FAO-implemented projects^1 focus on helping poor farmers and the landless to improve production and increase incomes from agriculture, aquaculture, forestry, and livestock in the Dry Zone, Southern Shan State, and the Ayeyarwady Delta.
1 a) Environmentally Sustainable Food Security and Micro Income Opportunities in the Dry Zone;
b) Environmentally Sustainable Food Security and Micro Income Opportunities in Critical Watersheds
c) Environmentally Sustainable Food Security and Micro Income Opportunities in the Ayeyarwady (Mangrove) Delta
A request for the SPPD Mission was formulated and agreed by UNDP in late 1997. At that time the Mission was seen as an initial stage in the formulation of a longer term strategy, and as providing a major input into the formulation of proposals for a proposed Phase III of the three FAO projects. In the event, the Mission did not arrive in Myanmar until November 1998. By which time a formal evaluation of the FAO projects had taken place in May and June of 1998, and the project proposals for Phase III had already been drafted. The Mission began its work in November 1998 with a review of its terms of reference. The suggested outputs (shown as Annex 1) were intended to support the three FAO projects in determining activities for Phase III and in consolidating and strengthening their approach to rural development. The SPPD Mission undertook its assignment during the course of two visits to Myanmar; 10 November through 9 December 1998, and 13 February through 17 March 1999.
This report seeks to consolidate and present the findings and recommendations of the members of the SPPD Mission.
The Mission is grateful to Mr. J. Rawley, UNDP Deputy Resident Representative, and to Mr. F. Rinville, FAO Representative, for their support and assistance. Members of the offices of UNDP and FAO in Yangon provided considerable logistical support. The CTAs of the three FAO projects were generous with their already scarce time, and unfailing in their efforts to provide for the requirements of the Mission. Thanks are due especially to the members of the farming communities visited by the Mission for their cooperation, patience and generous hospitality.
<section>3</section>
2. Summary of findings and recommendations
2.1 Main findings
2.2 Summary of recommendations
2.1 Main findings
Consolidation
The Mission believes that the three FAO-executed Projects have most capably addressed the needs of the rural communities in their areas, in most cases exceeding the established implementation targets. They have developed and introduced a range of innovative development interventions in resource-poor agricultural communities in Myanmar. There is concern that the relatively short time horizon of thirty months established for Phase III of the HDI Programme will not be sufficient to establish the consolidation and longer term continuity of many of the Projects' interventions. A major expansion of target villages is proposed in Phase III; 51 new villages in the Dry Zone, 141 in the Southern Shan States, and 300 in the Delta. This implies a pressure to deliver inputs which may be at the expense of capacity building and long term development.
The SPPD Mission concludes that the Projects' watershed protection and development approach which is based on area rather than households is correct in terms of protecting the environment and the sustainable use of agricultural resources. Such an approach, however, will benefit all inhabitants, rich and poor alike. But the Mission believes that, in selecting for the need for environmental protection rather than exclusively on the basis of poverty, Project interventions will be able to generate a greater expectation of sustainability. All three Projects have successfully raised awareness of the need for soil and water conservation.
Sustainability
Sustainability implies the need to institutionalise the proven interventions and approaches. National organisations are working with the three Projects as cooperating or facilitating agencies and, indeed, meeting the costs for their own activities. But there is no reason to believe that the relevant national organisations will be in a position to provide the required extension, research or credit services should the projects terminate at the end of Phase III. In terms of human resource development many of the interventions of the three projects will be sustainable, albeit at a local level. Communities which can continue to maintain a vibrant revolving fund, for instance, will be in a position to sustain income generating opportunities developed under the projects.
Farming Systems and Agronomy
Dry Zone
In recent years, annual rainfall has been decreasing, soil fertility is in decline and crop pests are increasing. Crop yields are falling. Agriculture is in decline. Unless this trend can be reversed through large scale water and soil conservation measures and the introduction of improved and sustainable farming technologies, the outlook for the rural communities in the Dry Zone is bleak.
Soil and water conservation measures, undertaken by the project on catchment and watershed bases, are demonstrating effectively that decline in land degradation can be slowed and depleted water tables recharged even in conditions of drought. Such measures are critical to arresting the decline in agricultural production and are the basis on which sustainable development can be built.
The project has assisted food security and income generation through the provision of inputs such as fertilizers, seeds, pesticides and sprayers, small-scale irrigation together with appropriate training to ensure that skills and knowledge are transferred.
Successful income generation has been undertaken through interventions such as goats, pig breeding and fattening, poultry egg production and provision of community stud bulls. A fodder production strategy is being developed which will be further emphasised in the Phase III. The project has also focused on improved organic manure production and composting.
The project has established an effective extension network that is able to deliver agriculture and livestock packages to the rural communities with the appropriate technology transfer. Some initial participatory technology development activities have been implemented and it is proposed to expand these in the Phase III.
Southern Shan State
Farmers report that crop yields are in decline compared with 15 years ago. This decline is attributed to loss of top soil from sheet erosion, decline in soil fertility, and decreasing rainfall. In response the project is providing inputs and training in support of a range of interventions that promote agricultural production through soil and water conservation, improved soil fertility and the introduction of improved varieties of grain crops, vegetables and fruit trees. These interventions include contour soil bunding, agro-forestry, fertilizers, compost making and green manuring, horticultural activities, and transfer of land to landless households.
The project is also providing inputs and training in support of income generation through livestock production. These include pig breeding and fattening, poultry egg production, provision of draught animals, promotion of fodder production, improved FYM quality, and the establishment of a para-vet programme. These interventions have been successful in generating income for participating households.
The project has initiated a participatory technology development programme. It is essential that this project, and the two other projects in the Dry Zone and the Delta, find the resources to properly technically monitor and evaluate all trials and demonstrations.
The project has established an effective extension network that has been able to deliver agricultural and livestock packages to the rural communities with appropriate technology transfer. However, staff are under considerable pressure to be able to service five Townships and many villages. No more than basic training has been provided but there is now a need for more intensive training and transfer of technical skills and knowledge. This should be part of the consolidation which should take place during the coming Phase III.
Ayeyarwady Delta Zone
The project provides inputs and training in support of a range of interventions to promote agricultural production. These interventions include the provision of fertilizers, improved seed and tree seedling distribution, power tillers and irrigation pumps, and compost making.
The project is also supporting income generation through livestock production. These activities have been popular and successful. Included are pigs for breeding and fattening, poultry and ducks for egg and meat production, draught animals and improved FYM through composting.
The project has recently introduced a number of participatory technology development (PTD) trials and demonstrations in its three Townships. PTD is an essential component of sustainable agriculture development and is warmly welcomed by farmers.
The project has established an effective extension network that reaches from senior project technical staff down to village grass-roots level. However, staffing numbers are low and it is a tribute to their dedication and hard work that they have been able to achieve so much.
Natural Resources Management
Over-exploitation and misuse of forests, farmlands and fisheries has caused severe environmental degradation, reduced land productivity, and declining crop yields, all of which contribute to growing poverty and food insecurity. The three projects target the restoration of land productivity with a view to improving livelihood opportunities for the very poor.
The projects have instilled an environmental awareness among community groups and a general enthusiasm for adopting conservation measures and protecting community forests. Many farmers have adopted on-field measures because they see direct benefits. But off-farm conservation and forestry are much longer term concepts and their benefits accrue to individual families and to groups, and to society as a whole. Subsidising the participants in these activities also largely removes their sense of ownership.
For community forestry specifically:
I. poor people (who depend on subsistence activities or daily labour) have difficulty contributing time and labour;
II. no significant return can be expected for several years;
III. restored forests will become increasingly difficult to protect as they grow and gain in value;
IV. the basis for future management is technically weak; and
V. its success and continuity rest on the Forest Department, which has limited staff and resources to survey, collect data, plan, technically advise, monitor and expand the programme.
For these reasons the replicability and sustainability of off-farm conservation and forestry activities is a cause for concern.
The three projects have developed impressive demonstrations of innovative technology, but have been obliged, in the main, to neglect field research and impact monitoring owing to their short thirty month time horizons and lack of qualified staff. The more mature beneficiary groups are now asking for improved technology, which points to a need for stronger field research.
Community Forestry
Resource Management
The priority ranking and selection of villages on the basis of poverty criteria alone is not necessarily compatible with the need to implement a natural resource management strategy based on a watershed and not on village or other administrative boundaries.
Deforestation in most areas of the three projects is a recent phenomenon. Most of the forests have disappeared over the past 25 years. Reasons for deforestation differ from area to area. In the Dry Zone farming and fuelwood production for jaggery making are said to be the main reasons for deforestation. The main causes in Shan State are farming, combined with an increase in population, while In the Delta the main reasons for deforestation are rice cultivation, charcoal production, and fuelwood production for brickmaking. Through their support for community forestry, the establishment of forest plantations, and other tree planting efforts, all three FAO-executed projects are seeking to at least stabilize and sometimes even to reverse the deforestation trend.
Forest Policy
In terms of Myanmar forest policies and policy instruments the past decade has brought several noteworthy developments. The new Forest Law (1992) replaced a Law dating back to 1902. The Government, through the Ministry of Forests, issued in 1995 a Myanmar Forest Policy Statement. Also in 1995, the Forest Department approved a Community Forestry Instruction to facilitate the transfer of forestland to community management. These three instruments are significant steps in the modernisation of forest management. However, a formal recognition of community forestry is still awaited.
Community Based Organisations
The institutional context of community forestry user groups is different in each project area. While the three projects should continue to promote the formation of executive committees of community forestry user groups it is important that they reflect the membership of the groups. This implies more women, landless persons, and representatives of minority villages (in terms of user group membership) in the executive committees.
Status of Community Forestry
Community forestry is only just starting in all the three projects. Immediately after the Community Forestry Instruction was issued in 1995 some community forests, all village woodlots, were handed over in Shan State and the Dry Zone. In the current phase it is only in the Delta, in Laputta Township, that community forestry certificates have been handed over so far. All projects expect that more community forests will be handed over soon. The issue of management plans for community forestry has, with the exception of Shan State, been taken up by the projects only over the last year. Most of the community forests handed over in the past do not have a proper management plan based on a detailed site survey and essentially prepared by the user group members themselves.
Training
Several training activities have been held by all projects concerning subjects related to community forestry including, nursery establishment and management, plantation establishment, improved stove production and distribution. An important next step will be for the projects to define a comprehensive community forestry training programme.
Fuelwood-saving Stoves
Woodfuel is the principal energy source of the rural population in Myanmar. It was estimated that woodfuel represents 78 percent of the total energy consumption in the country. The establishment of community forests (and to some extent tree planting on private lands) and the introduction of fuel-saving cooking stoves are at present the best strategies to address the fuel crisis in rural Myanmar. The types of stoves promoted by the FAO projects include the airtight (mud-clay) stove and rice-husk stove by the Delta project, and the Al-stove by the Dry Zone and Shan projects. The stoves are accepted in all three areas, and the distribution programmes of the projects are well executed.
Sustainability
All projects are seeking to improve the prospects for sustainability of community forestry. One constraint relates to the relatively short period of project support that can be provided to community forestry villages. Uncontrolled grazing in the plantation areas is another problem, especially in the Dry Zone and in Shan. In the future, once the forests mature, they will become valuable and attractive to outsiders and will need to be protected against encroachment. The lack of savings and the indebtedness of many project families to moneylenders can adversely affect the sustainability of interventions in community forestry.
2.2 Summary of recommendations
Consolidation
At the commencement of Phase III the three Projects should review the village expansion targets with their UNDP partner, taking into account the need to balance expansion into new areas with the benefits of consolidating the achievements already made. The projects have introduced a range of interventions in, for example, community mobilisation and organisation, watershed management and protection, forestry development, income generation, training, participatory planning, and technology development. This is an appropriate time to review progress to date and to use the results of that review to determine the way forward.
Phase III provides an opportunity to complete the previously established working models of direct participatory grassroots intervention. It gives an opportunity to improve the models' capacities for sustainable agricultural development including the rationalizing of staff to beneficiary ratios, fine tuning extension methods used, such as field trials, demonstrations, the identification and build-up of a corps of farmer-researchers, as well as the documentation and popularization of project experiences and appropriate indigenous practices. Phase III also gives an opportunity for replacement service providers to prepare to take over.
Community Based Organisations
In Phase III efforts should be concentrated on strengthening the capacities of CBOs to manage their affairs through strengthening and continuing their in-depth training (both formal and hands-on) including the following:
I. Diagnostic skills for all phases of a project/activity cycle.
II. Participatory community mobilization and group dynamics skills.
III. Financial management skills including business management of revolving funds, management of production and marketing, credit and banking, and strategies and management for savings.
The three projects should explore strategies for inter-CBO networking and collaboration including federation or cooperation through CBO participatory forums, and should initiate agreed-upon networking within HDI III. Project initiatives should be expanded in terms of linking CBOs to Government and private sector service providers (other than the HDI projects) including inputs, marketing, credit, finance, banking, extension, information and research providers.
It is recommended that appointments of professional socio-economists (as in the Dry Zone) be considered at NPPP, TSS and Assistant TSS levels for each Township covered in the Shan and the Delta. These officers would assist in the process of empowerment of communities as well as in preparing those communities to take over the management of their own affairs on the conclusion of the HDI Programme. It is also recommended that at least one Credit NPPP be appointed in the Shan and the Delta with similar terms of reference to those designed in the Dry Zone.
The projects should continue their efforts to design and test village performance indicators or ranking processes
Participation
Projects should continue their efforts to ensure the equitable participation of disadvantaged groups and women in the planning and decision-making bodies of all CBOs. In particular this should be achieved in VDCs, FIGGS, LIGGs, and in environment and natural resource management groups.
Revolving Funds
The projects should continue to explore ways to supplement and expand the revolving funds of the various groups. Inflation and poor repayment in bad years will otherwise gradually erode funds available to support activities. Methods are needed by which members can invest their own resources in the fund, by which the groups can trade in agricultural commodities, make loans or otherwise expand their available resources.
Gender Issues
Projects should reiterate their concern for the equitable, rather than the token, participation of women in all planning and decision making bodies and forums, accompanied by appropriate training on how women might constructively use their participation.
Projects should seek to be more gender sensitive in directing their assistance (for instance, by being aware of who does what and of who actually benefits from the proposed assistance). Women should be consulted to determine whether or not they deal with the inputs. Training should be directed to the women who actually implement specific interventions, rather than to other family members who do not.
It is recommended that rice delivered in support of famine alleviation activities should be consolidated into cereal banking, to be owned and operated by women's groups. As the groups develop experience and skill in cereal banking they could branch out to cover other crops such as maize, sesame, groundnuts and chickpeas.
Seasonal Migration Issues
In order to provide information on the extent and implications of seasonal migration it is proposed that UNDP, other donors, and Government undertake a separate but HDI-related study of the entire internal migration phenomenon. This should include a historical documentation of its evolution and a review of its relationship to health, education, agriculture, natural resource degradation, security, and economics.
To address some of the health and education problems imposed on seasonal migrants it is proposed that the HDI Health and AIDS programs be extended to cover the target areas of seasonal migration, including mines, construction projects, urban industrialization projects, tea and sugar cane fields during harvest periods. A study of the chemical/mineral poisoning problems in the mining industry is also recommended.
The HDI Education Project, in cooperation with the Department of Education, should study the possibilities of providing school children of seasonally migrating households with the opportunity to continue their schooling in areas to which they seasonally migrate in order to reduce the incidence of their dropping out of school due to the migration of their parents.
Farming Systems and Agronomy
General
There should be increased emphasis on participatory technology development particularly for agricultural production, taking into account the different agro-ecological conditions within each project.
Links with outside institutes, particularly those in the Indian sub-continent, South-east Asia and Australia should be expanded and strengthened.
In Phase III there should be emphasis on consolidating the work already being undertaken, rather than on a rapid and wide scale expansion into new areas. This consolidation should include further training of farmers to increase technical skills, knowledge and understanding in such areas as soil fertility management, IPM, seed multiplication, produce storage, fodder production, livestock management, farm equipment maintenance and participatory technology development.
The services already being provided by FIGGs and LIGGs in the sourcing and buying of inputs should continue to be supported. Training and support should be continued to enable them to become more self sufficient in handling all aspects of group management. This would be an element of the consolidation process.
Detailed economic analyses should be undertaken for a wide range of interventions in all three projects, as soon as sufficient data comes available, under different input and seasonal conditions.
In the Dry Zone:
The project should establish a series of simple fertilizer trials on farmers' fields to generate information on optimum fertilizer rates for different soils and different crops and under different moisture conditions.
Work already started by the Project on the sourcing and evaluation of improved crop varieties adapted to local conditions should continue during Phase III.
In the Southern Shan:
The wider use of legumes (green manures, food crops and fodders) relay cropped into main crops such as wheat, maize, upland rice and potatoes should be researched.
Research should be initiated into the value of fallow periods as practised in the project area in the maintenance of soil fertility. Alternatives such as legume cover crops (in addition to rice bean) should be explored in greater depth.
The planting of different fodders on contour bunds, in fodder plots and around the homestead could be expanded from the work already started.
Para-vets who are being trained in veterinary medicine should also receive training in fodder production and utilization, and in animal nutrition.
In the Delta:
There is scope for further development and diversification of ornamental foliage and flower production and marketing.
Home garden cultivation requires increased attention, particularly regarding the transfer of increased knowledge and skills in vegetable production, fruit tree pruning, and the dynamic management of multi-layered gardens to increase the range and productivity of plants grown.
The project should examine the results of urea-molasses nutrient block demonstration of the Dry Zone project with a view to introducing these to the Delta. The treatment of rice straw with urea to enhance digestibility and protein content for livestock would also be worth evaluating.
Natural Resources Management
In Phase III it is recommended that the projects give greater attention to:
I. monitoring and documenting the environmental impacts of community forestry and of conservation measures undertaken by the projects;
II. carrying out field research in the silviculture of planted community forests;
III. using the results of field research to develop guidelines for the sustainable management of these forests.
Despite the apparent short-term nature of the three projects and the weak institutionalisation it is, nevertheless, important to at least begin the process of establishing field research and impact monitoring, especially for forestry. Given the projects' limited capacity to take on extra tasks, additional resources would have to be tapped to minimize interference with normal project delivery. It is recommended that projects investigate the possibility of contracting the work to national or regional institutions or to capable NGOs.
Community Forestry
Consolidation
The SPPD mission strongly recommends that in Phase III forestry development activities be consolidated in areas where the projects have been operating in previous phases. Any expansion to new areas as far as forestry is concerned should be justified in terms of the communal use of lands adjacent to lands already supported by the projects under either the community forestry or soil conservation programme, or in order to protect the remaining patches of natural forests preserved by villages close to these natural forests.
Forest Policy
Community forestry should be formally recognised through an amendment of the Forest Law, and Forest Rules (or separate Community Forestry Rules) should be drafted, endorsed and promulgated. Community forestry should be defined in the Forest Law. The creation of a third category of forest land in addition to Reserve Forest and Protected Public Forest, to be called Community Forest, should be considered.
National community Forestry Workshop
Early in Phase III the projects should jointly organize a National Community Forestry Workshop to take stock of progress made, to discuss common issues, to define operational procedures and implementation strategies and to discuss desirable changes of the forestry legislation. It should also provide the forum to define training needs and priorities. The Workshop should be technically backstopped by FAO.
Community Based Organisations
The projects should continue to promote the formation of executive committees of community forestry user groups that are a better reflection of their membership than at present is the case. This implies more women, landless persons, and representatives of minority villages (in terms of user group membership) in executive committees.
Management Plans
The projects should explore the possibilities (as the Dry Zone is doing) of introducing the concept of integrated village landuse planning to take into account the use of all common lands such as potential community forestry areas (including Reserve Forest and unprotected public forestland), grazing areas and other waste lands.
In the first year of Phase III the projects should outline their approaches for management plan preparation as well as the format of management plans, to be undertaken in close consultation with the Forest Department.
Fuelwood-saving Stoves
The projects should continue with the introduction of improved and fuelwood saving cooking stoves and, where needed, strengthen quality control and close monitoring of the use of the stoves.
Monitoring and Evaluation
Provisions to monitor growth of community forestry plantations need to be made, so that the financial and economic feasibility of community plantations can be better assessed. Monitoring of tree survival should be continued by all three projects.
<section>4</section>
3. Main findings of SPPD mission
3.1 Consolidation
3.2 MYA/96/006* dry zone project^3
3.3 MYA/96/007* Southern Shan State^4
3.4 MYA/96/008* Ayeyarwady Delta Zone Project^5
3.1 Consolidation
The Mission believes that the three FAO-executed Projects have most capably addressed the needs of the rural communities in their areas, in most cases exceeding the established implementation targets. They have developed and introduced a range of innovative development interventions in resource-poor agricultural communities in Myanmar. Project interventions are based on a participatory process which leads to a response to the expressed needs of the communities, a process which is often based on developments in, or adjustments to, familiar technologies. Nonetheless, there is concern that the relatively short time horizon of thirty months established for Phase III of the HDI Programme will not be sufficient to establish the consolidation and longer term continuity of many of the Projects' interventions. For several village communities in the Dry Zone, for instance, their only experience of the Project in the past three years will have been one solely of drought conditions. The
recent HDI Assessment Mission^1 commented that, "Short phases, however, are not appropriate to almost any rural development or community-based project, particularly those from the low base from which HDI commenced." And further, that the "...time frame is too short for a community based rural development programme and inhibits staff in tasks of planning and implementation."
^1 "Human Development Initiative-Extension and Preparations for HDI-Phase 3, Report of Assessment Mission". Draft, United Nations Development Programme, Myanmar, 3 March 1999.
A major expansion of target villages is proposed in Phase III; 51 new villages in the Dry Zone, 141 in the Southern Shan States, and 300 in the Delta. This implies a pressure to deliver inputs which may be at the expense of capacity building and long term development. The three FAO-executed projects face the dilemma of meeting the expansion targets while continuing to service the programme in existing villages, essential to developing the sustainability of the interventions, yet placing a loyal and dedicated field staff under further pressure.
The SPPD Mission concludes that the Projects' watershed protection and development approach which is based on area rather than households is correct in terms of protecting the environment and the sustainable use of agricultural resources. Such an approach, however, will benefit all inhabitants, rich and poor alike. But the Mission believes that, in selecting for the need for environmental protection rather than exclusively on the basis of poverty, Project interventions will be able to generate a greater expectation of sustainability. All three Projects have successfully raised awareness of the need for soil and water conservation.
Sustainability
Sustainability implies the need to institutionalise the proven interventions and approaches. National organisations are working with the three Projects as cooperating or facilitating agencies and, indeed, meeting the costs for their own activities. But it was at least, in part, as a response to the lack of coverage in terms of extension, research, and credit, that the projects developed their own facilities in these areas. There is no reason to believe that the relevant national organisations will be in a position to provide those services should the projects terminate at the end of Phase III. But in terms of human resource development many of the interventions of the three projects will be sustainable, albeit at a local level. Communities which can continue to maintain a vibrant revolving fund, for instance, will be in a position to sustain income generating opportunities developed under the projects. For example, groups in the Dry Zone, with access to appropriate funding,
will be able to provide training and services in watershed protection to other communities.
The UNDP Assessment Mission, well summarised the situation with regard to the sustainability of the interventions of the HDI. "HDI should not be regarded as a sustainable development programme in the full and normal use of that concept. Many activities of HDI are not sustainable in an institutional sense because of the mandate under which HDI operates. On the other hand, HDI is promoting many activities which are sustainable at community and individual levels. HDI may be regarded as a humanitarian programme which, because it is people-centred and community-based, is contributing significantly to sustainable human development, and can continue to do so."^2 In this regard the SPPD Mission concludes that it is time, at the start of Phase III, to initiate the identification, selection, and training of future leaders and managers within target communities who will be able to give guidance after Project termination.
^2 Report of Assessment Mission, op. cit.
3.2 MYA/96/006* dry zone project^3
* Environmentally Sustainable Food Security and Micro Income Opportunities in the Dry Zone
^3 Based on visits to villages in Kyaukpadaung and Magway Townships.
Introduction
The Dry Zone area covers approximately 677,000 km^2 (17 percent of the total land area of Myanmar) and includes 22 out of 26 Townships in the Mandalay Division, 18 out of 25 Townships in Magwey Division, and 18 out of 34 Townships in Sagaing Division. The estimated population of the Dry Zone is 11.5 million (27 percent of the total population). The major landuse categories include cultivated land, wasteland, and Reserve Forest land. The common lands, the waste lands and Reserve Forest land, are being encroached for farming, livestock grazing and the collection of fuelwood. It is estimated that approximately 20 percent of the households in the townships covered by the FAO-executed project are landless. In response to a lack of income generating opportunities in the Dry Zone seasonal migration, especially by men, is common.
The Dry Zone is a resource-poor area with scarce water resources, thin vegetation cover and severe soil erosion. Its 20 to 40-inch rainfall is uneven and unreliable, broken by a July drought period and desiccating winds. Much of the minimal rainfall comes in torrential downpours and is lost as run-off. The year 1998 was the third successive year of drought, with rainfall below 15 inches and largely failed crops. Water is in critically short supply and often has to be transported long distances by bullock cart.
Rapid population growth has fragmented land holdings and placed heavy burdens on the lean resources and fragile environment. Declining agricultural yields have forced farmers to cultivate increasingly more marginal steeper land, often under dry thorn forest. Forests were not only cleared for agriculture but also were, and still are, cut for fuelwood (often for jaggery making) and charcoal as an important source of income for the poorest people. The destruction of hillside forests and the overgrazing of pastures resulted in increased runoff which began to overwhelm the traditional sediment storage dams and small checkdams built by farmers decades ago.
In Kyaukpadaung Township the agro-ecological conditions, range from hilly areas with shallow, stony soils to sedimentary plateau areas. There is considerable gully and sheet erosion activity brought on by the destruction of forest and vegetation cover in recent times and intense rain storms during the monsoon season. Agricultural soils are silt-clays. Water run-off is high with little infiltration into the soil.
Maximum land holdings rarely exceed 16 acres; the majority of farm households have less than seven acres with most of these being of four acres or less. In general, seven to eight acres are considered to be the minimum farm size to provide food security for a family. The main crops grown are cash crops: sesame, cotton (both short staple for domestic use and long staple for government purchase), green gram, chickpea and sunflower. Sorghum and millet for human and livestock consumption are also grown but rice is a rarity.
Every village has some pigs, draught cattle, goats and chickens but many households have few or no livestock, particularly the landless. Draught cattle are stall fed in the village with wild grasses and crop residues but other cattle and goats free-graze on marginal lands and hillsides. Draught cattle are generally in short supply, resulting in a high proportion of late sown crops, leading to reduced yields (20-50 percent reduction in yield due to late planting is reported). Farmers report decreasing annual rainfall in recent years and this, together with declining soil fertility has led to overall reduction in crop yields. Some examples provided by farmers indicate that over the past 15 years butter bean yields have decreased from 495 kg/acre to 165 kg/acre; cotton yield has been reduced by half from 560 kg/acre to 240 kg/acre while sunflower has decreased from 225 kg/acre to 90 kg/acre. Agriculture thus is in decline and unless this trend can be reversed through
large-scale water and soil conservation measures and the introduction of improved sustainable farming technologies, the future for many rural communities is indeed bleak.
Productivity of cropland is poor; organic manure and chemical fertilizers are applied but generally in insufficient quantities to give high yields. In addition, farmers face considerable risk in applying increasingly expensive fertilizers due to the high incidence of droughts or partial droughts. The past three years have all been years of poor rainfall.
In Magway Township, the project's zone of implementation is in the north-east sector. The topography is relatively flat but with many erosion gullies and considerable top soil loss. There is extensive deforestation of marginal lands. Soils are sandy and there is little rock and stone. On average about 55 percent of households within the township are farmers, 42 percent are landless while 2 percent are livestock households with no cultivated lands.
The main early monsoon crops are groundnut and sesame (May - July) while late monsoon crops include sorghum, mungbean, green gram, black gram and cowpea (August - January).
Most land holdings are less than 10 acres while many are under 5 acres. In recent times, annual rainfall has been decreasing, soil fertility is in decline and crop pests are said to be increasing. As a result, crop yields have fallen considerably. Ten years ago, groundnut gave average yields of 80 baskets/acre; now yields are 25-50 baskets/acre. Sesame gave 15 baskets/acre, and it has now fallen to 10-12 baskets/acre. Late sowing of crops due to shortage of draught power exacerbates the situation for many of the farmers. The livestock situation is similar to that in Kyaukpadaung Township.
Project interventions
The project's integrated area-development approach links water harvesting and soil conservation directly to fodder production, livestock, tree growth, rehabilitation of cropland and employment opportunities. The interventions seek to overcome constraints to production in the cropping systems through technological packages that are suited to the conditions of the Dry Zone and that are technically appropriate to the farmers.
Soil and water conservation
The project takes a watershed and catchment area approach to deal with erosion control and water harvesting with a view to improving crop production potential and the sustainable development of agriculture. Soil conservation and water harvesting have been the project's cornerstones in restoring land productivity. Extensive areas have been treated with soil and stone bunds, contour trenches, micro-basins, herring-bone and half-moon structures, overflow earth dams, run-off/run-on bunds, checkdams, bund/trench and straw trench stabilization and sediment storage dams. The involvement of all land users (not only the poorest) in constructing these structures from the top to the bottom of whole sub-catchments has proved to be a highly effective approach. Most of the structures themselves are integrated with the planting of trees and the sowing of, for example, green gram, millet, sorghum, or good local grasses on bunds and micro-basins, and vegetable crops behind checkdams. Natural
grass regeneration provides fodder for livestock and material for composting. By shaping the gullied and abandoned cropland behind sediment storage dams, farmers trap the topsoil washed down from upstream. This can create fertile new fields behind the dams in two to five years depending on the depth and width of the gulley and the farmer's efforts to reshape the sides.
Some 4,900 acres have been treated with soil and water conservation measures, including nearly 700 sediment storage dams, 5,371 checkdams, contour bunds on 2,150 acres and 462,000 woodlot trenches of various designs. Sediment storage dams are expected to reclaim over 940 acres of fertile land which can be used for paddy rice production. By trapping sediment with checkdams, at least 1,000 farmers have been able to restore fertility and grow vegetables on more than 750 additional acres. The water harvesting structures of the project are already recharging aquifers and increasing the supply of water in village wells.
The project has tailored the designs and appropriateness of conservation structures to the soil type, topography and rainfall. Villagers have installed the structures on lands claimed under customary rights or on hillsides to be leased to them under the 1995 Community Forestry Instruction. The scale of physical demonstration is impressive.
Project farmers were already well aware of soil conservation principles. In Kyaukpadaung, farmers built sediment storage dams 80 to 100 years ago, but the traditional designs could no longer withstand the increased water runoff from deforested hillsides. The project has improved on traditional designs and practices, encouraged collective action to treat whole sub-catchments rather than individual fields, and provided the resources for a concerted effort. Construction of all these soil and water conservation measures is also providing employment to landless people and to small farmers and so reducing out-migration in search of work elsewhere in Myanmar during the dry season.
On sloping marginal lands, used for grazing, soil fertility is generally very low, due to the almost complete erosion of the top soil, and any grass growth is usually of poor quality. The project plans a 50-acre demonstration site for the rehabilitation of such areas. Techniques used will include soil or stone contour bunds (according to the prevailing land slope), with the area behind roughly ploughed and seeded with good quality local grasses. In addition the project will establish in the coming Phase III, a demonstration and training site showing all soil conservation and water harvesting technologies for hillsides, marginal lands and cultivated lands in the one area.
These soil and water conservation measures, undertaken on the basis of the catchment or watershed, are demonstrating effectively that the decline in land degradation can be slowed and that depleted water tables can be recharged even in conditions of drought. Such measures are crucial to arresting the decline in agricultural production and are the basis on which sustainable development can be built. The interventions being demonstrated and implemented by the project are costly and labour intensive although, on a comparative basis, physical structures are cheaper to build in Myanmar than in any other Asian country. Nonetheless the challenge will be to identify ways in which these soil and water conservation measures might be replicated in a post-project situation. There is some evidence that replication of improved contour bunding is already taking place in non-project villages. The Ministry of Agriculture is also planning to undertake soil and water conservation in the Dry
Zone, based on models implemented by the project. However, for fullest impact, this approach should be undertaken with the cooperation of the Forestry and Livestock Departments also.
Replicability might occur where there is Government or private sector support or if the CBO is strong enough to sustain the development process. This latter situation might occur where the CBO is socially and managerially mature, able to provide technical and extension advice, and has the financial base to provide subsidised credit. For soil and water conservation, subsidies might be financed from the income generated through other activities of the CBO. Whether or not this takes place depends on the development priorities of the community. There are indications that in Kyaukpadaung township, where land degradation is a critical issue and where farmers are aware of the need for structural measures, the CBOs are providing medium term loans to farmers to construct Soil Sedimentation Dams to bring back land under cultivation. Farmers are already indicating the social and economic acceptability of these dams by using their own resources for maintenance. Moreover, it is also
possible for the CBOs to generate income for the revolving fund by investing in land development. Land would be purchased by them, rehabilitated and sold to members of the community.
No detailed financial and economic analyses have been undertaken yet to assess the overall returns to investments of these soil and water conservation technologies. These should be done as soon as sufficient reliable data becomes available in order to indicate their viability situation. However, if it is considered important that rural communities continue to live in these upland rainfed areas of the Dry Zone, then large-scale investments in soil and water conservation must be made either through Government or outside donors. Otherwise, agriculture will continue to be unsustainable and in rapid decline with increasing hardship for the people, and with consequent rising migration.
Provision of fertilizers
The supply fertilizers (mainly urea and triple superphosphate) has been the initial entry point between the project and the farming community. The value of the fertilizers is repaid into a revolving fund managed by the village Farmer Income Generating Group (FIGG). The FIGG has enabled farmers to purchase fertilizers at cheaper rates than were previously available from money lenders.
A recent innovation by the project to encourage repayment and to assist member farmers to overcome a drop in income due to drought conditions has been to provide all members with two weaner pigs for fattening and sale when at least 50% of total fund loans have been repaid.
Farmers (in all three zones) expressed a desire for more technical knowledge and skills. In the Dry Zone the project is currently preparing a training manual on integrated soil fertility management and is considering the use of the farmer field school approach as a possible training modality.
Seed distribution
The project has introduced several short season varieties of locally grown crops, including green gram, mungbean and chickpea. These short season varieties gave relatively good yields against the local varieties which failed or partly failed due to drought and provided excellent demonstrations to farmers. Other improved varieties supplied include sesame, wheat, sorghum, rice, groundnut, sunflower, onion and beans. Most of the varieties were already available in Myanmar but were not known in these remote project areas.
Pesticides and sprayers
The project has supplied pesticides, knapsack sprayers and training in pest management to most FIGGS. Training has been successful in improving farmers' use of pesticides and spray programmes. There is increasing focus on integrated pest management (EPM) and an IPM manual is in preparation.
Small scale irrigation
The scope for small-scale irrigation is limited on account of the scarcity of surface water during the dry season and limited freshwater underground resources. Where resources are available the project provides training in irrigation management. Localised small-scale irrigation of home gardens through open wells (hand-pumped water) and deeper tube wells also takes place.
Livestock
Livestock interventions have been mainly directed to landless households and the disadvantaged, with all decisions on household selection and prioritisation being made by the village community. In the Dry Zone, livestock development aims at increasing production and household income while ensuring that the livestock population matches the available fodder and forage, and does not exceed market demand.
Small scale income generation through provision of goats
In-kid does have been provided to selected landless households in eight villages which have sufficient rangeland grazing available and where the goats will not pose a threat to newly established community forestry areas. The value of the does is repayable to the Livestock Income Generating Group (LIGG) after 18 months from income received from the sale of the kids. This would seem to be a good income generating activity, incurring little cost beyond the initial investment. Agreed management of grazing lands and the controlled use of community woodlots (after they have matured sufficiently to allow grazing) and rehabilitated marginal lands will be essential to ensure the long-term sustainability of this activity.
Small scale income generation through pig breeding and pig fattening
Pig breeding is the most popular means of income generation among landless households and has been very successful. An initial priority group of twenty landless households is formed in each participating village and each household is provided with one pregnant sow. After some six or seven months, when the first litter has been sold, the value of the sow (K. 10,000) must be repaid to the LIGG revolving fund. Following payback, other landless households are eligible for sows according to their priority ranking. Where the pregnant sow has been purchased for less than the loan amount (K. 10,000) through bargaining, the LIGG borrows back the savings, enabling the bulk purchase of cheaper feed which is passed on to the pig owners. This system also increases the savings in the revolving fund.
Available information suggests that, on average, a substantial net profit is realised after the second litter. However, the cost of a pregnant sow is relatively high for a landless household without access to credit. The replication of such schemes will require the availabilty of an efficiently managed and healthy revolving fund in the hands of the LIGG, or access to other rural credit facilities.
In the pig fattening scheme two or more weaned piglets (valued at K. 2,500 each) are provided to selected households. Traditional feeding may be supplemented by oil cake, available in the village. The fattened pigs are sold after 8 months for about K. 17,500 each. There is thus scope to earn a relatively high net income from pig fattening. This activity, not surprisingly, is in high demand and so far has been very successful. There is an export market for fattened pigs with traders coming mainly from Shan State to buy for the Chinese market, in addition to local township markets. The project is considering the introduction of meat processing in Phase III.
To provide essential veterinary care in a timely manner the project selects two livestock extension workers (LEWs) in each village and provides one week of training in veterinary medicine. Livestock owners pay for their services and for the medicine. LEWs can earn K. 2,000-4,000 per month. Members of the LIGG must contribute K. 50 per month to an emergency veterinary medical fund from which they can borrow when treatment of their pigs becomes necessary. Repayment after one week incurs no interest but thereafter interest is charged at 4 percent per month. Government veterinary services are focused primarily on vaccinations for draught animals.
Poultry egg production
The project offers a one-month training programme and subsequent loan facilities to farmers who have previous experience in poultry. This activity has not been particularly popular, partly because of the risk of serious disease, although a Newcastle disease vaccine is now becoming widely available.
Community stud bull
To assist in up-grading the village cattle population and overcoming the shortage of animal draught power the project has supplied one stud bull for breeding purposes in each of several groups of adjacent villages. The bull is placed in the care of one landless household which must repay the value (K. 45,000) to the LIGG over two years on the basis of income from service fees (K. 300 per service).
In the forthcoming Phase III, the project is considering a programme to further alleviate the draught power shortage through the supply of a pair of oxen plus plough and harrow to the LIGG for hiring out to farmers.
The recent introduction on a demonstration basis of urea-molasses nutrient blocks (using locally available materials) should prove to be of value to livestock production. If successful, it is an intervention which could be considered by the Shan and Delta projects.
Pasture establishment on community land
The Project has attempted to establish good natural grasses through seeding in communal forestry woodlots. These activities have suffered from the drought conditions. Nevertheless, the project has demonstrated that in plantation sites treated with water harvesting measures there is a high potential for producing fodder of natural grass and sown millet. This will be an important element of the overall technology development planned for Phase III. The strategy in the coming phase will be to focus on fodder production rather than on grazed pasture. This fodder will come from fodder trees and shrubs to be planted in community forestry plots and along contour bunds; and from the cutting-and-carrying of good natural grasses growing in forestry plots and marginal lands. For that purpose, the project plans to locate and sow better local grasses and deep-rooted legumes on these sites to improve nutritional quality. Additional fodder will also become available in later years from the
trees Leucaena, Acacia catechu and Ziziphus jujuba. While cutting and carrying of fodder might not be a traditional practice in the Dry Zone, it is a much more attractive alternative than would be the opening up of the woodlots to allow controlled grazing after the trees are properly established and less vulnerable in, say, five years time.
Improved organic manure and composting
Every LIGG member must provide a sheltered manure pit to better maintain manure quality. Manure has a value of about K. 400 per bullock cart load, so additional revenue may be earned through the sale of this by-product.
Every FIGG member must make compost. Training in compost making and the use of "effective microbes" (EM) is being undertaken. The use of EM reduces the length of time required for compost preparation. Farmers report definite benefits from applying compost. It is envisaged that large quantities of poor quality grasses will become available from the protected community forestry plantations for composting. This should substantially increase the volume of compost available for agriculture. Compost will be an important resource for improvement of land productivity, given the high price of chemical fertilizers. However, some chemical fertilizer may be needed to supplement compost use. Field research will be important to determine the most appropriate combinations.
Community forestry
In the Kyaukpadaung and Magwey Townships there appears to be considerable scope for community forestry in terms of available land with a forestry potential. The project is helping villagers acquire 30-year leases on forest land under the 1995 Community Forestry Instruction. Since none of the land applied for is under direct Forest Department control, the process is lengthy and no lease certificates have yet been issued. Natural forests have all but disappeared around villages, so all the community forests are planted on bare eroded hillsides treated with water harvesting structures. Members of the user groups mostly comprise all households in the village or landless families in the village. The project reports an overall satisfactory performance of the forestry CBOs. Participation is enhanced through the involvement of the whole community. On the other hand a number of years will be required to prepare and train user groups for community forestry, taking into account the
needs for awareness raising, planning, training and the actual operations of seedling production, planting, weeding and early protection, as well as the slow growth of trees.
Forest management plans, required under the 1995 Instruction, are presently being prepared, spelling out silvicultural prescriptions and eventual utilization of the forest. Villagers expect to reap fodder, fuelwood, small timber and poles from their woodlots in five to fifteen years.
Productivity of trees planted conventionally in simple pits is poor in this harsh environment, but the use of water harvesting structures has dramatically improved tree and grass growth and survival. Survival of 1998 planting is currently estimated at over 60 percent. Of the ten or so species planted, the best performing are Acacia catechu, Eucalyptus, Cassia siamea and Leucaena. The Myanmar Forest Department has been impressed by these demonstrations and hopes to replicate water harvesting structures widely in the region for its planting programmes.
Site protection against the encroachment of outsiders, uncontrolled grazing, and fire protection are serious problems. With the support of the project many communities are developing their own measures to address these problems.
Agroforestry
The project has started to implement various agroforestry systems in all three Townships. These include alley cropping, boundary planting, homestead planting and an improved fallow system. The tree species selected are mainly nitrogen fixing. For homestead planting fruit trees such as tamarind, cashew nut, guava, (grafted) lime and custard apple were distributed to interested families.
Fuel-efficient stoves
Most domestic fuelwood comes from scattered trees on the roadsides and farm boundaries, from Prosopis scrub and from crop residues. A popular intervention by the project has been the provision of the fuel-efficient A-1 stove. To date some 8,000 have been distributed and stove production has begun in Kyaukpadaung Township. Fuelwood savings of up to 50 percent have been reported.
Participatory technology development, extension and training
The project has undertaken several evaluations and demonstrations of improved crop varieties and tillage operations, the latter through contracts with the Agricultural Mechanisation Department. These activities include evaluation of the benefits of row-sowing of sunflower, introduction of a number of short-season varieties, early ploughing, and deep ploughing and ripping. Participatory technology development activities will be much expanded in Phase III when they are expected to generate considerable information for planning and extension.
The project has established an effective extension network that is able to deliver agriculture and livestock packages to the rural communities with the appropriate technology transfer. At the village level, this work is mainly the responsibility of the Community Level Extension Workers (CLEWs), who are assigned approximately one per village. Some of the CLEWs hold diplomas in agriculture. To assist them in the technology transfer are volunteer extension workers and contact farmers. Every person receives field level training in the package(s) he or she handles. The project also upgrades staff technical skills (at all levels). Field days are held at selected sites for representatives of all FIGGs and LIGGs who can then pass on their knowledge to their members. Through this close contact with farmers, senior project staff are also kept informed of problems and constraints when they arise.
This extension system operates well within the project. However, its sustainability after the termination of the project must be doubtful since Government does not have the resources at present to take over extension staff and their activities. It seems unlikely also that a grassroots extension NGO could be formed, which could receive external assistance or be paid for its services by the community. Extension services could be replicated where a mature CBO establishes them as a community priority. In the Third Phase the project will continue to search for effective modalities to continue the provision of extension services. Most of the CLEWS, at present, see themselves as returning to farming at the end of the project.
Nevertheless, the training which they have received through the project will certainly enable them to continue to act as advisers in their communities and could, indeed, fit them to take up positions of leadership.
Marketing of produce beyond the local community can be a problem particularly for the more remote villages of the Dry Zone. Roads are rough or non-existent, hiring of bullock carts can be difficult, and for the remote villages, visits by outside traders are infrequent. Access difficulties to the larger markets are probably the main constraints to marketing. At present, there seems to be a demand for most farm products that exceeds supply. There are international markets for several crops (sesame, green gram, onion, pigeon pea, plums (Zizyphus)) and also for pigs and goats. These markets however may depend on export licences and so demand could fluctuate rapidly. To facilitate the marketing of livestock, the project is encouraging the establishment of Livestock Production and Marketing Organisations (LPMO). Composed of the LIGG chairmen from groups of five villages each, the LPMO is responsible for providing information and identifying marketing opportunities for livestock
and livestock by-products. This is a worthwhile initiative and should help to increase the sustainability of livestock activities in the future.
3.3 MYA/96/007* Southern Shan State^4
* Environmentally Sustainable Food Security and Micro Income Opportunities in Critical Watersheds (Southern Shan State).
^4 Based on visits to villages in Pindaya, Kalaw, and Ywangon Townships
Introduction
Shan State is among the largest of the states and divisions in Myanmar and is divided into two parts, Northern Shan State and Southern Shan State. The Shan Plateau is an extensive upland area with altitudes ranging from 1,000 to 2,300 meters above sea level.
The FAO project area under HDI-E and also under the proposed Phase III comprises five contiguous townships in Southern Shan State, including Nyaungshwe, Ywangan, Kalaw, Pindaya and Pinlaung. The total area is 9,500 km^2 and the total population is estimated at 480,000. Four important watersheds are present in the project area, namely Inle, Kinda, Paunglaung and Zawgyi watersheds.
The four watersheds within the project area feed three economically important multipurpose reservoirs (Kinda, Hmawbi and Zawgyi) which provide most of the country's needs for hydropower and irrigation. In the five project Townships physical infrastructure, public services and rural development are limited by terrain and isolation. Pressure on natural resources is intense and income opportunities are few. Excessive fuelwood cutting, shortened fallow periods for shifting cultivation, inefficient cultivation practices and uncontrolled livestock grazing have led to severe loss of soil organic matter and poor water retention, uncontrolled runoff, landslides, flooding and sedimentation of dams.
Most people in the Southern Shan State project area are subsistence farmers, one third of them with access to less than three acres of land. The proportion of land under fallow is declining because of population pressure. Loss of topsoil through gulley and sheet erosion results from farmers cultivating steep slopes without soil and water conservation, heaping and burning organic matter, and often by ploughing up and down rather than across the slopes.
The cutting of forests appears to have started in earnest some 20 or 30 years ago, often for shifting temporary cultivation, which in time became permanent. Villagers in steeper hill tracts cleared forest to grow tea, fruit trees or upland rice. The only forest left within reach of many villages is now on the hilltops. Villagers used to, and to some extent still do, collect fuelwood, bamboo, wild honey, wild turmeric, orchids, fruits and medicinal plants from forests. They have seen some tree species disappear, and many medicinal plants, usually along with the knowledge to identify and use them. Fuelwood cutting was a common source of income for the poor, but this seems to have stopped in the villages visited, since the project has provided alternative sources of income such as small livestock.
Logging, shifting cultivation, fuelwood collection and frequent burning to promote grazing have changed most forests into scrub or grassland. The overgrazing and the burning on these sites, and on many plantations, leave them dry and compacted and prone to high runoff and erosion. Much of the natural and older planted forest appears to be highly degraded, with branches and stems hacked for fuelwood, regeneration absent or stunted, and land frequently burned, eroded and gullied.
Plantations are particularly vulnerable to overgrazing, since herders purposefully select these areas to lead cattle away from cultivated land and to give them shade. The result is that plantations may in some cases be more prone to erosion than land without trees, and protecting them from grazing is a major challenge. On the other hand, these woodlots also have the potential under controlled conditions to produce a mix of wood and fodder under silvi-pastoral systems, provided stall feeding and the cutting and carrying of fodder can be encouraged. Since cut and carry is not a traditional practice this may not be possible. A less attractive alternative would be to open the woodlots for controlled grazing once the trees were well established and less vulnerable to grazing damage.
Lowland and upland rice are the main crops grown for household use. Other important crops are potato, wheat, various pulses, maize, ginger, tomato, niger and garlic and such tree crops as avocado, dog fruit (Abarema sp.), orange and jack fruit, all predominantly grown in home gardens. Traditional shifting cultivation is no longer practised in Pindaya Township, there being insufficient land. However, farmers with land in excess of about 10 acres frequently will incorporate a fallow in the rotation, partly because of labour and other input shortages and partly to improve soil fertility. The fallow period, however, can be as little as one year or a maximum of four years, which may be insufficient to have a significant impact on soil fertility restoration. During the forthcoming Phase III, if resources are available, it may be worthwhile to explore the value of fallowing as undertaken by farmers in the project area; and the possibilities of alternatives such as use of leguminous
cover crops (rice bean is already being demonstrated), and agro-forestry, as part of participatory technology development. Where land is being left fallow for lack of input resources, allowing a landless household to cultivate the land could be explored.
Double cropping during the 8 to 9 months of the wet monsoon with rotations are practised extensively. Examples within flat areas between sloping land are lowland rice followed by potato or tomato or chickpea. In sloping hill areas, potato (sown April) followed by upland rice (sown late June) is a common cropping pattern. Other common patterns are rice with niger or soya bean. In the dry season, wheat, potato or niger are often grown on residual moisture in the flat valley areas at the base of sloping hill areas. Sloping fields are left fallow. Land is ploughed at the end of the rains when the soil is still easily worked. Traditionally ploughing has been up and down the slope but this practice is beginning to change, under guidance of the project, to contour ploughing.
Wheat is harvested in March; yield varies considerably but 800 kg/acre can be obtained in years of reasonable rainfall. Fertilizer is normally applied at rates of 100 kg urea/acre and 100 kg TSP/acre. In some areas, farmers apply 50 kg MOP/acre in addition. Without fertilizer use, yield per acre is about 350 kg. Yield of upland rice with fertilizer use is about 400 kg/acre, whilst for lowland paddy rice yield averages 500 kg/acre although with good management and more fertile soil, double this amount can be achieved. Farmers report that crop yields are in decline compared with 10 to 15 years ago. This decline is attributed to loss of top soil from sheet erosion and decreasing rainfall.
In the more mountainous areas of Kalaw, grain crops are hardly grown (sometimes upland rice) and land cleared from forest is cultivated with tea plantations, fruit orchards, pigeon pea and annual crops such as indian leaf ("ju" or Chinese root), ginger, potato, sugar pea and medicinal plants.
Livestock, particularly draught animals (buffalo and cattle), play an important role in the farming systems. Land preparation is almost entirely dependent on draught animal power and the manure is used to help maintain soil fertility, although there is insufficient FYM for optimum crop growth. Inorganic fertilizers must supplement it where the farmer can afford them. Other livestock include pigs and poultry. Small ruminants (sheep and goats) are uncommon. Management of FYM and compost by farmers is poor, leading to nutrient loss and reduced quality. Draught animal power (mainly buffalo for cultivation and bullocks for transportation) is always in short supply due to a lack of available grazing and crop residues. Increased cropping on marginal lands and shortened fallow has reduced the available range for animal grazing. Subsequent overgrazing by cows and calves in groups of 30 to 40, and the frequent use of fire to reduce forest and shrub to grassland, have contributed to
soil erosion, loss of organic matter and damage to natural forest regeneration and young plantations.
Some large scale commercial fanning projects are being developed in Shan State for upland rice production. A commercial company makes a contract with farmers in which the company is responsible for land preparation fertilizer, seed and harvesting. The farmers are responsible for maintaining a clean crop and are given a 50 percent share in the rice harvest. Such commercial fanning is a growing trend in Myanmar.
Project interventions
Contour soil bunding
Soil erosion is a major factor in the decline of agricultural productivity in Shan State. The project provides one bag of urea for every 500 feet of trenched contour bunding. Training in this technology is provided by project staff and also by the Land Use Department of the MAS to a high standard of work. Farmers reported increased crop yields after bunding compared with adjacent non-bunded land. Yield increases for upland rice were said to be of the order of 25 percent. Several farmers were confident that contour bund construction would be continued after project exit. Certainly the project is successfully demonstrating this technology and imparting the necessary skills to the community. Contour bunding may also encourage farmers to plough and sow along the contour, rather than up-and-down the slope. This in itself would help to slow down the rate of soil erosion with little cost to the farmer. It seems very likely that farmers will continue to maintain their contour bunds
so sustainability is probably ensured.
Agro-forestry
The project is introducing an agro-forestry component through the planting of multi-purpose trees, including legumes, on contour bunds, thereby intending to stabilise the bunds, improve soil and water conservation, increase soil fertility and provide fodder, fuel and poles. The project offers villagers a rather limited range of forest trees. Crab apple (Eriolobus indica) is the most highly favoured multi-purpose species for its fruit and ability to regenerate after pruning or lopping for fuelwood. Beyond this, villagers seem to care only that an offered species grows fast. They consider pine to be too slow, and one group expressed a dislike for Eucalyptus because, they said, it dries the soil and crops do not grow around it. Eucalyptus is not suitable for agroforestry where moisture for nearby crops is limiting. Melia, Cassia, Glyricidia, Erythrina and Leucaena are better options, although incidence of frost may limit their elevation range. The project should consider
establishing demonstration sites for a range of different selected agro-forestry practices with a monitoring and evaluation system in place. Such participatory technology development research could include fallow management incorporating agro-forestry, for example, as a rotational component where the fallow period is of sufficient length. Optimum practices need to be identified through discussion, research and demonstration, and require a medium to long-term commitment.
Provision of fertilizers
Food security is under threat from the decline in soil fertility and farmers have insufficient organic manure to compensate. Their capacity to purchase chemical fertilizers is low because of the high cost of fertilizer and the high cost of credit from money lenders. Fertilizer grants-in-kind are provided to FIGGs for the establishment of revolving funds through the provision of loans-in-kind to farmers. Training in fertilizer application is provided by the project. Each farmer receives fertilizer for one acre of land, the value of which must be paid back after crop harvest. While this does not provide for all a farmer's fertilizer needs, it helps to reduce the dependence on local moneylenders. Provided the FIGG revolving fund can be maintained and increased, the distribution of fertilizer can be sustainable after project exit. There is a need for simple fertilizer trials to be established in combination with manure and compost. Since project staff are already working at full
capacity, such work may require contracting to national specialists or international institutes.
Horticulture (vegetables and fruit trees)
The project has helped to improve home gardens through the introduction of new vegetable varieties and training. Fruit tree seedlings, including improved grafted species, have been provided (avocado, dog fruit, mango, orange, lime, coffee, and tea). These will help to increase income from surplus sales and improve family nutrition. Through the training of farmers in the production of fruit seedlings (including grafting where appropriate) the project has equipped selected farmers to continue the technology transfer after the end of the project. These interventions are replicable outside the project through sales of nursery produce.
Compost making
Villagers are taught to make compost heaps out of leaves, grasses and organic residues. This activity helps to improve soil fertility and organic matter content. It is an appropriate activity but at a materials cost of K. 2,500 it is unlikely to be replicable in other villages without some form of support.
Green manuring
The project is encouraging the adoption of green manuring of fallow land by providing fertilizer and rice bean through the FIGG revolving fund. Both composting and green manuring are crucial to the sustainable development of agriculture, given the low organic content of soils and the high price of chemical fertilizers. Green manuring is an intervention which would benefit from further on-farm research trials during the Phase in. There is also a need to identify and test a range of legumes for suitability not only as cover crops on fallow land but also as relay crops within the major food and cash crops (e.g. maize and wheat), as green manures, food or fodders.
Land transfer
The project has initiated the transfer of land from large holdings to landless people with payment in fertilizer being made by the project. These transfers have been legalised. This project initiative is helping to bring about greater equity in land distribution, albeit on a relatively small scale. However, it is unlikely, that continued land transfers will be sustainable or replicable for such small payments after project exit.
Livestock
Pig breeding and fattening
Pig breeding and fattening for sale have been very successful and popular income-generating activities. A number of high standard breeding units (managed by household groups) have been established and these supply weaners to farmers and landless persons for fattening. Marketing of fattened pigs is not a problem as there is good local demand and also an export market to China. It is important that economic analyses be undertaken as soon as sufficient quantitative data becomes available. If project officers are not available due to pressure of other work, an agro-economist should be contracted to undertake this investigation. Provided appropriate veterinary care remains available, the breeding units should be sustainable after project withdrawal. However, the high cost of establishing a unit makes it unlikely that replication outside of the project can take place without financial assistance.
Poultry
The main form of poultry production undertaken through the FIGG is commercial egg production. Commercial layers consist of flocks of 50 - 200 birds. These units are well housed and the project provides good technical back-up. Government is now in a position to provide improved Newcastle disease vaccine. Analysis shows that these units can be profitable but that this profit is very sensitive to the egg production rate which is itself dependent on good standards of husbandry, water availability, quality feed and effective health coverage. Poultry farmers were enthusiastic and confident that they could maintain profitable production in the absence of project back-up. Local marketing can be a problem and some producers are having to locate markets some distance away from production sites. Investment costs for this activity are quite high and it is unlikely to be replicated outside the project area by the small farmer, particularly in the current absence of commercial loan
facilities.
Draught animals and fodder
Draught animals (buffalo and oxen) are essential components to farming in the Shan State for soil cultivation and transportation. In most villages there is a shortage of draught power, resulting in either delayed ploughing and sowing or in land being left in fallow. While many villages have large cow populations, in addition to draught oxen, there is a reluctance to use cows for draught purposes for fear of adversely affecting the reproductive cycle. The project is helping to overcome the shortage of draught power by providing buffalo and oxen through the FIGG with interest-free repayment over five years. As there is barely sufficient grazing and fodder for the existing herds, it is essential that draught power interventions are accompanied by training in the improved use of crop residues and the growing of high yield quality fodders, such as Napier grass, around the house and on contour bunds. The growing of good quality natural grasses in community forestry plantations
should also be encouraged for cut-and-carry or for managed grazing (after the trees have sufficiently matured). Assuming that some degree of early protection can be achieved to allow proper establishment, the potential exists to increase fodder production in the forests by spacing trees more openly and introducing legumes and improved grass species. However, cutting and carrying fodder is not a traditional practice; labour is in short supply, sources of fodder are often far from the villages and it is much easier to graze cattle freely. The alternative could be to open up community forests for controlled grazing on a trial basis once the naturally regenerated or planted trees are well established after, say, five to ten years. Neither pine nor eucalyptus plantations are favoured for this practice; pine drops a heavy layer of needles which acidify the soil, and eucalyptus too efficiently captures available soil nutrients and moisture. Natural forest containing gaps and
openings would be best suited for a tree/pasture combination. Small-scale farmer trials could be established to evaluate different fodders and new cultivars, perhaps through contracting an outside institution to do the work. Urea-molasses nutrient blocks, currently being tested by the Dry Zone project, would be a worthwhile technology to introduce to the Southern Shan, if they prove successful in the current trials.
FYM in sheltered pits
While the collection of FYM is traditional in Shan State, the quality is poor because of nutrient loss. The project provides materials for livestock owners to construct shelters over manure pits. Current cost is about K. 1000. It is possible that this activity can continue after project exit if farmers conclude that there is a real benefit to their crops.
Para-vet training programme
The project is establishing its own para-vet programme, providing selected persons with one-week training, followed by a six-weeks apprenticeship with the Township Veterinary Officer. This is an activity which should be sustainable after project exit as farmers are willing to pay for veterinary services and indications are that the Government Veterinary Department is likely to be supportive. It would be an advantage if the para-vets were also trained in fodder production and livestock nutrition since these are topics closely related to animal health.
Community Forestry
In all the Townships of the project there appears to be considerable potential for community forestry. As in the Dry Zone, the project is facilitating the hand-over of degraded forest lands to community groups under the 1995 Community Forestry Instruction. None of the land set aside for community forestry in Shan State is Reserve Forest land under Forest Department control, which means a lengthier and more complex process to rationalise different and often conflicting land uses. Despite this, a number of lease certificates have been issued. Among the species planted in community forests in Shan are Acacia auriculiformis, Eucalyptus grandis, Eucalyptus toreliana, Leucaena leucocephala, Cassia spectabolis, Pinus cassia and fruit tree species. User groups expect that with reasonable protection the forests could provide them with a wide range of material needs; fodder, pasture, fuelwood (at present most fuelwood comes from other sources), poles, small timbers and medicinal
plants.
User groups are reported to be more environmentally aware now than in the previous phase of the project, and to more readily see the potential benefits of forest protection. The long involvement of previous FAO-executed projects, the previous phases of the HDI, a sincere and hardworking project staff, close collaboration with the Forest Department, and the relative stability and cohesion of the communities, are positive elements for the sustainability of community forestry. On the other hand, sustainability is constrained by the relatively short duration of the project, the absence of group savings and a user group fund to meet contingencies, legal uncertainty, a lack of clear benefits at present from community forestry (which can affect people's commitment to participation), and the problems associated with the protection of the forest against grazing, fire, and the encroachment of outsiders. During the first plantation year the project makes a small incentive payment (in
bags of fertilizer) to guards, but thereafter group members must assume responsibility for protection. With the exception of nursery management and stove making, the involvement of women in community forestry, especially in the various committees, is considered to be limited.
The project is currently developing formats and procedures for forest management plans, but the technical base for prescribing silvicultural and management regimes is weak. The project has not yet documented its approach beyond the definition of a number of basic steps to be taken to implement community forestry. Little or no data exists on tree growth and yield, upon which future management decisions rest. There is a clear need to build up such knowledge, and a need to develop extension materials. The Community Forestry Instruction is used to guide the project and Forest Department staff in implementing community forestry, but the instruction itself is unclear on aspects of tenure, harvesting and utilization. Villagers assume at this stage that eventual produce and revenues of non-timber products will go towards communal events or needs, and that any sale of timber will require Forest Department approval and some payment of royalty. Groups have so far been trained in
plantation establishment, but some now express the wish for training in the longer-term management and use of plantations.
Fuel-efficient stoves
The total number of A1 -stoves distributed in the five Townships is 60,780, including stoves distributed during the previous project phases. The project has initiated the production of A1-stoves in one village in Kalaw Township and two villages in Nyaungshwe. Stove making is organized through the FIGG. Fuelwood savings are reported to be 40 percent.
Participatory technology development, extension and training
The project has undertaken a number of demonstrations using improved seeds and different cropping techniques such as double cropping/rotation (e.g. soybean-wheat, soybean-niger, groundnut-niger, lowland rice-tomato, maize-wheat), mixed cropping (e.g. upland rice with maize, upland rice with pigeon pea, ginger with chili) and intercropping (fruit trees with peas and beans). These initiatives are part of a new programme in participatory technology development. It would certainly be worthwhile to further expand the programme to include greater use of legumes (food, fodder, green manure) as relay crops within the main crops. It is essential that the project finds the resources to properly monitor such trials and demonstrations and to evaluate the results so that as much quantified information can be obtained. Under present staffing conditions this may mean that contracts will have to be drawn up with outside specialists or institutes. Farmers in all project areas have expressed
an interest in participating in their agricultural development. For future sustainability, it is important that they be fully involved in this kind of farmer-based, field-level, participatory research and development activity.
The project has established an effective extension network that has been able to deliver agricultural and livestock packages to the rural communities with appropriate technology transfer. However, the staff are under extreme pressure with five Townships and many villages to cover. No more than basic training has been provided but there is now a need for more intensive training and the transfer of technical skills and knowledge. This should be part of the consolidation which should take place during the coming Phase in. It is important that the project can find the resources to undertake this process of consolidation, if necessary by re-allocating budgets previously earmarked for expansion.
As in the other projects, the sustainability of the extension network after project termination must be in doubt, with conditions as they now are. It is important that the project continue to seek for ways to continue support to extension after termination.
3.4 MYA/96/008* Ayeyarwady Delta Zone Project^5
* Environmentally Sustainable Food Security and Micro Income Opportunities in the Ayeryarwady (Mangrove) Delta.
^5 Based on visits to villages in Laputta and Bogalay Townships
Introduction
In the first phase of the HDI Programme (January 1994 to September 1996) the FAO project covered two Townships, Bogalay and Laputta. In the second phase (October 1996 to present) the project area was expanded by the inclusion of Mawlamyinegyun Township. The total area of the project is some 6,780 km^2. Population density, at 128 persons per km^2 is one of the highest in the country. Because of this high population density, and the limited availability of land in non-saline areas more than 50 percent of the households are landless. The environment of the mangrove delta of the Ayeyarwady is under threat due to the shrinking of the forest cover which has occurred during the past five decades.
In 1991, the World Bank estimated that charcoal consumption in the Ayeyarwady division and in Yangon was four times more than the delta forests could sustain. Concern finally prompted the government to ban charcoal cutting in 1993 although there is still pressure to clear forest on the northern fringes of tracts which still remaining in the southern delta. Landsat imagery of 1995 shows that Laputta and Bogalay Townships, which both had over 50 percent forest coverage in the 1970s, now have only 5.8 percent and 19.5 percent of their land area forested, while Mawlamyinegyun recorded no forest cover. A certain amount of natural erosion and accumulation is expected in any delta environment, but the removal of the protective mangrove forests from shorelines and the increased wave action from boat traffic have exacerbated the problem on shorelines and channel banks. On many channels, the boundaries of paddy fields are being constantly eaten away and the infrastructure of shoreline
villages gradually destroyed.
The institutionalized destruction of the mangrove forests, the life blood of the delta, started in 1942, when hundreds of tons of timber and fuelwood were sent daily to Yangon for military purposes. Large-scale cutting of fuelwood to meet government quotas started around 1951, then turned to charcoal making with the energy crisis of the early 1970s. By 1972 there were an estimated 2,000 charcoal camps in the region. Paddy cultivation followed in the wake of the charcoal cutting. An estimated 40 percent of the Bogalay and 70 percent of the Laputta Township populations migrated into the delta to seek job opportunities during the charcoal era.
Cleared mangrove forest land was originally fertile for paddy cultivation, but crop yields in the low-lying brackish and saline zones have steadily declined because of increasing salinization, acidification and nutrient depletion. A saline environment is essential for healthy mangrove forest, but the inundation and leaching of salt water into fields can have a devastating effect on agricultural crops. Keeping a mangrove forest barrier between tidal waters and fields lessens the problem, since mangrove species absorb both salinity and acid (as well as protect against erosion). In most cases, however, such barriers have long since disappeared.
In all three sub-zones of the Delta agriculture is based on a wet monsoon paddy rice farming system, transplanted from nurseries in June and July and harvested in November and December. This system dates from the 1850s when the British annexed Burma and began to develop the Delta area for rice production. Forest trees, including large areas of mangroves, have since then been systematically cleared both for charcoal production and rice. The cleared areas are used for rice or remain as degraded forest. In the most southern areas of the Delta, rice production on the cleared land has declined due to increased salinisation of soils.
The traditional local rice was replaced by the Department of Agriculture in the 1980s but since then there has been little attempt to continue the upgrading of varieties. Farmers must save seed from the present crop to sow in the next wet season. Farmers have several different rice varieties, depending on use of the rice by the household. Thus one variety is sown for fulfilment of the government crop quota (about 12 baskets or 240 kgs) and for sale at the market, and another variety for home consumption. In some limited areas, where there is deep flooding, a deep water variety is used. About 250 kg of rice per adult per year is required for food security.
The seeding rate for wet monsoon paddy is 40 to 60 kg/acre (transplanted seedlings). Such seeding rates seem to be excessive. Average yield of paddy race is around 850 kg/acre. One bag of urea is said to increase yield by 200 to 250 kg/acre. In one village, four bags of urea were said to be the optimum application rate for paddy, yet farmers seldom apply this rate. In several villages, it was remarked that rice yields were in decline. Average landholding per household is also in decline due to population increase. In one village it was reported that over a twenty year period, the average farm size had decreased by about 60 percent.
During the dry season period (December to May), so-called "summer" paddy can be grown where farmers have access to irrigation water. Due to lack of such facilities, only a small percentage of land is so cropped. A short season rice variety (100 to 115 days) is used. The yield can be higher than wet monsoon paddy, where irrigation and fertilizer are available due to the more favourable climatic conditions. When urea (3 bags) and TSP (1 bag) are applied a yield of about 2100 kg/acre can be obtained. Seed is broadcast at a rate of 80 to 100 kg/acre, which would seem to be unnecessarily high but is done partly to combat weeds. The viability of short season seed is limited and farmers must multiply seed during the intervening wet monsoon. In the brackish water ecological sub-zone, dry-season crop production is generally not possible due to the salt content of the water.
Other crops grown, normally as individual trees or in small plots close to the household include vegetables (e.g. snake gourd, bottle gourd, bitter gourd, eggplant, beans of various kinds and chili), mango, lime, guava, bananas, paw-paw, betelnut and coconut. Land in the home gardens and elsewhere within the village household area is often not efficiently utilised and lack of tree management results in dense overhead canopies restricting light penetration.
With the destruction of mangrove forests, loss of employment income and declining paddy yields, the Delta's population, wealthy and poor alike, has increasingly turned to fisheries as the second most available natural resource in the region. Most landless people now depend on fishing, and the poorest rely on catching mud crabs. Many people spend their lives moving from village to village fishing and crabbing, some even living on boats throughout the year.
Strong evidence points to declining fishery stocks. The first contributing factor is likely to be the loss and degradation of mangrove forest, which provides shelter, feed (leaf debris) and breeding grounds for diatoms, phyto- and zoo-plankton and crustaceans; all vital elements in the food chain offish, prawn and crab. The second factor is over-fishing as increasing numbers of villagers, especially the poor, turn to fishing or crabbing as their only means of income or to supplement income. In addition to the increased numbers of nets, the breaking of regulations, use of larger nets and smaller mesh size, destructive fishing methods, and lack of Fishery Department control contribute to the decline in stocks. However, villagers themselves see potential in cage and small-scale pond aquaculture as an alternative source of income, but lack the required knowledge and resources to undertake the activity. Considerable scope exists for the project to develop these enterprises,
especially in the brackish and saline zones of the lower Delta where agriculture has less potential.
Project interventions
Provision of fertilizers
Through the FIGG, farmers have access to limited supplies of fertilizer. Urea is available for the seedling nurseries of monsoon paddy, and Urea, TSP and Muriate of Potash for the summer (dry season) paddy. Without fertilizer use, one acre of monsoon paddy will yield about 500 to 600 kg rice, while summer paddy will give about 800 to 900 kg. With fertilizer inputs (2 bags Urea, 1 bag TSP and 0.5 bag MOP), monsoon paddy will yield about 1200 to 1500 kg rice per acre, while summer paddy gives 2000 to 2500 kg per acre. However, except for some use on summer paddy, most farmers cannot afford to apply fertilizer. Over the past five years, fertilizer prices have risen by over 300 percent. Fertilizer use is increasingly moving beyond the reach of the small farmer.
Seed and seedling distribution
Through the community-based organisations the project has supplied a range of improved seeds and seedlings to the small farmers and the landless. This has included paddy rice, vegetables and mungbean seed, banana suckers, betel, chili, flower seedlings, and fruit seedlings such as guava, mango and holland lime. These have provided, and will continue to generate, valuable income and improved nutrition for households. Most of these interventions which are low cost will be sustainable and replicable. Gross margin analysis for chili, groundnut and green gram show that these are profitable cash crops despite high production costs. Production of low-cost ornamental foliage is also profitable. There would seem to be considerable scope for the further development of ornamental flower crops although the quality of available local seed is presently poor.
There is need for more technical knowledge transfer to be undertaken in several areas such as vegetable growing, fruit tree pruning and more appropriate management of the multi-layered home gardens to increase productivity as well as the range of plants being grown.
Power tillers and irrigation pumps
Through the FIGG, the project has supplied a number of power tillers for paddy field cultivation, and irrigation pumps for use in the dry season. One tiller can cultivate 50 acres of land per season compared to 10 acres for a pair of oxen. The pumps have enabled farmers to irrigate large areas of summer paddy and vegetable crops such as chili and mung beans. Each pump can irrigate about 30 acres per season. The provision of fuel and seeds to the landless, has enabled them to cultivate summer paddy on otherwise unutilized land. In freshwater zones, there is considerable potential for enhancing income and food security through the irrigation of high ground areas. However, the investment cost for a pump is high and without access to external credit facilities it is unlikely that the smaller farmer will be able to replicate this valuable intervention after project termination. The Myanmar Agricultural and Rural Development Bank will provide loans for equipment but the potential
borrower must be able to provide a minimum of 30 percent of the total cost. This loan facility, therefore, will only be available to the richer farmers. There is considerable demand from farmers for further training in the maintenance and repair of farm equipment.
Livestock
Pig breeding and fattening
These are popular and successful income generating activities undertaken by farmers and landless persons and women. Most households can care for only one or two pigs at a time. Some women form small groups to manage five or six pigs. Marketing is not a problem at present as many traders visit the villages. There is local demand and an export trade to Yangon. Indications are that pig breeding and rearing can be profitable enterprises but sustainability and replication in following years will depend on further credit being available from the FIGG, or a farmer having cash which has been generated from some other enterprise. This illustrates how essential it is for livestock development that the FIGG revolving funds remain sustainable and increase in value in future years so that farmers can continue to have access to them.
While most breeding is undertaken through single sows owned by individual households, the project is also establishing breeding units to be managed by groups of households. One such newly established unit has two boars and 15 sows. The initial investment cost was about K. 400,000 with repayment over three years.
Poultry and ducks
Small-scale chicken and duck farming for egg and meat production have been encouraged by the project and duck farming is particularly popular as there are fewer disease problems. In Mawlamyingyun Township, a duckling nursery has recently been established with an investment cost of about K. 380,000. Initially this seems to be a profitable business but the long-term sustainability of such an enterprise without access to further capital must be in question. The maintenance of a high survival rate will be of the utmost importance. Such an enterprise is unlikely to be replicated outside the project by the small to medium sized farmers or by landless households.
Draught animals
Shortage of draught power is a major problem in the Delta. It has been estimated that, for Bogalay Township alone, there is a short fall of about 4,400 animals or 500 power tillers to ensure timely land preparation and sowing for monsoon and summer paddy production. The project has provided over 90 draught animals to farmers which helps to overcome the power shortage at the local level but cannot hope to impact on the global situation for the Delta. It would be worthwhile for the project to review the experience of the Dry Zone project in the local production of urea-molasses mineral blocks for livestock feed, with the aim of their possible introduction to the Delta. It may also be worthwhile to organise an evaluation of urea-treated rice straw for improved digestibility and protein content.
FYM and composting
The project has undertaken farmer training in improved compost making through the mixing of FYM with other organic matter and incorporating EM in pits or mounds. The use of EM enables good quality compost to be prepared in two to three weeks compared to up to three months without EM. Farmers use compost on rice paddy and home gardens. Farmers have reported improved colour, ear set and straw length for rice crops when compost is applied even at modest rates such as 10 to 12 baskets per acre. However, these reports are anecdotal and no quantitative yield statistics have been collected. This is an activity that can be sustainable as EM is locally available and there are reports of non-project farmers replicating improved compost manufacture.
Wild fisheries
Present fishing pressure on wild fish stocks is probably not sustainable, at least not in the inland waters near villages. It is therefore questionable whether the project should continue to support wild fishery activities. In the last quarter of 1998, it provided 151 nets (of types beach seine, gill, skimming, fence, cast, floating, halsa and croker), as well as 112 crab traps and 127 canoes. Although these inputs provide immediate sources of income for the poor, project focus should now be directed away from wild fishery and more towards small-scale aquaculture.
Aquaculture
Cage, pen and small-scale pond culture for crabs, prawn, tilapia, carp, sea bass and snakehead have high potential in the Delta environment (freshwater, brackish and saline zones), and the project has successfully introduced these into communities in all three Townships. Particularly impressive is a system (termed 'silvi-pisci-culture') for raising prawns, crabs and fish in trenches around small islands of planted mangrove forest that gives them all the natural environmental benefits of shade, shelter and leaf detritus for micro-organisms in the food chain.
The technology for producing seed of prawn and crab does not yet exist locally, so ponds have to be stocked with captured wild seed. Seed in the wild has an extremely low survival rate, which justifies its use in aquaculture, where its survival can be as high as 90 percent. Wild seed is becoming less available, however, as a result of today's intense fishing pressure. Project staff estimate that the possible daily catch has declined over the last 10 years from 20,000 or 30,000 tiger prawn seed per day to 1,000 to 2,000 per day. The restoration of mangrove forest should greatly improve this situation.
Community forestry
The project introduced the concept of community forest management during the its first phase, 1994 to 1996. Beneficiary communities have been made aware of the relationship between forest destruction and many of the problems which they face, such as declining fish catches, eroding channel banks, salinization of land and decreasing paddy yields. The project's forestry focus is appropriately on the southern saline and brackish areas of the delta, while concentrating more on agriculture and livestock in the freshwater zone further north. Two types of community forestry management practices are promoted by the project to restore the mangroves; plantations for the barren areas and regeneration and improvement felling in the degraded areas.
As in Shan State and the Dry Zone, the project uses the 1995 Community Forest Instruction to help the landless and the poor acquire usage rights over tracts of natural or planted forests. Most of these tracts are cleared or degraded forest reserve lands under direct Forest Department control, which greatly facilitates the leasing process.
Laputta Township has more forest land per capita than has Bogalay, and this has enabled larger and more contiguous tracts of forest to be allocated to communities. In Laputta the Forest Department agreed to sub-divide community forests among individual households at about 5 acres each. This was not possible in Bogalay where the smaller more fragmented tracts are assigned to the management of communities as a whole. Under the Bogalay model benefit sharing will be based on each household's relative level of participation, a requirement which calls for a detailed accounting of each member's time. It can be expected that the Laputta model will work better than that of Bogalay, due to the individual household ownership responsibility (and benefits) and the less cumbersome administration.
The formal start of community forestry in the Delta was marked by the handover by the Forest Department of thirty-year lease certificates to 20 user groups in Laputta in August 1998. The certificates covered some 8,800 acres of community forest, while an additional 10,000 acres have been surveyed as proposed community forests in Laputta and Bogalay A start has been made on the preparation of management plans for the community forest areas handed over in Laputta. In terms of revolving fund support, the community forestry user groups have access to the general welfare fund through the Village Development Committee, and this provides the initial fund for their use. Eventually, funds for the forestry user group will develop with the availability of income from thinnings and harvest yield.
The project is serving primarily as a catalyst in the community forestry process; creating forest awareness, preparing guidelines, seeking clarification of rights and obligations and empowering user groups to understand these. The sustainability and replicability of community forestry will depend not only on user group performance but also on the severe limitations of Forest Department staff and the budgetary resources needed to demarcate land, to prepare management plans, and to monitor and administer the programme. User groups will have to learn how to regulate eventual harvest levels to avoid cutting too deeply into forest capital. They will be looking to the Forest Department for this kind of technical advice, but the Department itself has little or no growth data or mangrove management experience on which to base such decisions, and it lacks the resources for necessary research.
Forest protection
The impressive growth and density of mangrove plantations and natural regeneration attests to the potential for restoring forests in this region. If properly protected and managed, these forests promise to be a major source of future income for user groups. Protecting forests in the early years is easier in the Delta than in the Dry Zone or Shan State because there are not the hazards of fire and heavy grazing pressure. However, some groups in Laputta have already had to deal with outsiders cutting trees or encroaching into community forests. Protecting these forests is likely to become more difficult as they grow and become more valuable.
Sustainability of community forestry
The project has instilled an awareness and enthusiasm in the community groups and there are obvious signs of increased regeneration and growth of mangrove plantations and forests now under protection. However, under present circumstances the replicability and sustainability of community forestry must be a reason for concern, given that:
I. no significant return on labour can be expected for several years;
II. the basis for future management is technically weak;
III. restored forests will become increasingly difficult to protect from outside timber cutters as they grow and gain in value;
IV. the poorest members of user groups may not be able to meet their obligations for labour input or money to pay assigned guards and;
V. the success of community forestry rests on the Forest Department's extremely limited staff and resources to survey, collect data, plan, technically advise and monitor the programme.
Fuel-efficient stoves
The project has distributed fuel-efficient stoves intended to reduce the pressure on forest resources. In the Delta, 5,800 A-1 stoves and 4,881 rice husk stoves have been distributed. It has been estimated that the use of these stoves could save up to 570 acres of forest annually.
Participatory technology development, extension and training
The project has recently introduced a number of PTD trials and demonstrations in the three Townships, including evaluation of a hybrid summer rice variety (Simar), herbicides in rice, new varieties of mung bean and sesame and new livestock interventions. This is an excellent move as PTD is an essential component of sustainable agriculture development and, moreover, it is warmly welcomed by farmers. Indeed, a number of farmers expressed the wish for more such work to be undertaken in their villages and for appropriate training, including study tours to government research institutes. It is essential that project staff receive training in on-farm participatory research, including the laying out of simple trials, data collection and analysis. However, it is unlikely that the present staffing levels will be sufficient to carry out a meaningful PTD programme (given that a large expansion of target beneficiaries is also envisaged in the proposed Phase III). If additional qualified
staff cannot be recruited, then contracts for the PTD programme should be made with outside persons or institutes.
The project has established an effective extension network that reaches from senior project technical staff down to village grass-roots level. However, staffing numbers are low and it is a tribute to their dedication and hard work that they have been able to achieve so much. The "cutting edge" of the extension network is the CLEW of which each Township has ten. Each CLEW therefore has responsibility for several villages. The CLEWs have been recruited from the Village Extension Workers (VEWs) of the First Phase and provided with technical upgrading through the provision of additional training. To assist the CLEWs, each village has usually five voluntary VEWs, two women and three men. Monthly extension workshops are held at township, or occasionally at village, level for CLEWs, VEWs, leaders from the various CBOs and interested farmers. Informal training is also undertaken by senior staff, CLEWs and VEWs in the field. Staff and farmers participate in regular study tours.
Although good work is being undertaken, there is no doubt that, as in the other two projects, staff members are over-extended and are working under conditions of considerable difficulty. There is need for more senior technical staff, for more in-depth training and more contacts with outside institutions to gain experience, skills and knowledge.
<section>5</section>
4. Recommendations of the SPPD mission
4.1 Consolidation
4.2 Farming systems and agronomy
4.3 Natural resources management
4.4 Community forestry
4.5 Social, cultural and gender recommendations
4.1 Consolidation
At the commencement of Phase III the three Projects should review the village expansion targets with their UNDP partner, taking into account the need to balance expansion into new areas with the benefits of consolidating the achievements already made. The projects have introduced a range of interventions in, for example, community mobilisation and organisation, watershed management and protection, forestry development, income generation, training, participatory planning, and technology development. This is an appropriate time to review progress to date and to use the results of that review to determine the way forward.
Phase III provides an opportunity to complete the previously established working models of direct participatory grassroots intervention. It gives an opportunity to improve the models' capacities for sustainable agricultural development including the rationalizing of staff to beneficiary ratios, fine tuning extension methods used, such as field trials, demonstrations, the identification and build-up of a corps of farmer-researchers, as well as the documentation and popularization of project experiences and appropriate indigenous practices. Phase III also gives an opportunity for replacement service providers to prepare to take over.
4.2 Farming systems and agronomy
(1) Participatory Technology Development
In Phase III it is recommended that there should be increased emphasis on participatory technology development, particularly for agricultural production, taking into account the different agro-ecological conditions within each project. Topics would include variety evaluations for field, horticultural and fodder crops; simple fertilizer, manure and compost trials; crop responses to soil and water conservation measures etc.
It is recommended that the three projects enhance the capacities of farmer researchers through: a) Identifying and organizing farmer researchers into groups and federating them with other farmer researcher groups as well as fostering exchanges between them. b) Linking them with local and international sources of ideas and information relevant to agricultural development. c) Improving their skills by involving farmer researchers in applied research activities of the projects. d) Plan activities that recognize their farmer researcher efforts including documentation of their work, offer awards and organizing of guest shows. Any plans should be drawn up and undertaken with the participation of the farmer researchers as well as other concerned parties. The objectives must be clearly understood and acceptable to all parties concerned. Present project support for the development of farmer researchers should continue.
It will be virtually impossible for existing project staff to satisfactorily undertake such work, they do not have either the resources or the time available. Therefore the Mission recommends that the projects develop proposals to contract the work to local or external institutes (to be identified by the projects). The plans of the projects to invite national and international research institutions to undertake field research in their project areas would be a good opportunity for collaboration between farmer researchers and institutional researchers. The assistance package need not be too elaborate, sophisticated or expensive.
It will be essential that quantitative monitoring and evaluation of all research and demonstrations be undertaken.
(2) Expanding Contacts
In order to expand the flow of technical information and encourage the exchange of ideas and personnel it is recommended that the projects seek to further develop and strengthen links with outside institutes, particularly those in the Indian sub-continent, South-East Asia and Australia. Contacts established through the Technical Units of FAO-RAP, and with the FARMAsia network, with ICIMOD and the Participatory Watershed Management Training in Asia Programme in Nepal could assist this process.
(3) Consolidating Achievements
In the Phase III there should be emphasis on consolidating the work already being undertaken, rather than on a rapid and wide scale expansion into new areas. This consolidation should include further training of farmers to increase their technical skills, knowledge and understanding in such areas as soil fertility management, IPM, seed multiplication, produce storage, fodder production, livestock management, farm equipment maintenance, and participatory technology development. Training should be monitored and followed up in the field to assess the extent of skills and knowledge transfers. It will probably be necessary for the projects to obtain additional manpower and material resources to undertake such work, if necessary through the re-allocation of budget lines.
(4) Income Generating Groups
The services already being provided by FIGGs and LIGGs in the sourcing and buying of inputs such as fertilizers, seeds, chemicals, livestock, and feeds in general should be supported and encouraged in all areas as part of project strategy. Support and training should be continued to enable them to become more self-sufficient in handling all aspects of FIGG management in general. This would be part of the consolidation process. The possibility of making savings through the bulk-buying of inputs should be further explored.
(5) Livestock Activities
The important role of women should be taken into account by the projects when evaluating loan applications. It is recommended that when a household applies for, say, a pig loan, the women of the household should be consulted regarding the number of pigs the household (the women) can handle and whether they agree with the loan. Feed requirements for a fast multiplying livestock project should be planned for in advance. Interviews conducted by the Mission indicate that the majority of households can only care for one pregnant sow or one or two weaners for fattening. It is recommended that women be specifically targeted for piggery health training since it is usually they who take care of sick pigs. It is recommended that the projects encourage private veterinary drug suppliers, possibly at Township level, to provide drugs on consignment to the project-trained para-vets. In this way para-veterinary services for the livestock programme could be made more sustainable.
Following the example of the Dry Zone pig programme, which spun off a number of activities in pig fattening, meat processing, and animal feed stores, it is recommended that projects should explore the development of related enterprises based on the original income earning starter activity.
In situations where the availability of veterinary services are a problem, duck raising can be more successful than chicken production. Processing eggs with sodium silicate (waterglass) or lime could increase incomes from duck eggs. Preserving eggs is one way of extending their shelf life without the need of refrigeration.
(6) Home Gardens
Home gardens should be regarded more from the standpoint of their direct contribution to household food security than as a microenterprise. In promoting household home gardens, the projects should be aware that home gardens are considered as women's responsibility, part of their domestic chores. Therefore, promoting equal sharing of responsibilities among all members of the household should be part of the home garden-for-household-food-security campaign. Otherwise, women may be overworked.
It is recommended that the projects consider: a) encouraging the production of a wider range of medicinal plants for home consumption; b) introduction of more multi-storied cropping combinations; c) documentation of indigenous plant and plant uses and, more importantly, exchanging this information between the projects. The home garden is one of the best conservatories of crop diversity. Households, and women in particular, should be enlightened about the importance of biodiversity. Households should also be made aware of the current race to patent and thus control the use of plant and animal products and extracts. Women should be given training in simple ways of seed selection, storage, and labelling. Indigenous ways of storing seeds should be noted and, where possible, improved upon and encouraged.
It is recommended that the projects, in collaboration with the HDI Health and HDI Education projects, work to integrate nutrition concerns into the home garden activities. This means that the nutritional needs of the households and community should be studied and taken into consideration when deciding the crop/livestock mix for the home garden.
The projects should seek out and document, as leaflets for distribution, models of effective intercropping or intensive production systems.
(7) Data Analysis
Detailed economic analyses should be undertaken for a wide range of interventions in all three projects, as soon as sufficient data comes available, under different input and seasonal conditions. This will generate information on farm incomes as opposed to returns to single enterprises, and will provide data for planning purposes. Analytical tools are being developed in the Dry Zone for the appraisal of village capacity building, micro-project and rainfed farming activities. Their suitability for use in other areas should be considered. Because of personnel constraints, work on the analysis of interventions in the Shan State and Delta projects, may best be sub-contracted to a national agro-economist.
(8) MYA/96/006 (Dry Zone)
I. Since there appears to be little reliable information available on optimum fertiliser rates for different soils and different crops, and under different moisture conditions it is recommended that the project establish a series of simple fertiliser trials on farmers' fields. The possibility of undertaking this work through a contract with national specialists should be considered.
II. Work already started on the sourcing and evaluation of improved crop varieties adapted to local conditions should continue during the Third Phase. Contracts with national specialists or with overseas institutes to undertake the evaluation process should be considered in order to reduce the pressure of work on limited project staff members.
(9) MYA/96/007 (Southern Shan State)
I. The wider use of legumes (green manures, food crops and fodders) relay-cropped into main crops such as wheat, maize, upland rice and potatoes should be researched. Other intercropping patterns could also be explored which may have the advantage of giving higher total yields and better utilization of the soil profile.
II. Research should be initiated into the value of fallow periods as practised in the project area (commonly one to four years) in the maintenance of soil fertility. Alternatives such as legume cover crops (in addition to rice bean) should to be explored in greater depth.
III. The planting of different fodders on contour bunds, in fodder plots and around the homestead should be expanded from the work already started.
IV. Para-vets who are being trained in veterinary medicine should also receive training in fodder production and utilization, and animal nutrition.
V. In Shan State, the project has expanded piggery activities to include support for farmers to specifically maintain breeder stock to provide the piglets for distribution to regular multi-purpose pig raisers. These farmers keep larger numbers of animals than the regular pig raisers and the majority of them are men. It is recommended that women, who are traditionally the pig raisers, be encouraged to apply for these middle-sized breeder projects. Additional training will be needed for the farmers to ensure quality animals. Projects should encourage some applicants to raise one or two quality breeder boars in order to earn income from the services of these boars.
VI. In Shan State and the Delta it is recommended that the projects should investigate the interest in constructing chicken pens over fishponds. The chicken manure and feed droppings could provide additional feed for the fish.
(10) MYA/96/008 Ayeyarwady Delta Zone Project
I. There would appear to be scope for the further development and diversification of ornamental foliage and flower production and marketing. Seed quality is an important issue here since local seed is poor. The project should investigate the possibility of developing quality flower seed production on a relatively large scale as an income generating activity, as well as flower production itself.
II. Home garden cultivation requires increased attention particularly regarding the transfer of increased knowledge and skills in vegetable production, fruit tree pruning and the dynamic management of multi-layered gardens to increase the range of plants grown and their productivity.
III. The project should examine the results of urea-molasses nutrient block demonstration of the Dry Zone project with a view to introducing these items to the Delta. The treatment of rice straw with urea to enhance digestibility and protein content for livestock would also be worth evaluating.
IV. In the Delta it is recommended that the use of pig manure for methane gas production be investigated. The methane gas digester could be designed to utilize pig manure and human waste. Alternatively, neighbouring pig raisers could pool their pig manure and share a single digester.
V. It is recommended that the project should seek to educate the buying public about cultured mushrooms to help overcome buyer resistence. Considering the investment made in the mushroom spawn producing facility, its use could be maximized if it were to grow table mushrooms as well as spawn. It is recommended that greater effort be made to maintain sanitary conditions within and around the spawn making facility. Contamination can spread rapidly, is hard to eradicate, and could severely damage the business.
4.3 Natural resources management
(1) General
It is recommended that Phase III of the three FAO-executed HDI projects give greater attention to:
I. monitoring and documenting the environmental impacts of community forests and of conservation measures created under the projects;
II. carrying out field research in the silviculture of community forests, including species suitability, effects of initial spacing, weeding techniques and conservation measures;
III. using the field research data to establish objectives and guidelines for sustainable management of community forests.
Field research and impact monitoring should be built into any agriculturally-based project, especially one aiming to restore degraded environments and land productivity. These are long-term activities, however, and difficult to visualize for projects with a thirty month time horizon, especially with regard to forestry. But the need is strong, and an opportunity to generate essential knowledge could be lost by not at least starting the process. For the future, it has to be assumed that, fully realizing their weakness and lack of resources, the Forest Department and the Myanmar Agricultural Service would take over responsibility for these activities after project withdrawal,
Aside from their short time horizons, the projects are already stretched for qualified staff and budgets to carry out routine project delivery and have little capacity to take on additional tasks. On no account should the proposed monitoring and research activities interfere with and compromise their present performance. Project plans and budgets are already drawn up for the next project phase, and to some extent the proposed activities might fit into these plans. It is most likely that additional resources would have to be tapped, which at this stage might not be easy.
Finding well qualified and available personnel to undertake these activities would also be difficult, especially with respect to forestry. If qualified national staff cannot be directly recruited, the following options could be considered:
I. contracting a national institute or NGO;
II. contracting to regional institute or NGO; or
III. using a regional institute through a twinning arrangement.
(2) Technical Approaches
Environmental Impact Monitoring
Environmental monitoring is intended to measure the effects of fixed interventions. It is recommended that the projects should assess (qualitatively or quantitatively) and should document:
I. the effects of improved protection of natural community forests on biomass and species diversity (Shan and Delta);
II. the effects of contour bunds and other on-field conservation measures on cropping and crop yields (Dry Zone and Shan);
III. the effects of soil and water conservation structures, water harvesting structures and sediment storage dams on biomass and groundwater re-charge as indicated by changes in streamflow and the water levels in downstream wells (Dry Zone); and
IV. the effects of sediment storage dams and checkdams in the Dry Zone on sediment accumulation, cropping, and crop yields (Dry Zone).
Data should be collected not only on the direct and indirect effects, but also on input costs and output values in order to analyse economic viability. As far as possible the measured effects should be compared with a "no treatment" situation.
Monitoring in community forests should mean establishing and marking square or circular permanent sample plots of, say, 500 m^2 for regular annual measurement. Circular plots have the advantage of being easily marked with a permanent centre mark from which the plot is described with a 12.6 m radius at each annual measurement (central markers should be something other than posts or other items likely to be stolen). Each plot should be numbered and the exact position mapped in order to be re-located.
Monitoring in agricultural fields should involve selecting demonstration fields that represent typical with and without treatments. Crop yield should be sampled with small temporary plots. The effects of water harvesting structures on re-charging aquifers and water levels in wells could be done qualitatively through informal interviews.
(3) Field Research as a Basis for Future Management
Unlike environmental monitoring (which measures the effects of fixed interventions), field research is intended to measure and compare the effects of different treatments to build a base of knowledge for decision-making. It refers specifically in this case to testing different methods of woodlot establishment, including species suitability, effects of initial spacing, weeding techniques and conservation measures (such as water harvesting trenches in the Dry Zone).
The field research envisaged here might help the community groups to stay involved in the protection and management of their woodlots by helping them to set more specific objectives, clearer management procedures and understanding, and more realistic expectations of future production and income. Building in and assessing varied factors such as spacing would allow user groups to realize the obvious differences in labour inputs and value of product outturn, then to decide for themselves which regimes most benefited them. The projects should at least initiate this kind of field research, even if their short time horizon and other constraints did not permit them to complete the work.
The indicators measured in permanent sample plots or otherwise recorded should include, inter alia:
I. number of trees;
II. species planted;
III. planting survival;
IV. grass growth and species (only if considered of economic value);
V. individual tree heights;
VI. individual tree diameters at 1.3 m above ground (minimum 5 cm).
Example for the Dry Zone
The process here would be to:
I. select certain hillsides for intensive trial and impact monitoring;
II. establish the required treatment variations on these selected hillsides;
III. apply these different treatments in bands up and down the slopes to minimize the influence of water flow or downward seepage from one treatment on to the adjacent one;
IV. establish permanent sample plots in each treatment (approximately on the same contour) for the annual measurement of the required indicators.
It is recommended to test the effects of water harvesting trenches and different spacing of those trenches on tree and grass growth. The first priority would be to compare: 1) control (i.e. no trenching or planting); 2) simple pitting (i.e. conventional planting without water harvesting); and 3) water harvesting structures of best known design. A second priority, no less important but with added complexity, would be to compare wide, medium and close spacing between trenches (and planted trees).
Variations in spacing of trenches and trees (the norm is 400 per acre) would affect: 1) how trees interact with one another (e.g. speed of crown closure, shading out of grass, growth of stem diameter and the overall yield of wood per acre); 2) effectiveness of water harvesting, which in turn affects tree and grass growth. The effect on tree growth would thus be interactive.
Measures or indicators likely to show up differences between the above treatments include:
I. establishment and maintenance costs;
II. year by year grass production (close spacing of trenches may give greatest initial grass growth, but early shading out and suppression of grass by trees);
III. initial tree survival and year by year growth;
IV. the age at which tree crowns close or begin to shade out grass;
V. tree stem diameter (competition and tree crown closure sets in earlier with close spacing, the effect of which is to slow down stem diameter growth);
VI. volume of wood (or biomass) per acre (close spacing will give highest volume of wood but smaller trees);
VII. value of wood (or biomass) per acre (wide spacing may give lowest overall volume, but of larger and probably higher value trees).
Example for Shan State
It is recommend that the project test the effectiveness of on-field vegetative strips as conservation measures compared with contour bunds. Strips are less costly than bunds, they increase infiltration and form a permeable barrier through which runoff can flow. At the same time, they slow down runoff, filtering and leaving behind the sediments. There is less risk of concentrating runoff with subsequent breaching than there is with soil bunds. Laying-out vegetative barriers is less critical than contour bunds, for which misalignment on the contour can result in water accumulation, breaching and gulley formation. The first priority should be to establish demonstration plots, for which participant farmers should receive full compensation.
Example for the Delta
Spacing is a key factor in determining the most profitable management regime for user groups. As one example of recommended field research, the project should consider different spacings for sowing Avicennia propagules (say, 1 x 1.5 feet, 2 x 3 feet, 3 x 4 feet and 5 x 5 feet) to test the effects on tree growth and profitability. Assuming two thinnings before final harvest, each removing 50 percent of the crop, some expected effects of wider spacing might be:
I. reduced labour for propagule collection and sowing;
II. reduced labour per acre for each weeding, but possibly repeated more often;
III. possibly improved survival;
IV. reduced labour for thinning;
V. reduced number of trees from thinnings, but of larger size and value;
VI. reduced number of trees from final harvest, but of larger size and value.
The measured indicators from permanent sample plots in each treatment should include planting survival, tree height and tree stem diameter at breast height (1.3 m above ground level). Additional information should include the relative costs of planting, weeding and thinning, and the relative market values of different tree sizes. With the collected data, a projected cash flow for each treatment should indicate the most profitable combination of spacing, thinning and final harvest age.
The same principles apply to the thinning of homogeneous stands of natural mangrove forest regeneration, as well as to plantations of Eucalyptus.
(4) Recommended Personnel Requirements
It is recommended that the HDI programme assign the following environmental monitoring team, supported with adequate facilities and transport, to carry out the proposed tasks:
I. a Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist (qualified in environmental sciences) assigned for the project duration to design and oversee the monitoring programme for all three projects, in close cooperation with the three project Chief Technical Advisers;
II. a Database Specialist, also assigned for the project duration, responsible for organizing, checking, entering, analysing and reporting the collected data;
III. a full-time field supervisor and at least five seasonal field crew assigned to each project, working closely with project staff and community groups, to be responsible for laying out plots and carrying out the required sampling procedures and measurements.
It is recommended that the Monitoring and Evaluation specialist would:
I. identify the needs, and develop the rationale, approaches and indicators for environmental monitoring and field research in close cooperation with the Chief Technical Advisers;
II. establish procedures for sampling, measuring and analysing data;
III. train trainers in the team to work with contact farmers and community members in selecting appropriate sampling locations, bearing in mind the practical purposes and objectives of research and monitoring;
IV. oversee the programme to be conducted by team members and by selected (and paid) community user group members;
V. interpret the effects of project interventions on immediate or long-term product yields and management options, economic and financial viability, other direct and indirect environmental impacts, and likely sustainability;
VI. provide project staff (and hence community groups) with indications of the short- and long-term profitability of project interventions, recommended natural resource management strategies and guidelines for management plans.
4.4 Community forestry
(1) Project Expansion
The SPPD mission strongly recommends that in the forthcoming Phase III forestry development activities be consolidated in areas where the projects have been previously operating. Any expansion to new areas as far as forestry is concerned should be justified in terms of communal use of lands adjacent to lands already supported by the projects under either the community forestry or soil conservation programme or, in order to protect the remaining patches of natural forests preserved by villages close to these natural forests;
(2) Forest Policy and Policy Instruments
The Forest Law, the Policy Statement and the Community Forestry Instruction are significant steps in the modernisation of forest management, but bolder steps are needed to truly reform forest conservation and management in Myanmar. Community forestry should be formally recognised through an amendment of the Forest Law, and Forest Rules (or separate Community Forestry Rules) should be drafted, endorsed and promulgated. Community forestry will need to be defined in the Forest Law and the suggestion to create a third category of forest land in addition to Reserve Forest and Protected Public Forest called Community Forest should be seriously considered.
(3) National Community Forestry Workshop
In view of the different and often experimental experiences of the three projects with community forestry, it is proposed that early in Phase III (i.e. after the 1999 monsoon) the projects jointly organize a National Community Forestry Workshop to take stock of progress made, to discuss common issues, to define operational procedures and implementation strategies and to discuss desirable changes of the forestry legislation. Each project should, prior to this workshop, prepare a document outlining the project's concept and methodology for community forestry. The workshop, which would be attended by Forest Department officials, should be technically backstopped by FAO. Following this workshop, the projects could then further tailor their approaches and use these as a basis for "training of trainers" activities, to outline an awareness-raising strategy and to prepare extension materials related to community forestry.
(4) Forestry Community Based Organisations
It is recommended that the three projects should continue to promote the formation of executive committees of community forestry user groups which better reflect their membership. This implies more participation by women, by the landless and by representatives of minority villages (in terms of user group membership) in executive committees.
(5) Status of Community Forestry
The projects should, as the Dry Zone project is doing, explore the possibilities of introducing integrated village landuse planning which would take into account the use of all common lands such as potential community forestry areas (including Reserve Forest and unprotected public forestland), grazing areas and other waste lands.
(6) Community Forestry Management Plans
The three projects should use the first year of Phase III to outline their approaches for community forestry management plan preparation as well as devising the format of management plans. The projects should also assess the need for involvement in the preparation of (user) group constitutions. The efforts of the projects can only be expected to be fruitful if this happens in close consultation with the Forest Department.
(7) Training and Extension
Although several training activities have been undertaken by all projects none of them has yet been able to define a comprehensive community forestry training programme. This is largely because the projects are still defining their concepts of community forestry. It is anticipated that the proposed National Community Forestry Workshop (see 3 above) will help the projects to define their training needs and priorities, as well as their extension strategies, including awareness raising.
(8) Fuelwood-saving Cooking Stoves
The introduction of improved, fuelwood-saving cooking stoves is generally proceeding smoothly. The projects should continue and, where needed, strengthen quality control and close monitoring of the use of stoves.
(9) Sustainability
All projects are seeking to improve the chances for sustainability of community forestry. An evident constraint is the relatively short period of project support that can be provided to community forestry villages. The chances for sustainability could be greatly enhanced by adopting the policy measures recommended above.
(10) Savings and Debts
The projects should explore all options available to address the crisis of indebtedness of community households. Some form of compulsory savings scheme may be a possible solution.
(11) Monitoring and Evaluation
The projects should concentrate their efforts regarding monitoring and evaluation (M&E) on participatory M&E; the monitoring of tree growth and survival, group dynamics and conflict management and resolution. Provisions to monitor the growth of community forestry plantations should be made, so that the financial and economic feasibility of community plantations can be better assessed. Monitoring tree survival, undertaken by all projects, should be continued. The institutional development of community forestry user groups and their abilities to solve conflicts should be monitored. This will help the projects to respond in timely manner to general and specific constraints and to improve the community forestry concept for the benefit of present and future user groups.
4.5 Social, cultural and gender recommendations
(1) Expansion of the HDI Food Security Projects
It is recommended that any expansion to additional villages/village tracts be planned cautiously to ensure that they reach levels of self-reliance that are not in jeopardy when the phase ends. It is recommended that emphasis should be on vertical, rather than horizontal expansion in Phase III. Vertical expansion should focus on upgrading staff and beneficiary knowledge and skills, expanding and strengthening community research/extension capacities, networking among CBOs, and working out replacement service provider mechanisms before the projects withdraw. Any horizontal expansion under Phase III should ensure that the new communities and beneficiaries have adequate time to learn, digest, adopt, and make appropriate adjustments in human resource and technology development initiatives before the end of the thirty month time frame.
(2) Community Based Organisations (CBOs)
It is necessary to ensure that CBOs are equitably representative of the projects' clientele and that they equitably address the concerns of each group. The three projects should vigourously lend their support to equal representation of the disadvantaged and train them to intelligently wield their representation. In this regard the projects should study their present strategies of soliciting the involvement of the very poor (timing, group dynamics and confidence-building instruments, income-generating and welfare packages) and seek ways of making these more accessible to the poor.
It is time to consider the legal status of the CBOs. There is a need to legalize their ownership and the management of their assets. The CBOs need authority to act as a corporate body, to have the right to sue and be sued. Above all, they need Government's recognition and protection of their rights. It is suggested that UNDP and FAO, with the support and advice of Government, initiate discussion on the legal status of the CBOs and take action accordingly. It is further suggested that the matter be taken up and resolved as soon as possible. This would give the CBOs, with the support of the projects, time to discuss the matter with their membership. They also need time to take the necessary action as well to deal with, and experience, their legality. To ensure transparency of CBO financial operations and reduce the chances of misuse or loss of funds, it is recommended that all CBOs who have not yet opened bank accounts should do so. Even where banks are scarce and difficult to
reach, ways of dealing with the situation should be discussed. This may be one area in which the HDI micro-credit and HDI Food Security projects could collaborate.
It is recommended that the projects vigorously encourage the federation of CBOs. In this way, the advantages of working with small groups would remain, and individual CBOs would retain their independence and self-identity. A federation could increase the CBOs' bargaining power which they could translate into reasonable terms of access to capital and credit, to cheaper and better farm inputs, as well as to markets and better prices for their products and services. If the federation were large enough and strong enough, it could influence Government policy. The federation could be a network through which information, expertise, and technology were accessed and exchanged. For the projects, the federation's network could be an alternate or supplemental channel for reaching people. A federation should not replace individual groups, just as groups should not completely replace working with individuals. It is suggested that the projects introduce the idea of a federation to project
senior and junior staff and initiate a dialogue to clarify and generate ideas regarding its feasibility. The same could then be undertaken, first, with small groups of VDCs and their sub-groups and later with larger groups, perhaps at township level. Meanwhile, VDCs and sub-groups should be more involved in the process of planning and procuring inputs as well as working out product marketing within increasing competition. These participatory activities could provide insights, direction and experience to federation.
It is recommended that the HDI program review its community organizations' campaign and consider supporting the community's traditional way of coping; form a community coordinating body which each HDI CBO is represented. If the HDI projects' objective for organizing CBOs is to develop and train the villagers and the poor to be leaders, it is recommended that CBO leadership should be rotated and that apprenticeship of members to leaders be considered. This may help build a larger cadre of leaders from which to draw.
Throughout Phase III it is recommended that the projects continue to establish linkages and networking between the CBOs and Government as well as with private sector service providers of inputs, information, marketing, credit, banking, extension and research. Village CBOs in isolation will soon lose their usefulness. Contact with other CBOs and service providers is their lifeblood.
(3) Documenting and Disseminating Local Knowledge Systems
It is recommended that the three projects should continue their work of documenting local knowledge systems. What is local knowledge in one area may not necessarily be local knowledge in all communities. The projects should seek to popularize local knowledge beyond the areas in which it is found. When disseminated to other communities, farmer researchers will usually take on the testing and adaptation of this knowledge to fit their own conditions. The projects have prepared extension-teaching materials and the HDIS has also provided training to project staff in the preparation of leaflets.
(4) Community Level Planning
It is recommended that the projects continue to develop their participatory rural appraisal (PRA) and farming systems approaches, making rural people partners in the planning, implementation, and evaluation process. In terms of PRA the projects should be sensitive to how the local communities themselves can undertake PRA. Local methodologies could be developed or adapted jointly with project service users. Interaction should be encouraged between the social planners and the bio-physical scientists. Efforts should be made to enable villages and CBOs to be involved in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of their own data. They should know what information exists and should have ready access to it.
(5) Seasonal Migration
It is recommended that in the Dry Zone, the project pursue its efforts in identifying non-farm income-earning activities which could be undertaken within the community or on the farm, thereby reducing the need for migration. Preference for labour-intensive projects should continue to be given priority.
Where seasonal migrants are also farmers projects should continue to identify measures that could further increase the productivity of their farms, thereby reducing the need to seek supplemental income from migrant employment.
For school children who must accompany their parents during seasonal migration, projects should discuss with school authorities the possibility of allowing these children to continue schooling in the school nearest the place they migrate to. Their home school could provide the children with certificates of enrollment which they would present to their new school. When they leave these new schools to return to their home villages, they would be provided with school performance records. These records would then be added to the home school records. In this way there would be only short breaks in school attendance due to travel time and the children would not need to drop out of school. There is, however, a problem when families move from place to place within a migrant season due to lack of steady employment.
The HDI Health Project should consider programmes to reduce the health hazards affecting migrants and their communities. For example, providing migrants with malaria tablets, undertaking a study of the issue of lead-induced illness, and expanding the AIDS-control program to cover the mines and public works sites.
It is recommended that a separate study on the implications of seasonal migration be commissioned by UNDP. This should include a historical documentation of the evolution of migration, and a review of its relationship to health, education, agriculture, natural resource degradation, security, and economics.
(6) Performance Ranking of Villages
As a first step in determining which villages to exit from, the projects have started to categorize participating villages according to high, medium and low performance. The HDIS has also begun village tract analysis as part of their substantive series. The performance exercise made villagers more analytically aware of their own village as well as of other project villages. It is recommended that these incidental effects should be further explored and possibly adapted to generate constructive village self-determination and competitiveness. The indicators used to measure performance should be reviewed and possibly revised to include more substantive and qualifying (rather than quantifying) indicators or a combination of both. Community ethno-linguistic and religious affiliations as well as reciprocal relationships between community socio-economic groups should be taken into account when measuring performance.
(7) Micro Income-earning Activities:
Handicraft: The weaving of nipa shingles, bamboo wall sidings and mats are handicraft activities which are common to all zones. It is recommended that the projects continue to promote and support the maintenance of nipa/bamboo/palm groves and their related handicraft industries. Further, the development of new weaving designs, techniques of treating the materials to extend their lifetime, as well as seeking additional ways of using the raw or woven materials should be actively encouraged. In collaboration with architects, builders, the tourist sector, the agriculture and forestry departments of Government as well as art/craftsmen's guilds, the projects could consider organizing simple competitions cum trade fairs to meet these objectives. Foreign embassies could be approached to participate in these fairs, either volunteering judges from their countries who are also craftsmen, showing films of similar crafts from their countries, presenting small exhibits of tools, crafts,
or books for the same or similar materials. Alternately, the projects could offer to handle simple workshops in, for example, design, finishing, or treating. Such competitions cum trade fairs would sell Myanmar's products within and outside the country, as well as encourage further development of the industry. Unlike other crafts like textiles or decor crafts, these should be looked at from the standpoint of their utilitarian uses. Moreover, making nipa and bamboo housing an indicator of poverty will have a negative effect on the industry. If the use of these materials is avoided because of their implications, nipa and bamboo growing will decline along with the environment they sustain and the employment they generate.
Woodcrafts: including lumber and carving, as well as ceramics, should be reviewed for potential development as handicrafts. The use of poles, coconut lumber, coconut coir for stuffing seats, making packing materials, even as planting medium for greenhouse and intensive vegetable gardening may be worth exploring.
Weaving: The Swedish and back-strap cloth loom weaving workshops which have been sponsored by the Delta and Dry Zone projects for village women should be continued. Provided the projects are careful not to train too many weavers, there will be a local market for their products.
Trading and Retailing
A number of small trading and retailing activities have been assisted by all three projects. These include rice, fish paste, beetlenut, cloth and dry goods. Women show particular interest in small trading. Trading and retailing are activities women can engage in during their spare time, particularly if the trade is in dry goods, processed foods and textiles which are not so perishable. While present incomes from these activities may be small, it is recommended that women be supported to expand their operations. For example: a) small groups or a few individuals could be financed to undertake the trade in farm inputs including seeds, pesticides, fertilizers, farm tools and implements; b) small groups could be encouraged and financed to buy and trade in farm produce. The landless could go into partnership with producers, handling post harvest operations as well as marketing. There are a number of such activities taking place throughout the project areas. What may be needed is
to identify these activities and discuss with the villagers, the landless and women in particular, the possibilities of their engaging in these activities with funding from the project and/or from their revolving funds.
Cereal banking
Since areas covered by the three projects suffer from chronic or seasonal food scarcity, it is recommended that cereal banking be considered by the projects as both a food security and an income-earning activity. Project records show that borrowing for rice during hunger periods as well as rice retailing are WIGG activities. Therefore, it is recommended that cereal banking be placed in the hands of women's groups. The cereal banking model popularized by FAO and WFP could be adapted to cover, for example, the following activities in rice cereal banking:
I. cash loans to poor farmers, to be repaid in paddy after harvest at prevailing prices;
II. purchase village rice production after harvest for storage, payment in cash at prevailing prices;
III. rice-for-work loans during hunger months at market or less than market values, repaid in cash at 2 percent per month interest;
IV. rice retailing available to entire village, purchases paid for in cash at prevailing prices;
V. seed available to all farmers for planting, on cash and carry basis.
As the women's groups develop experience and skill in paddy cereal banking, they could branch out to cover other crops such as maize, sesame, groundnuts, chickpeas and other legumes.
It is recommended that the projects should consider the upgrading of the business skills of women's groups through small community workshops in which the women could learn to analyze their project records and use their findings to improve their businesses. Women's income-earning activities need not be limited to the scale of operation which earns for them only small incomes. These often restrict women to hand-to-mouth incomes, leaving nothing to be invested in expansion or diversification. Women are capable of owning and managing middle to large-scale enterprises. Projects should guard against depending only on gender stereotyped jobs or income-earning activities. There is a need to explore and provide opportunities to either sex to engage in income-earning activities other than those which are gender tagged. There is also a need to be aware of gender-differentiated constraints and the need to provide supporting activities which address these constraints. These may include
ways to reduce the time required to fetch water and firewood, or the provision of some form of day care centre so that mothers can be given extra time to engage in income-earning activities.
(8) Credit
All projects provide start-up capital and credit to CBOs as well as individual beneficiaries. The sensitivity and responsiveness of the credit programmes to the seasonal character of the enterprises for which they are used, is perhaps the most important advantage of the capital and credit schemes which the three projects support.
Most community projects are designed to generate income to initiate revolving fund schemes for the beneficiary community. It is recommended that the projects build in simple but adequate mechanisms for monitoring the administration and management of revolving funds. It is equally important that the villagers or beneficiaries be trained to use these mechanisms.
Not all start-up and credit portfolios charge interest on loans. It is recommended that interest on loans should be adopted for all start-up and credit activities of the three projects. The establishment of this interest rate should take into account administrative charges plus a small amount of profit, and should be fixed on either a per-month or annual rate basis. There should be closer monitoring of group lending to ensure that all members share equally in the risks as well as in the profits.
For the poorer beneficiaries, credit is often used for consumption purposes as is the case with the rice-for-work programme. It is recommended that the rice for work programme should be reviewed and designed in such a way that it can maintain itself. The women who borrow rice so they are able to negotiate for better wages from the farmers for whom they work should be encouraged to regularly save a fraction of the increased wages which they earn. Eventually, their savings should be sufficient so that they will no longer need to borrow rice. They can use their savings just as if they were borrowing from themselves.
Not all eligible beneficiaries will be willing to borrow for income-earning activities. This is particularly true of the poorer members of a community who are wary of risks. They would prefer steady employment rather than involvement in an uncertain microenterprise. In this regard, it is recommended that the projects consider enterprises that can employ members of the community who need steady wages. Many of the community microenterprises including rice mills, fish hatcheries, boat services, farm machinery repair shops and cereal banks could employ a few such persons on a regular basis.
(9) Women's access to microenterprises
The difference between male and female microenterprise ventures lies in the relative size of the activities. This is due primarily to women's lack of time to engage full time in the enterprise. Women respond to this problem by working as a group. The draw back to this strategy is that a group, rather than an individual must share in whatever earnings are derived. In the end, individual incomes may be very small. It is recommended that the projects consider the following possibilities to allow women to invest their time more effectively in microenterprise activities:
i) Organize community day care centers in order to free mothers from caring for their pre-schoolers for a few hours a day. This time could be used to engage in microenterprise work. In addition the day care center would provide employment for one or two child-care givers;
ii) Campaign for equal sharing of the domestic chores. One way of highlighting domestic chores is to put a value on them. If household members understand that women could earn more if they were not tied down to household chores, they might be more willing to take on some of the work;
iii) Enhance women's skill levels to make them economically more productive within a given period. Improving the quality of finished products and services could increase the price received and ultimately increase total earnings. Reduction of losses and wastage of raw materials, along with the possibility of recycling scrap into marketable products could reduce production costs and increase profit margins.
iv) Encourage women to engage in economically more profitable microenterprises. Together with the women, the projects should prepare feasibility studies of the possible microenterprises they can engage in. In this way the women can select microenterprises that fit their particular situations and which are likely to earn them better incomes. If some of these enterprises require larger amounts of credit the projects should be willing to finance them provided that the feasibility studies have been properly made.
<section>6</section>
Annexes
Annex 1 - Suggested outputs of the SPPD mission. February/March 1999
Annex 2 - Timetable for second visit of SPPD mission. 14 February through 17 March 1999 - Travel schedule of mission members
Annex 3 - Government research. Extension and credit
Annex 4 - Forestry related policies and related instruments
Annex 1 - Suggested outputs of the SPPD mission. February/March 1999
Within the general context of the need to ensure sustainability, replicability, people's participation, partnership with NGOs and other potential donors, the Mission will:
I. Make recommendations for actions for consideration by the three FAO-executed HDI projects during the course of the third phase.
II. Report on evaluations of specific project activities.
III. Make recommendations for the improvement of monitoring and evaluation activities designed to measure the impact of project interventions (including group formation and the management of funds).
IV. More specifically, and within the disciplines represented, the Mission will undertake the following activities:
Farming Systems and Agronomy
I. Estimates of gross margins for selected enterprises.
II. Evaluation of selected project interventions.
III. Replicability/sustainability of project technical innovations.
IV. Access to inputs at local level.
V. Review of marketing, prices, credit facilities.
VI. Review of technical capability of project staff, and staff of government extension services.
VII. Review of participatory development and the transfer of technology to communities.
VIII. Demonstration effects in non-project communities.
IX. Review of constraints to development.
Natural Resource Management:
I. Current use of natural resources.
II. Environmental situation.
III. Linkages between environmental degradation and poverty.
IV. Environmental effects of project interventions (related to natural resources).
V. Recommendations regarding untapped resources or technical weaknesses.
VI. Needs and methods for monitoring.
VII. Sustainability and replicability of resource-based project interventions.
Community Forestry:
I. Recommendations for developing management plans for community forests;
II. Review of policy and policy instruments on the basis of actual project experiences with community forestry;
III. Review of methodologies and strategies adopted by the projects to implement community forestry;
IV. Recommendations for the further development of community forestry approaches, based on the above review;
V. Consequent upon case studies undertaken in all three project areas, specific aspects for review and recommendation include the following:
a) awareness raising and extension;
b) community forestry planning process, including management plan preparation and management plan formats;
c) user right security, site protection, and grazing issues;
d) plantation establishment, management and utilisation aspects (in collaboration with other mission members);
e) training of farmers and staff;
f) institutional development of community forestry user groups;
g) targeting (i.e. female-headed households, landless and small farmers);
h) sustainability and replicability.
i) monitoring and reporting
Social Planning/WID:
I. Review of institutions established in the three zones.
II. Development of village profiles.
III. Documentation of process of income generation through the revolving fund.
IV. Directions in the post-project period.
V. Training project staff in monitoring techniques.
VI. Study of migration from the Dry Zone.
VII. Spread of innovations in the Delta beyond the project coverage.
Annex 2 - Timetable for second visit of SPPD mission. 14 February through 17 March 1999 - Travel schedule of mission members
Date
H Marshall
D Hamada
A Sterk
T Thorp
JM Stainbum
14/02 Sun
Arrive Bangkok
Arrive Bangkok
Arrive Bangkok
15/02 Mon
FAO-RAP
FAO-RAP
FAO-RAP
FAO-RAP
16/02 Tue
To Yangon
To Yangon
To Yangon
To Yangon
17/02 Wed
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
18/02 Thu
Arrive Bangkok
To Delta
To Delta
Yangon
Yangon
19/02 Fri
To Yangon
Delta
Delta
Yangon
Yangon
20/02 Sat
To Delta
Delta
Delta
To Delta
Yangon
21/02 Sun
Delta
Delta
Delta
Delta
Yangon
22/02 Mon
Delta
Delta
To Yangon
Delta
Yangon
23/02 Tue
Delta
Delta
Yangon
Delta
Yangon
24/02 Wed
Delta
Delta
Yangon
To Yangon
Yangon
25/02 Thu
To Yangon
Delta
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
26/02 Fri
To Shan
Delta
To Shan
To Shan
To Shan
27/02 Sat
Shan
Delta
Shan
Shan
Shan
28/02 Sun
Shan
Delta
Shan
Shan
Shan
01/03 Mon
Shan
To Yangon
Shan
Shan
Shan
02/03 Tue
To Dry Zone
To Dry Zone
To Dry Zone
To Dry Zone
To Dry Zone
03/03 Wed
Dry Zone
Dry Zone
Dry Zone
Dry Zone
Dry Zone
04/03 Thu
Dry Zone
Dry Zone
Dry Zone
Dry Zone
Dry Zone
05/03 Fri
Dry Zone
Dry Zone
Dry Zone
Dry Zone
Dry Zone
06/03 Sat
Dry Zone
To Yangon
To Yangon
Dry Zone
To Yangon
07/03 Sun
Dry Zone
Yangon
Yangon
Dry Zone
Yangon
08/03 Mon
To Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
To Yangon
Yangon
09/03 Tue
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
10/03 Wed
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
11/03 Thu
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
12/03 Fri
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
13/03 Sat
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
14/03 Sun
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
Yangon
15/03 Mon
To Bangkok
To Bangkok
To Bangkok
To Bangkok
To Bangkok
16/03 Tue
FAO-RAP
FAO-RAP
FAO-RAP
FAO-RAP/depart
FAO-RAP
17/03 Wed
FAO-RAP
Depart
Depart
18/03 Thu
Depart
Annex 3 - Government research. Extension and credit
Research and Extension
Agriculture
Agricultural research in Myanmar is focused on crop diversification and farming systems involving important commodities such as rice, maize, cotton, oilseeds, pulses, sugarcane, fruits and vegetables. This is undertaken through a network of research facilities, at the head of which is the Central Agricultural Research Institute (CARI) located near Yezin. The institute is one of the twelve Divisions of the Myanmar Agricultural Service (MAS), a major Agency of the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation. The mandate of CARI is to carry out basic and applied research on agronomy, botany, soils and agro-chemistry, plant pathology and entomology, particularly for rice and the important industrial crops. The work is oriented to increase production through improved seeds and varieties, better crop management and protection techniques, better plant nutrition and better cropping systems suited to each agro-ecological condition. The Institute provides training for research and
extension staff from the 16 Agricultural Experiment Stations and 54 sub-stations located in different regions of the country. Results from the research programmes of the Institute are passed on to these regional stations and sub-stations for further testing. The stations are also responsible for solving specific agricultural problems in their respective areas of responsibility.
An annual transfer of technology meeting is held at CARI, before the onset of the rains, attended by senior headquarters officers, and research and extension officers from State or Division, District, and Township level. This meeting provides a forum for exchange of information, presentation of research findings, and planning to deal with problems raised by field officers. A programme of work is determined for implementation by the various research stations in the country. Quarterly coordinating meetings review the progress of the research and extension programmes.
Extension services reach to township and village tract levels. At township level, there is the Township Manager (TM), two deputy TMs and several High Yield Station Officers. Beneath this, theoretically, there is a Manager for each Village Tract, but frequently only about half of these positions are filled. At village level there is occasionally a village extension worker. Under the present conditions of underfunding, shortage of transport, limited international contacts in recent years and a consequent lack of incentives and motivation, research and extension staff have difficulties in implementing their mandates. Direct contact with the farming community is limited, not least because of staff shortages. Identified contact farmers manage extension demonstrations on their lands. It is estimated that, at present, Myanmar has fewer than thirty "researchers" per one million hectares, compared, for example, to about 330 "researchers" in China.
In the Dry Zone the MAS is the lead cooperating agency with the Dry Zone project and has assigned six township level staff to work with the project on a full time basis. Training has been provided to the Land Use and Planning Department in soil and water conservation and soil mapping. As a direct result of the project's work, the MAS has allocated funds under its 1999-2000 budget to replicate in nine adjacent Townships a number of soil and water conservation and agricultural activities. Early in the process the MAS intends to initiate work on soil sedimentation dams, check dams and contour bunds.
Under the UNDP mandate for Myanmar, direct links with Government line Agencies and institutions are not permitted. However, it may be possible for the projects to further explore the establishment of contracts with individuals from agricultural and livestock institutions to carry out specific work assignments in research, and in the technical monitoring of activities.
Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine
Within the Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries the Department of Livestock Breeding and Veterinary Medicine is responsible for research and development of livestock. Within this are several Divisions including Animal Health Development and Research, and Disease Control. There are three regional diagnostic laboratories and a Central Diagnostic Laboratory in Yangon. There are also several livestock enterprises and institutes under the Ministry. Within each State or Division of Myanmar, there is a Chief Veterinary Officer, a Veterinary Officer for each District, a Township level officer for each Township and a Village Tract officer for each VT. Veterinary staff at Township and VT levels are trained in a multi-disciplinary approach to livestock production and health care. The Department has initiated a programme of training auxiliary veterinarians at village level, drawn from interested farmers. These "bare-foot vets" will receive a veterinary medical kit, the "Blue Cross" kit,
to enable them to dispense animal health care to farmers. The Department is severely underfunded and understaffed. FAO has supported the Ministry with several small TCPs.
Credit
The Myanmar Agricultural and Rural Development Bank (MARDB) is an agency of the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation. It provides credit to farmers traditionally to support the monsoon paddy crop. Recently it has started to give support to summer (dry season) paddy. It has branches at Village Tract level and in each village a bank representative is appointed. The credit it can provide is extremely limited and is related to farm area: K. 4,000 for 1 to 5 acres; K. 8000 for 6 to 10 acres, and K. 12,000 for over 10 acres. The interest rate is at about 21 percent per annum. An average of 10 percent of debtors default on loans but all monies are eventually recovered. There are indications that in 1999 there will be more flexibility and larger loans will be available. In effect, it will probably mean that loans will be geared more towards the richer farmers whilst the poorer farmers will be even more hard pressed to obtain loans at a reasonable interest rate. MARDB has
difficulties in operating a savings scheme due to lack of proper banking structures and security at Township and VT levels. However, it has recently instituted a compulsory savings scheme that obliges farmers who take out a loan to pay 5 percent of the value into a savings account.
The informal credit schemes (revolving funds) set up through the three projects for various CBOs, including agricultural and livestock groups, are at present working reasonably well but the ability of many of them to continue to operate should the projects exit in the near future is a cause for concern. Leadership and experience of the executive committees will be of critical importance. All three projects are placing considerable emphasis on training in accountancy, management and book keeping, but they themselves have very limited staff to do the work.
Apart from the need for good management, an ability to generate additional funds through diversification of activities will be pivotal to the sustainability of the credit schemes. Projects are already encouraging CBOs in this direction but it is difficult for many communities, particularly the poorest and less well educated, to visualise what they could do. Such CBOs will need at least three more years of project support and advice to ensure that they become firmly established.
Annex 4 - Forestry related policies and related instruments
Forest Law (1992)
The present Forest Law was enacted on 3 November 1992. This Law replaces the Forest Act of 1902. 'Forest Land' is defined as "land including Reserve Forest and Protected Public Forest". The Law empowers the Minister of Forestry, with the approval of the Government of the Union of Myanmar (GOUM), to constitute Reserve Forest and to declare Protected Public Forest on land at the disposal of the Government. The Forest Law defines "land at the disposal of the Government" as "other land with the exception of land in which a Government department, organisation or any person has acquired right of cultivation, right of possession, right of use and occupancy, beneficial enjoyment, heritable right or transferable right under any existing law". The Forest Law specifies the following five categories of Reserve Forest: (a) Commercial Reserve Forest; (b) Local Supply Reserve Forest; (c) Watershed or Catchment Protection Reserve Forest; (d) Environment and Bio-Diversity Conservation
Reserve Forest; and (e) Other Categories of Reserve Forest. The Law states the following purposes of Protected Public Forest: (a) protection of water and soil; (b) conservation of arid-zone forests; (c) conservation of mangrove forests; (d) conservation of environment and bio-diversity; and (e) conservation for sustainable production.
The Forest Law does not mention, nor does it provide, a definition of community forestry. The closest reference to community participation in forest management is found among the basic principles for implementation of the Forest Law (Chapter II, Article 3). The third principle says: "to promote the sector of public cooperation in implementing the forest policy and the environmental conservation policy of the Government". The next principle speaks about a contribution "towards the food, clothing and shelter needs of the public", while the final principle refers to a contribution "towards the fuel requirement of the country".
Myanmar Forest Policy Statement (1995)
The Myanmar Forest Policy 1995 was approved on 20 July 1995. In the preamble a reference is made to the forestry principles adopted at the UNCED. The Policy sets out six imperatives, to which the Government must give the highest priority in order to achieve broader national goals and objectives. These include protection, sustainability, basic needs (of the people for fuel, shelter, food and recreation), efficiency, participation (of the people in the conservation and utilisation of the forests) and public awareness.
Among the policy measures proposed in the Statement, the following seem especially relevant in relation to community forestry, farming systems and food security:
I. establish a National Land Use Advisory Board with the responsibilities to oversee and coordinate overall land utilisation in the country;
II. base rehabilitation of shifting cultivation areas not only on extension and welfare but also on investment and development;
III. gazette 30 percent of the total land area of the country as Reserve Forest and 5 percent under a protected area system;
IV. establish plantation cooperatives and provide institutional finance for the establishment of man-made forests on degraded/denuded lands;
V. reforest an area of 20,000 hectares annually to restore degraded lands and meet rural needs;
VI. recognise the socio-economic importance of non-wood forest products in the list of priorities for forest development;
VII. create an awareness of community forestry and the significance of the problem it seeks to address;
VIII. demonstrate the cost/benefit of community development programmes as the mechanism for distribution of benefits to facilitate adoption of the programme by the people.
Community Forestry Instruction (1995)
To address an urgent need for the establishment, with the cooperation of the people, of new forests as well as the replacement of degraded forests, the Forest Department issued in 1995 a "Community Forestry Instruction" (CFI). The provisions set out in the Community Forestry Instruction are to be formalised through an amendment of the Forest Law and the promulgation of Forest Rules or Community Forestry Rules.
The CFI contains the following definition of community forestry: "community forestry means:
I. afforestation of areas where there is not sufficient fuelwood and other forest products for community use;
II. planting of trees and exploiting of forest products to obtain food supplies, consumer products and incomes".
The CFI states that community forests as well as village-owned firewood plantations may be established with the permission of the Government on Reserve Forest land, Protected Forest land, and land at the disposal of the state. Community forests may also be established with permission of the owner(s) on privately owned land or land owned by government organisations and non-governmental organisations.
The CFI further specifies that each household should be allotted not more than five acres, and that permission for the use of land for community forestry by the user group shall initially be for a period of 30 years. The user group is obliged to prepare a management plan according to the format given in an appendix of the CFI. After handover the executive committee of the user group must submit once a year a monitoring report through the Township Forest Officer to the Assistant Director of the Forest Department. A format for this report is also appended to the CFI.
Draft Community Forestry Rules
Based on the CFI draft Community Forestry Rules were prepared. FAO's Legal Office supported the process with an assessment of the existing legal framework and recommendations for change. In October 1995 a two-day workshop on "Community Forestry Rules and Forestry Extension" was held in Yangon.^1 The recommendations of the Working Group on Community Forestry Rules included, inter alia, using the CFI as the basis for drafting Community Forestry Rules, expanding the legal scope of community forestry to include the possibility of community management of natural forests, and amending the Forest Law by including a third category of forest, "Community Forest", in addition to Reserve Forest and Protected Public Forest.^2
^1 Among the workshop participants was Mr. J. Lindsay, Legal Officer, FAO-Rome.
^2 Following the workshop, Mr. Lindsay prepared draft Community Forestry Rules. To date, the Government has not approved Community Forestry Rules. The Forest Department informed the SPPD-mission that it is not likely that Community Forestry Rules will be adopted in the near future, instead it was thought more likely that the Forest Law will be amended by introducing community forestry.
The Forest Department
The Forest Department (FD) is the designated government agency for community forestry. There is no separate unit or division within the Forest Department to deal with community forestry. At present community forestry is under Extension and Watershed Management.
The approval procedures for community forestry differ according to the type of forest to be transferred for community management. The Forest Department is the designated government agency to handover Reserve and Protected Public Forest to communities. In the case of "Unprotected Public Forest" (also called unclassified forests), the Forest Department must obtain the concurrence of the Land Record Department and the Township Peace and Development Council. The Land Record Department's concurrence is required to verify that the proposed community forest does not conflict with any other current or proposed landuse. Also, a recommendation from the Township Peace and Development Council is needed to proceed with the handover of the community forest.
For the community the procedure is the same for all types of forestland. In the Dry Zone, a pre-application is first made to the Township Forest Officer. After the tentative go ahead, field activities may start, e.g. establishing a plantation. The application for community forestry, including a management plan, follows the required approvals at the township level being forwarded to the concerned district forest officer.
Legal Issues
In terms of Myanmar forest policies and policy instruments the past decade has brought several noteworthy developments. First, the new (1992) Forest Law replaced a Law dating back to 1902. Following UNCED, the Government, through the Ministry of Forestry, issued in 1995 a Myanmar Forest Policy Statement with six imperatives including protection, sustainability, basic needs, efficiency, participation, and public awareness. Also in 1995, the Forest Department approved a Community Forestry Instruction to facilitate the transfer of forestland to community management.
All three instruments, the Forest Law, the Policy Statement and the CFI, are significant steps in the modernisation of forest management in Myanmar, but bolder steps are needed to truly reform forest conservation and management in Myanmar. As for community forestry it will be essential that community forestry be formally recognised through the Forest Law and Forest Rules (or separate Community Forestry Rules). Community forestry will need to be defined in the Forest Law and the suggestion to create a third category of forest land in addition to Reserve Forest and Protected Public Forest to be called Community Forest should be seriously considered. It remains to be seen how the present community forest user rights will hold in the long run. Experience elsewhere shows that tenure (user right) security is an important incentive for users to invest in the development of (degraded) community forestlands.
The three FAO-executed projects are involved in policy matters in two ways. First, by providing extension to communities on government policies related to community forestry. Second, through assisting the user group in preparing an application for community forestry (including a management plan). Although both aspects, i.e. information concerning rules governing community forestry and a community forestry certificate, may empower the community, the question remains as to whether this is sufficient to convince the user group members that as custodians of the forest they will ultimately become the prime beneficiaries.
With few exceptions, most communities are not familiar with existing Government policies concerning community forestry. At some stage the basic principles of community forestry are explained by the projects and discussed with the targetted communities, but on the whole the user group members did not appear to be familiar with the prevailing policies. Part of the problem is that the policies themselves are not always communicated to the field level. For example there does not seem to be a written rule that the Township Peace and Development Council should approve the handover of community forests on unclassified forest land, but all projects have included the Township Peace and Development Council in their approval procedures. Apart from being unaware of government policies related to community forestry, many user group members did not show much confidence in community forestry policies and the enforcement of these policies in the future. Most community forestry groups had
strong doubts about their ability to protect their community forest after the end of the project and once the value of the forest had increased.
The availability of extension materials based on policies related to community forestry is lacking at field level in all the three projects. This is not meant to criticize the projects in any way, because the implementation of community forestry is still in an initial phase. Eventually, and sooner rather than later, this important requirement which is part of the process of the empowerment of communities must be dealt with. Before preparing extension materials the projects should exchange their experiences and consolidate and document their procedures for community forestry. A national workshop on community forestry might be an appropriate way forward in this respect.
