<title>A glimpse of local technology knowledge for comprehensive watershed management in China (GCP/RAS/161/NET)</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The Participatory Watershed Management Training in Asia (PWMTA) program GCP/RAS/161/NET recognizes the importance of local/indigenous technology knowledge and practices for watershed management in the Tropics and Himalayan region of Asia as paramount to their sustainable development process. New technologies and practices can be successful if they are well ingrained into the local/indigenous knowledge systems.
With this background, the PWMTA program commissioned action research studies in its member countries for documenting the Local/Indigenous Technology Knowledge (L/ITK) for Watershed Management (WM). This document is a result of this study in China. This is also an introduction to farmer's innovations in China. It is in reality a first effort ever made in this direction for watershed management even though many local/indigenous ideas can be found scattered in different sources. It is hoped that the countries will carry forward this work by further research as well as validation, by ingraining it into their development programs and include it in their education and training programs related to natural resources management in the upland watersheds.
I wish to express my sincere gratitude to Professor (Mrs.) Wu Deyi of the IRTCES, Beijing for organizing this work. The compilers have also done this work in a short time. For this I extend my highest appreciation to the study team i.e. the compilers of this document. It is a path breaking work as it brings to the forefront a glimpse of the rich local knowledge base of the people in China. They have also captured the ideas very well in sketches. I also thank Mr. Ranjan Kumar Poudyal (PWMTA) for the lay out of this document and the PWMTA team for all their support.
I hope all concerned with the development of the upland watersheds as well as those related to training, education and research in natural resources management will take note of this work and carry it forward by making use of it in the development process as well as by further documenting more local/indigenous techniques available with the Chinese people. The document is also being made available to the Asian region as many of the ideas are also applicable to other countries in similar situations.
June., 1998
Prem N. Sharma
Regional Coordinator/Chief Technical Advisor
(PWMTA) and Sr. NRM/WM Advisor (FARM)
FAO (UN), Kathmandu, Nepal
<section>2</section>
Introduction
This document is an attempt at documenting Chinese farmers' innovations consisting of some ancient, some evolved over long time, some contemporary techniques perfected by the local people to the level found today and some adaptations of old ancient and recent techniques made by the farmers to suit their needs. Thus this presentation of indigenous technology knowledge (ITK) is termed here as local technology knowledge (LTK). This documentation can only be a fraction of what is available in China hence it is only a glimpse into enormous indigenous technology knowledge that exist in China for watershed management (WM). However, since it is the first attempt at documenting the techniques as related to the multi-disciplinary field of comprehensive watershed management in China, it is hoped that this will generate interest among the mainstream watershed management researchers. Thus we expect them to enrich this collection by further work. Also this documentation is only
preliminary and more details on many of the ideas may be needed before they can easily be transferred to other locations. We hope the interest generated will help further detailed study by national professionals and other concerned persons in China.
The participatory watershed Management Training in Asia (PWMTA) program of the FAO (UN) financed by the Netherlands, commissioned this study to its focal institution, the International Research and Training Center on Erosion and Sedimentation (IRTCES), Beijing, China. The IRTCES made a team of professionals from various parts of the country consisting of the compilers of this document for the study. After a review of the study by the PWMTA it was presented in the Regional Workshop of the PWMTA on ITK/WM held in China in Nov. 1997. After which the study was finalized and edited by the PWMTA to this present form.
The compilers of this study contacted various professionals in the field who helped in this documentation. Also county level soil and water conservation research and extension station staff scouted some of the ideas being practiced by the farmers and interviewed them to identify the techniques. Thus the methodology used was a combination of contacts with field professionals as well as filed scouting by the compilers. Some of the compilers have also been practicing some of the techniques detailed here e.g. the sluicing and siltation method of small dam construction is a well-accepted technique by now which evolved over ages. The engineers have tries to standardize it by now. The warping of floodwaters for soil conservation and soil fertility improvement is an adaptation of natural processes of low land formation by siltation. Similarly some of the ancient agronomic, cultural and animal husbandry practices are very prevalent in China today. All these have a potential of being
used or adapted to other countries also.
For the ease of presentation, the local WM technologies in this document are categorized as below:
· Peoples' Participation Strategies
· Water Harvesting
· Gully Control
· Soil and Water Conservation
· Orchard Management
· Crop Production Management
· Vegetable Farming Management
· Poultry for Income Generation
· Fish Raising for Income Generation
· Soil Fertility Improvement and Mulching
· Crop Processing and Storage
· Feed and Fodder
The presentation of the local techniques in this document follows the above categories of subject matters in the subsequent pages.
<section>3</section>
People's participation strategies:
An innovative approach to participatory watershed management
Several forms of cooperative efforts for small watershed management
An innovative approach to participatory watershed management^1
^1 Compiles by Mr. Guo Tingfu, Ministry of Water Resources, China.
This approach is used by farmers in eroded mountainous area. It is to attract farmers, their groups and institutions to participate in watershed management of large waste barren lands or gullies. Marginal farmers use their barren land and labor as stock shares to join in the management of the watershed. The rich farmers, groups and institutions invest their financial resources as shares to join. For instance, one share is Yuan 2, 000 (US$ 1= Y 8.25) which is worth 300 labor days one share. Both the financial resources and labor are used for watershed management. The economic benefits obtained through it are allocated according to quantity of shares held by a person. This approach provides employment opportunity for rural persons, promotes farmers' participation in watershed management on a cost/benefit basis and attracts investment for watershed management.
Several forms of cooperative efforts for small watershed management^2
^2 Compiled by Sun Boyuan, Department of Water Resource and Soil Conservation, Xinzhou Prefecture, Shanxi Province)
Cooperative efforts headed by a household
Cooperative efforts between a scientific unit and a production unit
Cooperative efforts between a collective am households
Cooperative efforts headed by a household
It is headed by one household who works in cooperation with several households. Each household provides labor input. The township and village administration provide materials. These inputs are transform into stocks. For instance, 1000 Yuan (approx. US$ 12.10) is equivalent to a stock which also equivalent to 00 labor days. The benefits generated from the small watershed produce are distributed according to the amount of stocks held by family.
Cooperative efforts between a scientific unit and a production unit
Scientific Watershed Management Ltd Co. are established which set up national stock collective stock and individual stocks. National stocks are partly used for investment in watershed management, and partly for scientific research purposes. The collective stock is converted into inputs as materials and labor. Individual stock is converted into individual inputs such as labor and machines.
Cooperative efforts between a collective am households
In order to concentrate on small watershed management, the village committee will distribute a certain area of waste land to each individual household to manage. The village collective will input seedlings and provide subsidy for land preparation while each household provides labor input. Individual households will be responsible for management and maintenance of the land. The economic benefits will be shared by the village collective and its households on a 50% basis.
<section>4</section>
Water harvesting:
Check dams built by the sluicing siltation method
Check dams built by the sluicing siltation method^3
^3 Refer: Chinese National Committee on Large Dams (edt.), 1979. Dam construction by the Chinese people.
History and development of sluicing-siltation dams
Advantages of sluicing-siltation dams
Construction technique
Layout of the borrow areas
Sluicing-siltation operation and division into mud ponds
Construction of levees
Soil loosening and mud mixing
Control of mud concentration
Draining embankment water
History and development of sluicing-siltation dams
Embankment construction by sluicing-siltation method was developed after Chinese liberation in 1949 by the Chinese laboring people for building dams. This is for storing water, for warping, and for soil and water conservation in the basin of middle reaches of the Yellow River. These are severely eroded areas. Since the founding of New China, soil conservation has been carried out by the masses on a large scale. Thousands of gullies and ravines were checked by building check dams by people's labor on farm lands for stable yields. As a consequence of this, both the flood water and silt pouring into the Yellow River have reduced. In the process of check dam construction, the people developed a new method of constructing dams, i.e. sluicing-siltation method, which makes full use of local favorable topographic conditions and natural materials such as sand and loess. In fact, it is a further development of the ancient Chinese experience of diverting water to sluice soil for the
purpose of forming farmland and building levees. Such type of dams has the advantages of simple construction, less labor, high efficiency, low cost and good quality.
According to statistical data, since 1970 a total of more than 6, 000 check dams and storage dams higher than 15 m have been built by sluicing-siltation method in the northern parts of both Shaanxi and Shanci provinces. The soil materials suitable for applying this method can vary from sand to light, medium and heavy silt loam as well as gravelly clay.
The popularization of building dams by sluicing-siltation method has promoted the development of agricultural production and water conservation in the region. It has also played as active role in the control of soil erosion and harnessing the Yellow River.
Advantages of sluicing-siltation dams
The method of building earth dams by sluicing-siltation method has higher labor efficiency as compared with the rolled-fill method. It has greatly reduced the amount of work in loading, hauling, unloading and compaction of soil materials. This it leads to 3-6 fold increase in the efficiency of labor. In the sand blown areas of northern Shaanxi, still higher efficiency was achieved as the water for sluicing the soil materials could be diverted by gravity flow. In Zizhou County, a 36 m high Dianshi Earth Dam of 49 ha-m volume was completed in 5 months by a small number of local laborers.
The quality of this type of dam is good. Sluicing-siltation earth dam is built of high concentration slurry, which consolidates to become a homogeneous dam with the escape of excess water from the embankment. After completion, the dry density of the embankment can quickly attain the value as required in the design, and is generally over 1.5 t/m^3 as per a field study.
The cost is low which includes the cost of labor, pumping water, power consumption, soil loosening by blasting, management and so on. The costs are 60 % cheaper than that of a rolled-fill dam.
Construction technique
Preparation works
Acquisition of water source and storing of water by building cofferdam
Selection of the pumps
Treatment of foundation and abutments
Preparation works:
The location of the dam is decided based on near to possible water source, topography and geological conditions. The preparation of the construction work mainly involves the acquisition of water source, storing of water by building cofferdam, selection of pump units, stripping of foundation and abutments etc.
Acquisition of water source and storing of water by building cofferdam:
To guarantee the supply of water for construction use source of water with adequate supply is needed. If it is possible to get water from a reservoir, or a canal, or a spring upstream of the dam site and also at a high location, diversion of water by gravity flow is preferable to the use of pumps. If water diversion by gravity flow is not possible or the base flow in the river does not provide the necessary quantity, it would be necessary to build a cofferdam for storing water. The amount of water required may be taken as the volume of the embankment. Based on the needed storage, the height of the cofferdam can be fixed. In general, the cofferdam for storing water may be incorporated with the upstream levee of the embankment used as a check dam or a storage dam.
Selection of the pumps:
This involves mainly the selection of the suction head and the capacity of the pumps as well as their corresponding power equipment. The suction head of pump depends on the anticipated height of the dam, the elevation of the borrow area and its distance from the dam, and should generally exceed the design dam height by 20-30 m so as to ensure a sufficient gradient of the mud-mixing ditches and mud-conveyance canals. In case that the pumps available do not satisfy the requirement of the suction head, several lift pump stages are needed. The pump capacity is decided upon in accordance with the construction schedule and the daily volume of earthwork. However, a discharge of at least 30 t/hour has to be provided for efficient work. Separate units are to be installed on both banks if the slurry is sluiced from both banks
Treatment of foundation and abutments:
The treatment requirements of foundation and abutments of a sluicing-siltation earth dam, apart from those in common with the rolled-fill earth dam, differ accordingly to the construction features, purposes of the dam, and height of the dam. The popular practice for check dams below 20 m height is to clear only the top soil from the foundation and abutments to a depth of 0.1-0.3 m. If the abutment is too ^- steep, it should also be flattened suitably. For storage dams and higher check dams, be it a rock foundation or a pervious over burden layer of sand and gravel, one or two cutoff trenches should be excavated in the foundation upstream of the dam axis, and then backfilled by the sluicing-siltation method. This is to prevent erosion at the interface or to prevent serious leakage or piping.
In northern Shaanxi and western Shanci, most of the sluicing-siltation earth dams were built on thin alluvia of pervious sand and gravel, which serve as natural drainage blankets and facilitate consolidation of the embankments to achieve stability quickly. The rivers there carry large amount of sediments, which are mainly composed of fine silt loam. After one or two floods, the sediments deposited behind the dam would naturally form a thick blanket for controlling seepage flow. Therefore, check dams for warping or small storage dams in the area of serious soil erosion do not need any treatment of the foundation so long as the foundation is stable and pervious.
Layout of the borrow areas
Choice of the borrow areas
Arrangement of the mud ditches
Choice of the borrow areas:
The borrow areas are classified according to the purposes i.e. whether the soils serve for sluicing-siltation of the embankment or for placing the levees. When supplying the soils for placing the levees, the borrow areas are to be located on places with gentle slope, and preferably on both upstream and downstream of the dam for shortening the hauling distances.
The borrow areas used for sluicing-siltation should be as near as possible to the dam, generally over 20 m higher than the design height of the dam so that the natural gradient might be used to mix the slurry uniformly. When the condition permits, the borrow area should be chosen in combination with the spillway excavation to reduce the volume of earthwork.
Arrangement of the mud ditches:
The functions of the mud ditches are to first mix the slurry and then convey it to the embankment where it is to be deposited. Therefore, the ditches are divided into two sections: those for preparing the slurry at the borrow area are referred to as mud-mixing ditches and those for conveyance ditches are called canals.
Popular experience shows that the mud-conveyance canals should be narrow, deep, steep and long so as to increase the sluicing effect of the water and also the capacity of carrying the soils. When water is delivered from a 3" - 4" pump, the ditch may have a depth of 1 m and a bottom width of 0.5 m. The flowing slurry may easily be stumbled in a shallow ditch and may spill over it. The mud-mixing ditches should also be deep and narrow, with a length of 70-130 m and a gradient of 15-20 %. The alignment of the mud ditches may be changed with the locations of the borrow areas and the siltation ponds as well as with the topography and gradient of the ground.
The exit section of a mud-conveyance ditch should be kept parallel to the side levees and at a certain distance from them, lest the side levee might be damaged by the slurry flow. If the slurry pond is wide, two or more exits from the mud-conveyance ditch are used alternately to prevent the concentration of thin slurry at one place.
Sluicing-siltation operation and division into mud ponds
Sluicing-siltation operation
Sluicing-siltation from one bank
Sluicing-siltation from two banks
Intermittent sluicing-siltation
Continuous sluicing-siltation
Division of construction surface into mud siltation ponds
One mud pond on the entire construction surface
Two or more mud ponds
Sluicing-siltation operation:
Sluicing-siltation operation may proceed from one bank or from both banks of a gully (or rivulet or river) according to the locations of the borrow areas. The operation may also be intermittent or continuous according to the sluicing requirement.
Sluicing-siltation from one bank
Sluicing-siltation from one bank: this applies in the case where the borrow areas are all located on one side of the river/gully on which dam is to be built. With this type of operation, the mud-conveyance ditches usually extend a long length and the gradient of the mud surface on the embankment will be great, causing the water to accumulate at the farther end of the embankment. The water should be drained away on time for facilitating the consolidation and stability of the dam.
Sluicing-siltation from two banks
Sluicing-siltation from two banks: in this case borrowing, mixing and conveying of soil materials proceeds at both banks, enabling the slurry to flow into the embankment from two opposite directions. The two fan-shaped slurry surfaces will overlap each other. This may avoid the escaped water to accumulate at one place for a long time to the advantage of the embankment stability. Such kind of sluicing operation should be used wherever the locations of borrow areas and the pumping equipment permit. If the mud siltation pond (a section of the dam dyke) is too wide, the exit section of mud-conveyance ditch should be shifted from place to place to prevent the escaped water from collecting at one place and to prevent the gradient of the mud surface from varying.
Intermittent sluicing-siltation
Intermittent sluicing-siltation: This means that the sluicing-siltation operation will stop when the mud deposited on the embankment has reached a certain thickness (say 0.5-1.0 m). The work of sluicing-siltation for the next layer will not resume until the moisture content in the mud is reduced through infiltration and evaporation and the mud surface is hard enough to be trodden upon by men (in other words, the moisture content has been reduced to liquid limit or below it). The time interval between the successive sluicing-siltation operation is called the intermittent period. It depends on the soil properties, air temperature, layer thickness for one sluicing-siltation operation, drainage condition and others, and may take at least 1-3 days or at most 10 days. This kind of operation is usually applied for low dams or for the dams being constructed to a height for flood retention. Successive roving operations of sluicing-siltation at multiple mud ponds also fall within the
category of intermittent sluicing-siltation (sketch below).
Continuous sluicing-siltation
Continuous sluicing-siltation: This refers to the method of sluicing-siltation at daytime but suspended at night. The method is often used to ensure the dam safety during flood season in those cases where there is a need to hastily raise the dam height for flood retention due to both a large volume of embankment and watershed area.. For the purpose of ensuring the safe construction of the dam, the daily rate of heightening the dam by sluicing-siltation should be uniform over the construction surface of the embankment and not too fast. According to the statistical data of completed dams in northern Shaanxi and western Shanci, the rate is controlled within a certain limit depending on the soil types as shown in Table 1. If the rate of construction is high, to ensure the dam stability a wide side levee is necessary which may render a large amount of labor to be uneconomical. The 34 m, high Moshigou Dam with a 47 ha m silt volume was completed in only 5 months with a daily rate
of sluicing-siltation height of 0.23 m/day averaged over the entire construction period. Soil testing of samples from deep bore holes one year after the end of construction revealed that the embankment water content had decrease from 39% at the initial stage to 22-26%, and the dry density increased from 1.35 t/m^3 to 1.53-1.66 t/m^3. The embankment is good in quality and has been in performing normally under reservoir operation.
Table 1. Permissible rate of construction (height/day)
Soil type
Permissible rate of sluicing-siltation (m/day)
Daily rate
Averaged over the construction period
Maximum daily rate averaged over 10 days
Sandy Loam
Light silt loam
Medium silt loam
Division of construction surface into mud siltation ponds
The construction conditions, construction schedule, the size of construction surface and the intermittent period determine the number of mud siltation ponds.
One mud pond on the entire construction surface
One mud pond on the entire construction surface: This is usually applied to low dams. Only two side levees are needed to be built, one on upstream and the other on downstream The sluicing-siltation operation is simple and labor saving.
Two or more mud ponds
Two or more mud ponds: When the construction surface of the dam is wide, it is often necessary to arrange two or more mud ponds by building one intermediate levee or more parallel to the dam axis. The sluicing-siltation operation is carried out in turn on these mud ponds. If the water level behind the dam rises rapidly or it is necessary to retard the flood temporarily, the upstream mud pond can be raised by continual sluicing-siltation operation so as to first form a small cross section. At the same time, the sluicing-siltation is done at the other mud ponds in order to raise the embankment surface like a ladder. Near the top of the dam, the embankment surface is changed to having only one mud pond. It is necessary to reduce the mud ponds where ever possible to reduce costs and increase efficiency.
Construction of levees
Methods
Width of side levee
There are two kinds of levees. The function of the upstream and downstream side levees is to retain the slurry and help in the stability of the embankment slope during the construction stage. Therefore, the width, and construction quality, and the stability of the dam.
Methods:
By roller-fill method
By compacting with spades
By filling loose soil
By sluicing siltation
Levees are of trapezoidal cross section and are placed layer by layer. The outer slope of the side levees is combined with the embankment outer slope. The inner slope is 1:
1 or at an angle of repose. The intermediate levees generally have a slope at an angle of repose. During construction the outer slope of the side levee can be steeper than the embankment outer slope with the toe of the side levee placed on the embankment slope line. It is then trimmed after the end of sluicing-siltation operation. The building of the levee should be kept higher than the slurry surface preferably not greater than 1 m. The upper side levee should overlie the lower one by a width greater than two-thirds of its bottom width.
By roller-fill method
By roller-fill method: This method can ensure good construction quality of the levee It is mainly used in the building of a storage dam or a large check dam by continual sluicing-siltation operation. During compaction, the layer thickness is about 0.3 m and the dry density is controlled at greater than 1.5 t/m^3
The top width of the levee should be kept more or less constant, being neither too great at one time nor too small at the other so as to prevent the occurrence of defects.
By compacting with spades
By compacting with spades: This method avoids the hauling and compaction of soil materials borrowed from the bank. The deposited soil in the mud pond after consolidation is directly dug and placed on the levee and then compacted by beating with the spades. The levee build by this way has a steep slope and small width. This method has ease of digging in pervious soils such as sand and sandy loam. The mud should not be dug close to the levee but 1 to 2 m away only.
By filling loose soil
By filling loose soil: The levee is built of loose soil hauled onto the dam by machine or by manual labor. The loose soil is compacted by the hauling vehicle movement. Such method is simple and needs less labor, but the levee is of poor quality. The intermediate levees or the side levees of small check dams are built in this way.
By sluicing siltation
By sluicing siltation: The side levees can be built by sluicing-siltation method. The mud pond is arranged on the side levee and generally sandy soils are used. This method has the advantage of decreasing the labor cost of hauling soils and omitting the compaction procedure. However it is not applicable in cohesive soils.
Width of side levee:
The upstream and downstream side levees are the component parts of the embankment slopes. In the course of building a dam of light to medium silt loam by continual sluicing siltation, the embankment with a certain depth and range of 'fluid-like' slurry zone needs the support of side levees for maintaining the its stability. Hence, the side levee is required to have a suitable width and good quality construction. The statistical data show that the earthwork of the levees constitutes generally 20 percent of the total volume of the entire dam. The width of the side levee depends on the dam height, soil type, concentration of the slurry, rate of sluicing-siltation operation, the volume of 'fluid-like' slurry, and topographical and geological conditions. Generally speaking, the side levee can be narrower in case of gentle embankment slope, pervious sandy soils, high concentration slurry, narrow valley and slow rate of construction, and vice versa. Higher dams of different soils,
the top width of a side levee can be calculated by the following empirical formula:
b = 0.005 (n+ a) (1+ v) Hp
in which
b = top width of side levee (m);
n = gradient contained in 1:n;
v = the rate of construction (m/day);
H = the design height of the dam (m);
a = empirical coefficient;
p = clay content of the soil material (%).
Soil loosening and mud mixing
In the course of mud mixing, it is necessary to loosen the soil in time and to dump it into the mud-mixing ditches with spades so as to ensure the slurry to have an adequate concentration. Soil loosening may be done by manual excavation, blasting, bulldozers, water jets and other methods. The number of laborers needed for taking care of soil loosening and mud mixing depends on the condition of borrow areas, usually 1 person for every 2,000 liters of water pumped are needed along the mud mixing ditches. Sufficient loose soils should be dumped continually into the ditches as water flows along. The ditches are cut deep into which the soil is dumped. At the outlet of the mud-conveyance ditch, special persons are needed to measure and control the concentration of the slurry.
Control of mud concentration
The mud concentration will affect the labor efficiency and construction quality of a sluicing-siltation earth dam. A high concentration of slurry means a high labor efficiency and low cost. Slurry of low concentration will not only result in high cost and low labor efficiency but also cause a high pore water pressure and a large zone of 'fluid-like' slurry in the embankment slope. On the contrary, if the slurry is too high in consistency its flowability is poor, and the gradient of the mud surface on the embankment may be so great as to affect the construction of the levee. A suitable concentration of slurry can be identified as in table 2.
Table 2. Identifying the mud concentration of light to medium silt loam
Color of slurry
Corresponding moisture content %
Corresponding soil volume transported by per unit volume of water (M^3/m^3=T)
Concentration of slurry
Light Yellow
Low
Dark Yellow
Suitable
Blackish
High
where
T = soil volume transported by per unit volume of water (m^3/m^3);
rn = density of slurry (t/m^3)
G = specific gravity of the soil particles,
G=2.71 for medium silt loam;
G=2.7 for light silt loam;
G=2.69 for sandy loam.
rd = Average dry density of the soils in the borrow area (t/m^3);
w = Average moisture content of the soils in the borrow area (in decimal figures);
rw = Density of water (t/m^3)
According to measured resulted of some sluicing- siltation dams made by the testing and researching group of sluicing-siltation earth dam in Shaanxi and Shanci, a suitable concentration of slurry prepared from sandy loam, and light to medium silt loam should have a moisture content of 37-41%, and a corresponding soil discharge T of 2.32-2.6 as shown in Table 3.
Table 3. measured mud concentration of some sluicing-siltation dams
Name of dams
Soil material classification
Clay
content%
Mud concentration (average value)
wet density m t/m^3
Water content
W
Soil volume transported by per unit volume of water T m^3/m^3
Taoerzui
Light silt loam
Shangliu-jiachuan
Ditto
Dianshi
Ditto
Dongfeng
Medium silt loam
In order to ensure a suitable concentration of the slurry during construction, it is necessary to take regular samples for measurement from the exit section of the mud conveyance ditch. If undesirable value is detected, the persons in charge of the mud mixing must be notified immediately and must increase the concentration of the slurry.
Draining embankment wate
Dewatering embankment surfaces
Laying dry soils on the slurry surface
Using filters
Special internal drainage facilities
After the slurry flows onto the construction surface of the embankment, the water moisture will escape through natural evaporation and seepage. In addition to this, some effective measures are necessary to accelerate the drainage and consolidation of the embankment slurry with an objective of promoting the stability of the embankment.
Dewatering embankment surfaces:
After the slurry enters the mud ponds on the embankment, a part of the free water will be squeezed out by the weight of the soil grains and will accumulate at the low places in the slurry surface. It can be dewatered away from the dam by using siphon or small pump.
Buried pipes may also be adopted i.e. steel or rubber pipes are embedded in the levees with the pipe mouths at the same level as the slurry surface so that the water collected on it may be drained immediately by gravity. With the raising of the slurry surface, these pipes should also be raised to guarantee the drainage uninterrupted.
Laying dry soils on the slurry surface:
A layer of dry soil is placed on the slurry surface just after sluicing siltation to absorb the water in the slurry. This will expedite drainage and consolidate the slurry. Such a method is suitable to the slurry prepared from cohesive soil.
Using filters:
Apart from constructing diversion tunnel for releasing the base flow to reduce the storage of water in the reservoir during construction stage, it is advisable to build the downstream toe prism in advance or to build it to a greater height for accelerating the drainage and consolidation of the embankment. This is useful when the soil materials used for sluicing siltation are not very pervious but sand and gravel are available at site.
Special internal drainage facilities:
The internal drainage facilities include sand ditches, sand drains, drainage blankets and so on. A number of sand ditches (1×1 m cross section) or sand drains (1 m diameter) should be distributed in the embankment under sluicing-siltation. Sand ditches of trapezoidal cross section are filled with such filter materials as sand and gravel, or porous concrete pipes are used instead. The main trunk sand ditch leads to the toe prism. Vertical sand drains are of circular section and are connected to the trunk sand ditch.
The drainage blanket consisting of sand and gravel arranged as a filter is used on impervious foundation. It is directly connected to the toe prism. If the drainage blanket is located in the middle portion of the dam, it can be connected to the toe prism through sand drains or porous pipes. Whether the internal drainage facilities are necessary or not will depend on the specific conditions. Practical experiences show that sluicing siltation earth dams built of light to medium silt loam do not require the provision of internal drainage facilities if the foundation is relatively pervious.
<section>5</section>
Gully control:
Gully head protection by overhanging nozzle type drop structure construction
Diverting flood for warping farm land
Gully head protection by overhanging nozzle type drop structure construction
Head-ward retreat of gullies in the loess plateau is very serious. In order to effectively control it, local people use overhanging nozzle type drops. A basin for collecting water is built at the top of the escarpment of gully head. Then a 5 m long metallic morning-glory type over hanging nozzle is installed in the gully walls directing it toward the basin. The lower ends of the nozzles are fixed to the walls by means of chains acting as suspenders. An apron of willows to dissipate energy protects the fall bottom.
Diverting flood for warping farm land
It is a long-standing tradition to divert the floodwater for warping on plots of farmland in Shaanxi province ever since the Qin Dynasty more than 2200 years ago. Jinghui and Weihui irrigation districts were all built in sediment-laden tributaries of the Yellow River, irrigating 75-300 thousand hectares of farmlands. Diverting floods coming from gullies, streams, villages, watersheds and roads to wrap farm land for the purpose of soil improvement, preserving soil moisture and flood control is an efficient method to comprehensive utilization of water, soil and fertilizer resources for farm land construction, increased agriculture production and soil and water conservation.
The benefits of flood diversion by warping are obvious. Increase in the yield in warped farmland is from 22-39 % as compared with non irrigated lands. In order to get high production of crops; techniques of irrigation should be grasped. The thickness of warping should be controlled. The immersed water should be drained and the inter-till age should be done on time. Within 0-30 cm of the top soil layer, the amount of nitrogen, phosphorus as well as organic matter increases by 71.4%, 19.7% and 40% respectively. The rate of salt elimination is in general 48.6% and may reach 75.9% after warping. The unit discharge of warping should preferably be large enough in order to keep the deposits uniformly distributed.
Drawing of floodwater at hyper-concentration of sediment for warping has proved to be an effective measure to meet the demand of water for plants in arid season. The soil fertility is improved and the farmland could be leveled and reclaimed. Ditches could be filled up and the seepage of the ponds could be prevented. In view of all these multiple benefits, it is recommended as an effective method for sediment trap and flood control in watersheds where soil loss is prominent.
<section>6</section>
Soil and water conservation:
Intermittent slope level ditch
Technique to pave gravel on the sloping lands for soil and water conservation
Method of planting trees on terrace risers
Amorpha fruticosa - a good tree species for soil and water conservation
A good species of herb for soil and water conservation
Method of building level strips of land by contour plowing
Covering crops with colored plastic film for increasing agriculture production
Good way to preserve agro-plastic film
Intermittent slope level ditch^4
^4 Compiled by Wen Chuqiang, Shaanxi Provincial Bureau of Water Resources.
Advantages of the intermittent slope level ditch
Southern China farming technology for soil and water conservation
Shaanxi Province is located in the loess plateau mountain area. Soil erosion is very serious here. With a long history of erosion control practices, the local people have found that the intermittent slope level ditch is very useful for erosion control and land utilization. It has all the advantages of intermittent bench terraces, silting dam (locally called Yudiba), and fish-scale pits. It helps to intercept sediment, store water and at the same time increases fertility.
On slopes below 25°, the ditches are constructed 13 m apart along the contour,. The distance between the ditches is narrowed on slopes more than 25°. A ditch of 2 m width and 30 cm depth is first excavated and disposed on the inner side (upper slope); then on the outer side the earth is excavated to a depth of 1 m and the excavated material is disposed on the lower side for a ridge. The ridge should be 0.7 m higher than the original slope surface with a bottom width of 1 m and top width of 0.5 m. The earth should then be rammed. Finally the excavated surface soil is refilled in to the ditch. The refilling should be 60 cm deep. A fast growing, economical tree should be planted where the earth has been refilled at a distance of 5 m from each other. Grasses and other cash crops can grow under the tree. In each hectare of slope land an estimated 750 m long ditches can be constructed.
Advantages of the intermittent slope level ditch
Effectively controls soil and water loss
Improve forest and grass growth
Multi-functions
Low labor and other costs
Effectively controls soil and water loss:
An area with 750 m/ha of constructed ditches can hold over 900 m^3 soil and water each time. Even a 100 mm rain can not cause any soil and water loss. The slope gradually turned into bench terraces with the natural scouring and yearly land preparation and maintenance.
Improve forest and grass growth:
The refilled surface soil brings the fertility to normal top soil level, stores water and conserves soil. This raises the survival rate and growth rate of trees and grasses.
Multi-functions:
The constructed ditches are not only favorable for the presently growing crops but also for the preparation of future transformation of slope land into forestland or grassland.
Low labor and other costs:
On an average, each hectare of sloping land needs only less than 150 labor days and 75 Yuan (9 U.S. dollars) for tree seedling or grass seeds. Also the technique is very simple for the farmers.
The limitations of above ditches are that they needs lot of labor, consume much land and can reduce productivity in the first 2-3 years.
Southern China farming technology for soil and water conservation^5
^5 Compiled by Chen Fayang, Nanchang Professional College of Water Resources.
Contour cultivation on terraces
Ditch and ridge tillage
Pit planting
Semi-dry rice farming system
Multiple crop rotation
Minimum tillage and mulching system
Contour strip inter-cropping system
Grassland strip rotation system
Some of the agronomic and cultural practices developed by the people in Southern China are given here.
Contour cultivation on terraces
Contour cultivation on terraces is practiced on a large scale for soil and water conservation. It has the capacity to retard runoff, increase infiltration of rainfall and conserve soil and water.
Ditch and ridge tillage
Ditch tillage for preserving soil fertility
Contour ridge tillage
This is a technology used in mountainous areas of south China. People plough the sloping lands into contour ditches or into ridged farmland. This increases surface roughness to retard and store runoff, which benefits the growth of crops. The main patterns used in south China are given below.
Ditch tillage for preserving soil fertility:
The sloping land is excavated into ditches with width and depth along the contour as required for the row spacing of crops or trees. The top soil is put back with base fertilizer into the ditch.
Contour ridge tillage:
In this type of tillage a ditch or ridge along sloping land contour is constructed to shorten the slope length and change the direction of runoff flow for the purpose of storing water, preventing scouring and combating drought and soil erosion.
Pit planting
This technology is widely used in the steep and arid sloping land. Pits of needed size are excavated along contour. The excavated top soil is disposed on the upper side of the slope and kept for refilling. More sub-surface soil is excavated and disposed on the lower side of the slope to form a half-circle ridge for storing water and preventing soil erosion. Then, the stored top soil on the upper side is refilled in the excavated pits along with base fertilizers. The excavated pits between upper and lower part are staggered in order to shorten slope runoff line, increase capacity for storing water and enough space for crop growth.
Semi-dry rice farming system
In this system the large paddy fields are changed into ridged and ditched fields to store water in the ditches and transplant rice seedling on the ridges. The advantage of this system is that soil erosion is reduced effectively and the yield of paddy rice increased.
Multiple crop rotation
Three crops in a year are grown in south China. It is also called the multiple crop rotation system. For instance, wheat-maize-sweet potato or wheat-yellow bean-sweet potato are grown. It has the advantage of conserving soil and water and increasing crop yield. It makes full use of climatic resources, increases the area for photosynthesis, and prolongs the duration of surface cover.
Minimum tillage and mulching system
The characteristic of this system is that the farmland is not ploughed after harvesting the previous crop. Ditches are excavated in rows with fixed spacing for broadcasting. The crop residues between ditches are retained and the previous crop straws or leaves or green manure are used as mulch to cover the newly planted crop. This system has the advantages of reducing soil erosion, reducing loss of organic matter and increasing crop yield.
Contour strip inter-cropping system
This system is suitable for sloping lands in south China especially with slopes below 25°.
Grassland strip rotation system
Grassland strips in rotation with crops can effectively control soil erosion, intercept runoff, increase infiltration of soil, improve water quality, and increase crop yield on the sloping lands. The nitrogen fixing grassland rotated with crops will improve soil fertility and structure.
Technique to pave gravel on the sloping lands for soil and water conservation^6
^6 Compiled by Mr. Yang Guoqiang of the Jr. of Soil and water conservation, Henan, Zhengzhou, China.
Gravel-cover farming is a non-tillage technology used for a long time by people of Gansu Province. Gansu Province is located in the semi-arid and arid region with low rainfall and lack of water resources for irrigation. This is a typical rainfed farming system.
In this technique a certain thickness of gravel is paved on the surface soil of the sloping land to store water, reduce evaporation, preserve fertility and reduce soil temperature, sanitation and soil loss.
By this technique, the requirements of water for crop growth can be basically met even under semi-arid and arid climatic conditions without irrigation. Since, the rainfall is generally concentrated in July, August and September, agriculture production is not guaranteed without irrigation. However, by paving gravel in a scattered manner on the surface of sloping lands, soil and water are preserved which can assure a harvest, increase crop yields, increase infiltration, reduce evaporation, temperature and salinization and prevent erosion. The example below illustrates the technique.
The sloping land is first ploughed once and the soil raked after the fall season. Then 75, 000 kg of organic matter for melon production as well as 150 kg of urea and 300 kg of ammonium calcium in each hectare are applied as base fertilizer. Pits are dug in rows along contour according to the row spacing of melon. The pits should be marked so that the gravel can be put around. Then between rows, some vegetables such as pepper or eggplant can be inter-cropped. Finally, a layer of gravel in 5 cm thickness can be paved on the remaining sloping land. The pits can be used for growing melon during the right season. After the harvest of melon, the second crop, for instance, maize or bean can be grown without tillage.
The gravel-covered farmland can be paved once and used for 15 to 40 years without tillage.
Method of planting trees on terrace risers^7
^7 Compiled by Mr. Zhao Jingyong of the Jr. of Soil and water Conservation, China.
Tree species, which are suitable for planting by inserting them on terrace risers, are used. Strong 1-3 year old seedlings with thickness of 0.5-2.0 cm should be selected and cut into strips of 20-30 cm length. A 3 cm diameter, 60 cm long sharp wood is used to make hole on the terrace risers with a spacing of (0.2m-0.50m) × (0.5m-1.0m). The selected tree stripes are then inserted and the whole is filled back with wet soil.
The terrace riser plantation stabilizes terraces and generates income from trees but is limited by rainfall conditions.
Amorpha fruticosa - a good tree species for soil and water conservation
This species is found in reasons with 1,000 m AMSL. It is widely distributed in northeast China, north China, Guangdong, Yuannan and Guangxi Provinces. It has a well developed root system, is resistant to drought, and requires cold and wet conditions to grow and can survive on saline and infertile soils, seriously eroded gullies in both dry and humid climates. It is of high economic value as it is used for weaving, fodder, fuel wood, manure etc. It retards runoff and conserves soil.
A good species of herb for soil and water conservation
Buffalogourd (Cucurbita foetidissima) is a kind of perennial herb of the gourd family with perennial roots. It can survive 30-40 years. The plant promises high oil bearing herbal fruits from the very first year to the end and tuber crop underground. It is therefore a kind of economic plant with multiple applications, high adaptability, readily cultivated on barren mountains and floodplains, which are otherwise not arable. An annual intensive farming and fallow cycle is used. Bringing the plant to mountainous areas in north
China, which is extremely dry and sparsely vegetated, may be rewarding in conservation of soil and water, while at the same time increasing the income of local people by the sale of herb.
Method of building level strips of land by contour plowing^8
^8 Compiled by Yui Peicheng and Li Yunsheng, Agriculture Research Institute, Chifeng, Inner Mongolia.
Sloping lands can be changed in level stripes by contour plowing in about 5 year period. The ridges formed by this method in between two strips can be further reinforced by planting bushes, fodder grass or medicinal plants on them. This adds to more economic benefits.
For Inner Mongolia region to develop level strips in the sloping lands below 10° contour plow the lands. On the lower side, the height can increase by 20-24 cm and on the higher side the height can decrease by 20-24 cm. The slope becomes gradual after plowing several times. Experience shows that a 7 m wide belt needs to be contour ploughed 3-4 times. A 10 m level land needs to be ploughed 10 times.
Covering crops with colored plastic film for increasing agriculture production
Crops like rice seedling and carrot grow faster if covered by a red plastic film. Red color strengthens the absorption capacity of the leaves and makes the seedling grow healthy which in turn improves the harvest.
If a yellow plastic film is used to cover bean, lettuce, celery and cucumber, they will grow well and increase the yield by 50-100%. Farmers can get good harvest and prolong the marketing supply period to get economic benefit.
If the temperature gradient of the green house is to be adjusted, silver colored film should be used.
Good way to preserve agro-plastic film
There are 3 indigenous methods to preserve and save agro-plastic film
1. Put the clean plastic film in a plastic bag and bind the mouth of the bag and keep in a cool and damp place. This way the film can be preserved for 2 years.
2. Put the plastic film in a big jar with a weight on it, then add water to the jar until the film is submerged and cover it. This way the film can be preserved for 4 years.
3. Put the clean plastic film in a plastic bag and store it in a 30 cm deep hollow or a cellar. This way the film can be preserved for 3 years.
<section>7</section>
Orchard management:
Method of planting litchi
Mango tree care
Three key points to fruit tree grafting
Raising seedlings in paper bags
Pit preparation for fruit tree plantation by explosion
Three methods to prevent premature dropping of blossom and grapes
Grape orchard management for high yield
Method to produce seedless grapes
Method of planting litchi
Digging the pit
Selecting the planting season
Selecting seedling varieties
Plant spacing
Pest control
Seedling care
Digging the pit
A round-bottomed pit of 1-m depth and 1 m width should be first dug. The surface soil and other layers of soil should be disposed separately. The soil should be put back at the bottom of the pit, several days before planting. About 50 to 100 kg of grass, manure and rubbish, 1 to 1.5 kg of lime, 50 kg of organic fertilizer and 0.5 kg of phosphorus should be mixed with the rest of the soil and put back.
Selecting the planting season
The season for planting litchi is based on the time of supply of the seedlings, the climate and also on the local custom. Generally, the best planting season is spring (February to April). The next best time for planting is summer (May to July). Planting can also be done in autumn (August to September).
Selecting seedling varieties
Two varieties of litchis should be selected for plantation on large areas in order to help pollination and increase fruit setting ratio. The seedlings selected should be strong and of 50 to 60 cm heights, free from disease and pests.
Plant spacing
For trees with large canopy, the spacing between the rows should be 6 to 7 m with about 250 trees/ha. For trees with small canopy, the spacing between rows should be 5 to 6 m with 330 trees/ha. About 8 cm thick soil should cover the roots of the seedling.
Pest control
In order to prevent insect infestation, the BHC (bemzeme jexacjprode, a local pesticide) powder should be evenly scattered around the roots of the planted seedlings.
Seedling care
In order to keep the seedling stable, the soil around it should be pressed by hand and the seedling covered with grass straw after planting. Watering should be done slowly and regularly 5-6 times a month with light fertilizer application. A shady canopy of tree branches should be constructed around the seedling.
Mango tree care
Fertilizer application
Tillage and weeding
Disease and insect control
Fertilizer application
As the flowering season approaches in February/March, the mango tree needs to be replenished with nutrients in order to have enough food for the baby fruit. To supplement the nutrients in the trees, organic and chemical fertilizers should be applied. For this a ditch 60 cm deep, 120 to 150 cm long and 40 to 60 cm wide should be dug around the tree canopy. 20 to 25 kg of organic fertilizer, 0.5 kg urea and potassium chloride should be added in the ditch and regular irrigation done during the spring to promote flower and baby fruit growth.
Tillage and weeding
Tillage is generally done in spring along with the application of fertilizer. In orchards where there are a lot of weeds, weeding can be done by spraying 1% Caogan phosphorus solution (a local weedicide).
Disease and insect control
The mango tree is attacked by several diseases and insects. One of the most common disease is anthracnose which can be controlled by spraying 1:1:100 to 3:3:100 Bordeaux mixture or diluted (1000 times with water) 50% Jiajitoubujun (a local pesticide) to the new sprout. Powdery mildew is another common disease in the mango tree, which can be controlled by spraying lime sulfur with a concentration of 0.4 Baume degree. Another common disease is leaf spot, which is, controlled by picking the sick leaves and by spraying 1:1:100 Bordeaux mixture or diluted Beijunqing (a local pesticide) with 1500 times water. The insect evening moth is controlled by spraying diluted (80 to 100 times water) mixture of Didiwei, Dibeichong (local pesticides) and 50% ammonium phosphate. The tree should be sprayed 2 to 3 times after an interval of 7 to 10 days. Leaf cicada is controlled by spraying diluted (1500 times) Roger oxide or phosphorus, 1 to 2 times at the beginning stage of insect growth.
Three key points to fruit tree grafting
Rational grafting period
Grafting, storage and grafting wax
Grafting and binding
Rational grafting period
The phonological period of plants can be used as indicators for rational grating period, e.g.. the most suitable period for grafting is when the buds on the grafting branch begin to sprout.
Grafting, storage and grafting wax
Before grafting, the scion will be taken and cut into several sections of 15 cm length and with a bud on top of each section. Meanwhile, the wax should be melted and boiled in hot water and then the two cut sides of the scion should be painted with the wax liquid. The scion can be storage now for grafting anytime.
Grafting and binding
A 5 cm wide and 50 cm long plastic rope is used for general grafting by binding the.scion with the cut point of the parent tree. The scion can be exposed to outside.
Raising seedlings in paper bags^9
^9 Compiled by Mr. Xu Dafu of the Jr. of Soil and water Conservation, China.
First paper bags from waste paper are prepared. Then nutritious soil is prepare by mixing well powdered 10 kg of black vitriol, 50 kg of coal, 2 kg of salts with 15 kg of urea. This mixture is put for fermentation for a day. Then it is mixed into 1500 kg of soil for filling in the paper bags. For quick sprouting, the desired seeds are soaked in warm water (45°C) for 24 hours and then put into plastic bags. The paper bags thus planted are kept on the raised broad beds in a nursery at a rate of 9600 bags/m^2. The begs are regularly watered. The method saves labor, seeds, and farmland thus cost effective.
Pit preparation for fruit tree plantation by explosion^10
^10 Compiled by Ma Weimin, Rural Water Conservancy Div., Water Resource Department, Hebei Province.
In areas with exposed rock, artificial explosion can be used for pit preparation for planting high value trees Powder is used to explode a pit to a depth of 1 m and a diameter of 2-3 m. Then good top soil and organic matter are put into the pit into which a seedling is planted and watered. The nitrogen from the explosion powder remains in the pit after explosion thus increasing the nutrients for fruit tree growth. However due to relatively higher costs of explosives, this method of pit digging can only be used for high value trees e.g. fruit trees.
Three methods to prevent premature dropping of blossom and grapes
Following three local methods are used in north China to prevent blossom and premature grape drop:
1. The cuticular is cut at lower part of parent branches in a circle so that photosynthesis matter gathers on the part above the cut circle of the branch during blossom period.
2. Keeping a leaf above flower heads of parent branches, cut some of the new buds above the leaf. Do not cut too much or too little.
3. Thin flower head and cut end of tassel, one week before blossom. Thin more for stronger vine while thinning less gives weaker wines. Fruit production can be increase if new bud is cut and flowers are thinned at the same time.
Grape orchard management for high yield
Preventing grape vine from freezing in winter by plastic film cover
Method to stimulate advanced fruiting of the grape vine
Spray glucose liquid for good yield of grapes
Preventing grape vine from freezing in winter by plastic film cover
Bind pruned grapevine collecting it from grape trellis and cover it with a 20 cm thick grass covers. It is watered twice and covered with plastic film during winter.
Method to stimulate advanced fruiting of the grape vine
During summer season, select new branches of grape vine, which have grown longer than 1 m and thick parent branches. Put them down from trellis and cut the bud at the end of those branches. Then, bury them 25 cm deep into mud and keep the end of the branches out of the mud. After that apply regular water, spray fertilizer and pesticide. The branches grow roots in the same year. Plant these branches with their root in the next year. This way gives higher survival rate and fruit bearing is advanced by a year.
Spray glucose liquid for good yield of grapes
Better yield of grapes can be harvested if sprayed with glucose liquid (1:800 glucose/ water ratio) during blooming, fruiting and harvest stages. It gives still better results if the liquid is further mixed with phospho-dihydroxy-potassium at a rate of 3000 g/ha..
Method to produce seedless grapes
1. Make a mixture of 1 gm giberellin and 10 liters of water. Put the flower head into mixture for 10 minutes about 2 weeks before the blossom stage. Repeat the same process 12 days after the end of blossom stage.
2. Make a mixture of 100 ppm giberellin and 400 ppm streptomycin and repeat the process at the same period as mentioned above. The use of this mixture can render 90% of the grapes seedless.
However, no bordeaux mixture should be sprayed 5 days before and till 2 days after the above treatments. If it rains soon after the above procedures, they should be repeated.
<section>8</section>
Crop production management:
Pre-broadcasting treatment for better groundnut harvest
Controlling number of tillers for increasing rice yield
Method of preventing cotton plant with non-blooming buds
Rice blast diagnosis
Inter-cropping corn and chili for increased production
Inter-cropping of cotton and melon (Cucumis melo)
Honey bee - a good guard against bird damage to grape
Inter-cropping for pest control in cotton
Sorghum-cotton inter-crop
Rape seed-cotton rotation
Pre-broadcasting treatment for better groundnut harvest
Groundnut is usually planted by broadcasting. Before broadcasting the seeds they are treated in three steps. First the groundnut is dried in the sun and graded. Drying seeds before peeling off can improve seed vigor. Usually the skin of the peanut is peeled off 4 days before broadcasting and then large size seeds are selected for broadcasting.
Then the seeds are soaked in cold water for 12-14 hours followed by again soaking in lukewarm water (35° C) for 2 minutes. The soaked seeds are then put in a bucket and a wet grass film is used to wrap them closely. The bud will sprout after 20 hours.
The third step is dressing the seed by pesticide. This is done by evenly splashing ammonium molybdate desolved in lukewarm water on the seeds and then dressing the seeds with duojunling (a local pesticide) in order to prevent disease and pests. For 50 kg of seeds 100 g ammonium molybdate and 250 g of Duojunling with a 25% concentration is required.
Controlling number of tillers for increasing rice yield
Rice yield can be increased by 30-40% by controlling the number of tillers. In this method the water is drained from the paddy fields so that the soil is exposed to the sun and allowed to dry till fissures appear. The fields are then irrigated again and this procedure is repeated several times till the number of tillers is only 80% of normal tillers of a variety. If there is more rain in tropical areas and there are less sunny days, there is no need to irrigate again after draining water until two leaf stage. The paddy field should be kept dry and wet alternately. The method produces 20% more grain bearing ears compared to the rate without the use of this method.
Another method, which can increase rice yield by 30%, is by frequent irrigation to the depth of two leaves. After the two leaf stage the field should is kept wet and dry alternately. In fertile clay soils more sunshine is needed other wise in sandy and less fertile soils long exposure to sunshine is not needed.
Method of preventing cotton plant with non-blooming buds
A successful method to solve the problem of cotton plants bearing non-blooming buds is to spray on the leaves a 0.1 % boric acid and 0.2 % borax hot mix diluted in cold water. The rate of spray is 6,975 liters/ha. The spraying is done during seedling stage, bud stage and blooming stages, respectively.
Rice blast diagnosis
There are two methods for diagnosis of rice blast in advance. One method is to take 6 rice leaves with some spots on them from the field. Put them in a bowl with a piece of wet cotton. A bowl is closed with a plastic cover. Put the bowl in an oven at 24°C for 24 hours. Then take the leaves out of the bowl and check whether there is a gray mould on the back of the leaf. If there is, then it can be confirmed that the rice plant in the field is suffering from blast.
Another method is to take the 6 rice leaves with some spots from the field. Bind them and hang them above hot water at 40°C in a bottle. Then close the bottle for 24 hours. After that, check at the back of the leaves. The appearance of gray mould on it shows that the rice field will be attacked by blast. Preventive measures should be taken as early as possible.
Inter-cropping corn and chili for increased production^11
^11 Compiled by Mr. Li Xuemin, Chongzhou Agriculture Forest Academy of Sciences, Hebei.
Inter-cropping corn and chili can enhance land productivity. The corn production not only remains the same but the chili crop also gets good profit.
For land preparation, it is tilled to 25 cm depth and spread with organic manure. Now a days phosphorus and nitrogen (1:2/3) are also applied to the soil. The corn is planted at a row spacing of 100 cm × 15 cm with a plant density of 4500 rows per 0.15 ha. Two columns of chili are planted between corn in 30×30 cm spacing. The density of chili is at a rate of 4500 rows per 0.15 ha.
Now a day fertilizer is sprayed during crop growth. Weeding and pest control before corn cobs are formed require special attention. To promote chili to ripe old corn leaves should be removed during the growing stage of the corn.
The heights of corn and chili plants are quite different. Lower leaves of corn shadow the chili, which is beneficial to it. On an average about 77 corn leaves are in 100-160 cm space, but chili occupies 60-80 cm space. This is a good arrangement to give sufficient light to chili. The corn production under this intercropping is same as of solo crop. Thus income from chili becomes extra. However, the method is suitable in summer season of semi-humid regions only as enough light and water are available at the same time.
Inter-cropping of cotton and melon (Cucumis melo)^12
^12 Compiled by Lui Xiaowen and Pong Shuping, Agriculture Extension Station, Zhibo, Sandong and Jia Fusheng and Sun Chuandian, Agriculture Extension Station, Bianhe, Sandong, China.
Management
For this inter-cropping arrangement, plant cotton in wide columns (80 cm) alternating with narrow columns (50-55 cm), with row spacing of 28-30 cm with a density is 3500 rows per 0.15 ha. Melon is planted in the space between wide columns of cotton with a row distance of 60-70 cm and a density of 800 rows per 0.15 ha for melon.
For good land preparation, in the winter season during plowing apply organic manure at a rate of 2500-3000 kg/ha, calcium phosphate 40-50 Kg/ha and urea 15-20 kg/ha. Then rake the soil for sowing in April in the tropical regions of Sandong province of China.
Pre-treat the cotton seeds in hot water at a temperature of 75°C for 2-3 days before sowing. The land is then covered with a plastic film after sowing. If the soil is dry it needs to be watered 1-2 liter/hole before sowing.
Select melon seeds of medium variety with high yield. Melon is sown at the same time with cotton. Put 2-3 melon seeds in each hole and cover with 2 cm of soil.
Management
Seeding stage
Middle stage
Cotton blooming and ball formation stage
Seeding stage:
By controlling the cotton density, it grows faster and promotes the growth of melon. It needs about 80 days for melon to ripen from the time of sowing. During this period cotton grows slowly and does not need too much water and fertilizer. This creates a good growing condition for melon.
Thinning out of the cotton seedling is required at two leaf stage. Control of the cotton pests such as aphid, thrips and cutworm etc also. The soil should be loosened to keep the moisture intact and to promote growth. If melon grows too fast, only 3-4 branches and 3-4 melons should be kept. Its head and other branches should be cut. It is necessary to control pests such as powdery mildew.
Middle stage:
Melon ripens in June- July. It should be harvested on time, since cotton needs more nutrition at this time. Chemical liquid should be sprayed twice to foster the growth of strong cotton seedling after it has 5-8 buds. The first spraying should be done at the end of June and the second spraying should be in the middle of July. Take out plastic film in the last ten days of June, and work the soil to loosen it in the spaces between the cotton columns.
Cotton blooming and ball formation stage:
It is necessary to spray 10-15 kg urea before the 10th of July and around the 20th-25th of July. The head of the plant should be cut at the same time when the pruning is done during the first week of August. Attention should be paid to drainage, to loosening of the soil and to timely pest control.
Since both cotton and melon are drought-resistant and have different growing periods, inter-cropping the two can have high economic benefits. Natural resources such as land, light and water are used very economically. This technology is well suited to the rainfed mountain areas. However the intercropping is not suitable for cotton and melon varieties that have long growing period.
Honey bee - a good guard against bird damage to grape
Birds like to eat ripe grapes. Honeybee is a good guard against this damage. If beehives are put in the grape orchards during their grape maturity period, it very successfully protects the grape from bird damage. Bees attack birds, when they come to eat grape. According to local experience about 30 beehives/ha of orchard is enough for complete damage control.
Inter-cropping for pest control in cotton
Sorghum-cotton inter-crop
Plant sorghum on both sides of a cotton furrow at intervals of 2 m. This is found to prevent pink ballworm in cotton. Intercropping cotton and sorghum does not effect the cotton growth and protects cotton in rainstorms.
Rape seed-cotton rotation
Plant one rape seed column at an interval of every 11-12 cotton columns. Before cotton is sown, the rape seed should be uprooted or plowed under the soil to attract the natural enemy of cotton i.e. the aphid. It also increases the organic fertilizer content of the soil.
<section>9</section>
Vegetable farming management:
Cultivation of Xianggu mushroom
Vinegar to increase yield of vegetables
Honey bees in the green houses for pollination of vegetables
Capsicum (bell pepper) liquid - an effective aphidicide
Peanut shell beds for mushroom cultivation
Cotton hull used for cultivation of tremella
Method to cultivate tremella in jars
Cultivation of Xianggu mushroom
Cultivation on wood
Cultivation in plastic bags
Xianggu mushroom has a long history of cultivation in China. This fragrant mushroom is a traditional food of the Chinese people. There are 2 methods of cultivating it:
Cultivation on wood
Select a section of wood 1 -1.2 m long and 8 - 20 cm in diameter. Drill holes of about 12 mm width and 10 mm depth for planting. The holes should be spaced 1 to 20 cm apart and the rows of holes should be 5 to 7 cm apart. A small grain of the Xianggu mashroom seed is filled in to the hole and covered with mixed saw dust..
After seeding, the wood section is kept in a well-shaped structure to enable proper ventilation and humidity. The wood moisture content should be over 50 % and the relative air humidity should be 80 to 90 %.
Cultivation in plastic bags
Plastic bags of the size of 17×50 cm are filled with 1500 to 1750 gm of mixed saw dust. The seeds are broadcasted after being sterilized and exterminating of bacteria. They are cultivated at a temperature range from 22 to 26 °C. The mushroom can be harvested after 30 to 45 days. In olden times paper bags were used in place of plastic bags.
Vinegar to increase yield of vegetables
Spraying a diluted vinegar solution (0.5 liter vinegar in 50 liters water) before blossoming can increase vegetable production by about 15% in case of eggplant, cucumber and capsicum. Production increases by 10% for Chinese cabbage if 0.5 liter vinegar mixed in 100 liter water is sprayed at the cabbage leaf opening stage. Vinegar solution is also effective on fruit trees for prevention of fruit rot disease. This method is widely used in northern China.
Honey bees in the green houses for pollination of vegetables
Yield increase of up to 40% in cucumber and tomatoes in green houses have been obtained by putting five beehives with about 12,500 bees for every 1/15 ha. It is recommended that the beehive bed be kept at the level of the top of vegetables. There should also be sufficient space for bees to move around. Water in plates is put at the ground between vegetables for bees to drink from. Pesticides are strictly forbidden during blooming stage. If any pesticide spraying is necessary, then the beehives should be removed from the green house.
Capsicum (bell pepper) liquid - an effective aphidicide
Boiled capsicum (bell pepper) liquid is an effective aphidicide, which can kill 90% of the aphids. To achieve this select a strong bell pepper powder, put it in a pot and mix it with water in a proportion of 0.05 kg/liter of water. Boil this liquid at 100°C for 10 minutes and use after cooling. The best time to spray this bell pepper liquid solution is from 10 AM to 2 PM.
Peanut shell beds for mushroom cultivation
Smash the peanut shells and submerges them in 20% quick lime liquid for 24 hours. Then steam it for 10 hours after the water has boiled. After that, take 78% treated peanut shell powder, 20% bran and 2% plaster of Paris, mix them and make a bed of this mixture for planting mushrooms.
Another way is to put peanut shell powder in boiled water and to continue boiling it for 20 minutes. Then take it out until its temperature is reduced to 30°C. Make a bed of it for mushroom planting.
By the above methods on 1 kg of peanut shells 0.8 kg mushroom can be produced.
Cotton hull used for cultivation of tremella
Take 100 kg dry and clean cotton hull which is picked from the field before the frost season, and 20 kg bran, 3 kg plaster stone powder, 1 kg sugar, 0.5 kg magnesium sulfate, and 115 liters water. Then, first put magnesium sulfate and sugar to dissolve in some water and put bran, plaster stone powder and cotton hull in the remaining water and mix them. Control value of pH between 5.5-6.5.
For killing bacteria select plastic bag of about 50 cm in length, 12 cm in width and 4 cm thick which is made from polyethylene under low pressure. Put the above compound in a bag for 7 hours after covering and tying it. Open 4 holes at 2 cm depth on one side of the bag for inoculation. Then, stick rubberized fabric on each hole and put the bag in oven at 1, 000°C for 10 hours to kill bacteria under normal pressure. Take it out of the oven then it can be inoculated after the temperature drops down to 30°C. Tremella can now be cultivated on it.
Method to cultivate tremella in jars
Select 500-750 ml jars. Take 50 kg saw dust, 1 kg bran, 1 kg plaster stone powder, 0.75 kg sugar, 1 kg soybean powder, 0.25 kg magnesium sulfate, and 60 liters of water. Mix saw dust, bran, soybean, dissolved sugar and magnesium sulfate in warm water, then put all the things together and mix them up. Feed the mixture in jars and drill a hole 6 cm deep, 5 cm in diameter on the top of the mixture in the jar. Cover the jar with a plastic film and tie the mouth of the jar. After this kill bacteria. A jar of protonema of tremella can inoculate 70 jars of tremella.
<section>a</section>
Poultry for income generation:
Inducing hunger - a good method to stimulate hen to lay eggs
Keeping hen awake during hatching by a vinegar dose
Garlic - a good health protection additive for chicken
Nine indigenous methods to stimulate laying hen to produce more eggs
Stimulating hen to lay more eggs in winter season
Eight methods to prevent chicken pest
Two kinds of local chicken feed for increased egg production in Southern China
Inducing hunger - a good method to stimulate hen to lay eggs
When a group of hen have come down to laying only half the amount of eggs it is a good time to induce hunger by only feeding water. After the hen looses 20% of its weight the normal diet can be resumed. After 14 days the egg deposition will be at its peak
Keeping hen awake during hatching by a vinegar dose
A spoon of vinegar can be fed for 4 days to a sitting hen in the morning and evening on an empty stomach before hen enters the chicken house for 4 days. The sitting hen will be awake during the hatching process,
Garlic - a good health protection additive for chicken
Garlic when added to forage can prevent white diarrhea and indigestion in chickens. To 50 g forage add 50 g garlic powder and 0.25 g terramycin. The forage should however, contain all the necessary nutrients.
Nine indigenous methods to stimulate laying hen to produce more eggs
1. Feed one gram of honey mixed with water with the forage to the hen every morning and evening.
2. 8% boiled vegetable seeds are added as additive with the forage. 4. Reduce 10% grain component from forage and add 20% earthworm gradually to the forage 4. Boil and cut earthworm in pieces and replace 10% of the grain component in the forage with this.
5. Add 3% peanut shell powder to the forage instead of the grain component and feed the hen.
6. Add 2% sunflower powder to forage.
7. Add 2% zinc in the forage for 7 days. The quantity of egg deposition will be reduced after the first 3 days, and will totally stop after 7 days. The quantity of eggs laid will, however, increase to 50% after 2 weeks and will continue to increase by more than 10% every week.
8. Dig a pit and put a layer of pig manure on the surface of the pit. Then put straw to cover the manure and add water to keep it damps every day. Maggots will be born after several days. Maggot is good food for the laying hen.
9. Mix pig blood to wheat bran in the proportion 1: 1. Then put the mixture on the ground for drying. This mixture can be added to forage with some water. With this feed hen can lay 30% more eggs than normal.
Stimulating hen to lay more eggs in winter season
Hen is taken out to give as much sunshine as possible. At the same time the temperatures in a poultry house are maintained above 10°C. The poultry house should be spacious and juicy vegetables and forage are places at about 30-35 cm height so that the hen is required to jump to eat them. Trace elements like iodized potassium (10 mg/week/hen) are also fed. More fodder (5 times/day) mixed with boiled pumpkin (in spring season, 4gm/day/hen) is fed and warm water is provided for drinking. This way has been reported to stimulate 15% more egg production.
Eight methods to prevent chicken pest
Following eight methods are reported to control 90% of the chicken pests:
1. 50 gm quick lime is mixed in o.5 lit water and filtered. Them 250 gram rice is soaked into this liquid. After 24 hours the rice is taken out and dried in shade. This rice is fed to the effected chicken in the morning and evening (2spoons/chicken/dose) for five days.
2. Vinegar socked soybean (dry) are fed (3 beans/hen) once a week for 6 weeks.
3. Mix some vinegar in millet and feed it to chicken for one week.
4. A single ground grain of white pepper powder is feed to a chicken in two dozes once in two days.
5. Soak millet in wine for 15 minutes and feed chicken in the morning and evening for 3 days continuously.
6. Chicken is bathed in water with 5% alkali. Especially clean the chicken under its wings and anus once every 7 days in summer and autumn.
7. Feed fodder mixed with some pounded garlic during the winter season.
8. Feed water to the chicken with 0.5% potassium permanganate in winter season.
Two kinds of local chicken feed for increased egg production in Southern China
Insect lured into poultry house by electric lamp
Sawdust - a good additive feed
Insect lured into poultry house by electric lamp
25-40 watt bulbs are hanged 50 cm at every 2 m above ground level in the poultry house to lure insects. The lamps are lighted for 2 hours every night. The feed thus collected can increase egg laying by 30%.
Sawdust - a good additive feed
80% sawdust, 19% bran, 1% distillers yeast are mixed in enough water to make a soft dow. The mixture is filled tightly into a jar with a thermometer and covered. When the temperature rises above 40°C during the day, 20% of this mixture is added with forage to feed chicken. Enough clean water should be provided to the chicken.
<section>b</section>
Fish raising for income generation:
Method of cleaning and disinfecting a fish pond
Raising young fish in paddy fields
Method of cleaning and disinfecting a fish pond
Flushing water to clean pond
Planting of specially bred plants
Disinfecting the pond by quick lime
Fish production can be effectively increased by cleaning and disinfecting a fish pond during Nov.-Feb. for which the following method is locally used in China.
Flushing water to clean pond
Flush out the pond water in winter, and strengthen the sides and ridge of the pond. The pond sediment is used as crop fertilizer by throwing it on the nearby farmland.
Planting of specially bred plants
After the pond water is flushed out, some crops such as oil plants and green manure can be cultivated by which the soil can be improved and fish diseases controlled.
Disinfecting the pond by quick lime
This is usually done on a clear day about 10 days before putting the baby fish in the pond. The shallow pond is disinfected splashing dissolved raw lime at a rate of 750 to 1025 kg/ha of pond area. Also, if preferred, the dissolved raw lime can be loaded on to a square-bottomed bamboo basket and pulled by rope from one bank to another so that the lime is evenly distributed in the pond as shown below.
Raising young fish in paddy fields
Raising young fish in the paddy fields before spring transplanting is an effective way to resolve the problem of getting a source of young fish for ponds and reservoirs in the mountainous regions.
The ridge of the paddy field is heightened, green manure and organic fertilizer is put as base fertilizer and the fields leveled by plowing and raking. When the depth of stored water is 20 to 25 cm, 450 kg/ha raw lime or 625 kg/ha tea bran are applied to sterilize the paddy field. After this 3000 to 4500 kg/ha of organic fertilizer is applied. When the water temperature is stable at 18 - 20 ° C, 0.75 million to 1.5 million /ha 'young fish can be put in to the paddy fields. Good water quality and fish fodder should be monitored. After 20 days, the young fish will grow up to 2 to 4 cm in length and can then be transferred to fish ponds or reservoirs for raising. Early rice can be transplanted soon after.
<section>c</section>
Soil fertility improvement and mulching:
Method of compost application at the time of fruit tree seedling plantation
Three "watch" for fertilizer application for raising seedling
Straw blanket - a successful way to increase rainfed crop yields
A good traditional way to spray fertilizer and pesticide
Wheat or corn straw bedding for soil fertility improvement in orchards
Method of compost application at the time of fruit tree seedling plantation^13
^13 Compiled by Lu Weixin, Department of Water Resources, Linxian People's County Government, China.
This method is common in Hunan Province. A pit of 1 X 1 X 1 m^3 dimensions is dug. Then loosen soil and get rid of gravel, grasses and roots in the pit bottom. Apply compost (70 kg) in each pit and mix it with the loosened soil at the pit bottom. The height of thus mixed compost and loosened soil should be about 80 cm from of pit bottom. Finally, dig a hole in the mixture and plant fruit tree seedling. Cover it with soil and water the seedling. The seedling is planted 20 cm deep.
Three "watch" for fertilizer application for raising seedling
While applying fertilizer to seedling three "Watch" are observed for stronger and better seedling growth.
First "Watch" is to watch the weather. During spring, the temperature is a little bit low, sufficient organic fertilizer such as compost, green manure, pond silt should be applied but the rapid effect fertilizer can not be applied too early and too much, because the baby seedling absorbs fertilizer very slowly and in small amounts. During the summer, the temperature is high, the fertilizer should be applied many times and much less, and the land after applying should be kept damp so that the roots can absorb and utilize the fertilizer. Application of the fertilizer is better in the evening when the weather is clear. The chemical fertilizer should not touch the leaves and stem of seedling as they can be scorched.
Second "Watch" is to watch the soil quality. If the base fertilizer is sufficient, then less amount should be applied, otherwise apply the fertilizer many times but each time the amount should be less. For heavy clay soil, the fertilizer should be applied on the shallow layer to favor decomposition of fertilizer and assimilation for seedling.
Third "Watch" is to watch the seedling. According to the changes in morphology of the seedling, the problem of lack of fertilizer can be diagnosed. The seedling with short stem, thin or small leaf, less leaves, yellow-green color, dead side sprout, is short of nitrogen fertilizer. The seedling with short branches, purple or copper leaves, and leaves dropping off easily on the lower part of stem is short of phosphate fertilizer. If the stem and leaves become emaciated with the top of the leaves withering first and then the sides, the seedling is considered to be short of potassium.
Straw blanket - a successful way to increase rainfed crop yields
An 5-10 cm thick straw blanket covers the ground between row crops in this method. Thus about 3, 000- 4, 500 kg/ha of straw is needed. This leads to a decrease in evaporation while it helps accumulate and infiltrate rainfall. Organic matter content of the soil is increased and the weeds are controlled with in 5 days of covering the ground. Thus there is no need of plowing for weed control. By this method in rainfed areas, the irrigation frequency is reduced by 1 -2 times as compared to the fields without ground cover. The method also has been seen to increase yields by about 8% in field crops.
A good traditional way to spray fertilizer and pesticide
A 60 ml liquid fertilizer or pesticide bottle is hung 20 cm above ground level on the
Wheat or corn straw bedding for soil fertility improvement in orchards
20 cm thick bedding of wheat or corn straw on the ground of an orchard at a rate of 22, 500 kg/ha for two continuous years, increases the organic matter content of the soil by 0.7%. This is as good as applying 2.500 kg of compost. It can increase fruit production by about 450 kg. It can also reduce pests, diseases
and saves water (see figure below).
<section>d</section>
Crop processing and storage:
Preserving potato for 11-12 months
Method to keep mushroom fresh
Preserving potato for 11-12 months
Farmer households in loess plateau have accumulated experience to successfully preserve potato for 11-12 months. This is done by making a cellar by digging a vertical well 4 - 5 m deep followed by an underground horizontal tunnel 4 - 5 m long and 1-1.5 m high. One month before storing potato, open the door of the cellar to ventilate for keeping the cellar dry and clean. If the cellar has been used in the last winter, scrape the thin top layer of the soil from the ground and the walls and throw this soil out of the cellar. If the cellar is covered by bricks on the ground and the walls, a rinse of quick lime should be given. Spray disinfectant two days before putting potato in the cellar. After that close the door of the cellar till potato is stored. Before storing, dry the potatoes in the sun for one day soon after harvesting. Select only good potatoes for storage and reject sick and damaged ones. Also easily decomposable varieties should be rejected. To prevent damage handle
the potatoes gently. Fill only one third of the cellar with potatoes to allow space for ventilation. When potato turns from white to green by being exposed to sunlight and wind, it becomes poisonous and is not fit for consumption. Potato should be checked in the cellar from time to time. Temperature should be decreased and the heat diffused during October/November when the potato is stored in the cellar to prevent decomposition due to more carbon dioxide, moisture content and heat. Also care should be taken to prevent the potato from freezing.
Method to keep mushroom fresh
Put fresh mushroom in 0.6% concentration of salt Water for 10 minutes, then drain out the water and put the mushroom in a plastic bag and keep it at a temperature of 10-24°C for 5 hours. The mushroom will become white in color. By this method mushroom can be kept fresh for at least 3 days (sketch below).
<section>e</section>
Feed and fodder:
Processing of pulverized hay as green feed
Chicken manure - a good oxen fodder
Processing of pulverized hay as green feed^14
^14 Compiled by Hong Xiyan, Yuxi Professional Agriculture School, China.
Development of animal husbandry for merchandise production depends on provision of large quantities of pulverized hay as top grade green feed, while encouraging grazing on pastures, so as to keep a balanced supply of animal feed all year round. Pulverized hay as green feed is an important source of protein, vitamins and mineral contents as nutrients for animals is therefore of much significance to improving nutrition condition of domestic animals. It is also a main constituent of granulated fodder. Thus processed hay saves around three fourth to four fifth of storage space, while retaining 16-20% more carotene. The processing includes drying of the hay in sun or by machine, them pulverization, filtration and then storage with nitrogen.
Chicken manure - a good oxen fodder^15
^15 Compiled by Lui Xiaowen, Hebei Hedan Agriculture College, Hebei.
Three methods for preparing chicken manure for fodder
Feeding method
Chicken manure has nutritive value; it contains 11.4% water, 28.7% protein, 13.84% fiber, 7.8% calcium, 2.1% phosphorus and vitamin B. Besides, it contains 550-1350 calories of metabolic energy. Therefore, it is a good supplementary fodder for proteins, minerals and energy, for oxen.
Three methods for preparing chicken manure for fodder
One is to dry manure by putting fresh manure on clean ground in thin layer in air for 2-3 days in summer. The experience in practice shows that it will dry after 2-3 days in summer, 3-5 days in autumn and 7-10 days in winter. Take out sand and impurity from dry manure.
The second method is to spray 37% formalin mixed with dry manure with a ratio of 550 g to every 100 kg of manure. After 12 hours of mixing it is ready to use. Formalin kills colon bacillus and other germ that cause disease.
The third method is to ferment manure. Mix this manure with chaff in proposition 7: 3, add salt and water. The usage of salt and water is 0.5% and 60% weight of manure and chaff respectively. It is then put it in a container and closed for 3-5 weeks.
Feeding method
The amount of manure added to the fodder should be increased slowly in order to make the oxen accustomed to eating it. The usage of 15% manure in fodder is suitable for oxen younger than 12 months, 40% manure is suitable for oxen older than 12 months.
However, make sure that it is not used if chicken manure was not processed as mentioned above as well as if manure is not mixed with other fodder. The usage of manure should never exceed 40% of the total weight of fodder.
Publications of PWMTA - ASIAN WATMANET
I. ASIAN WATMANET Newsletters
Issue No. 1, theme: WMTUH and FARM Introduction
Issue No. 2, theme: Status of Watershed Management in Asia
Issue No. 3, theme: Farmers' Organizations
Issue No. 4, theme: Policy Issues in Watershed Management
Issue No. 5, theme: Gender Framework for Resource Management
Issue No. 6, theme: Participatory Watershed Management Training
Issue No. 7, theme: Gaps in Participatory WM Training and Education in Asia
Issue No. 8, theme: Envisioning of WM professionals
Issue No. 9, theme: Elements of Participatory Processes in WM
Issue No. 10, theme: Land Use Titles - A Key to People's Participation
Issue No. 11, theme: Sustainability of Participatory WM
Issue No. 12, theme: Participatory Watershed PME
Issue No. 13, theme: Indigenous Technology Knowledge for WM
Issue No. 14, theme: Sustaining Success and Learning from Failure: Farmers'
Institution Building for WM
Issue No. 15, theme: People's Movements in Watershed Management
Special issue: Membership Directory (I, II & III Edition)
II. Field Documents
No. 1 Status of watershed management in Asia
No. 2 A rapid review of the NWDPRA in India
No. 3 Case study of people's participation in WM in Nepal (BTRT area),
(in Nepalese language, out of press)
No. 4 Case studies of people's participation in WM in Asia:
Part 1: Nepal, China and India
No. 5 Case studies of people's participation in WM in Asia:
Part 2: Sri Lanka. Thailand and Vietnam.
No. 6 Recent Developments, Status and Gaps in participatory watershed management training and education in Asia
No. 7 Participatory Process in Integrated WM
No. 8 Farmer Led Integrated WM- A Trainers' Resource Book
No. 9 APEX and SWAT Models for Rapid Impact Assessment in Management of Small Areas Watershed (in draft)
No. 10 Participatory Watershed Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation
A Training Resource Pack
No. 11 Indigenous Technology Knowledge for Upland WM in Bangladesh
No. 12 A Gimpse of Local Technology Knowledge for Comprehensive WM in China
No. 13 Building Farmers' Organizations for Integrated WM in India- A Trainers' Manual
No. 14 Ripples of the Society - Peoples' Movements in Watershed Development in India
PARTICIPATING COUNTRIES
Afganistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
China
India
Myanmar
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Thailand
