<title>ADCP/REP/79/10 - Aquaculture Development in China. Aquaculture development and coordination programme Aquaculture development in </title>
<section>1</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The members of the FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Study Tour to China (2 May-1 June 1978), wish to express their appreciation to the Government of the People's Republic of China, to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and to the United Nations Development Programme for the opportunity to participate in the tour.
The members of the group are most grateful to their Chinese hosts for the admirable arrangements made for the tour, their friendliness and warm hospitality and above all the many opportunities provided to learn something of the tremendous advances made by the country after its liberation.
Special thanks from the group are due to officials of the Bureau of Foreign Affairs of the Ministry of Agriculture in Beijing, and especially to Mr. Li Yungkai, Director of the Bureau, and to Mr. Chang Shihjang, Deputy Director of the Bureau, who accompanied the group on their travels within the country and provided invaluable help in different ways. Despite the difficulties posed by the technical terms often used in discussions, the interpreters, Mrs. Shao Chingfen, Mr. Chian Nanfang, Miss Jen Hung, and Mr. Huang Yuyi, did an excellent job and the group is most appreciative of their assistance. The group also wishes to express its appreciation to the staff at the Chinese Embassy in Rome and particularly Mr. Chin Fengchu, China's Permanent Representative to FAO, for their kind assistance in the preparation of the tour.
All the members of the group contributed in some measure to the preparation of this report. Mr. V.O. Sagua, Director of the Kainji Lake Research Institute in New Bussa, Nigeria, spent several days in Rome after the tour and helped the Group Leader in compiling and analysing the information collected. Special thanks are due to him for his assistance.
TABLE OF CONVERSION FACTORS
1 mu = 0.066 ha (1/15 ha) = 0.165 acres
1 jin = 1 catty = ½ kg = 1.1 pounds
1 li = 0.576 km = ½ km = approx. 1/3 mile
1 Yuan = US$ 0.63
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
The Study Tour on Aquaculture (including some aspects of freshwater fisheries) held from 2 May-1 June 1978 in China was the fourth of a series organized by FAO and the Government of the People's Republic of China. It was the first of the study tours in 1978 and was financed by UNDP as an inter-regional project (INT/77/017). In 1976, a professional study mission consisting of four FAO staff members visited China to study freshwater aquaculture and, among other things, recommended the organization of "study tours of inland fishery administrators and planners to provide them with new or different perspectives on their own problems".
Aquaculture being one of the areas in which China has made notable progress, there is widespread interest in studying the organization and practices followed and in determining their applicability in other countries. This study was therefore organized to provide directors of fisheries or senior fishery officials at the policy-making level from selected developing countries, with the opportunity to observe aquaculture development in China, the strategy of development, policy and programme planning mechanism, priorities and implementation. It was also intended to give the participants an opportunity to study the underlying principles of fisheries and aquaculture development, its relationship with overall agriculture development and integrated rural development, and the organizational aspects of fisheries development as a whole. The Government of China has been running a series of short-term training courses for technicians from selected countries, sponsored by the FAO
Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP) and UNDP in the Guangdong Provincial Research Institute of Aquatic Products in Guangzhou. The study group was to be given the opportunity to visit this training centre to determine its suitability for training of technicians from the participating countries in different aspects of fish culture.
The study group arrived in Beijing on 30 April 1978 in two batches; one batch of 13 from Teheran and the other of five from Tokyo. The list of participants is given in Appendix 1. Dr. T.V.R. Pillay, Programme Leader, Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, FAO, acted as the leader of the group. Mr. Chang Shihjang, Deputy Director, International Division, Bureau of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, together with a team of interpreters, accompanied the study group during its travels in the country.
FAO had indicated in advance the main activities that the group would like to see. The host Government proposed an itinerary which included most of the items suggested. As additions were impractical owing to shortage of time or travel and accommodation problems, the proposed itinerary was followed with only minor alterations (see Appendix 2). Although the group cannot claim to have studied representative production units, the itinerary appears to have covered a fairly representative number of communes, production brigades and institutions of the advanced type that had distinguished themselves in their fields of endeavour. They clearly showed what is capable of being achieved under conditions existing in China and made it possible to evaluate the possibilities of applying Chinese experience in participating countries. The group's itinerary included visits in the provinces of Jiangsu, Guangdong, Hunan and Hubei and the municipalities of Beijing and Shanghai. State fish farms;
fish farms operated by communes, production brigades and production teams; hatcheries; integrated production of fish, crops and livestock; fish culture in lakes, reservoirs and rivers; fish culture and hydrobiological research; fishery education, training and extension services; fishing; fish transportation, processing and marketing, were the major activities studied by the group. Even though it was not possible to visit any of the coastal aquaculture sites, the group was briefed on the techniques adopted and was shown a film that described the operations in some detail.
Fig. 1 Map of China. The names of places visited by the study group are boxed
In all the places visited, the senior local official(s) concerned gave a general briefing, tracing the progress made in aquaculture since the liberation of China and the steady increases in production obtained since then. This was generally followed by long question and answer sessions through which the group was able to gather a fair amount of quantitative information. It was not possible to obtain many published or unpublished reports on specific projects and so the main source of information, on which this report is based, consists of the briefs and data provided during discussions. Since very often such information was given from memory (although only after sometimes prolonged discussions between the local officials), they should largely be considered only as quantitative approximations. They are, however, clearly indicative of the trends and general directions. Even though the interpreters assigned to the group were extremely helpful and efficient, the interpretation of
technical discussions, particularly of quantitative data, presented very considerable problems. In spite of these problems, and the size of the group, which tended to make most discussions somewhat formal, the observations and conclusions contained in this report are considered generally correct and valid. After each major visit, the group met to compare notes and discuss findings. Efforts were made to reconcile differences in understanding, particularly figures, by repeated enquiries from different sources.
In most institutions and places visited, the hosts invariably expressed their interest in learning from other advanced countries and asked the group to give their views and suggestions for improvement of their activities. Where the time permitted and the hosts seemed anxious to have the information, the leader and some of the members of the group described related activities in other countries and indicated possible adoption of improved practices under Chinese conditions. Provision of useful relevant literature for this purpose was promised. (The group leader has since furnished literature on a number of subjects.)
<section>3</section>
2. BACKGROUND TO CHINESE AQUACULTURE DEVELOPMENT
The long tradition behind Chinese aquaculture is too well known to be mentioned, but what is probably not so widely known is that many of the revolutionary changes that have taken place since China's liberation have contributed substantially to accelerated efforts for increasing production through fish farming. It has developed as an integral part of the overall farming system which, in the words of Chairman Mao, is the foundation for the development of modern China. The country has some 300 million mu of freshwater area, of which at least 100 million mu are suitable for fish farming. About 20 million mu of this is now under some form of cultivation; obviously, there are vast areas still available for expansion of freshwater aquaculture. It is not only ponds that are used for fish farming; larger bodies of water such as natural lakes, reservoirs, canals and small rivers and their tributaries are also used for fish cultivation. Collective ownership has made the management of
such large water areas for fish farming feasible. Coastal aquaculture is still rather undeveloped, but oyster and sea-weed farming have been introduced are expanding fairly rapidly. Apparently there is great scope for accelerated production in this sector as well, but the major emphasis appears to be on the expansion and intensification of freshwater aquaculture.
Out of about 200 economically important species of fish occurring in China, it is reported that the following 25 (including introduced species) are cultured in ponds:
Silver carp
Hypophthalmichthys molitrix
Big head carp
Aristichthys nobilis
Grass carp
Ctenopharyngodon idella
Black carp
Mylopharyngodon piceus
Mud carp
Cirrhina molitorella
Common carp
Cyprinus carpio
Crucian carp
Carassius auratus
Wuchan fish
Megalobrama amblycephala
Black bream
Megalobrama terminalis
White Amur bream
Parabrama pekinensis
Freshwater Yellowtail
Xenocypris argentea
Small scale
Plagiognathops microlepis
Tilapia
Tilapia mossambica
Tilapia
Tilapia nilotica
Mandarin fish ^1^/
Siniperca chautsi
Spotted Mandarin fish^1^/
Siniperca scherzeri
Snakehead^1^/
Ophiocephalus argus
Grey mullet^1^/
Mugil cephalus
Red-eyed mullet^1^/
Mugil soiny
Chinese sturgeon
Acipenser sinensis
Japanese eel
Anguilla japonica
Loach
Misgurnus anguillicandatus
Rainbow trout
Salmo gairdneri
Round snout
Distoechodon tumirostris
Red eye
Squalibarbus curriculus
1^/ Cultured only on a very limited scale
National statistics of aquaculture production were not available but local production figures from some of the areas visited were obtained. From these and other relevant information, it would appear that the earlier FAO estimate of a total production of 2.5 million t, including production from ponds, lakes, reservoirs, rivers and coastal areas, is valid.^2^/ It was reported that over 20 thousand million fry of freshwater fishes are produced and distributed in the country. On a country-wide basis, production is reported to be 50-60 jin/mu in open waters and 250-300 jin/mu in ponds.
2^/ This was confirmed by further enquiries during a later visit to China by the group leader in 1979
Fish culture is undoubtedly more developed in areas with controlled irrigation and rural electrification. Free or cheap sources of water and electricity have contributed to improvements and some amount of mechanization of farming operations. Roughly half of the country appears to have such favourable conditions. Climate has also influenced the development of aquaculture and accounts for some of the regional differences, in the extent of fish culture operations. The southern part of the country, which has a warm climate, allows a year-round growth of fish conducive to high productivity. In the northern part, the growing season is restricted to only 4-5 months; whereas in the rest of the country, which has a temperate climate, the growing period is 7-8 months. Consequently, there appears to be a greater concentration of fish farming in the southern part of the country and in the major river basins and coastal areas.
In discussing the background to Chinese aquaculture development, it is important to take into account the sources of motivation for leaders and workers in production units. Adherence to political ideology and Communist Party directives plays a decisive role in the organization and implementation of aquaculture. Chairman Mao's instruction to: "take grain as the key link and ensure all-round development of agriculture, industry, animal husbandry, forestry, sideline occupations and fisheries" has undoubtedly given great impetus to the traditional practice of integrated crop, livestock and fish productions The directive to achieve the targets of production set to meet the country's requirements through a series of provincial, county, commune, production brigade and production team plans, both of long-term and short-term nature, is readily followed. There is obviously considerable discussion at different levels; and there is participation by the people concerned in deciding on
the ways and means by which these targets are to be achieved. But the need to produce the country's requirements of foodstuffs through self-reliance is fully accepted and economic options do not figure too prominently in the discussions. Chairman Hua's exhortation that the suburban area should become a base for supplying food to the urban area, has spurred intensive farming operations in suburban communes and production brigades in different parts of the country. The resolution of the Fifth National Congress that the country should achieve comprehensive modernization of agriculture, industry, national defence and science and technology by the end of the century, has given rise to an eagerness to mechanize farm operations, and to learn from other advanced countries. Adoption of three "localizations", "hatch locally, stock locally and catch locally", has characterized the development of fish farming.
Slogans are very widely used to motivate the masses. "Wherever there is water, there should be fish", "Freshwater fishery is the sideline of agriculture", "In fisheries, do stocking and catching in rotation", "Lay stress on culture and simultaneous development of culture and capture" and "Learn from Dazhai" are some of the slogans commonly used in campaigns for aquaculture development.
<section>4</section>
3. PLANNING, ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT OF AQUACULTURE
3.1 Organization and management
3.2 Planning
3.1 Organization and management
As stated earlier, development of fish farming in the country has benefited from the socialist policies of the Government and the collectivization of agriculture and allied industries. There is very close linking of fish culture with agriculture and animal husbandry as will be discussed in a later section.
Aquaculture production in China is largely carried out through state farms or communes and its constituent production brigades and production teams. The organization of communes in China has been fairly well documented and is described in detail in the report of the FAO Study Mission on Agriculture and the People's Communes.^1^/ The production team is the basic agricultural production (of which aquaculture is a part) unit. In a good many areas, it is also the basic accounting unit, although there is now a tendency to have larger accounting units, such as the production brigades and even communes. The identity of households as social units and to some extent even as economic units, is now maintained, with limited ownership rights. Even though they may own and cultivate private land on a small scale, the ownership of most of the cultivable land and of implements and machinery rests with the communes or their subsidiary units. The production brigades have major planning and
administrative roles and are headed by revolutionary committees with adequate political representation in their management. The commune is both an economic collective and a basic unit of political power in rural China. It administers all activities within the commune area, including agriculture, industry, commerce, education, social welfare and security affairs, merging government administration with commune management. The standard of living and income of commune members are dependent on the success of their operations and the profits made by the commune by collective endeavour and wise management.
^1^/ FAO (1977): Learning from China - A Report on Agriculture and the Chinese People's Communes: 112 p.
Generally the communes undertake activities that neither the production brigades nor the production teams can undertake. In respect of aquaculture, pond fish culture can largely be carried out by production brigades and teams, but farming of lakes and reservoirs or river systems is often done by the commune and sometimes jointly by two or more communes. The commune serves as the link between production brigades and teams on the one hand, and the county and provincial administration on the other.
Besides the production units, production brigades and communes concerned with agricultural and fisheries production, there may be supply and marketing cooperatives at the commune level. They distribute consumer goods and act as purchasing agents for the state wholesale organization.
Most counties and provinces have Bureaux of Aquatic Products, which have the major role of providing technical advice to, and maintaining liaison with, production units.
The majority of counties have established state farms, which may specialize in some form of culture, as in the case of the Nanhai County Hatchery and Farm, which produces fry and fingerlings for distribution. Unlike those in the communes, production brigades and production teams, the workers in a state farm are paid employees and their incomes are not affected by the profits made by the farm. The state farms appear to be important as a support to aquaculture activities of communes and production brigades. As in the case of the Paitan Lake Fish Breeding Farm in the Hengyang County of Hubei Province, they may take an active role in extension of techniques, some types of research, supply of fry and finger-lings and short-term training of personnel. They seem to assume a leadership role in the introduction of new technologies and ideas.
Fish marketing is handled by the state through its purchasing centres, which buy the harvest at prices fixed by the state and generally transport the fish alive. The communes arrange for their supply to households within their limits.
Most of China's fish farming is done through communes, or their subsidiary units. Some of them have fish as the main crop (or 'link' to use campaign vocabulary), whereas the others have grain or livestock as the mainstay. Whether on a small or large scale, aquaculture appears to be practised wherever facilities are available and fish is an acceptable form of food.
Many of the communes have established small-scale industries, some of them producing tools required for fish farming or fishing. With the growing interest in mechanization of fish culture, an increasing number of communes are taking to the manufacture of fish-culture equipment. The group saw at least two that were manufacturing aerators and some others manufacturing different types of water pumps and a type of slush pump for building dikes.
3.2 Planning
As self-reliance, "planning from below", and peoples' participation in decision-making are believed to be some of the major factors responsible for the success of Chinese aqua-culture, the study group paid special attention to these aspects. The fisheries or aqua-culture development plan for the country forms a part of the agriculture plan, even though very recently a separate State Bureau of Aquatic Products^1^/ has been established in the Ministry of Agriculture, under the charge of a Vice-Minister.
^1^/ There is now (June 1979) a separate General Administration of Aquatic Products which is directly responsible to the State Council
The whole planning process is somewhat complex and it may not be correct to describe it as entirely "planning from below" or as "centralized planning". The fisheries or aqua-culture part of the agricultural plan, like other parts of it, appears to be worked out by a series of negotiations. The central authorities formulate a national plan for production and distribution. They then establish quotas for each province. The province, in turn, sets quotas for the counties and the counties, in their turn, determine targets for the communes. The communes consult production brigades and teams. The targets concern not only production, but also collection of tax, and purchase of produce. The targets are set on the basis of detailed information on past performance, production potential, etc. The detailed production plans are prepared at the production team, production brigade and commune levels, in which considerable discussion and participation of workers may be involved, The plan
then moves upward from the production team, production brigade and commune level to the county, province and state level. At each point, integration of individual plans, including some negotiation and adjustments, may be done. If there are disagreements, individual plans may be sent back to the originators and a further round of discussions and adjustments may ensue. All these discussions and adjustments are obviously made within the framework of guidelines provided by the state, which has effective control on production by virtue of its role in allocations of inputs and in marketing. The participation of Party members in revolutionary committees ensures that deviations from the state policies do not occur. Even though the state has thus a very substantial role in production planning, the production units have autonomy in working out the details of the plan and have to agree to any changes that may be made in it. The study group was not able to ascertain exactly how long the
finalization of a five-year and annual plan takes, but was told that decisions were generally made in very short periods of time, which indicates that disagreements are not too common.
In line with the policy of self-reliance, which has been a guiding principle of rural development in China, the communes are expected to rely largely on their own financial resources. They are expected to produce enough food for their own use, besides selling a fixed quota to the state for distribution in other areas or to be kept in reserve.
<section>5</section>
4. FINANCING AND CREDIT
All communes and production brigades are expected to rely largely on their own financial resources for all development activities, wherever possible, even the costs of major construction work. However, state assistance can be sought and obtained when required because of natural disasters or when the magnitude of the investment is far in excess of the production unit's means. The study group was told, in many production brigades and communes, that financing was not a constraint to aquaculture development and that they were able to obtain funds for any worthwhile project without much bureaucratic red tape.
The People's Bank of China, operating at the central, provincial, county and commune levels, as well as city, district and township levels, provides the main banking system and it is closely linked to local credit cooperatives which function under the policy guidance of the Bank. The People's Bank undertakes commercial transactions, including the acceptance of deposits, grant of loans and clearance of payments, besides helping production units to set up new enterprises.
The main source of funds for credit cooperatives is the accumulated savings of production brigades, teams and individuals. As mentioned earlier, communes may also obtain state loans when "public accumulation funds", development funds, or reserve funds, are not sufficient and major investments are required. Even though credit cooperatives accept deposits from individuals, they do not extend loans to individuals. The latter have to obtain credit, if needed from production teams or brigades. Loans are generally granted for one year to supplement working capital, but these can be extended if found necessary and justified. When costly equipment has to be purchased or major construction work has to be carried out, the loans may be extended up to five years. Interest on loans vary: industrial loans are charged 0.42 percent/month; production or business extension loans, 0.36 percent/month; and loans for replacement of facilities, 0.18 percent/month. The rate of interest paid on
savings deposits is 0.18 percent/month on current accounts and when a personal loan is obtained, the same rate of interest is charged. A higher rate of interest, 0.27 percent/ month, may be paid on one year fixed-term deposits.
From the information that the study group could gather, it would appear that the system of financing and credit for aquaculture production works smoothly and it has achieved the main purpose of eradicating the middleman and usurer. As will be discussed in a later section, aquaculture has proved to be a major source of "accumulation funds" and the study group was told that in some communes, the income from fish farming provided a good part of the money needed for the purchase of agricultural equipment (October People's Commune - Hubei Province).
The system of agricultural taxation applies also to aquaculture, but tax on fish farming is reported to be less.
In the Ho Li People's Commune in the suburban area of Wuxi, the tax paid to the state is 1.34 percent of the total income of the Commune, of which the rest is distributed as follows:
8.98 percent
set aside as development fund;
5.02 percent
public welfare fund;
0.42 percent
reserve fund as insurance against national disasters, wars, etc.;
84.24 percent
distributed among the workers on the basis of work points.
<section>6</section>
5. FISH CULTURE PRACTICES
5.1 Artificial propagation
5.2 Rearing of fry and fingerlings
5.3 Rearing of fish to marketable size in ponds
5.4 Fish diseases and their control
5.5 Design of fish farms and its significance in management
5.6 Economics of pond culture
Although the basic fish-culture technology of China is largely based on traditional practices, a number of new innovations and improvements have been adopted. A major breakthrough in modern times is the artificial propagation of the major cultivated species of carp by the administration of hormones in 1958. Although this technique was also independently developed in India at about the same time, it is only in China that it has been possible to bring it down to the farm level on a country-wide basis and make it a common farm practice. Traditional Chinese fish culture was based on larvae and fry collected from the rivers. Hydro-electric and flood control projects implemented after liberation resulted in a drastic reduction in the availability of fry in rivers and hatchery production became a necessity. This, and effective extension work through the "three-in-one" (farmer-technician-party cadre) combination appears to have helped in the farm-level application of artificial
propagation.
5.1 Artificial propagation
The method of induced breeding and hatchery and larval rearing techniques adopted in China has been described in the report of the FAO Fisheries (Aquaculture) Mission to China (FAO Fisheries Technical Paper No. 168). The study group observed some variations and improvements in the technique. The strong point of the Chinese method of induced breeding would appear to be the selection and rearing of brood fish, which do not receive the same amount of attention in other countries. In general, female silver carp and mud carp over three years old, four-year-old big head and five-year-old grass carp, are selected for breeding. Males can be about one year younger than the females. They are reared in special brood ponds, stocked at low densities of 100-150 kg/mu. They are fed at the rate of about 1-2 percent of the total body weight with wheat shoots, grain, corn or meal cake. Water quality is maintained in the ponds by periodic changes of water, at the beginning once or twice a
month, but increasing to three to four times a month about a month or two before spawning. Spawned fish receive special care and are reared separately. The group saw brood fish that had been used for breeding for over 12 years. Normally five- to fifteen-year-old fish are used for breeding. It was reported that fish which have been bred a few times are more responsive to hormone administration and can be bred even by the administration of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) only, except for mud carp for which it is generally ineffective and for grass carp for which it is only feebly effective. The most commonly used pituitary extract is of the common carp, but the silver carp, big head and grass carp pituitaries are also used. The HCG used is the product marketed as "gonadotropin for animals".
Fig. 2 Injection of HCG to spawn a seven-year-old brood fish
A new development in induced breeding in China is the use of the LH-RH analogue as an ovulating agent. In combination with a small dose of pituitary extract, it has been found to be very effective on all species of carp, the dose required being 1-10 mg/kg of body weight, depending on the species. Its use is still not very common in China, but the group observed the breeding of all the species of Chinese carp by the administration of ampouled LRH-A and common carp pituitary extract. It was reported that the same fish can be bred twice, or, if weather conditions are favourable, even three times during a season, at intervals of 20-30 days.
The spawning and hatchery system is simple and fairly easy to maintain, but it has the disadvantage that the monitoring of fertilization, hatching, and dead and diseased eggs, is difficult. This may account for the low rate of fertilization (60-80 percent) and hatching (40-70 percent) reported from some of the centres. It will be useful to make a comparative study of this system of breeding and larval rearing with other commonly used hatchery systems and with a system based on the Chinese design but built above ground level with fibreglass or similar material which will facilitate close monitoring.
Fig. 3 Spawning and hatching pools in the Nanhai County Fish Hatchery, Guangdong Province
Fig. 4 Cloth tank with eggs for hatching in a hatching pool, Note the circulation of water in the tank
Fig. 5 Hatching pool in the Gaungdong Provincial Research Institute. Note the sprinkler arrangement to maintain water circulation and temperature
Fig. 6 A simpler type of hatchery used in Shi Yeh Brigade in Hubei Province
The estimated production of fry in China is over 20 thousand million.^1/ Although there are some large state-owned hatcheries like the Nanhai County Fish Hatchery (in Guangdong Province) and Paitan Lake Hatchery (in Hubei Province) with a capacity of over 600 million fry per year, most of the seed production is done in individual communes and production brigades. The large central hatcheries like the one in Nanhai transport hatchlings by train or truck to different parts of the country in plastic bags filled with oxygen. Five or six-day-old larvae are sold from the Nanhai Hatchery at Yuan 3 per 10 000 and 2-3 cm fry at Yuan 19 per 10 000, plus transport charges. A critical study of the cost-efficiency of centralized hatchery operations as against farm-level seed production, has not yet been made, even though the opinion has been expressed that the former is much more economical and efficient.
^1/ Although most of it is produced in hatcheries, it was learnt during a later visit by the group leader, that some quantities are collected from the rivers. Brood fish raised from larvae or fry collected from the rivers help to reduce the genetic effects of in-breeding
Fig. 7 Fry raised in rearing tanks at Nanhai County Fish Hatchery being removed for counting and transport
5.2 Rearing of fry and fingerlings
Monoculture is usually practised for rearing fry to fingerlings. The fry are left in the hatchery tanks for three to five days before being transported to nursery ponds of 2-3 mu. The ponds are cleared to eliminate predators and treated to control infections. They are also fertilized a few days prior to stocking, with organic manures such as "tatsao" which is a traditional Chinese combination of different kinds of herbaceous plants, with soya-bean meal or soya-bean curd, and/or rice bran or peanut cake powder. The manures stimulate the growth of planktonic organisms upon which the young fry and fingerlings will feed. The stocking density varies from one farm to another, but, in all, the practice is to have a high density at the beginning to be reduced after a few days. For example, at the Ching Po County Fish Farm, a density of 100 000/mu is maintained for one week, which is reduced to 10 000/mu for the following four weeks or until the fry reach the size for transplanting
to fingerling ponds. However, at the Paitan Lake State Fish Farm, the initial stocking density of hatchlings is 70 000-80 000/mu which is reduced after ten days to 5 000/mu.
The survival rate in the stage between fry and fingerling is not very high in some of the Chinese fish farms and even the Lin Fu state-owned fish farm and hatchery, with fairly good facilities compared to commune farms, has only 30-40 percent survival rates. Hatching rates are high, reaching 80 percent, and 90 percent in many state-owned farms. However, at the Guangzhou Provincial Research Institute of Aquatic Products and Fish Breeding Farm, because of the use of poor quality river water, very low hatching rates (30-40 percent) were reported. Application of manure is carefully controlled so as not to over-fertilize as this leads to depletion of dissolved oxygen which can kill off all the fry. "Tatsao" is applied within two to three weeks of stocking of the fry of silver carp and big head at 1 300 kg/mu in ponds stocked at 10 000/mu. If the fry are weak then peanut cake is given at the rate of 0.3-1.2 kg/10 000 fry/mu, in two or four equal parts two to four times per day.
For mud carp and grass carp fry less fertilization is required and 150-200 kg/mu of "tatsao" is applied every three days, together with 1.5-2.5 kg/10 000 fry/mu daily of peanut cake or rice bran. Usually the fry will grow rapidly under this management and attain fingerling size within three to four weeks.
Fingerlings may be raised in the same fry ponds but the ponds have to be cleaned out and limed to get rid of pests and prevent disease outbreaks. Great care is taken to select healthy strong fry for stocking in fingerling ponds. The usual stocking rates in monocultures are given in Table 1.
Table 1 Stocking Rates of Fingerlings in Monoculture
Species
Fingerling size (cm)
Stocking rates/mu (No.)
Rearing period (days)
Approximate survival (%)
Transfer size (cm)
Grass carp
Grass carp
Big head
Big head
Mud carp
Mud carp
Silver carp
Silver carp
Fingerlings may also be raised in polyculture and in this case different stocking rates are used. As shown in Table 2, the growth of the fingerlings will differ; the lower stocking rates producing bigger fingerlings.
Table 2 Stocking Rates of Finger lings in Polyculture
Species
Fingerling size (cm)
Stocking rates/mu (No.)
Rearing period (months)
Approximate survival (%)
Transfer size (cm)
1 (a) Grass carp
July-January
Big head
July-January
1 (b) Grass carp
July-January
Big head
July-January
2 Grass carp
July-March
Mud carp
July-March
3 (a) Grass carp
July-January
Silver carp
July-January
3 (b) Grass carp
July-January
Silver carp
July-January
Feeding of fingerlings is done in the same way as for fry. However, more reliance is placed on artificial feeds like rice bran, soya-bean cake, peanut cakes and wine residues. Silkworm pupae, crushed snails, and fish meal, are also used with chopped soft grass and vegetable tops being added for grass carp fingerlings.
A higher survival rate (as much as 70-90 percent) is obtained in the rearing of fingerlings about 4-5 cm. However, it is stressed that success would depend on the care and attention to details essential for the proper management of fingerling ponds. These include regular close observation and care by personnel specially assigned for the purpose, to:
(i) ensure that water colour and quality are right and if fish are surfacing, taking prompt remedial action;
(ii) guarding against fish escaping owing to broken dikes or overflow of ponds after heavy rain;
(iii) adequate feeding of the fish;
(iv) cleaning of the ponds, especially the feeding places, by applying bleaching powder to sterilize the feeding areas in order to reduce the incidence of fish diseases; and
(v) preventing predation by scaring off fish-eating birds, and controlling other predatory organisms.
5.3 Rearing of fish to marketable size in ponds
5.3.1 Stocking rates
5.3.2 Fertilizing, feeding and pond management
As is well known, traditional fish farming in ponds in China is based on polyculture of compatible species of Chinese carps. By judicious combinations of silver carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix) and big head carp (Aristichthys nobilis), which feed on plankton and generally occupy the surface area, grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) and wuchan fish (Megalobrama amblycephala), which are herbivores feeding on grasses and vegetables occupying mostly the middle layers of ponds; and black carp (Mylopharyngodon piceus), crucian carp (Carassius auratus) and common carp (Cyprinus carpio) living on the bottom and feeding on detritus or benthic organisms, the Chinese farmer has been able to obtain very high rates of production.
As is only to be expected, yields vary very considerably between farms. The national average was quoted as 1 875-2 250 kg/ha (250-300 jin/mu), the production in the southern part of the country being higher. However, the more advanced communes and production brigades that the study group visited, reported much higher production. The yield data from a number of these advanced communes and state farms is summarized in Table 3. Some of the very high yields are obtained in communes that undertake fish production as the main "link" or enterprise. A very high level of inputs and constant care of stock are needed to get high production.
Fig. 8 A view of the Paitan Lake Fish Farm
The combination of species certainly contributes to high productivity. It was noticed that in some farms the number of species stocked had risen from the traditional four or five to as many as eight or nine. The new additions, although not yet widely used, are the tilapia, the white croaker and Plagiognathops microlepis. The production units appear to assume that the addition of more species would result in higher production and therefore in some places the study group was asked to suggest species that could be imported for polyculture. It is not clear that the addition of more species would contribute very substantially to increased production, as the space and resources of the ponds seem to be more or less fully utilized. It will therefore be advisable to base any further additions on more critical information on the ecology and food utilization in the ponds.
Table 3 Yields and Income from Different Types of Fish Farms visited by the Study Group
Name of commune
Per caput income
Water area
Yield of marketable fish
Fry production (millions)
Average
Maximum
(Yuan)
(ha)
(kg/ha)
A. Communes with fish as the main crop
Jiefang People's Commune
Huang Chiao People's Commune
Ho Li People's Commune
Sha Chiao People's Commune
Shihu Production Brigade - Shihu People's Commune
B. State fish farms
Ching Po County Fish Farm
Fixed wages
100+0.3 fingerlings
Nanwei County Fish Farm
Fixed wages
0.4 fingerlings
Nanhai County Hatchery and Farm
Fixed wages
Lin Fu Fish Farm
Fixed wages
40-50 +0.18 fingerlings
Paitan Lake Fish Farm
Fixed wages
C. Communes with fish farming as sideline occupation
Chen Ling People's Commune
Chang Ching People's Commune
Tang Sha People's Commune
One of the practices responsible for high productivity is multiple stocking and harvesting of ponds. Fingerlings of different sizes and species are stocked, and as the fish grow and the pond becomes crowded, the larger marketable fish are harvested and smaller fish are restocked. An example of this type of intensive polyculture was seen at the Ho Li People's Commune experimental fish farm near Wuxi. A 7.2 mu pond of 2.5-3 m depth was stocked with eight species of fish of different sizes at different times of the year. Intensive feeding was done with a mixture of crushed snails (13.2 percent), grasses (17.8 percent), rice bran and commercial feeds (1.2 percent) and fertilized water (67.8 percent), and the pond was aerated frequently. The total feed applied in the 12 months of the experiment was 827 563 jin and the total harvest of fish was 22 560.7 jin which is equivalent to a yield of 3 133.4 jin/mu or 24 850.5 kg/ha/year. In a second experimental pond of 3.3 mu under
similar management, a yield of 23 175 kg/ha/year was obtained. The results of the first experiment are presented in Table 4 showing details of stocking and harvesting.
These high yields, although only experimental results, serve to highlight the potential in this culture method. The average yield from commercial production ponds in this commune is 1 314 jin/mu or 9 855 kg/ha.
In another practice, described as "multigrade conveyor culture", the ponds are stocked with different species of fish but all of the same size, and when they reach marketable size, they are all harvested together and a new stock of fingerlings planted; generally two crops are raised annually.
The frequency of harvesting and stocking depends on the species, the size of stocked fish and the acceptable market size. At the Lin Fu State Fish Farm the study group was told that it took 14 to 15 months from hatching to produce marketable size fish. Hatching was done in May and rearing of fingerlings took eight months from the end of May to January. The fingerlings were stocked in January and harvested by June/July at an average weight of 1.5-2.0 jin. Between January and June the fingerlings grow from an average weight of 5 jin/10 000 fry to 200-300 jin/10 000 fry.
5.3.1 Stocking rates
In most of the fish farms visited by the study group very high stocking rates are followed, as can be seen from Table 5.
5.3.2 Fertilizing, feeding and pond management
Because of the high rates of stocking, very heavy fertilization and feeding are adopted in all the farms. Fertilization is invariably with organic manures, the most important of which is pig manure. The integrated type of farming in China (see pages 29-32) facilitates easy utilization of farm manure. About 75 000 jin of pig manure is used to fertilize 1 mu of fish ponds per year. Over and above this, some 50 jin of aquatic plants or 70 jin of grasses, are applied every day to feed grass carp. The "fertilized water" which consists of residues of bean curd and other wastes from food processing industries, is also used to fertilize the water at the rate of some 200 jin for every jin of silver carp. Crushed snails are provided at the rate of 40 jin for every jin of black carp to be produced. Poultry manure may also be applied where available at the rate of about 1 t/mu of pond area per year. Besides these, many farms utilize sewage also for fertilizing ponds. Latrines are still
built on ponds for direct fertilization in certain parts of Guangdong Province, but in many other areas the group visited, direct application of sewage and pig manure has been replaced by controlled fertilization with fermented excreta.
Table 4 Stocking and Harvesting Record of a 7.2 mu Experimental Fish Culture Pond in Ho Li People's Commune, Wuxi, in 1977
STOCKING
HARVEST
PERCENTAGE
Fish Species
Month
Number
Weight (Jin)
No . /mu
Total (Jin)
Weight stocked (%)
Weight harvested (%)
Silver carp
Jan.
Jan.
Aug.
Total
Big head
Jan.
Jan.
Aug.
Total
Black carp
Jan.
Jan.
Jan.
Total
Grass carp
Jan.
Jan.
Jan.
Total
Common carp
Jan.
June
Total
Wuchan fish
Jan.
Jan.
Total
Crucian carp
May
Tilapia mossambica
May
July
Total
Others
TOTAL
30 457i
* The average size of these fingerlings was 2.5 cm long, but numbers not given
** Total harvest of silver carp and big head
Table 5 Stocking Ratios and Stocking Densities of some Fish Farms in China
Fish Species
Lin Fu State Fish Farm
Shihu People's Brigade Hunan Province
Paitan Lake Fish Farm
Ho Li People's Commune (Experimental)
Silver carp: wt (%)
no./mu
Big head: wt (%)
no./mu
Grass carp: wt (%)
no. /mu
Black carp: wt (%)
no./mu
Common carp: wt (%)
no./mu
Wuchan fish: wt (%)
no. /mu
White croaker: wt (%)
no. /mu
Tilapia: wt (%)
no. /mu
Crucian carp: wt (%)
Others: wt (%)
Fig. 9 Cut grass held in an enclosure for feeding grass carp
Fig. 10 Aquatic plants being ground in a grinder and conveyed to a boat for distribution in fish ponds in Chang Chuang Production Brigade of Wu County. The boat is made of ferrocement
Fig. 11 Snails crushed on board a boat for feeding black carp
Fig. 12 Latrine built on a pond for direct fertilization in Nanhai, Guangdong Province
In some farms, aquatic plants and grass are ground before being introduced into the ponds, but this is not a widespread practice. Often a good percentage of the fodder decomposes and fertilizes the pond. In addition, an appreciable proportion of the grass eaten by the grass carp is excreted undigested or only partly digested, providing readily used fertilizer. With all this the pond becomes highly loaded with organic matter, giving rise to tenuous environmental conditions requiring constant attention to prevent gross pollution and consequent fish mortality, particularly under unfavourable weather conditions. Cognizant of this, many communes organize special training courses in pond management for farmers before the onset of the summer and rainy seasons, when such mortalities generally occur.
Some advanced communes, like the Ho Li People's Commune, have done preliminary work in the preparation and testing of compounded feeds. There is very little expertise in feed technology in the country at present and so the traditional methods of feeding and fertilizing are continued with only small improvements.
When water conditions deteriorate in ponds, especially when dissolved oxygen deficiency occurs, clean fresh water may be pumped in or, where aerators are installed, they are operated for extended periods. The use of aerators of various types has now become very widespread in most parts of the country, except in certain areas in the south, such as Guangdong Province. The relatively low cost of electricity for agricultural and fishery uses (Yuan 0.06/kWh) makes this feasible and economically acceptable under Chinese conditions in at least areas served by hydro-electric schemes. The majority of other developing countries may find it a major item of cost that would affect the economic viability of commercial fish farming, at least for the present.
See below different types of aerators in use in fish ponds a, b, c.
Fig. 13 Different types of aerators in use in fish ponds a.
Fig. 13 Different types of aerators in use in fish ponds b.
Fig. 13 Different types of aerators in use in fish ponds c.
5.4 Fish diseases and their control
As is only to be expected in such intensive systems of culture, disease is an ever-present risk. The study group found that considerable attention is devoted to disease control in research centres. Preventive measures are emphasized but local herbal, as well as chemical, products are used for treatment of diseases.
In order to prevent infection, ponds are drained and limed or treated with tea seed cake at the rate of 30 jin/mu before being filled with water. Healthy, strong and large-sized fingerlings are stocked and these are disinfected with bleaching powder solution (1 g/50 kg of water is used to disinfect 25-30 jin of fingerlings) for five minutes before stocking. The spread of disease may not occur too freely, as usually the ponds are not interconnected. Despite the direct use of sewage in ponds in some areas, there appears to be no evidence of any human diseases being transmitted, except for some reported cases of transmission of the digenetic trematode, Chlonochis sinensis, from fish to man, if raw fish is eaten. Not much critical research appears to have been done on public health hazards associated with the use of raw, or partially treated sewage in fish ponds. Human sewage constitutes almost one third of the fertilizer resources of the country and has been used in fish
culture since ancient days. Detailed research on public health aspects of sewage farming will therefore be justified and important, not only for China but also for many other countries that are trying to develop productive methods of sewage disposal.
The Institute of Hydrobiology in Hubei has done considerable work on fish diseases in China and the group was briefed on the following diseases:
(i) Stigmatosis
This is a bacterial disease caused by Pseudomonas sp., affecting silver carp and big head. It causes inflammation of the abdomen and also affects gonad development. Control and cure of this disease is by the application of bleaching powder and treatment with streptomycin.
(ii) White spot disease
This is caused by the cilliate, Icthyophthirius multifilis and affects grass carp, causing white spots on the body of the fish.
(iii) Myxosporidiasis
This is a disease affecting the goldfish, Carassius auratus, and is similar to "whirling disease" caused by Myxosoma cerebralis in Europe and the U.S.A. No cure has yet been found for this disease in China.
(iv) Disease caused by trematode parasites
This includes diseases caused by Diplostomum sp., a well-known trematode parasite with a life cycle involving aquatic birds and snails. It is controlled in China by the application of copper sulphate solution at 0.7 ppm.
(v) Disease caused by cestode parasites
An example of this is the infestation of grass carp fingerlings by Bothriocephalus sp., which in heavy infestations causes considerable mortality. A traditional treatment is with a 1:1 (by weight) mixture of powdered seeds of pumpkin and cucumber, which is spread over the affected pond.
(vi) Other diseases
The most important of these is the infection by Lernea sp. which affects the fingerlings of silver carp and other carps, the parasite being attached to the gills or body of the fish, It is controlled by bathing the fish in 0.2-0.5 ppm solution of "Dipterex" or 80-100 ppm solution of bleaching powder. It could also be controlled by bathing in a 0.1 ppm solution of potassium permanganate. The disease is known to be most common in sewage ponds.
A fungus disease caused by Saprolegnia sp. also affects a number of species. It is controlled by the application of malachite green in a 1:150 000 solution.
5.5 Design of fish farms and its significance in management
As described elsewhere in this report, most of the large fish farms are built as part of communal farming systems, usually integrated with crops and livestock production; so the design of fish farms differs in many respects from that adopted in other countries. A very striking feature is the width of dikes between ponds, which is often 10 m or more wide on the crown. Similarly the sides are also very wide. These wide areas are used for the cultivation of grass and other fish fodder, vegetables, mulberry and sometimes even trees like cedar. Pigsties are also built on the dikes. This reduces the labour involved in transporting fodder or manure from long distances. Also pond silt can be applied directly to fertilize the crops.
Fig. 14 A view of pond dike in Chang Chuang Production Brigade. Note the grass planted on the sides and slopes and mulberry on the crown
The ponds are relatively deep, in most cases 2-3 m. This is necessary for the poly-culture of various species that inhabit distinct layers in the ponds and to enable the culture of large stocks of fish. Since draining and filling of ponds are done by pumping, the maintenance of such deep ponds is not difficult and the need for sluices and other water control structures is reduced. The study group saw pond dikes lined with concrete or bricks in some farms in Guangdong and Hunan Provinces in areas where the soil is sandy or porous.
Fig. 15 A pond in the Shao Chiao People's Commune in Shunde County. Note the broad dikes planted with corn and vegetables
The ideal size of production ponds was reported to be 4-5 mu. In areas where the soil is poor and porous, ponds of 10 mu are more common. Fry and fingerling ponds are generally 2-3 mu in area. There is a tendency to build rectangular or square-shaped ponds or remodel old, irregular-shaped ones into square ponds. The construction cost of square ponds is lower than that of rectangular ones and it would appear that aeration of water by wind or aerator would be more efficient in square ponds. The regular shape of the ponds facilitates the use of motorized vehicles on the farm and the mechanization of operations.
Harvesting of ponds is generally done manually with seine nets. Commune or production brigade members, both male and female, participate in fishing, but the group observed that fishing expertise, or the efficiency of gear used, was not too high. There is considerable interest in mechanization of fishing in ponds to reduce labour, but not much has been done in this direction.
Although most of the fish farming is done in earth ponds, attempts are now being made in some places to introduce indoor intensive farming in cement tanks with heating and aeration, particularly for tilapia, which cannot withstand low temperatures.
Fig. 16 Harvesting of fish from a pond in Lin Fu State Fish Farm in Hengyang
Fig. 17 A catch of Chinese carps, wuchan fish and black bream from a fish farm
Fig. 18 An experimental indoor culture of tilapia in cement tanks
5.6 Economics of pond culture
Although the economics of individual operations are not of primary importance under Chinese conditions, the study group was able to obtain some useful information on the cost of production and profit made in certain communes and production brigades. As is only to be expected, there are considerable variations in investment and production cost per unit area. It ranged from Yuan 260/mu to Yuan 1 500/mu. The income from fish was quoted as Yuan 140/mu, as against Yuan 130/mu for rice in Shao Chiao People's Commune in Guangdong Province. In Shiyeh Commune in Xishui County, income from fish was reported to be Yuan 1 000/person as against Yuan 600/person from rice production. In Hengyang the cost of production of fish was Yuan 0.20-0.23/jin and it was sold to the state at Yuan 0.35/jin. In some of the communes the study group was told that the income from fish made it possible for them to buy agricultural machinery. Vegetable growing in suburban towns was said to be the only normal
farming activity that provided much higher income per unit area than fish.
The percentage of the components of cost of production also varies from place to place. In one of the communes, it was reported as follows:
Fry:
5 percent
Labour:
30 percent
Feed and fertilizer:
50 percent
In some the cost of fry was said to be much higher, as much as 26.5 percent and of electricity, about 14 percent.
<section>7</section>
6. INTEGRATED FARMING OF FISH, CROP AND LIVESTOCK
6.1 Nature of integration
6.2 Basis of fish, crop, and livestock combinations
6.3 Advantages of integration
6.4 Management of integrated farms
The most impressive aspect of Chinese aquaculture that the study group observed was the integration of fish farming with livestock production and farming of agricultural crops, including vegetable farming. Integrated farming is a traditional. Chinese practice and, as mentioned earlier, has in recent years been further supported by the concept of an all-round 'development of agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries and other sideline occupations. Although integrated farming is economically and environmentally sound, the motivation for integration would appear to be the national policy of diversification of production.
6.1 Nature of integration
The fish cultivated and the general farming practices are amenable to easy integration, The grass carp feeds on grass and other vegetable matter which can be grown on the dikes and adjacent agricultural land. They also feed on aquatic plants which can be raised in canals and other adjacent water bodies. Aquatic plants such as Pistia stratiotes, Eichhornia crassipes, Alternanthera phyloxorides and duck weeds, are grown for feeding fish or pigs and poultry on land. Sugar cane, corn and bananas are some of the other crops grown in association with fish farms. Ipomea aquatica, Lolium perenne, sorghum, maize and mulberry are also grown in many areas. The leaves, stalks or other waste products are chopped or crushed and fed directly to the fish or composted to be used as fertilizer. Silver carp and big head feed on plankton which can be grown by the application of organic manures provided by pigs, cattle, and chicken raised by the side of fish farms. As mentioned, pigsties are
often built on pond dikes, facilitating the application of manure, either directly or after fermentation. Duck farming in association with fish, is also reported to be practised in a few places. In areas where silk production is prevalent, mulberries are planted on the pond dikes. The silkworm pupae and other wastes are used to feed the fish. Fish pond silt is an excellent fertilizer for land crops and is commonly used by farmers. In areas without adequate irrigation, pond water may also be used for irrigating crops, when necessary. The commune or production brigade members can also be considered as an element in this type of integration and recycling, as they eat fish and other farm products and human wastes are used to fertilize ponds and crop land.
Fig. 19 Pigsty built on the embankment of the fish farm in Chang Chuang Production Brigade
Fig. 20 Inside the pigsty. Washings from the sty are led into a fermentation tank
Fig. 21 Chickens raised in association with fish and pigs in Chang Tung People's Commune near Shanghai
In Lin Fu State Fish Farm in Hengyang, farming is closely associated with a winery. Waste water from the winery goes to the fish ponds for fertilizing and feeding fish and the solid wastes are fed to the pigs. The fish and wine, of course, go to feed man! In many places fish farms are also used for the rearing of the freshwater mussels, Anodonta and Hyriopsis, for the production of pearls. The methods adopted are described in FAO Fisheries Technical Paper, No. 168.
Fig. 22 Culture of freshwater mussel for pearl production in a pond in the Nanwei County State Fish Farm
The allocation of land and water for fish, crops and livestock varies. For example, in one state farm, about 60 percent of the land was devoted to fish culture, 14 percent to pigs and cattle, 14 percent to cultivation of fodder and 10 percent to growing rice and wheat.
The experiences gained over several years of integrated farming of this type, when critically analysed and rationalized, could be of considerable value to all developing countries interested in integrated rural development. There are many aspects of such farming that are fascinating subjects for research, which, when carried out, could give a scientific understanding of the processes involved and consequently, lead to better management of the system.
6.2 Basis of fish, crop, and livestock combinations
About 20 000-25 000 jin of aquatic plants can be produced in every mu of water area and this will be enough to feed ten pigs. One mulberry tree can produce up to 270 jin of leaves. The production of sugar-cane leaves is estimated to be up to 12 000 jin per mu of land. Over 70 jin of grass or other plant material will be needed to produce 1 jin of grass carp and 200 jin of manure for producing 1 jin of silver carp of big head. Each pig produces 4 000-5 000 jin of manure a year and, based on local experience, about 3-5 pigs are grown for every mu of fish ponds. Similarly, 30 chickens are raised for every mu of fish ponds. It is estimated that a cow can produce 1 t of "manure water" per day and this is used to calculate the number of cattle to be raised. One mu of fish ponds produces 20 000-30 000 jin of silt and silt from 2 mu of fish ponds will fertilize about 1 mu of land. It should be pointed out that the above estimates are rather empirical and remain to be confirmed
through critical studies.
6.3 Advantages of integration
The advantages of integration are obvious. As far as fish production is concerned, it serves the major purpose of providing cheap feedstuffs and organic manure for the fish ponds, thereby reducing the cost and need for providing compounded fish feeds and chemical fertilizers. By reducing the cost of fertilizers and feedstuffs the overall cost of fish production is reduced and profits increased. The study group was told that the profit from fish culture is often increased 30-40 percent as a result of integration. Secondly, the overall income is increased by adding pig and/or poultry raising, grain and vegetable farming, etc., which supplement the income from fish farming. Thirdly, by producing grain, vegetables, fish and livestock products, the community becomes self-sufficient in regard to food and this contributes to a high degree of self-reliance. Fourthly, the silt from the ponds which is used to fertilize crops, increases the yield of crops at a lower cost and the need
to buy chemical fertilizer is greatly reduced. It is estimated that about one third of all the fertilizer required for farming in the country comes from fish ponds. The production of freshwater pearls in fish ponds provides one more additional source of income.
6.4 Management of integrated farms
Integrated farming calls for skill in different types of activity such as raising pigs and poultry, crop and vegetable farming, growing grass and aquatic plants and farming of fish. One person can take care of 6-8 ponds of 5-7 mu each; or 30-50 pigs or 500-1 000 chickens, but many of the activities, including harvesting, will need a large number of people. Obviously, if integrated farming has to be done on a large scale, a sufficient number of people with the required skills have to work together. The organization of production brigades and communes appears to be very well suited for the adoption of the practice. A production team may be found to be too small a unit, as was reported in Hengyang, where, with the introduction of integrated farming, the organizational and accounting unit was changed to production-brigade-level.
As pointed out earlier, the main motivation for integrated farming is the accepted national policy of all-round development, where the economic benefits of individual operations do not figure very prominently. The social and political milieu of the country is highly favourable for such development. From the limited experience in some other countries also, it appears that the introduction of integrated farming can play a major role in rural development in developing countries. However, the study group does not believe that the Chinese system can be transplanted as such to other countries. Species of fish, crops and livestock to be raised will have to be selected on the basis of local conditions and requirements. In most other developing countries the objectives of integrated farming will have to be heavily oriented to economic, social and nutritional benefits. Farmer cooperatives or other associations may have to be built up to meet the manpower requirements for economically
viable units. Suitable pilot projects will have to be designed and implemented to test the systems and based on the results of such projects, further development will have to be planned.
<section>8</section>
7. FISH CULTIVATION IN NATURAL LAKES AND RESERVOIRS
In China the lakes are categorized as large, medium and small on the basis of surface area. Large lakes are those that exceed 100 000 mu in area; medium lakes are from 10 000 mu to 100 000 mu; while small lakes are from 1 000 mu to 10 000 mu. Bodies of water less than 1 000 mu in area are considered as ponds. The study group visited one reservoir, two large natural lakes, one medium and one small lake. These lakes were of relatively shallow depth, the maximum depth averaging 4 m, while the shallowest ones were of 2 m average depth.
All the lakes, including the largest one, Taihu, were used for fish culture and were under careful management. The smallest one, Tanghu, was managed more like a large fish pond, except that it is not drained or fertilized.
The stocking of selected species of fish, usually big head, silver carp, black carp and grass carp, is a common practice. Wuchan fish, common carp, crucian carp and bream may also be stocked. Emphasis is now on stocking of large-sized fingerlings which have a higher survival rate than smaller ones. Fish 15-20 cm in length and weighing over 50 g (over five months' old) are preferred for stocking. The stocking rate in Paitan Lake is about 150 fingerlings/mu. Eradication or control of predatory fish is done in the medium- and small-sized lakes. Several blocking devices are used to prevent the escape of stocked fish into connecting rivers and streams. The water level in the lakes is maintained at around 3 m. A form of integrated production is practised even in lakes.
For example, in Paitan Lake, fish are cultivated in deep water, lotus in shallow water, rice around the edge of the lake and mulberry trees on the dikes. The income from the lake has been appreciably increased by this. The income from sideline occupations is over 20 percent of the total income of Yuan 262 000 from the lake.
In the small and medium-sized lakes (Paitan and Tanghu) fishing is done only by the state farms which manage them, while in the larger lakes fishing is open to the members of the communes that control the lake. In all cases, fishing is done by the same group of people who are responsible for stocking and management of the lakes. Such collective ownership and management ensures a highly responsible approach to the utilization of resources.
In large lakes such as Taihu, closed seasons (March to May) are observed to protect brood stocks during their breeding season and to ensure enhanced recruitment to fish populations. For those species which attach their eggs to grasses or vegetation, clumps of floating grass are anchored over large portions of Taihu, to provide favourable breeding sites and thereby increase the chances of successful spawning.
Fishing gear has been improved to facilitate harvesting lakes. Special methods have been developed to concentrate fish in portions of the lake for easy harvesting. Harmful fishing methods such as the use of poisons and explosives are forbidden. Mesh-size regulation is enforced to ensure that fish below 1 jin in weight escape capture.
In Taihu there is a provincial-level Lake Management Committee, which includes representatives of the communes and fishing brigades around the lake, and technical personnel from universities and other institutions. The task of the Committee is to review available information on the lake, including the results of culture and capture, and to use it as a basis for the management of its fisheries. In general, stocked fish under 1 jin are not allowed to be caught. In at least some areas there is now a tendency to reclaim shallow portions of lakes into large ponds for intensive fish farming.
The Hubei Hydrobiological Research Institute carries out research on the limnology and fish production in Tanghu. This work, which includes studies of ichthyomass, primary production and carrying capacity of the lake, has indicated that the lake has a potential production of 2 million jin per year, whereas the actual production in 1977 was 1.3 million jin. It has also been found that the stocking of large-sized fingerlings increases the recapture rate of stocked fish from 1 to 20 percent. In 1977, 95.5 percent of all the fish caught in Tanghu were stocked fish, only 4.5 percent belonging to natural stocks in the lake. Thus the value of culture operations has been clearly demonstrated.
Among the problems encountered in the management of small- and medium-sized lakes is the control of predatory fish such as Siniperca chautsi, Erythroculter mongolicus, and Elopicthys bambusa. Some of these predators appear in schools during the spawning season and advantage is taken of this known habit to capture them by intensive seining. Destruction of spawning grounds is another measure widely adopted for the control of predators.
Fish production per unit area from the Chinese lakes varies with the size of the lake as in other countries. This is clear from Table 6 which summarizes some of the available data on stocking and annual yields of the four lakes visited by the study group. The smallest lake, Paitan, has the highest yield of 250 kg/ha, while the largest, Taihu, has the lowest, 53 kg/ha. Fish culture is admittedly the main source of increased fish production from lakes and reservoirs in the country.
The management of freshwater reservoirs is similar to that of small-sized lakes, except that feeding, manuring and stocking rates approach the standards adopted in fish ponds, if the reservoir is small.
Only one reservoir, the Mei-chuan Reservoir, was visited by the study group. It has an area of 2 500 ha or 37 500 mu, with minimum arid maximum depths of 7.5 m and 19.5 m, respectively. The annual yield was 100 t in 1977, which gives an average yield of only 40 kg/ha. This rain-fed reservoir, although built for irrigation, also provides water for 70 mu of fish ponds and generates power for local use. Fry are reared in the fish ponds and from these 12 million fry are stocked in the reservoir annually. About 1.2 million jin of grass and pig manure are applied as fish feed and fertilizer in the reservoir and associated ponds. The main problem faced in fish production in this reservoir is the low survival of stocked fish (5-7 percent). The fingerlings stocked are only 9-12 cm and fall easy prey to predatory fish.
<section>9</section>
8. FISH FARMING IN RIVERS
As fish culture appears to be the basis for fishery development in inland waters of China, it is not surprising that methods have been evolved for farming small rivers.
In the Tang Sha People's Commune, Xinhui County in Guangdong Province, the study group saw an example of fish cultivation in rivers. The main river used is the Tiensha, which is 50 km long, with some 140 km of tributaries. Because of the large area covered, embracing several production brigades, fish cultivation in the river is done by the commune as a whole, while individual production brigades cultivate the smaller branches of the river.
The total water area used in river cultivation in this commune is 5 800 mu and the production in 1977 was 240 000 jin (i.e. 41 jin/mu), although the brigade output averaged 100 jin/mu.
The main features of river fish cultivation are:
- stocking with large-sized (over 9 cm) fingerlings:
- provision of blocking devices in tributaries and gates in the main river, allowing the passage of boats, but preventing the escape of fish;
- rearing fry in dry season pools before releasing them into the river;
- the eradication of predatory fish by selected fishing.
Table 6 Fish Production in some Chinese Freshwater Lakes in 1977
Lake/ Province
Area ha
Average Depth
Fish Stocked
No. Fingerlings Stocked
1977 Production
Average Yield/ha
(mu)
(m)
(Main Species*)
(tonnes)
Taihu
225 000 ha
Big head*
(not available)
(Jiangsu)
(3 375 000 mu)
Bream
Ting Shan
7 000 ha
Silver carp*
10 million
(Shanghai)
(105 000 mu)
Grass carp*
(16 g size)
Black carp
Big head
Mullet
Eel
Tanghu
1 467 ha
Silver carp*
4 million
(East Lake)
(22 000 mu)
Big head
(16-17 cm fingerlings)
(Hubei Province)
Grass carp
Black carp
Plagiognathops microlepis
Paitan
400 ha
Silver carp*
30 million fry
(Hubei)
(6 000 mu)
Big head*
1 million large- sized fingerlings
Bream
Crucian carp
Grass carp
Black carp
Common carp
Wuchan fish
Fig. 23 A view of the Mei-chuan Reservoir used for fish culture. Note the feeding of fish from a boat
Fig. 24 The fish farm associated with Mei-chuan Reservoir. It is used for raising fingerlings for stocking the reservoir and for production of marketable fish
Fig. 25 Blocking devices made of wood, bamboo and netting used for fish farming in rivers (a)
Fig. 25 Blocking devices made of wood, bamboo and netting used for fish farming in rivers (b)
In 1977 the following numbers of fish were stocked by the commune and brigades:
Big head
Silver carp
Grass carp
Common carp
A small number of other fish, such as wuchan fish, were also stocked. The rivers and other tributaries were not fertilized, nor was there any form of supplementary feeding. The run-off from the surrounding cultivated land enriches the river water.
Fig. 26 Fishing from the river tributary used for fish culture in Tang Sha People's Commune, Hsinhui County
The use of natural dry season pools which appear on the edge of the river during low water for cultivation of fingerlings enables the raising of large fingerlings for stocking in the river. Three- to four-day-old fry are purchased and stocked in these pools where they grow to about 300 g, before they are released into the river by the flooding of the pools during the rainy season. The survival rate of fingerlings has been estimated to be between 60 and 80 percent. Because of the success of this method, the commune plans to build additional artificial pools for fry rearing.
In all, 56 persons are engaged in river fish culture in the commune and their work includes the stocking and harvesting of fish and control of the river gates. With an annual production cost of only Yuan 6 000 and an income of about Yuan 28 000 from the harvests, river fish culture appears to be very profitable.
Although the cultivation of fish in rivers is feasible in China, there will be a number of difficulties in introducing it in other countries, which would include legal, environmental and technical problems. The collective ownership and commune system of administration make this practice possible in China.
<section>a</section>
9. MARINE AQUACULTURE
Although the study group was not able to visit any marine aquaculture centres, it was briefed on the activities in this field by Mr. Li Kemin, Head of the Marine Aquaculture Division of Guangdong Aquatic Products Bureau. Compared to freshwater fish farming, marine aquaculture is a very recent development in the country. It is still in the early stages of development, even though production of certain species like oysters and seaweeds has become substantial. All coastal provinces in China undertake marine aquaculture now, but Shandong and Liaoning Provinces are more advanced in this field. Production in 1977 was quoted as about 11 000 t and in 1978 was 12 000-13 000 tonnes.
In Guangdong Province alone over 120 000-130 000 mu of coastal waters are used for oyster farming. Bottom culture on rocks or on cement concrete slabs planted in regular rows on mud flats are used for oyster culture. Production is reported to be 300-500 jin of shucked meat per mu by rock culture and 1 000-1 500 jin per mu by slab culture. Pearl cultivation is also undertaken on a small scale by the hanging method of pearl oyster farming. Cockle farming is done on a small scale. The area utilized and production obtained are small, but income is relatively high as most of the cockles are exported to Hong Kong. Besides collection of spat, planting and protection of the environment are the major activities related to shellfish farming. The culture of different species of seaweed is expanding, but the production varies very considerably, depending on the species and area where cultivated. Shrimp culture experiments have been started in recent years, but the prevalent practice is
similar to the maintenance of "trap ponds" where juveniles are allowed to enter and grow to marketable size. In a few places along the coast young crabs are also collected and grown in ponds.
Marine aquaculture is carried out by state farms or communes and production brigades, either as the main or sideline occupation. Obviously this is an area of aquaculture in which China is not very advanced and has a lot to learn from other countries.
<section>b</section>
10. MARKETING
Since a good proportion of the population is self-sufficient, particularly in regard to food the role of marketing is relatively less significant in China. Production quotas are generally decided upon the basis of market demands. In the case of suburban communes, the magnitude, as well as the schedule of production, is determined on the basis of daily and seasonal requirements of the cities. To minimize transport problems, fish farms are located near consuming centres: where possible.
At the provincial, district and county level there is a fishery products corporation, but at commune level there is a commercial unit or marketing centre which serves each production unit. The centre has the responsibilities of buying the agreed quota of the produce, transporting it to markets, and supplying the necessary fishing gear and other farming inputs. Each year the production and commercial units concerned discuss and decide on the plans for marketing that year. The commercial units schedule marketing in such a way as to maintain steady supplies to the markets served by them from one or more production units. Members of commercial units work very closely with the production units and often those responsible for marketing may go and work with the masses in the communes or production brigades to understand their problems and to gain the necessary knowledge of field conditions for appropriate market planning.
Most of the fish produced by culture are sold in the live or fresh state. For transporting fish alive on land, canvas tanks mounted on trucks are used. In Shunde County in Guangdong Province, the study group saw the use of large boats with holds for live fish. The hull has holes on the sides for exchange of small quantities of water. Fish are sorted according to species and size and held in the holds alive. About 1 500 kg of live fish are transported every day, of which about one third is taken to a border port near Hong Kong, from where traders buy and transfer them to larger boats for transport to Hong Kong. Live fish fetch a 30-60 percent or even 100 percent higher prices and so often a commercial unit may request the producers to hold the fish in ponds on payment of agreed charges, either to regulate supplies or to meet increased demands during festivals, etc.
Fig. 27 Fish transported alive in the farm in canvas containers after capture
Fig. 28 Boats with live holds for transporting fish alive in Shunde County in Guangdong Province
Fig. 29 Fish being transferred from live hold in a boat for sale in Shunde County
The buying and selling prices of fish are fixed by the state. When a commercial unit or fish marketing company or corporation, as in the case of certain cities, enters into a contract with a production unit to purchase a given quantity of fish, the agreed price is assured. Thus stability of price is maintained.
The provision for payment of premium price as a special incentive for increased production of agricultural crops applies to a limited extent to fish also. In some areas like Shanghai and Wuxi, where there is a greater demand for fish, the state would pay higher prices for fish produced in excess of the agreed quota. But in Hengyang, if the production exceeds the agreed quota, they are given a bonus in the form of chemical fertilizers.
Fish are harvested on demand or held in special market ponds alive and delivered at agreed delivery points. In cases where fish cannot be delivered alive, dead fish may be sent on ice. Cold storages are only seldom used, and only for short periods when the weather does not permit storage of live fish.
The margin of profit taken by the sellers to cover the overhead expenses is low, as can be seen from the following data obtained in Hengyang.
Table 7 Price of Fish in Hengyang 1978 (in Yuan per jin)
Fish
Price paid to Production Units
Price at which sold to Consumers
Margin of Profit of Commercial Units
Grass carp and crucian carp
Big head
Silver carp
White croaker
The price of fish is not the same in all markets. In cities and industrial areas, they tend to be higher than in the rural areas, as can be seen from the following information obtained by the group:
Table 8 Price of Fish in some City Markets 1978 (in Yuan per jin)
Fish
Guangzhou (Shunde County) Suburban Market
Shanghai City Market
Grass carp
Black carp
Silver carp
There are considerable regional differences in fish consumption within the country. Generally speaking, more fish is consumed in the south than in the north. It is reported that people in Shanxi Province do not eat fish.
<section>c</section>
11. EDUCATION AND TRAINING
11.1 Vocational training
11.2 Secondary technical school training
11.3 Education and training at universities and colleges of agriculture
Three basic types and levels of training for fisheries workers were observed by the study group. These were: vocational training for fish farmers at the grass-root level; training of middle-level fisheries technicians at secondary technical schools; and thirdly, education and training at university, agricultural and fisheries colleges.
11.1 Vocational training
At the lowest level is the vocational type of training which is more or less training on-the-job with short periods of institutionalized training given in the communes or at an institute by staff of universities, institutes or technicians from the Bureau of Aquatic Products. The short courses may last from a few weeks to three months, and they are usually organized for experienced fish farmers from the communes who need updating in theoretical knowledge and new techniques. The three-month courses organized by the Sun Yat Sen University are very popular and the trainees, on return to their communes and production brigades, become focal points for contacts with scientists and teachers in the university or institute that offered the training. Shorter courses of a few weeks are usually held during or before particular seasonal activities, such as fish breeding or disease control, are undertaken. The course is run in the commune for the fish farmers who are taught the correct
practices for immediate application in their farms.
Fig. 30 A view of a short training course in session at the Ho Li People's Commune for fish farmers
11.2 Secondary technical school training
The secondary and higher level of training is offered at the fisheries secondary technical colleges. At these institutions, fisheries junior technicians and professional fisheries workers who will become active members of fish cultural groups in the communes, are trained. For example, the Guangzhou Aquaculture Products Secondary School offers a three-year course in fisheries in which fisheries technicians are trained. The trainees for the secondary technical college are junior middle-school graduates who have to pass an entrance examination. Youths from fish-producing areas with proven interest in fisheries work are usually given preference, to ensure that on completion of training, they will have opportunities of engaging themselves in fisheries work.
11.3 Education and training at universities and colleges of agriculture
At the highest level are the four-year courses run by colleges of agriculture and fisheries and at universities. The Guangzhou Aquatic Products College (Guangdong Province), Hua Chung Agriculture College (Hubei Province) and the Sun Yat Sen University, which were visited by the study group, run four-year courses for fisheries professionals. The courses run at the university are equivalent to B.Sc. degree courses and it was explained that the difference between the university course and those of technical colleges is that the university students have more in-depth theoretical training while the technical colleges lay more emphasis on practical fish farming. The best of the university graduates as well as those from agricultural colleges may continue with post-graduate research although higher degrees, as known in other parts of the world, are not awarded. When they complete their studies: the Central Government usually assigns them to a job and place of work. Those with
research qualifications become lecturers and professors at universities or colleges of agriculture. The graduates of the four-year courses from colleges of agriculture could be assigned to work as senior technicians in the communes, or in research institutes. Bureaux of Aquatic Products or as teachers in technical schools. The remuneration is the same for graduates from universities and colleges of agriculture. Also the entrance requirements to the two institutions are identical. Only graduates of senior middle school are allowed to take the entrance examination to these institutions of higher learning. Although candidates are free to select the institution of their liking, the successful candidates are chosen not only on the basis of their academic performance in the entrance examination, but also on being found morally and physically suitable. They must also possess a high degree of political consciousness so that after graduation they will serve the people and engage in
physical labour with the masses.
At the Hua Chung Agriculture College, the study group visited the Fisheries Department, which trains high-level fisheries technicians. Apart from a four-year course, the College also offers a short one-year course which is run specially for the Ministry of Agriculture. A similar one-year course was also being run at the Sun Yat Sen University in Guangzhou, mainly for officers of the Bureau of Aquatic Products and middle-level technicians from the communes. It is designed to improve the technical knowledge of cadres who are assigned fisheries duties in the communes.
In the four-year fisheries course at the Hua Chung Agriculture College, a total of 23 subjects are taught. They include basic science subjects taught in the earlier years of the course, such as mathematics, physics and chemistry; special fisheries subjects taught include icthyology, freshwater biology, fish physiology, fish culture in ponds and in large water bodies, fish breeding, fish diseases, freshwater fish capture and fish culture engineering. General courses included are politics, foreign languages (mainly English) and physical education.
At the Zoology Department of Sun Yat Sen University, the course convent of the four-year university course in fisheries was said to be divided into two parts. The first three years are devoted to detailed theoretical studies involving four main subjects: icthyology, hydrobiology, diseases of fish and the biology of cultured fish. In the fourth year the students carry out practical projects and are expected to write a dissertation at the end of the course.
The University also used to run two- to three-year post-graduate research courses for a qualification equivalent to a M.Sc. degree, but this was discontinued some years ago.
In all the higher institutions of learning visited, the group was told about the harm done to scientific education and training under the influence of the "gang of four". For example, the Hua Chung Agriculture College was unable to admit students in 1975 and 1976 and at the Sun Yat Sen University, entrance examinations were not held for a period of ten years. Things have changed for the better during the last two years. There is now a resurgence of activity and enthusiasm in the pursuit of scientific and technological knowledge all over China, following the new policy aimed at modernizing agriculture, industry, national defence and science and technology, so as to make China a great socialist nation before the turn of the century. To achieve this, the training of scientists and technologists and advanced scientific research are considered essential.
<section>d</section>
12. FISHERIES RESEARCH
12.1 Organization of research
12.2 Shanghai Institute of Aquatic Products
12.3 Guangzhou Provincial Fisheries Research Institute of Aquatic Products and FAO/UNDP Training Course
12.4 Hubei Hydrobiological Research Institute
According to Gu Sandun (1975)^1^/, China has about 1 600 research institutes and academies, and each of the 27 provinces is said to have at least one institute of zoology or fisheries, and a museum where scientific and cultural materials are preserved and displayed. Until recently, research on biology of fish was directed at the national level by two organizations: the Academia Sinica and the Department of Fisheries under the Ministry of Agriculture. In the last few years, however, there has been a considerable amount of decentralization with more provincial research institutes having a great deal of autonomy in their work. After a period of general discouragement of scientific research, and the placement of research workers in communes and production brigades to work with the farmers, the research institutions were in a state of reorganization when the study group was in China.^2^/The study group was therefore able to visit very few research institutions and even from these
the information available was limited and not too definitive as regards future policy and plans. Nevertheless the group obtained a general idea of how research in fisheries is organized, the basis of selection of research topics and some of the on-going lines of research.
^1^/ Gu Sandun (1975), Fish Biology in China. Copeia, 1975, No. 2, pp. 404-12
^2^/ During a later visit of the group leader to China, he was informed that two new research stations concerned with aquaculture have been started, viz., the Taihu Fish Stocking Research Station in Wuxi and the Buo-Hai Gulf Aquaculture and Fish Stocking Research Project in Yian Tan in Shandong Province
12.1 Organization of research
Fisheries research is carried out in research institutes of the Bureau of Aquatic Products, in state-owned experimental fish farms, in central and provincial government universities and in colleges of agriculture and fisheries, and even at the grass-root levels by the so-called three-in-one groups of scientific experiments. Research in fisheries is largely of an applied nature aimed at solving practical problems of fish production and increasing productivity. This is in keeping with the policy laid down by Chairman Mao, that "scientific research must serve production". The academic interests of the scientists take second place, although they are not altogether neglected, because it is also accepted that basic research will help to advance performance in production in the long run.
Scientists are required to participate in productive labour with fish farmers and other workers so that they will learn at first hand the problems faced in production in the field and share experiences with the ordinary worker. Scientists, like other workers, have to behave, not like elites in ivory towers, but to participate in the production front in their specialized fields. This attempt to educate people to realize the quality between intellectual and physical work is part of the philosophy that is stressed everywhere.
The high priority now being accorded to scientific and technological endeavours arises from the determination of the new Chinese leadership to modernize their country before the end of this century. In a speech at the opening ceremony of the National Science Conference in Beijing on 18 March 1978, the Vice-Chairman, Mr. Deng Xiaoping, emphasized the role of scientists and technologists in achieving the national goals of the "four modernizations" in the following words: "To catch up and surpass advanced world levels within the century means that we should cover the distance in the next 22 years that it took others 40-50 years or more to cover. Scientists and technicians should concentrate their energy on scientific and technical work and the minimum demand is that five sixths of their work should be left free for scientific and technical work. The crux of the four modernizations is the mastery of modern science and technology."^1^/ Research in fisheries can now be expected to
be given the support that was lacking for a long time.
^1^/ Peking Review, Vol. 21, No. 12, 24 March 1978
The study group obtained a general idea of on-going research in fisheries during visits to the Shanghai Institute of Aquatic Products, the Guangzhou Provincial Fisheries Research Institute and Experimental Freshwater Fish Breeding Farm^2/ and the Hubei Hydrobiological Research Institute. In all these research institutions, research emphasis appears to be on the following areas:
- productivity studies on lakes, rivers, reservoirs and fish ponds, and assessment of carrying capacity, population densities, biology of cultivated species and measures for increasing fish production;
- research on introduction of new cultured species, genetic studies for stock improvement, developing hybrid fish resistant to certain diseases or faster-growing strains of cultured fish;
- research on diseases of cultured fish, their prevention, control and treatment - this is given prominence due to the prevalence of fish disease in Chinese fish culture;
- pollution studies, such as pollution ecology, toxicology and disposal of industrial wastes and sewage, especially as they affect fish production in fresh waters.
^2^/ This institute has since been divided into two: the Tsu Kiang Research Institute, dealing with freshwater fisheries and the South Sea Fishery Institute, dealing with marine fisheries
The group observed that little or no work was being done on fish feeds and fish nutrition although Prof. Liao Hsianghao of the Department of Zoology, Sun Yat Sen University, indicated that some work in this area is expected to be initiated soon.
12.2 Shanghai Institute of Aquatic Products^3/
^3^/ It is understood that the name has now been changed to the Eastern Sea Fishery Institute
Established in 1958, the Institute is run under the Bureau of Aquatic Products, with a staff of 300, of which 120 are university or college of agriculture graduates. There are five specialized departments, viz., fishing gear technology, fish processing, icthyology, taxonomy, and freshwater fish cultivation. The freshwater fish cultivation department works mainly on the fishery resources of Ting Shan Lake and the estuaries of River Yangtze, including the effect of dams on the fish production in the river. Proposed studies on aquaculture include work on the major Chinese carps, the introduction of new species for culture, induced breeding, the role of aerators in fish production in ponds, cage culture and the use of warm water effluents from industries to ensure high production in fish ponds. The Institute has a large collection of fish in their museum.
Apart from purely research functions, the Shanghai Institute of Aquatic Products, like other similar institutes elsewhere, offers technical advice and training on prevention and cure of fish diseases, artificial propagation and other aspects of fish culture to the communes within its area. Short-term training is given for technicians from commune fish farms. The scientists also often participate in actual fish production in farms to demonstrate new techniques. During such work with the farmers the scientists learn at first hand the problems encountered in production and are able to gear their research to solving such problems.
12.3 Guangzhou Provincial Fisheries Research Institute of Aquatic Products and FAO/UNDP Training Course
The FAO Training Course on Aquaculture in Guangzhou is run by the Guangzhou Provincial Fisheries Research Institute and the Experimental Freshwater Fish Breeding Farm. At the time of the study group's visit, 19 Bangladesh trainees were at the training centre undergoing a course in artificial propagation of farm fish. The four-month course covers four aspects: techniques of artificial propagation; rearing of fry and fingerlings; cultivation of adult fish in ponds, and the prevention of fish diseases.
The trainees interviewed expressed general satisfaction with the course, but had language problems, as they had to use interpreters, which made lectures very slow.
Practical training in fish farming is provided at the Experimental Freshwater Fish Breeding Farm nearby where there are 200 mu of fish ponds. The lecturers for the FAO course are drawn from neighbouring higher institutions as well as from the Guangzhou Provincial Fisheries Research Institute and Experimental Freshwater Fish Breeding Farm, and emphasis is placed on practical work.
12.4 Hubei Hydrobiological Research Institute
This Institute at Hubei, which was built in 1950 with an initial staff of 30, has grown into one of the best research institutes in fisheries in China. It has a staff strength of 385, of which 204 are scientific personnel, 31 of professor and assistant professor rank. The Institute has six research laboratories, each with specific research functions:
Ichthyology Laboratory: This laboratory deals with fish taxonomy and ecology. There is a good collection of freshwater fish in the museum representing most of the 750 species found in China. A book on the "Fish of the Yangtze River" has been published by this laboratory.
Genetics Laboratory: The main work of this laboratory at present relates to induced breeding and physiology of fish, especially cultured fish. Success was achieved recently in breeding Plagiognathops microlepis which has now been introduced for fish culture in 19 provinces. Genetic studies are being carried out with promising results on cross-breeding of male mirror carp with female red variety of common carp, and of wuchan fish with grass carp to produce improved varieties.
Fish Disease Laboratory: Research on various fish diseases, their prevention, cure and control is carried out in this laboratory. Work has been done on ten common fish diseases in China, including gill rot, whitehead and white spot diseases and haemorrhage of grass carp. "A Monograph of Pathogenic Fauna and Flora of Fish Diseases" and "Handbook on Prevention and Cure of Fish Diseases" are two of the important works published.
Lakes and Reservoirs Laboratory: In this laboratory, research on biological productivity of water bodies is studied with the aim of evolving measures for increasing fish production. Research is also done on the control of predatory fish in reservoirs. Two monographs have been published, viz., "Chinese Freshwater Rotifers" and "Chinese Freshwater Cladocera".
Phycology Laboratory: Studies on freshwater algae, including taxonomy, ecology, and physiology and genetics, are done here. The laboratory carries out work on nitrogen-fixing algae, especially blue-green algae and their culture in rice fields as a source of fertilizer. A monograph, "Chinese Edogoneacea" has been published.
Environmental Protection Laboratory: This laboratory is concerned with studies on pollution, ecology and toxicology, with special reference to the treatment and disposal of industrial effluents and sewage.
The journal, "Acta Hydrobiologica Sinica", is published by the Institute. The institute is currently funded by the provincial government, but previously belonged to the group of institutes controlled by Academia Sinica.^1^/ There used to be a research advisory board, comprising representatives of the institute and other important research institutes and universities which, although abandoned during the years of the "gang of four" influence, has now been restored.
^1^/ It is understood that the institute has since been transferred back to the control of Academia Sinica
<section>e</section>
13. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
(i) As mentioned on page 1 the tour was organized for the purpose of observing the organization and practices followed in aquaculture in China and determining their applicability in the participating countries. The participants were able to see some of the most successful aquaculture projects and were greatly impressed by the high production obtained in freshwater fish culture. Although still largely based on traditional practices, many, new innovations have been introduced with remarkable success. Polyculture and multiple stocking and cropping are probably the main reasons for this success. The applicability of these practices in other countries will, to a large extent, depend on the species cultivated and the consumers' acceptance of herbivorous and omnivorous species which form the main constituents of the polyculture system. In cases where a species has to be grown on complete feeds, opportunities for polyculture may be limited. However, stock manipulation through
multiple stocking and harvesting can be more widely applied and with considerable advantage.
(ii) Fish-crop-livestock integrated farming is the most striking feature of Chinese farming and this can have considerable significance in rural development in many developing countries. However, it may not be possible to transplant the system as such to other countries with different social and political conditions. Based generally on Chinese concepts, appropriate forms of integration and motivation and feasible systems of management suitable to different countries have to be developed through pilot operations. It is recommended that at least the countries that participated in the study group formulate and implement pilot projects in suitable areas to test the feasibility of such integrated farming and to evaluate the extent and nature of benefits that would accrue under different conditions. In order to gain the necessary in-depth knowledge for planning and executing pilot projects, a small number of senior technicians with broad-based experience, should be trained at a
suitable centre in China.
(iii) Since the concept of integrated farming of fish, crop and livestock may have application in many developing countries throughout the world, compilation and analysis of Chinese experience in this field will be of great value. There are a number of aspects of the integrated system that call for critical research for scientific understanding of the processes and possible upgrading of practices.
(iv) The planning and organization of aquaculture development in China is naturally adapted to the social and political systems of the country. There are major difficulties in adopting them in different administrative and socio-political conditions in most other countries that participated in the study group. However, it should be possible to apply some of the strong points of Chinese aquaculture planning and organization through the cooperative system being tried in many developing countries. A favourable rate of return on investment will be a major concern even for cooperatives. This will be the primary consideration for private sector investment in aquaculture, which will probably be the most feasible means of large-scale development in the majority of developing countries.
(v) The Chinese experience has clearly shown that aquaculture techniques can be successfully applied in lake and reservoir fishery development. The report of the FAO Fisheries (Aquaculture) Mission to China (FAO Fisheries Technical Paper, No. 168) refers to some of the environmental problems involved. Many developing countries are now engaged in the utilization of man-made lakes and other large inland water bodies for fish production. The Chinese experience would provide the basis for some of the aspects of inland fishery development.
(vi) As mentioned earlier in this report, artificial propagation of Chinese carps and large-scale production of fry and fingerlings are two of the major developments in Chinese fish culture in recent years. Although capable of improvement, the hatchery system adopted in the country is simple and adequate. The on-going training programme sponsored by FAO and UNDP in Guangzhou for technicians from Bangladesh, concentrates on fish breeding and fry production. Although the direct application of the technique may be limited only to countries where Chinese carps are cultured, it would be of interest in connexion with the breeding of some of the other cultivated fish that do not breed in confined waters. Participants in the study group therefore felt that the training course should be made regional in nature. It will be useful to continue the course for a few more years, till an adequate number of technicians from countries of the Asian region have familiarized themselves with
the technique and are able to undertake comparative studies of its efficiency.
(vii) The Chinese hosts repeatedly asked for suggestions and criticisms of their activities. Some of the members of the group provided as much information as possible about developments in other countries and practices that may have application in China. There is apparently much that Chinese workers could learn from other countries in respect of marine aquaculture and certain types of freshwater fish culture, such as cage and pen culture and raceway and recirculating system culture. Since aquaculture .research is now being resumed and expanded in many institutions in the country, the scientists will greatly benefit by visits to research centres abroad to acquaint themselves with recent developments and to establish necessary contacts with other scientists. The group would therefore recommend the organization of a study tour for selected scientists and senior technicians to visit selected institutions and aquaculture centres abroad.
(viii) As is evident from the foregoing pages of the report, the study tour proved of great value to the participants in obtaining a first-hand knowledge of aquaculture development in China and possibilities for the application of their practices in other countries. Due to problems of interpretation, this tour was limited to selected English-speaking countries of Asia and Africa. It is recommended that similar tours be organized for Spanish-speaking and possibly French-speaking countries.
<section>f</section>
Appendix 1 - List of participants
AQUACULTURE STUDY TOUR, CHINA 2 MAY-1 JUNE 1978
Country
Name
Designation
Burma
Mr. Maung Maung Kyi
General Manager People's Pearl and Fishery Corporation
Rangoon
Arab Republic of Egypt
Mr. Samir Mahmoud Hamdy
Director Aquaculture Development Project Aquaculture Resources Department Ministry of Agriculture
Cairo
Mr. Nabil Riahd Bassily
Aquaculture Engineer Aquatic Resources Department Ministry of Agriculture
Cairo
India
Dr. V.D. Singh
Deputy -Commissioner (Fisheries Planning) Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
New Delhi
Dr. Y.R. Tripathi
Director of Fisheries Government of Uttar Pradesh
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
Malaysia
Mr. Ong Kah Sin
Senior Fisheries Officer (Aquaculture) Fisheries Research Institute
Penang
Nepal
Mr. K.G. Rajbanshi
Fisheries Development Officer Department of Agriculture
Pulchowk
Lalitpur
Kathmandu
Nigeria
Mr. J.A. Gaffar
Principal Fisheries Officer Department of Fisheries
Lagos
Mr. V.O. Sagua
Director Kainji Lake Research Institute
New Bussa
Pakistan
Dr. Yakub Javed
Director of Fisheries Government of Punjab
Lahore
The Philippines
Mr. Felix R. Gonzales
Director Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
Manila
Sri Lanka
Mr. K.E.J.E. Fernando
Director of Development Ministry of Fisheries
Colombo
Tanzania
Mr. G.K. Libaba
Director of Fisheries Fisheries Division Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism
Dar-es-Salaam
Mr. J.C.L. Mtolela
Assistant Fisheries Officer
Mwanza
Thailand
Mr. Umpol Pongsuwana
Director Brackishwater Fisheries Division Department of Fisheries Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok
Mr. Ariya Sidthimunka
Director Freshwater Fisheries Division Department of Fisheries Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok
FAO, Rome
Dr. T.V.R. Pillay
Programme Leader Inter-regional Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
Mr. N. Kojima
Director of Operations Fisheries Department
<section>g</section>
Appendix 2 - Itinerary of the study group
30 April 1978 (Sunday)
Beijing
Arrival of participants
Morning
Discussion of itinerary with International Division, Bureau of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Afternoon
General briefing on aquaculture in China by Directorate of Freshwater Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture
Banquet by the Vice Minister for Agriculture and Forestry
1 May 1978 (Monday)
Beijing
May Day celebrations and visit to Summer Palace
2 May 1978 (Tuesday)
Beijing
Visit to Great Wall and Ming Tombs
3 May 1978 (Wednesday)
Morning
Arrival Shanghai
Afternoon
Discussion of itinerary with Bureau of Aquatic Products.
Briefing on organization of aquaculture in Shanghai
4 May 1978 (Thursday)
Qingpu County
Morning
Ting Shan Lake and Liberation People's Commune
Afternoon
County State Fish Farm
5 May 1978 (Friday)
Jiading County
Morning
Chang Tung People's Commune
Afternoon
Nanwei County State Fish Farm
Evening
Banquet by Director, Bureau of Aquatic Products
6 May 1978 (Saturday
Shanghai
Morning
Fish Processing Factory of the Bureau of Aquatic Products
Afternoon
Shanghai Institute of Aquatic Products Research
Evening
Acrobatic Show
7 May 1978 (Sunday)
Shanghai
Morning
Visit to a fish, meat and vegetable market and Industrial Exhibition
Afternoon
Departure for Suzhou
Arrival Suzhou
Evening
Banquet by Director of Agriculture
8 May 1978 (Monday)
Wu County
Morning
Huang Chiao People's Commune
and Afternoon
Chang Chuang Production Brigade
Evening
Movie - "The Dream of Red Mansions"
9 May 1978 (Tuesday)
Suzhou
Chang Ching People's Commune
10 May 1978 (Wednesday)
Morning
Arrival Wuxi
Ho Li People's Commune
Afternoon
Taihu Lake
Evening
Song and dance performance by children
11 May 1978 (Thursday)
Wuxi
(a) Inspection of short-term training course on water quality improvement
(b) Ho Li People's Commune Banquet by Chairman, Revolutionary Committee of Suburban Area
Evening
12 May 1978 (Friday)
Morning
Return to Shanghai
Afternoon
Departure for Guangzhou
Arrival Guangzhou
13 May 1978 (Saturday)
Guangzhou
Morning
Discussion of programme with the Bureau of Aquatic Products
Afternoon
Guangzhou Export Commodities Fair
Evening
Banquet by Deputy Director, Bureau of Aquatic Products
14 May 1978 (Sunday)
Shunde County
Morning
Sha Chiao People's Commune
Afternoon
Sha Pian Production Brigade
Stay overnight at Hsi Chiao Hill
15 May 1978 (Monday)
Nanhai County
Nanhai County Hatchery
16 May 1978 (Tuesday)
Xinhui County
Tang Sha People's Commune
17 May 1978 (Wednesday)
Guangzhou
Morning
Guangzhou Provincial Research Institute of Aquatic Products and Fish Breeding Farm and FAO/UNDP Training Course
Afternoon
Sun Yat Sen University, Department of Biology
Evening
Documentary films on marine aquaculture and fisheries
18 May 1978 (Thursday)
Guangzhou
Morning
Afternoon
Briefing on Marine Aquaculture by the Bureau of Aquatic Products
Departure for Hengyang
19 May 1978 (Friday)
Arrival Hengyang
Morning
Briefing on aquaculture
Afternoon
Lin Fu State Fish Farm
Evening
Banquet by Deputy Director of Agriculture Bureau
20 May 1978 (Saturday)
Morning
Shihu People's Commune
Afternoon
Shihu Production Brigade
21 May 1978 (Sunday)
Morning
Leave for Changsha
Afternoon
Arrival Changsha
Evening
Visit to Hunan Museum Opera - "The Smash of Tienmen Formation"
22 May 1978 (Monday)
Visit to Shaoshan
23 May 1978 (Tuesday)
Morning
Departure for Wuhan
Afternoon
Arrival Wuhan
Briefing on Hubei Province Freshwater' Fisheries
Evening
Banquet by Deputy Director, Bureau of Aquatic Products
24 May 1978 (Wednesday)
Guangji County
Mei-chuan Reservoir
Evening
Movie - "Wild Pig Forest"
Stay overnight
25 May 1978 (Thursday)
Xishui County
Morning
October (Shi yeh) Brigade, October Commune
Afternoon
Huang gang County
Paitan Lake State Fish Farm
Evening
Chinese Movie - "Red Guards on the Hunghu Lake"
Stay overnight
26 May 1978 (Friday)
Paitan Lake State Fish Farm
Return to Wuhan
27 May 1978 (Saturday)
Wuhan
Morning
Hubei Hydrobiological Research Institute, Hubei Province
Afternoon
Hua Chung Agriculture College, Hubei Province
Evening
Opera - 'Red Lantern Society'
28 May 1978 (Sunday)
Wuhan
Morning
Tanghu Lake State Fish Farm (East Lake)
Afternoon
Leave for Beijing
Evening
Arrival in Beijing
29 May 1978 (Monday)
Beijing
Discussion on findings of the study group
Report drafting
30 May 1978 (Tuesday)
Beijing
Visit to the Forbidden City
Return banquet for the Vice-Minister for Agriculture and Forestry and other senior officials of the Ministry
31 May 1978 (Wednesday)
Beijing
Morning
Visit to Chairman Mao's Mausoleum and to the Heavenly Temple Discussion of summary report
Afternoon
Discussion with Mr. Li Yungkai, Director, Bureau of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture
1-2 June 1978 (Thursday-Friday)
Departure of participants
<section>h</section>
Appendix 3 - Persons met by the study group
30 April 1978 (Sunday)
Beijing
Mr. Xiao Peng
Vice Minister, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF)
Mr. Chang Yangchung
Director of Bureau of Freshwater Fisheries, (MAF)
Mr. Sun Chiayi
Deputy Director, Bureau of Freshwater Fisheries, (MAF)
Mr. Wang Shaoju
Director of International Division, Bureau of Foreign Affairs (MAF)
3 May 1978 (Wednesday)
Shanghai
Mr. Kao Kengchiao
Director of Freshwater Division, Bureau of Aquatic Products
Mr. Chen Holi
Deputy Director, as above
Mr. Yan Tsengfu
Deputy Director, Shanghai Institute of Aquatic Products Research
Mr. Chen Liang
Official of the Bureau of Aquatic Products
Mr. Lin
Official of the Aquaculture Bureau of Aquatic Products
Mr. Shia Yingliang
Official of the Shanghai Institute of Aquatic Products Research
4 May (Thursday)
Qingpu County
Liberation People's Commune
Deputy Director Revolutionary Committee
Mr. Li Lianpin
Mr. Ku Chushi
Member of Revolutionary Committee
Mr. Ku Jianhua
Member of Revolutionary Committee
Mr. Chuang Shewei
Leader, County State Fish Farm
5 May 1978 (Friday)
Jiading County
Chang Tung People's Commune
Mr. Cheng Shulung
Chairman, Revolutionary Committee
Mr. Guang Sichang
Member of Revolutionary Committee
Mr. Shou Genshan
Member of Revolutionary Committee
Nanwei County State Fish Farm
Mr. Sung Lungguan
Leading member
Mr. Huau Yungching
Manager
6 May 1978 (Saturday)
Fish Processing Factory, Shanghai
Mr. Wang Yieyu
Leading member
Mr. Shan Tusen
Leading member
Mr. Chang Podu
Group leader of technicians
Mr. Chin Yunken
Deputy Director,- Refrigeration Plant
Mr. Yie Shinghai
Director, Food Processing
Mr. Chen Shinzhao
Deputy Director, Fish Liver Oil
Shanghai Institute of Aquatic Products Research
Mr. Tao Chishih
Deputy Director
Mr. Kao Nansin
Leader Scientific Study Group
Mr. Wang Hsijun
Leading member Fish Culture Department
Mr. Chow Chuanyin
Research fellow Resources Evaluation Department
Mr. Wang Yuhuai
Research fellow
7 May 1978 (Sunday)
Mr. Tang
Deputy Director, Agriculture Bureau of Suzhou
Mr. Fan Lingyun
Director, Bureau of Aquatic Products, Wu County
Mr. Yiao Ya
Technician, Bureau of Aquatic Products, Wu County
8 May 1978 (Monday)
Wu County
Huang Chiao People's Commune, Chang Chuang Brigade
Mr. Yao Kenglin
Chairman
Mr. Lo Ehhan
Deputy Chairman
9 May 1978 (Tuesday)
Suzhou
Chang Ching People's Commune
Mr. Tao Chinlong
Vice-Chairman of Revolutionary Committee
Mr. Ke Shelian
Group Leader for Diversification
Mr. Shen Pinsu
Secretary
10 May 1978 (Wednesday)
Wuxi
Mr. Wu Zhao
Chairman, Revolutionary Committee of Suburban Area
Mr. Guo Chaiping
Director, Aquatic Products Division of Revolutionary Committee
Mr. Tang Sunnau
Technician
Mr. Kiang Chi Chang
Division of Foreign Affairs of the Committee
Mr. Chu Baoming
Division of Foreign Affairs of the Committee
Mr. Si Chauku
Division of Foreign Affairs of the Committee
Ho Li People's Commune
Mr. Liu Weiping
Chairman
Mr. Sheng Chongyen
Technician
Mr. Wang Wu
Technician
Mr. Dou Yibai
Technician of Aquatic Products Division
13 May 1978 (Saturday)'
Guangzhou
Mr. Sun Hsiaomin
Deputy Director, Aquatic Products Bureau of Guangdong Province
Mr . Kuo Lin
Section Chief, Aquatic Products Bureau of Guangdong Province
Mr. Yeh Huanchiang
Staff, Aquatic Products Bureau of Guangdong Province
Mr. Fang Tinglurai
Staff, Aquatic Products Bureau of Guangdong Province
Mr. Kuo Fu
Director of Fish Breeding Section, Aquatic Products Bureau of Guangdong Province
Mr. Feng Kuocheu
Leader of Technical Division, Aquatic Products Bureau of Guangdong Province
Mr. Chiang Chaichin
Foreign Affairs Bureau of Guangdong Province
14 May 1978 (Sunday)
Shunde County
Sha Chiao People's Commune
Mr. Ho Shunfa
Chairman of Revolutionary Committee of County
Mr. Ho Chensung
Leader of Fishery Management, Revolutionary Committee of County
15 May 1978 (Monday)
Nanhai County
Nanhai County Hatchery
Mr. Fu Hsianglung
Manager
Mr. Tao Tiengung
Deputy Manager
Mr. Liu Changhuang
Technician
Mr. Lao Chihning
Technician
16 May 1978 (Tuesday)
Xinhui County
Tang Sha People' s Commune
Mr. Huang Peitao
Deputy Director, Aquatic Products Bureau
Mr. Yeh Chunchien
Chairman, Revolutionary Committee
Mrs. Kuo Aihua
Deputy Director of Foreign Affairs
17 May 1978 (Wednesday)
Guangzhou
Guangzhou Provincial Research
Institute of Aquatic Products and Fish Breeding Farm
Mr. Mao Chenhua
Director of Training Department
Prof. Cheng Lin
Deputy Director of Training Department
Mr. Wu Kuolun
Deputy Director of Training Department
Mr. Tseng Vhupian
Manager
Miss Shih Kwangpi
Interpreter
Prof. Liao Hsianghao
Department of Zoology, Sun Yat Sen University
18 May 1978 (Thursday)
Guangzhou
Mr. Li Kemin
Head of Marine Aquaculture Division, Aquaculture Department of Aquatic Products Bureau of Guangdong Province
19 May 1978 (Friday)
Hengyang
Mr. Tseng Kwangcheng
Deputy Director, Agriculture Bureau, Revolutionary Committee of Hunan Province
Mr. Tsang Hungtao
Deputy Director, Fisheries Division, Revolutionary Committee of Hunan Province
Mr. Shen Hsihhsiao
Director, Bureau of Non-Staple Food Products of Hengyang City Revolutionary Committee
Mr. Chen Chien
Director, Foreign Affairs, Bureau of Non-Staple Food Products of Hengyang City Revolutionary Committee
Mr. Wang Tanyuan
Technician, Bureau of Non-Staple Food Products of Hengyang City Revolutionary Committee
Mr. Yeh Helin
Technician, Agriculture Bureau of Hunan Province
Lin Fu State Fish Farm
Mr. Chai Yuchih
Manager
20 May 1978 (Saturday)
Hengyang
Shihu People's Commune, Shihu
Production Brigade
Mr. Luoyn Hsien
Manager of Brigade
Mr. Tsia Hsienkuo
Chairman of Commune's Revolutionary Committee
23 May 1978 (Tuesday)
Wuhan
Mr. Ma Chimin
Deputy Director, Bureau of Aquatic Products, Hubei Province
Mr. Liu Wei
Director, General Office, Bureau of Aquatic Products, Hubei Province
Mr. Chu Chonghuai
Staff member. Bureau of Aquatic Products, Hubei Province
Mr. Kao Tsehsung
Staff member. Bureau of Aquatic Products, Hubei Province
Mr. Chou Hocheng
Staff member. Bureau of Aquatic Products, Hubei Province
Mr. Chao Kuangfu
Staff member. Bureau of Aquatic Products, Hubei Province
24 May 1978 (Wednesday)
Guangji County
Mei-chuan Reservoir
Mr. Tung Chuanyang
Chairman, Revolutionary Committee of Guangji County
Mr. Liu Hauchuan
Director, General Office, Revolutionary Committee of Guangji County
Mr. Chai Wenching
Deputy Director, Revolutionary Committee of Guangji County
Mr. Chow Chengyu
Director of Managing Committee of Mei-chuan Reservoir
Mr. Chu Chinshau
Deputy Director, Managing Committee of Mei-chuan Reservoir
Mr. Liao Kuaihsing
Technician, Managing Committee of Mei-chuan Reservoir
25 May 1978 (Thursday)
Xishui
October Brigade, October Commune
Mr. Lou Taunting
Vice-Chairman, Revolutionary Committee
Mr. Hu Chihsien
Vice-Chairman, Revolutionary Committee
Mr. Yang Paisong
Deputy Director, Bureau of Aquatic Products of Xishui County
Mr. Yang Fengche
Deputy Director, Bureau of Aquatic Products of Xishui County
Mr. Chang Kenau
Leader, October Brigade
Mr. Chen Paichu
Manager Fish Farm, October Brigade
25-26 May 1978 (Thursday-Friday)
Huang gang County
Paitan Lake State Fish Farm
Mr. Shen Pingcheng
Vice-Chairman, Revolutionary Committee of Huang gang County
Mr. Tu Kuomin
Deputy Director, General Office, Revolutionary Committee of Huang gang County
Mr. Tsao Pinshau
Deputy Director, Water and Electricity Bureau of Huang gang County
Mr. Liu Chuohuang
Manager of Huang gang Fish Farm
Mr. Wong Lichu
Assistant Manager of Huang gang Fish Farm
Mr. Yu Paochuan
Technician of Huang gang Fish Farm
27 May 1978 (Saturday)
Wuhan
Hydrobiological Institute of Hubei Province
Prof. Liu Chienkang
Leader of Academic Study Commission
Mr. Chang Songchuan
Director, Ichthyology Laboratory
Mr. Chen Hungta
Director, Lakes and Reservoirs Laboratory
Mr. Li Lienhsiang
Leader, Fish Disease Laboratory
Mr. Yu Haohsiang
Leader, Genetics Laboratory
Hua Chung Agriculture College
Mr. Han Tehchian
Vice-Chancellor
Mr. Weng Yun
Deputy Director, Education Department
Mr. Hsu Suying
Deputy Director, General Office
Mr. Shan Tashu
Deputy Director, Fishery Department
Mr. Yi Polu
Professor, Fishery Department
Mrs. Shi Chuantang
Assistant Professor, Fishery Department
28 May 1978 (Sunday)
Wuhan
Tanghu Lake State Fish Farm
Mr. Su Shanyen
Vice Chairman, Revolutionary Committee Hungshau District, Wuhan City
Mr. Hsu Chihhsien
Director, Bureau of Animal Husbandry of Fisheries, Hungshau District, Wuhan City
Mrs. Chin Ying
Leader, Office of Foreign Affairs
Mr. Fu Yongyeh
Staff, Office of Foreign Affairs
Mr. Chiang Chunkuai
Manager of a fish farm
Mr. Hsia Changsong
Deputy Manager
Mr. Chu Ahlung
Deputy Manager
30-31 May 1978 (Tuesday-Wednesday)
Beijing
Mr. Li Yungkai
Director, Bureau of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF)
M-44
ISBN 92-5-100811-6
