<title>Towards a collaborative rangeland and wildlife management: Consultancy Report (GCP/SYR/003/ITA)</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgements
The consultant wishes to acknowledge Dr. Mohamed M. Mirreh, the project CTA, who has made available his knowledge and experience enabling the final version of this report.
A special thanks to Dr. Talal Razzouk, the National Extension Consultant, for dedicating full time to support the consultancy, for his valuable suggestions and for the great dedication to accomplish the challenging task of implementing extension and communication activities for Bedouins. Furthermore, a valuable help to the mission has been given by the technical backstopping officers at FAO Rome, especially Ms. Caterina Batello who has effectively supported mission preparation ensuring clear guidelines to search concrete outputs.
Finally, I would like to thank the staff of the extension unit of the project for their patience in participating in the assessment and planning activities carried out mainly in English. They show to have the most important quality of every communication specialist: the willingness to listen and share with others.
<section>2</section>
Executive summary
The project needs to finalise the social component and the extension programme. It should be done considering the limited time still left. Nevertheless, pilot extension communication activities can be implemented and monitored to raise awareness among different stakeholders and to prepare the ground for future activities.
A communication strategy and workplan have been formulated within the framework of the overall extension programme. Communication and extension activities, have been formulated in order to support the introduction of a collaborative management approach and to involve all stakeholders. Within this framework, three main issues have been identified as fundamental for the extension communication strategy: information and education for rangeland and wildlife management; extension and community based learning (training); communication activities for collaborative management. Specific objectives and activities have been defined according to target groups prioritised by the project, such as:
- production of a pilot radio programme to be broadcast once a week;
- preparation of sets of appropriate visual aids to support education and training (especially flipcharts on cloth);
- production of a video documentary to raise awareness about project activities and results;
- implementation of communication activities to support the establishment of grazing committees and the identification of collaborative activities.
Special attention has been given to horizontal information sharing especially among women groups. The identification and training of community facilitators, as well as the establishment of programme to support women learning process about environmental degradation, animal care and solutions to their problems is strongly recommended.
Several recommendations were defined in order to improve the activities and results of the extension unit, such as:
- an improvement of the process for data collection related to the need to elaborate extension messages and communication material through a participatory message design process;
- to organise photo and video archives and to implement activities to document project activities on a regular basis, identifying since the beginning of the project the final products required (e.g. documentary, publications);
- a better definition of the tasks assigned to the staff of the extension unit;
- training of the staff especially in: communication planning; participatory message design; radio, video and low cost material production;
- inclusion in the extension staff of a local artist in order to be able to quickly prepare visual aids with Bedouins;
- specifications for the purchase of new equipment.
Furthermore, additional research on Bedouins informal communication flow and decision making process is recommended in order to enable the definition of a wider extension/communication strategy, which should be one of the most important components in case a second phase is approved.
During the mission opportunities for collaboration were discussed with the Extension Directorate in order to strengthen project capacity to implement the extension/communication strategy and to ensure adequate follow up. A workshop has been scheduled for the month of March in order to allow to set up a final agreement and to identify responsibilities for the implementation of a joint strategy.
<section>3</section>
I. Background
1.1. Project background and present situation
1.2. Activities carried out
Bedouins are proud of grazing life and settlement never attracted them as long as their herds were fed and happy......
The tribes are the nations and the rangelands are the states.
(A. Masri 1991)
1.1. Project background and present situation
- General overview
Project GCP/SYR/003/ITA is a rangeland and wildlife management project for the rehabilitation of marginal lands and the establishment and conservation of wildlife in the Syrian Steppe, which started in February 1996 with an overall duration of three years. The project is financed by the Government of Italy and is being executed by FAO and the Directorate of Al-Badia of the Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform (MAAR). The project area covers some 130,000 ha in one of the driest parts of Syria, with a mean annual rainfall of less than 200mm. It is divided into four sub-areas: Talila Wildlife Reserve, Arak, Mumbateh and Abassiya. This is part of a vast arid ecosystem named Al-Badia which covers approximately 55% of the Syrian territory. The project is located in the city of Palmyra within the building of the Directorate of Al-Badia. The international staff includes a CTA, a rangeland specialist, and a wildlife expert, while the national personnel is formed by a National
project director, wildlife specialist, a rangeland counterpart and a technician, 4 extensionists (2 men and 2 women) and a national extension consultant.
The immediate objectives presented in the project document are: "to help national institutions to develop appropriate techniques for a sustainable use of the grazing land" and "to establish an integrated model for the use and maintenance of an area grazed by wild and domestic animals". The long term objectives of the project also foresee " to enhance human resources and communication abilities, data analysis and planning capacities of national officers for the development of improved techniques and new national regulation for the use of communal grazing lands".
The ultimate beneficiaries of the project are the livestock operators of the area, namely Bedouins households and tribes organised by the Peasant Union, a syndicate supported by the Government, in three local cooperatives for sheep raising: Arak, Mumbateh and Abassiya (see map 2). Another group of beneficiaries are the camel herders also organised under a cooperative. The cooperatives are in charge of range and sheep improvement but at the moment they mainly dedicate to provide supplementary feeding for sheep to their members. At the moment over three thousand members are inscribed in local cooperatives but the number of rangeland users is much higher than the people officially inscribed.
The grazing period varies according to the rainfall regime but in general it occurs during February - May. Nevertheless, animals are in Al-Badia also in the period included from November to January but they depend on supplementary feed (introduced for the first time during the drought of 1958-59), and normally provided by the Cooperatives to their members.
Since early 70s the Government issued law and acts to protect rangeland natural resources, especially by prohibiting cultivation in Al-Badia. Furthermore in 1991 Al-Talila Wildlife reserve was established to rehabilitate habitats, protect wild animals and to generate income to local communities through eco-tourism since the Palmyra area already attracts tourists with its historical and archaeological features.
Al-Badia Rangeland Sheep Directorate, the national counterpart agency, is implementing Government policy by:
- establishing 82 lamb fattening cooperatives;
- reducing pressure on range;
- establishing 28 range and sheep improvement centres covering about 75,000 ha which are used for: seed collection; grazing by government sheep flocks; grazing by neighbours communities flocks; improvement of milk, meat and wool production; distribution of improved rams; establishing nurseries for the production of shrub seedlings; maintaining 170 wells.
- Activities and challenges: seeking the social sustainability of the project.
As mentioned earlier the project focuses on two major objectives: the improvement of range management and the establishment of a wildlife reserve. The main problem the project has to face is the deterioration of Al-Badia rangelands due to:
- destruction of vegetation cover by ploughing the land;
- early and overgrazing by an increasing sheep population;
- fuel collection through cutting and uprooting of fodder shrubs as source of firewood;
- off-road driving of vehicles that has destructive effect on vegetation and soils;
- increased stocking around boreholes and other sources of water.
The main activities being carried out to accomplish project objectives are:
- Range rehabilitation and management: improvement of range sites; planting shrubs; range reseeding; seed planting; data collection and monitoring of reseeding techniques and resided areas; surveys of soils, topography and vegetation; preparation of a range management plan; promotion of the use of alternative energy sources such as solar energy and solar stoves.
- Wildlife reserve: reserve management plan; reintroduction of wild animals (gazelles and oryx); improvement offences; controlled grazing by camels in the reserve; feasibility studies on eco-tourism activities to be initiated; wildlife management through: monitoring of the animals; provision of water and supplementary feed; control of the fencing.
According to the tripartite review mission undertaken in October 1997 the project has already achieved successful results from the technical point of view. This is also due to the fact that the project has carefully considered socio-economic aspects (several studies have been carried out), promoting culturally appropriate technologies, and fostering the active participation of range resources users in several occasions.
Nevertheless, as underlined by the report of the tripartite review, in the project document the design of the social component was extremely weak if compered with the impact that rehabilitation measures will have on traditional grazing habits and to the need for collaborative management mechanisms involving all stakeholders for implementing sustainable management plans. Several range management specialists and ecologists indicate that the main social factors affecting the rangeland stability have been: inappropriate agricultural practices, the introduction of gasoline engines (water trucks, pick-up trucks, pumps and plough tractors) as well as the lack of consideration for the traditional tribal based rangeland management model, the so called Hema system. The latter is a delicate issue which will became evident once the range rehabilitation process supported by the project is completed, and the range management scheme implemented. This will also involve a clear definition of
the land tenure system and the establishment of consultative decision making procedures, enabling the social sustainability of technical measures by involving and benefiting local people.
To take care of different social aspects the project is dealing with, since 1996 an extension unit was created and a strong Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) component is being implemented. Two PRA workshops were held (March and September 1997) to develop skills in PRA for applied field and extension work. Furthermore, a national consultancy was undertaken to identify the extension needs of Bedouin women. The PRA work contributed to:
- define a methodological framework to interact with the ultimate beneficiaries
- specifying main target groups of the project
- identify preliminary activities to be carried out
- identify extension needs both of men and women
- initiate community awareness
- identify activities addressed to women
- agree upon collaborative activities
- improve the ability of the extension staff to communicate with the target groups
Nevertheless PRA is a process, it is not an just an extractive means of gathering information. It is developed according to project needs to improve participation and to reach strategic agreements with the target groups. Presently, relevant socio-economic data as well as extension needs assessment of target population is being complemented and systematised. It will provide valuable elements to orient the overall strategy of the project as well as for further specifying extension and communication activities according to Bedouin needs. It also offers legitimacy for the project to claim for alternative rangeland management measures and presents to decision makers, cooperatives and households a possibility to establish a collaborative framework and procedures for participatory planning. Presently, the project is involved in the challenging task of establishing grazing committees to enhance participation and undertake collaborative activities. Furthermore, another important
activity the project is initiating is the establishment of an extension programme for women.
The tripartite review recommended to strengthen the social component and the extension activities by formulating a communication strategy and workplan for the project in order to ensure that the intended beneficiaries "feel that they are stakeholders". This recommendation has been the starting point for the present mission.
1.2. Activities carried out
- Mission framework and results
The mission was undertaken to build up a communication strategy within the context of the overall extension component and workplan actually being formulated to support project objectives and activities. To such extent, accurate analysis of the PRA assessment of stakeholders and project extension needs, as well as concrete opportunities and constraints to develop and implement the communication component have been carried out. The result has been the design of extension and communication activities, to reach awareness about project objectives and activities both at community, local, and national level, to support information, education and training processes and to enhance people's participation. Nevertheless, the consultant feels that further activities should be undertaken to validate mission outcomes at community level, to collect complementary data (especially regarding information flow among herders, presence of traditional opinion leaders, the use of mass media and the
visual perception especially of women) and to carry out specific training on communication planning and participatory message design for the extension staff. Furthermore special attention should be also given to train the extension staff in low-cost media, radio and video production methodologies.
- Methodology and activities implemented
The terms of reference of the mission included the following tasks:
- assessment of main communication needs of the different target audiences of the project;
- preparation of a communication strategy up to the end of the project;
- identification of the most appropriate type of visual aids for modules aimed at Bedouin women;
- recommending simple techniques for producing educational materials;
- identification of production facilities in Syria;
- recommending guidelines for video series;
(Detailed Terms of Reference are presented in annex 1)
Due to the enormous amount of data already available within the project and the time constraints, the consultant concentrated on in-project assessment and planning activities such as:
- Intensive work with the CTA, the staff of the extension unit and the national extension consultant:
presentations of communication for development concepts and methodology and of the assessment and planning activities for the extension/communication component (see document in annex 4);
- PRA data analysis;
- Thematic brainstorming sessions;
- Questionnaire to assess staff tasks, skills and expectations (see annex 5).
- Field meeting with Camel herders for the establishment of a grazing committee;
- Interview of technical staff and local people;
- Interviews with the director of the Directorate of Extension, Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform and the Executive Producer to identify an institutional framework for collaboration and production facilities.
Finally, an early draft of mission recommendations was prepared, discussed and agreed upon with the project CTA before leaving Palmyra.
<section>4</section>
II. Findings and conclusions
2. Extension and communication needs assessment
2. Extension and communication needs assessment
2.1. Project target groups
2.2. The extension component of the project at the present
2.3. Extension and communication needs
2.1. Project target groups
- General features.
Project activities involve a variety of target groups. The most important are the ultimate beneficiaries, the livestock operators which are divided according to their movements for grazing the herds into three groups: settled, semi-settled and nomads. In general terms the nomadic groups (sheep and camel herders) maintain a presence in the area which varies from 6 to 8 months according to the seasonal rainfall and availability of pasture. Bedouins communities and household are mainly devoted to sheep and camel breeding. Typical households include not only a nuclear family but extended families totalling 8-12 persons per household. Both the camel herders as well the sheep herders consider themselves as members of natural groups, the tribes. Each tribe is divided into sub-groups related to some influential person, the muhtar.
According to the PRA outcomes (Chatty 1997:2) members of the cooperatives are divided into two groups: livestock herders, generally living in tents, and sheep owners and merchants, generally living in cement houses in the villages (these can also have mobile tent household as well). Furthermore, in the cooperatives areas there are many Bedouins who are not cooperative members but spend part of the year in the area. They are also being considered by the project as target group.
According to the surveys carried out by the project, the literacy rate in the area is very low: among the settled households 85 % of men and 96 % of women are illiterate while among nomads more than 95% of men and close to 100 % of women are illiterate. At the same time the presence of mass media in the area is quite impressive. Data collected by the project show that 36 % of camel herders households have television while 42 % have radio. These equipment are normally powered by diesel generators. According to the information collected by the extension unit Bedouins' interest is mainly related to films about life in the steppe, and to weather forecast and news programme. An increased interest for soap opera has also been noticed. Bedouins have access to two other official and external sources of information: the veterinarian services and cooperatives. The cooperatives provide information mainly related to fodder delivery and similar topics, while the information delivered by
the veterinarians is related to emergencies and normally based on scientific terminology. There is a great demand among Bedouins for veterinarian assistance and training.
In the project area the following schools are available:
- Arak: primary school
- Mumbateh: primary school
In Palmyra there are several schools at different levels: primary, intermediary and secondary. A small clinic is available in Arak while another one is in Palmyra. There is telephone service in Mumbateh, Arak and Palmyra.
In Syria there is no extension service attending Bedouins needs. This is due to the operational philosophy of the Syrian Extension Systems, formally based on a methodology of training and visits, and working mainly in the agricultural sector. This is also due to the difficulty to set up appropriate servicing for Bedouins because of their frequent movements covering large distances. Another constraint for traditional extension activities is the lack of "messages and packages" due to total absence of fundamental and adaptive research, while Bedouins traditional knowledge on rangeland and animal breeding is very broad.
In Bedouin society important decisions are mainly taken at household level. Decisions like when to move to another area apparently involve only individual households, but sometime interest groups carry out specific activities, such as the construction of dicks for water. Regularities have been noticed in the seasonal movements of the households but no standardised pattern according to tribes or households has been identified until now. Therefore it is difficult to target and monitor training activities to be carried out by the extension staff on a regular basis.
Special consideration is given by the project to Bedouin women. Recent studies show that at least 78% of women take active part in sheep rearing. Women have a very substantial work load during the lambing and milking season, when they are the primary work force for milking and hand feeding the family flock. Women and girls are also responsible for firewood and water fetching. Milk processing is also considered as women work. Women's workload is very heavy, indeed heavier than man's, at most time of the year. Furthermore, as indicated by the literacy rate, women have limited access to education. According to these features the project decided to consider women as priority target.
- Target groups prioritised by the project
Project activities are related to a wide range of measures for sustainable rangeland and wildlife management which imply the involvement of several stakeholders. Therefore, an increased awareness about problems and solutions the project is dealing with is also required. As underlined by the tripartite review, in order to ensure sustainability and equity for rangeland measures especially, once rangeland is rehabilitated, attention should be given to the land tenure problem. It will imply the involvement of national institutions and policy makers.
According to PRA results, an important aspect to be considered is the existence of different interest groups. For example, villagers and sheep merchants' are very much against having any more land "lost" to reseeding, while Bedouin herders are very much in favour of this in order to improve the range. One of the most challenging tasks of the project, while creating awareness regarding environmental problems, is to reach consensus on the conservation measures among the different target groups and to ensure a positive "climate" for enabling a policy regarding the use of the range and the land tenure. Appropriate communication activities have to be undertaken to prepare the ground for this kind of social interaction which will facilitate improved rangeland and wildlife sustainable management. To ensure effectiveness of activities being implemented by the extension unit, according to the immediate objectives of the project at the present, but also considering further development
of rangeland initiatives, the project prioritised target groups according to the following list:
Ranking of target groups prioritised by the project:
1. nomadic sheep herders
2. camel herders
3. semi-settled sheep herders
4. Local institutions/policy makers
5. Schools
6. General public
As mentioned, earlier women are always considered as a priority target whatever social group they are involved, facilitating their active participation in any extension work being implemented. Another important activity is to enhance local participation by establishing collaborative agreements with target groups for implementing rangeland activities. This is the case of camel herders, which have been allowed to graze in the reserve. Furthermore, six collaborative actions have been prioritised and immediate follow-up has been given (marking out corridors in the reserve areas, provide access to water sources coming out from the reserve etc.). These are the basis for establishing a solid rangeland and wildlife management collaborative process.
2.2. The extension component of the project at the present
- Extension activities carried out
Until now the work developed by the extension unit has been mainly devoted to carrying out activities related to the overall social component, namely research and participatory assessment and planning of project activities. Another important task has been to inform Bedouin households about project objectives and activities through direct contacts (meetings, PRA exercises, field activities etc.). Within the extension team there is enough commitment and willingness to work at field level as well to reach concrete results, but the lack of extension messages and communication materials to work with, as well as the expectations for the results of the PRA process in order to finalise the overall strategy and the extension programme, have limited the possibilities for undertaking extension activities on a regular basis. The project is now validating technical recommendation to be delivered to the Bedouins according to preliminary extension needs identified. At the moment it is
difficult for the project to act as an integrated rural development project. In fact, due to its short duration, it might lead to dispersion of the project's resources and generate expectations without being able to satisfy them. In a second phase, the project could eventually consider the possibility to act as a facilitating agency, by co-ordinating interventions of other institutions according to identified needs. It is therefore recommended that the project concentrates on sustainable wildlife and range management topics generating technical information relevant to Bedouin needs. This technical information should be processed by the extension unit according to communication methodology, and diffused by using appropriate extension activities and communication tools.
The extension staff has very limited knowledge of communication for development methods and techniques. An intense training in participatory message design and production of low cost communication materials is required (see also Recommendation for strategy implementation). Nevertheless, the national extension consultant is an experienced specialist who can take care of implementing and supervising intensive training and communication material production (not radio), once the final version of the extension/communication plan will be approved.
Furthermore the national extension consultant prepared guidelines based on PRA tools and techniques which have been incorporated in the daily work of the extension unit (T. Razouk PRA In Extension. A Special Methodology Design for the Bedouins of the Syrian Steppe).
- Communication materials developed
At the moment the project is still concentrating in raising awareness of all stakeholders on the need for the establishing a rangeland and wildlife scheme. Messages have been delivered until now through direct contacts and meetings. At the same time several attempts to produce communication materials have been undertaken such as:
- Posters
Until now the extension unit has concentrated on the production of visual aids, especially posters. At the moment a set of 13 posters has been produced in draft form. Two of them have been field tested with Bedouins. This activity has to be considered as parallel to the regular activity of the extension unit because the posters have been prepared under the supervision of the national extension consultant, by the students of the Agricultural Extension course at the University of Aleppo as practice for their degree. The messages to be addressed were already available in the project. The general objective was to raise Bedouins awareness on sustainable rangeland and wildlife management also showing problems with cultivation. It was supposed to use the posters by placing them in critical locations such as the headquarters of the Co-operatives, water points, cheese processing facilities and on Bedouins cars. All posters included drawings and generally they would show two
different aspects of the same message: the negative aspect and the positive. Only two posters out of 13 were tested by the extension staff at field level. The criteria considered were: age, sex, level of education; understanding of the general message; time taken to read the message; comments on how to improve the presentation. The main topics and messages presented by the posters are:
1. Sustainable use of rangeland:
- advantages of preserving plots from grazing
- consequences of degradation caused by cultivation
- problems for intensive animal production
- problems caused by agriculture to the grazing environment
- problems caused by uprooting and overgrazing shrubs
- lack of grass for sheep
2. Environmental care:
- degradation and pollution problems
- animals disappearing due to hunting
3. Animal care:
- need for animal health control (by veterinarians)
The draft posters have been carefully analysed by the consultant and the national extension specialist. It was agreed that, in many cases they represent the view of an urban person trying to make appealing to Bedouins a message already defined in another environment. The style of the drawings is similar to comics or caricatures and does not have references with the reality of Al-Badia. The entire process of preparing the message in an external environment and by literate people to convince Bedouins, even if it is inspired by the good intention of providing the project with supporting materials, is a wrong way of addressing the problems and presenting possible solutions. This process should be undertaken jointly with final users who have to be involved in message design and material development to ensure that the material will present a message related to their reality, culturally appropriate, and responding to local graphic and visual codes. It is therefore recommended
the preparation of posters to be done at project level, by involving a talented local artist who can join extension unit activities, such as PRA exercise and meetings with local people, in order to quickly sketch problems and people's views, visualise ideas, and prepare draft materials to be field tested by the extension unit.
- Video and play scripts
Several video scripts and shootings have been prepared by the national extension consultant, and in particular:
1. Talila.
A full script in Arabic for the production of a documentary about project activities has been prepared. About 80 % of the video footage is already available in VHS format but there are still some difficulties in finding editing facilities. The preparation of the video is an urgent task to support project presentations for Bedouins and general public.
2. Seed Production Techniques.
This video programme is aimed at informing technicians about different seed production techniques. At the moment 70 % of video shots is available. Some important footage of seed collection is missing but it could be substitute with photographs.
Furthermore a scenario for a play called "Saleh" was prepared to reach awareness about environmental degradation. It is intended to have this play video recorded in order to present it through television broadcasting and video playback.
(Please note guidelines for production of both video programme are presented in annexes 7 and 8 of the present report.)
- Leaflet
A three pages leaflet with photographs was produced and distributed to present the project.
- Documentary activities
The activities of the project are normally documented through photographs and video recording. Until now an enormous quantity of slides and photos have been collected regarding technical topics. Several video shots have been filmed for further editing. At the moment nobody of the extension staff has received training in video production.
- Displays
The extension unit has prepared visual displays of project activities (photographs on board) and placed them in the corridors of Al Badia Directorate. This is a good communication tool for the rest of the personnel to learn about project activities. Displays can also been carried elsewhere for presentations.
- Equipment and facilities
The extension unit is located within Al Badia Directorate. Five persons work full time in the extension unit. They have access to two rooms equipped with two personal computers. The personnel has been trained in the use of Windows and Excel PC programmes. No desk top publishing training has been carried out.
The project has already both some video equipment and photo cameras (see annex 6). A digital photographic camera as well a scanner have been purchased in order to prepare low cost publications, posters and other visual presentations. Appropriate installation of video equipment as well as for photos and graphic work has to be prepared. It is indispensable for the extension unit to have another room to set up a small multimedia production unit. At the same time one of the project vehicles should be made available full time to the extension unit for field work.
Furthermore, the project should also be equipped with a video playback unit for presentation of video programmes for information and training. It is recommended to buy a combined module (TV with VHS built in) and a power source, such as diesel engine. The playback unit should be protected in a wooden or metal box. It is also very important that the project to buy a low cost video editor to be able to edit short programmes based on the video recording already being undertaken.
A good audio tape recorder together with two low cost tape recorders should be purchased in order to prepare interviews with Bedouins and technicians for future radio broadcasting.
2.3. Extension and communication needs
- Extension needs according to PRA
Nevertheless this needs assessment presented has to be considered as an indicative tool for planning to be improved and specified once PRA outcomes are be systematised (end of January 1998). PRA final results will allow to better target specific extension activities according to each target group.
According to the extension needs identified until now, specific technical subjects should be selected, validated with Bedouins, and developed into extension/communication messages. Careful consideration should also be given to participatory message design including Bedouins perspectives regarding problems and solutions, and by considering traditional knowledge. To this end PRA tools can be used.
- Messages to be delivered by the project
The project has already selected a number of messages to be delivered according to the preliminary results emerging from the PRA extension needs identification, and also taking into consideration its overall objectives. Prioritisation has been done according to immediate needs, and availability of messages related to different technical and social aspects. Until now the project has prioritised the following messages and activities to be delivered at different levels:
At community level
- Project activities
An information flow about project activities should be established to raise awareness and to involve people and decision makers and to support project initiatives.
- Sustainable use of rangeland
The project has identified the need to produce a change in Bedouin attitudes regarding the non sustainable use of the range. The project intends to present the problems affecting the range (agriculture, overgrazing and early grazing, firewood collection etc.), and alternative rangeland measures, (e.g. comparing an area managed with rangeland criteria Vs another overexploited).
Ranking of extension needs according to PRA (Camel Herders)
No.
Rank
Needs
Specific needs
Men
Women
Animal health
Type of camel diseases
x
x
Ways of avoiding diseases occurrences
x
x
How to deal with ill animals
x
x
How to inject animals with antibiotic
x
How to release gazes from swollen animals etc.
x
Animal husbandry
Management of herd
x
Animal in general
x
Mating
x
Culling
x
Male female ratio
x
Animal nutrition
Important feed component in general
x
x
Feed ratio in general
x
x
Feed ratio for different stage in the cycle of production
x
x
Supplementary feeding and pasture
x
x
Grazing management
Knowledge of plants
x
How to manage the grazing area
x
The best time to graze and to stop
x
etc.
Animal production
Camel milk utilisation
x
Cheese making
x
Hair utilisation
x
Literacy
Reading and writing
x
Human health
x
House care
x
Cocking
x
Food preservation
x
Knitting and sowing
x
Zerb making
x
Clothes Decorating
x
Carpet and "Bust" making
x
Milk processing
x
- Stop growing barley
The project wants to inform Bedouins that this decision was taken by the government before the project started, and explain the reasons why barley affects the environment.
- Re-establishing resources Bedouins had for centuries
Overgrazing and early grazing become a problem. Bedouins cannot have sustainable animal production with an enormous amount of animals. The project has to address the problem of the destruction of the original environment and show why and how the original range balance has to be re-established.
- Animal care
This is a fundamental aspect in Bedouin economy and daily life. Several aspects are being considered for training activities such as animal husbandry and animal feeding.
- Nutritional Aspect
How to feed properly the flock. This aspect is also related to the reintroduction of indigenous plants and improved range (annual and perennial plants, introduction of salsola verniculum).
- Range rehabilitation
A number of conservation measures have been implemented in the project area in order to rehabilitate marginal land. Access to these areas is restricted and corridors have been traced to avoid the passage of sheep and vehicles. Furthermore, collaborative agreements with herders lead to several field activities (such as establishing and marking out corridors in the reserve areas, provide access to water sources coming out from the reserve etc.). Special signs indicating these activities on the territory have to be placed.
- Wildlife reserve
Awareness should be raised regarding the positive impact of the reserve on the range and about the importance of respecting wild animals.
- Solar energy
The project is trying to limit the negative effects of shrub collection and uprooting by promoting the use of alternative energy sources such as solar energy and solar stoves. Pilot experiences using improved stoves have been carried out with Bedouin women. There is the need to show the advantages of this technique and how to use it.
- Establishment of grazing committees
Information regarding the creation of grazing committees should be provided to Bedouins to facilitate participation. Furthermore, appropriate communication channels should be used for horizontal and bottom-up information sharing in order to establish a common framework for participatory decision making and collaborative activities.
- Messages for women
According to an extension needs assessment carried out by the project, the following topics for an extension programme for women were identified:
- firewood collection and soil degradation
- animal nutrition
- home health
- home handy craft
- improved milking
- literacy
- cooking
The project is prioritising women needs and technical messages in order to prepare a training module for women. At the moment priority should be given to firewood collection and animal care.
Local level
As mentioned earlier, according to PRA results, there are multiple interest groups in the area. The main difference is between settled and mobile herders. The first group is much more powerful. The mobile herders have been prioritised by the project, but it was also suggested to set up a double strategy to work with both. Communication activities can contribute to raise awareness of both target groups and create the climate for negotiation and cooperation. The category "local level" refers to general public including a variety of local target groups (settled herders, school children, people living in Palmyra etc.). At this level most of the messages presented above are related to awareness building and, in general, information and education should be addressed.
Institutional and policy level
At national level awareness should be promoted in order to gain policy support to the establishment of appropriate land tenure measures. The project is actually organising a national seminar on this topic. As recommended by the tripartite mission the National Advisory Committee should be reinforced. Specific communication activities should be undertaken to establish linkages between national policy and local decision making processes.
Documentation of project activities and results is a priority in order to call the attention of the Government, international institutions and the donors. Mechanisms and linkages for consultative management should be created.
<section>5</section>
III. Recommendations
3. Extension/communication strategy and plan
4. Recommendations for strategy implementation
3. Extension/communication strategy and plan
3.1. Communication for sustainable rangeland and wildlife management
3.2. Extension/communication strategy
3.3. Extension/communication plan
3.4. Opportunities for the extension/Communication component at the present
3.5. Detailed workplan
3.1. Communication for sustainable rangeland and wildlife management
[...] of rangeland concerned institutions and policy makers, as well as traditional and grass root organisation and the population at large in a consultative process establishing a framework for collaborative management^1. It also requires to raise awareness about main issues the project is dealing with and to establish a common understanding about project objectives and activities. A two way communication flow should be established between all stakeholders in order to share information, knowledge and skills, to achieve common goals and actions. Communication activities can play three major roles by supporting the natural resources management process foreseen by the project:
A. Making things visible: explaining biophysical information (increasingly with the aim of creating new perspectives rather then transferring pre-packaged solutions). In this case we are referring mainly to communication for education and training.
B. Fostering policy acceptance: promoting awareness through information among all actors involved in the development process and promoting interactive policy making by creating the climate for decision making rather then using persuasive advertising approaches.
C. Facilitating platforms processes: giving a voice to different stakeholders to establish platforms where negotiation among different parties can take place with regard to natural resources. To allow participatory decision making is what we call communication for collaborative management.
^1 Collaborative management is a term used to describe a situation in which some or all of the relevant actors in a protected area are involved in a substantial way in management activities. The focus of their collaboration is on joint management, either at local, regional or national level (Ramirez 1997).
Communication for sustainable natural resources management implies establishing linkages among all stakeholders involved, a common understanding, language, channels for participatory communication, as well as responding to information and training needs to achieve sustainability (Ramirez 1997). This approach should be implemented according to priorities set up jointly by the project and final beneficiaries. Appropriate communication methods and techniques will:
- improve awareness raising;
- deliver information to be shared with dispersed and mobile target groups;
- support participatory rapid appraisal, planning and implementation of project activities;
- increase efficiency and effectiveness as well the coverage of conventional extension activities;
- respond to training and education needs of specific target groups with the support of appropriate communication media and tools;
- facilitate agreements between project, institutions and Bedouins.
To this extent, it has been considered appropriate to set up communication activities within the framework of the overall extension programme.
3.2. Extension/communication strategy
In order to respond to the needs identified and to support the project in achieving expected outputs, the extension/communication strategy in tegrates the following components: Information, Education, Training and Communication. Extension/communication activities will be developed at different operational levels (community, local and national) according to the target group's characteristics. A multimedia approach for the production of communication materials has been adopted giving priority to visual media due to the low literacy rate. Messages presented by different media/channels should be complementary.
Due to the present situation of the project (limited time, lack of training of the extension staff, validation process of specific messages regarding the rangeland), priority should be given to carrying out information and education activities in order to raise awareness of different target groups and to prepare the ground for future implementation of collaborative rangeland and wildlife management plans. Training activities will be undertaken on a limited scale, facilitating Bedouins learning, and will concentrate in responding primarily to women needs. Special attention will be dedicated to implement pilot communication activities to support local decision making processes for collaborative management which should be monitored and evaluated in order to provide recommendations for the a second phase.
Specific communication objectives as well as strategy definition and appropriate communication media and tools to be used at different level are presented below.
Community and local level
1. Information and education for rangeland and wildlife management
Objectives:
- To inform Bedouins and local population regarding project objectives and activities.
- To reach awareness among local population about environmental degradation and its effects on self-sufficiency through information and education.
Strategy:
Information and education messages should be aimed primarily at Bedouins and local population, to inform about project initiatives and ensure awareness about environmental degradation and appropriate rangeland and wildlife management measures. Horizontal information sharing should be fostered by using a participatory message design methodology, to consider people's needs and perspectives. A number of supporting materials should be developed and used to show project initiatives at field level, especially rehabilitation measures, collaborative actions already undertaken (establishment of corridors, water sources etc.), and innovative practices such as the use of solar energy and improved stoves. Information materials produced could also be used for formal education activities if the project wishes to establish cooperation with local schools.
Media/tools:
Radio
The most suitable media for information sharing with dispersed and mobile Bedouin households, especially for camel and sheep mobile herders, is radio. The production of a ten minutes radio programme to be broadcast once a week, is strongly recommended. The programme should contain information related to project activities and technical recommendations for conservation and rangeland management. It could also include Bedouin interviews sharing problems and concerns, views about collaborative actions, as well as traditional knowledge. The contents of radio programmes should be broadcast according to the seasonal activities and movements. Production should be realised at field level (interviews) and final editing should be done in Damascus by the Extension Directorate. Programming should take into consideration Bedouins daily activities (early in the morning). The broadcasting through the national radio station of a programme for Bedouins will open a new space for their
participation in national life and provide the possibility to influence other social groups (citizens and decision makers). This should be considered as a pilot activity to be monitored in terms of audience as well as production procedures.
Posters
The production of an educational poster on wildlife and rangeland management is recommended. It should show in details the elements of an ideal rangeland. It should be placed in critical locations (e.g. Peasant Union offices, vet. centres etc.), and it could also be used as extension and education material. To this end, the preparation of guidelines explaining the elements presented and their relationship, for extension workers, school teachers and other facilitators is recommended.
A logotype to identify the project is also recommended. It should be culturally appropriate and should include elements referring to sustainable rangeland and wildlife management. It could be placed close to project infrastructures and stamped on project vehicles. It could also be distributed to Bedouins to be placed on their lorries.
Signs
Production of two sets of signs on metal board indicating project field activities, especially those related to collaborative actions (e.g. corridors, and water sources). Careful attention should be given to the graphic aspect limiting the use of words.
Video
Three video programmes to present the project objectives and activities should be produced and/or finalised. The subjects are: the project (called Talila), seed production and solar energy. These should to be used in group sessions as introduction to project activities, and eventually could be broadcast by TV (and announced by the radio programme mentioned above).
2. Extension and community based learning (training)
Objectives:
- To facilitate the learning process of Bedouin men and women through extension about prioritised topics rangeland and wildlife management and other relevant needs.
- To support community based learning activities through horizontal knowledge sharing and the training of local facilitators (especially women) to spread information at household level.
Strategy:
According to PRA outcomes, it is very important to plan and implement training activities for women and for Bedouins in general. This is a difficult task which has to be carried out at household level. Furthermore, because environmental care activities have long term results which cannot be shown in a limited time, communication materials should be prepared to present the reasons of environmental degradation, as well as the type of conservation measures and rangeland management activities to re-establish the balance. At the same time low-cost materials should be prepared to document conservation measures and community activities and to allow horizontal sharing of the experiences. As mentioned before, the poster on sustainable rangeland could also be used at household level.
Traditional training and visits have a limited effect with mobile population. An alternative strategy should be therefore implemented for supporting a community based learning process for environmental care. This should be promoted by involving community facilitators who could run short presentations related to rangeland management topics. This activity should be targeted according to gender and type of herder groups. It is important to identify key actors, men and women, that could be information/knowledge brokers/facilitators at community and household level. A feasibility assessment should be carried out to identify Bedouin women who can be trained to deal with women, as well as local leaders who can train men. These people can also became sources of information and be involved in the production and use of other media (e.g. radio programmes). The assessment should be done quickly using PRA tools such as SWOT analysis as well as interviews. Several issues have to be
considered for selecting the women facilitators and preparing with them a workplan, such as: literacy level; willingness to serve the communities and socio-cultural constraints; area of influence (number of households with which they have regular contacts and for how long); possible incentives; participatory evaluation of services delivered. This activity should be careful prepared by the extension team, especially by the female extensionists, by carrying out brainstorming exercise and appropriate field research.
In a second phase of the project participatory assessment of Bedouin knowledge and information systems using the knowledge and information system methodology should be carried out to deepen the information regarding Bedouin informal networks.
Media/tools:
Flipchart series on cloth
To allow extension activities on selected and prioritised topics the use of flipcharts on cloth is recommended. These materials are easy to carry and can present a full description of a specific topic, visualising the problems and solutions. Easy guidelines and cards printed on paper should be prepared for the use by extension worker or community facilitators. Flipchart production should be realised starting at household level and field tested before final production. A local artist should be hired to prepare initial sketches, to elaborate drafts and, after including corrections according to field tests, to produce final version. The flipcharts on cloth will be used at community level by extension workers and/or community facilitators. In case community based activities would be implemented, extra copies can be left with community facilitators. According to PRA results it is recommended the production of the following 4 flipcharts (the first 2 are aimed especially at
women while the others refer to general topics):
Firewood collection and soil degradation (eventually including solar stoves)
Animal nutrition: feed ratio for sheep
Grazing management: how to manage the grazing area
Wildlife and its relation to the rangeland
Guidelines for the use of the flipcharts and cards (sheets reproducing the same illustration of the flipcharts) to be distributed once meeting are over as a reminder to the participants (especially about technical recommendations) should be prepared.
Educational booklets 2 booklets for Bedouins, one about rangeland management, and another on animal breeding, should be prepared. They should be done by drawings and photographs, and prepared and distributed at household level.
Photo albums
Important activities and experiences such as conservation measures and/or other development initiatives related to rangeland and wildlife, as well as for animal care, can be documented by photographs either at household level or considering specific interest groups (income generating activities for women etc.). Photos can be collected in photo albums. These can be kept at household or group level and also presented to other groups. This tool will be very useful to document women activities and to share their experiences.
Photographic flipcharts
These should be used to visualise problems identified in the area (e.g. erosion, soil degradation, uprooting problems) and solutions experienced elsewhere to resolve the problem. The flipcharts should be prepared with photographs and covered by plastic sheets. Guidelines to orient the discussions should be prepared. Once validated the flipcharts could be also scanned to prepare printed materials such as: cards, flipcharts, posters, etc..
3. Communication activities for collaborative management
Objectives:
- To support the local decision making processes of grazing committees through horizontal information sharing.
Strategy:
Initial collaborative agreements and activities are the starting point for a wider collaborative management framework. They will contribute to the sustainability of the rangeland. Participation of newly established grazing committees should be supported through the implementation of pilot communication activities facilitating horizontal information sharing and decision making. Important meetings should be documented with the use of video and video programmes can be edited and played backed to present relevant decisions to other target groups. Furthermore, grazing committees decisions as well as Bedouins opinions could also be shown to decision makers (e.g. MAAR) to orient their policies.
Media/tools:
Video
Video recording and editing for further playback for focus group discussions.
Institutional and Policy level (national)
4. Information towards institutions and decision makers
Objectives:
- To reach an agreement with national institutions regarding an extension communication plan for extension/communication activities in support of collaborative rangeland and wildlife management
- To inform policy makers and institutions about project activities and results at the national and international level.
Strategy:
The project should strengthen the relationship with the Extension Directorate of MAAR, for which there are very good opportunities. The implementation of the present strategy will provide a framework for collaboration. Several activities should be carried out and monitored jointly (see also detailed workplan 3.3. of this report). The Extension Directorate can provide access to national television and radio as well as training for the extension staff. Furthermore, a close collaboration might be foreseen with the Extension Circle, the unit depending on the Extension Directorate based in Palmyra (see also point 3.2. of this report). At national level information should be delivered towards institutions and decision makers in order to gain attention to project initiatives and to ensure support for project extension.
Media/tools:
Workshop
Once the present strategy and plan are approved by FAO, a workshop should be held in Palmyra to agree upon activities to be carried out together. If possible, this should take place in early march.
A letter of agreement should be signed specifying the framework for collaboration and the contribution of each counterpart. A follow up meeting could be held after six months to evaluate the work done.
Video
A documentary video programme should be produced for policy makers, donors, technical experts and public opinion, describing project activities and results, social and environmental framework, as well as results and challenges for the future. The video should motivate the approval of a second phase for the project. Two versions of the video should be produced: an extended one for technicians, describing in detail the project framework, activities and outputs. A shorter one for policy makers and donors underlining the results and the challenges for the future. The latter could be also broadcast for public awareness and consensus building. It is recommended to start preparing the script in order to document the last year of project life. At least two language versions of each product should be prepared (Arabic and English). An Italian version could be also considered. The documentary should be of professional quality. It should be produced in collaboration with the
Directorate of Extension, which is provided with full Betacam equipment and has an experienced professional video producer. Collaboration with the FAO Information Division could also be considered.
3.3. Extension/communication plan
According to overall extension and communication strategy a detailed communication plan is resumed below. It has been divided into different components, activities and operational levels of implementation.
COMMUNITY AND LOCAL LEVEL
Table 1. Communication component: Information and education for rangeland and wildlife management
No.
Activities
Production of 1 radio programme to be broadcast once a week.
Production of 1 poster to be used also as environmental education supporting material on wildlife and rangeland management.
Production of 1 logo for the project image
Preparation of signs on metal board indicating collaborative activities
Production or final editing of 3 information video programmes to be presented in group sessions: Talila Video, Seed Production and Solar Energy
Table 2. Communication component: Extension and community based learning (training)
No.
Activities
Production and use in the field of 4 flipcharts on cloth: Firewood collection and soil degradation, Animal nutrition: feed ratio, grazing management, wildlife and the rangeland
Use of the educational posters on rangeland and wildlife management at community level
Information sessions using video programmes related to the project to start discussions with Bedouins
Preparation of 2 booklets
2 Photographic flipcharts for problem identification (e.g. erosion, soil degradation, uprooting problems etc)
Preparation of group photographic albums according to local experiences
Training of women facilitators to share information about selected topics.
Table 3. Communication component: Communication activities for collaborative management
No.
Activities
Support to grazing committees and local decision making process through video documentation and playback at local level.
INSTITUTIONAL AND POLICY LEVEL
Table 4. Communication component: Information towards institutions and decision makers
No.
Activities
A workshop with the Extension Directorate to discuss and approve the workplan
Two versions of a documentary video programme for policy makers, donors, technical experts and public opinion, about project activities and results (language versions: Arabic, English and Italian)
3.4. Opportunities for the extension/Communication component at the present
According to the tripartite review findings, the major constraint the project is facing is its limited duration which is unrealistic considering the technical and social factors involved in sustainable rangeland and wildlife management. The formulation of the communication activities has been undertaken very late in project life. Communication activities should be integrated in the daily extension work and will strengthen the capacity of the extension unit to attend Bedouins. The project should continue supporting the extension component and define clear responsibilities within the extension team in order to carry out communication activities. It is recommended to organise two extension/communication groups providing each group with specific task related to the production and use of communication materials and extension activities. Individual terms of reference should be written up once the extension/communication programme has been approved.
The national extension consultant should supervise the groups and ensure that technical messages are made available by the project and other sources in order to prepare extension/communication messages and materials. This is a time consuming activity. Therefore technical inputs should be made available in time in order to accomplish the workplan (see point 3.3.) ensuring cooperation with other institutions (such as the extension directorate), and technical services (e.g. the veterinarians). To this end operational linkages and responsibilities should be identified.
As indicated by the results of the Skills and Tasks Assessment carried out by the consultant (see annex 5) the extension staff is expecting to be trained in several communication methods and techniques, especially visual aids. Nevertheless, some activities might be subcontracted or implemented in collaboration with other communication/extension facilities, like in the case of the radio programme and the production of a documentary of broadcasting quality.
- Institutional Support and Facilities Available
As mentioned before the extension unit should work in close collaboration with other institutions to receive technical support for the preparation of the extension messages as well to improve the communication skills.
During the mission a meeting was held with the Director of the Agriculture Extension Directorate of MAAR, and the Executive Producer. The Director expressed great interest in starting extension/communication activities for Bedouins. He recognised that at the moment there is no capacity for establishing services for Bedouin on a regular basis due to the lack of messages to be delivered and the mobility of the target group. The Director also expressed the willingness to initiate a close collaboration with the project to carry out an innovative extension/communication programme to be considered as a pilot activity to implement the design of regular services for Bedouins. At the moment, the Syrian Government is negotiating a project with IFAD which will include this component. The experience the project would gain implementing innovative communication activities for Bedouins, such as radio programmes, community based learning approach and the use of video to support
collaborative management, will provide the MAAR with useful field experiences on the basis of which to design this component. It was agreed that, once the present strategy and workplan are approved, a planning exercise will be carried out jointly by the project and the Extension Directorate, and an official letter of agreement will be signed to specify areas for cooperation and expected outputs. To this end a workshop should be held in Palmyra early March.
Furthermore, the following areas for cooperation were already identified:
a) Production of a weekly radio programme for Bedouins.
The Extension Directorate will facilitate access to the National Radio in order to include the programme for Bedouins in the regular programming at an appropriate time for broadcasting (maybe before the daily radio programme already broadcast for farmers). It will be produced by the project which will take care of preparing raw materials like interviews and technical messages, while the Extension Directorate will take care of final editing and broadcasting. The Extension Directorate will implement a training course on radio production for the extension staff of the project in order to define the format of the radio programme and to prepare the staff of the project for the production. Final agreement should be reached regarding the costs for broadcasting the radio programme. Once established the programme it will be monitored in terms of audience and production procedures.
b) Production of a documentary video programme about the project.
Within the Extension Directorate full Betacam facilities are available. Furthermore an experienced executive producer is undertaking the production of a weekly television programme for agricultural extension. It is recommended the project to produce the video documentary using the facilities of the Extension Directorate under the supervision of the executive producer and the National Extension Consultant. The cost of a 15 minute video programme (Betacam format), including the broadcasting by the national television is of about 1000 US $.
c) Other areas for collaboration.
The Extension Director expressed interest in defining other areas for cooperation at field level. One possibility would be to involve the extension circle unit working in Palmyra in carrying out the extension/communication plan jointly with the project. Interest was also expressed regarding the possibility of training Bedouins as community facilitators, especially women.
Furthermore, several printing shops are available in Damascus to produce the printed materials foreseen by the extension/communication plan. The project is presently verifying costs in order to prepare a detailed budget. Depending on the kind of institutional agreements for co-production, cost-sharing could also be proposed.
3.5. Detailed workplan
An operational framework for planning and implementation of extension/communication activities is presented below according with activities presented in Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4.
No.
Outputs
Activities
Requirements
Time frame
25 radio programmes broadcast
Production of a weekly radio programme to be broadcast (by the Extension Directorate).
Technical contents; agreement with Ext. Dir.; Training staff; assess audience; technical contents.
Apr.-Dec. 98
1 educational posters
Draft, field test and final production. Distribution.
Technical contents. Identify artist. Message design. Identification of critical locations for diffusion.
Jan.-March 98
1 logo for the project
Draft, field test and final production. Distribution.
Identify artist. Message design. Identification of critical locations for diffusion
Feb. 98
2 sets of signs on metal board
Draft, field test and final production. Location.
Identify artist. Message design. Identification of critical locations for diffusion.
June 98
3 video programmes
Script writing; shooting; editing. Talila; Solar Energy; Seed Production.
Technical contents. Complementary images
Talila March. 98
Energy Apr. 98
Seeds June 98
4 flipchart series on cloth
Draft, field test and final production:
Technical Contents. Identify drawer. Message design
Jan.-May 98
Sessions using education posters
Educational Poster
Poster. Guidelines on how to use it.
Jan.-Jul. 98
Information sessions using video
Raising awareness
Video. Booklet for training and discussion.
Jul.-Sept. 98
2 booklets
To be used for extension
Technical contents. Maybe related to video
Jul.-Sept. 98
2 photo flipcharts
Flipcharts for training
Technical contents. Photos; guidelines
August-Oct. 98
Community/group photo albums
Training of women
Women activities
continuos
Training of women facilitators
Training of women
Research by extension unit
continuos
Support to grazing committee
Communication for collaborative management
Video recording and playback of grazing committees activities
continuos
1 Workshop with the extension directorate
Support to strategy implementation
To approve the extension communication workplan; prepare letter of agreement
March 98
1 Video programme
Documentary on project activities
Broadcasting quality
to be finalised by October 98
4. Recommendations for strategy implementation
- Data collection and participatory message design
Due to the high technical competence of the international staff, the project has generated valuable technical results which, jointly with the PRA outcomes, constitutes the project "offer" in terms of knowledge and information. A great deal of information has been collected and it is being analysed. It is therefore important to concentrate on participatory validation and systematisation of messages the project wants to deliver according to Bedouins' needs and perceptions.
It has to be considered that effective message design is a long process which implies bridging the gap between technical people and communities. It generally involves: validation and adaptation of technical contents; participatory message design; accurate media selection; production and pre-testing of communication materials; final production and diffusion of the materials. To carry out these complex and time consuming activities it is necessary to establish a clear definition of the responsibilities and tasks of the extension unit, as well as permanent collaboration with other technical units of Al-Badia Directorate, especially the veterinarian unit.
The documentation process of ongoing project activities has to be carried out on a regular basis. Specific tasks should be assigned to each member of the extension unit for documentation, data analysis and information storage. These activities have to take into account final products (e.g. a video documentary, photo library organised according to topics etc.).
- Tasks of the extension unit
As mentioned before, according to the overall design of the extension component, individual terms of reference should be written and appropriate training should be undertaken in order to facilitate tasks. Once the final workplan has been approved and individual terms of reference written, a participatory assessment of extension unit and individual performances should be done taking into account the tasks agreed upon. Adequate training to fulfil tasks requirements should be provided as well as incentives (such as additional training, compensatory holidays, additional compensation etc.). Participatory assessment of staff expectations, strength and constraints should be done on a regular basis. This will facilitate the establishment of a collaborative environment.
- Training of national staff
Training of national staff both in extension and communication assessment and planning use is required. As mentioned earlier, participatory message design capacities have to be strengthened based on the use of PRA techniques (especially semistructured interviews).
Every extension staff should be trained in the production and use of one or more communication tools (flipcharts, photo camera and tape recorder) in order to document field activities and to share information with Bedouins. The following media production skills should be developed:
- at least one of the staff should be trained in video production (scriptwriting, video recording and basic editing procedures) in order to produce draft videos at field level:
- the entire staff should be able to carry out participatory radio production for the weekly radio programme;
- special training on low cost material production should be realised.
In order to utilise effectively the limited funds for training abroad, it is recommended that one person to be trained in video production as soon as possible in an Arab country, maybe Egypt were there is a development communication centre collaborating with FAO.
Furthermore, it is strongly recommended that the project identifies a talented artist to start with a permanent visual aid production.
- Participatory monitoring and evaluation
A user friendly monitoring and evaluation system to assess the use of appropriate communication channels and materials should be designed and implemented. Under this light special attention should be given to traditional and popular media/channels as well as to local key actors and opinion leaders (mapping them). In the future, Rapid Appraisal of Knowledge and Information Systems (RAKIS) should be considered, especially if a second phase is approved.
- Community facilitators
The identification of key actors that can be information/knowledge brokers/facilitators at household and community level is an important task in order to evaluate the possibility of undertaking community based communication and training activities especially for women. An assessment should be carried out by the extension unit in order to evaluate the feasibility of this strategy.
- Equipment and facilities requirements
The physical space for the extension unit at the moment is very limited. It is necessary to have another room in which to set up a small multimedia production unit. It could be organised in three areas: printed materials and photos (set up one computer with the scanner and the digital photo camera for low cost publication production); video recording and editing; radio production. Already available video shots, photos, slides and documents have to be organised into archives to improve accessibility. To set up the equipment it is recommended to ask for the support of the extension directorate, or to hire a local consultant.
Complementary equipment should by purchased such as:
- one TV-VHS set and a power generator to play back videos in the field;
- one VHS editor for editing raw videos;
- 3 audio recorders for the production of the radio programme (consult with Extension Directorate for compatible models).
A special effort is recommended in order to get access to E-mail, maybe through the FAO office in Damascus.
- Institutional support
It is urgent to provide follow-up to the meeting held with the Extension Directorate in order to confirm the interest in establishing an agreement with the project for strategy implementation. Once cleared, this report should be copied to the Directorate and a preliminary agreement should be confirmed.
- Budget
A tentative budget to finance extension/communication activities should be prepared according to the costs the project is verifying in Syria.
<section>6</section>
Annexes
Annex 1 - Terms of reference
Annex 2 - Mission schedule
Annex 3 - List of persons met
Annex 4 - Guidelines: "Communication assessment and planning"
Annex 5 - Questionnaire: Skills and tasks assessment
Annex 6 - Equipment available in the project
Annex 7 - Guidelines: 1. Production of an information video programme about project activities
Annex 8 - Guidelines: 2. Production of a video programme on seed production techniques
Annex 9 - References
Annex 10 - Maps
Annex 1 - Terms of reference
Communication Consultant
1. Assessment and evaluation of the communication needs of the project geared to nomadic livestock operators of both literate and illiterate audiences and targeting different groups involved in the utilisation and management of rangeland (women, men children, etc.)
2. Prepare a communication strategy and workplan for the project until its NTE.
3. In collaboration with the extension staff, the Consultant will help in identifying the most appropriate type of visual aids for modules to be produced for Bedouin women.
4. With the assistance of the Wildlife expert and the National Extension Consultant, the Communication Consultant will help designing or recommending simple techniques for producing materials for environmental conservation education and particularly for different target groups including school children.
5. Identify media production facilities or resource persons available in Syria who could produce the required communication materials.
6. Recommend guidelines for the preparation of Video Series with emphasis on Talila Reserve and Seed Production techniques.
7. Prepare in the field and present to RNER, according to reporting schedule and FAO reporting instructions, three copies and a diskette compatible with FAO reporting software (Word), a concise report detailing practical recommendations. The report must be cleared by FAO Field Operation Service before circulation.
Duration:
Three weeks
Duty Station:
Palmyra, Syria
Qualification:
High degree in communication with at least ten years of field experience.
Annex 2 - Mission schedule
Travel from Rome to Damascus
Briefing with FAO Rep., Programme Officer and Admin. Officer
Meeting staff project GCP/INT/589/ITA
Meeting with Mr. L. Galanti, Italian Embassy
Travel from Damascus to Palmyra
Briefing with Mr. M. Mirreh, CTA, and staff of project GCP/SYR/003/ITA
Presentation of the objectives and methodology of the mission
from 20 to 29/12/97
Palmyra, in-project activities for the extension/communication assessment and strategy development; 22/12 Field day with camel herders for the establishment of a local grazing committee
Travel from Palmyra to Damascus
Visa procedures
Meeting with Director and staff of the Directorate of Extension, Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform; de-briefing at FAO office with Mr. D. Burgeon
from 31/12/97 to 2/1/98
Drafting strategy proposal and preparation of final presentation
Meeting with CTA and project staff for presentation of main findings and conclusions.
Travel from Palmyra to Damascus
Travel from Damascus to Rome
Report writing and de-briefing at FAO HQs (AGCP and SDRs)
Annex 3 - List of persons met
FAO
Mr. M. Sinaceur, FAO Representative
Mr. D. Borgueon, Programme Officer
Dr. M. Mirreh, CTA GCP/SYR/003/ITA
Mr. B. Cavalcaselle, CTA GCP/INT/539/ITA
Mr. P. Del Lungo, Integrated Forest Management Expert, GCP/INT/539/ITA
Mr. T. Ettle, Extension specialist GCP/INT/539/ITA
Ms. C. Batello, Technical Focal Officer, AGCP, FAO Rome
Mr. S. Baas, SDAR, FAO Rome
Mr. P. Van der Stickhele, SDRS, FAO Rome
Project Staff
Mr. H. Fahad, National Project Director
Dr. T. Razzouk, National Extension Consultant
Mr. I. Mohammed, Chief Extension Unit
Ms. F. Daas, Agricultural Engineer
Ms. N. El Fargiani, Agricultural Observer
Mr. A. Al Jundi, Rengeland Counterpart
Mr. K. Al Jani, Agricultural Engineer
Ms. R. Gritli, JPO, Gender Analysis Specialist
Mr. A. Zaruk, JPO, Animal Nutrition Specialist
Government agencies
Mr. A. Al-Ahmad, Deputy Director of Al-Badia
Mr. Z. Darwish, Director of Agricultural Extension
Mr. N. Mahaini, Extension Directorate, Consultant, Executive Producer
Others
Mr. L. Galanti, Counsellor for Economic Affairs, Italian Embassy, Damascus
Mr. A. Masri, Director, Consultant, Rangeland Management Specialist
Annex 4 - Guidelines: "Communication assessment and planning"
Step I: Learning from within: participatory assessment of the extension/communication component
I. Objectives and tentative programme
The purpose of our meeting today is to start a learning process in which we share our ideas regarding extension and communication and we exchange knowledge and information already available in the project regarding this specific issue. The meeting will have two moments: a brief presentation and open discussions on general ideas regarding communication for rangeland and wildlife management; and an assessment of our daily work, the needs and constraints that we face, as well as the information gathered until now and the way how to use it to assess communication needs and to orient the definition of a communication/extension strategy and workplan. To this end a questionnaire has been distributed to assess tasks and skills within the extension unit and to express ideas regarding the needs to better undertake our work.
I would like to stress that, I have an excellent impression of the work that you have done until now and that most of the elements required to reach our objectives (communication need assessment and strategy formulation and planning) are already available within the project. For this reason I propose myself to be a facilitator, together with Dr. Talal, of an assessment process which has the following general objectives:
- To assess main target audiences related to project objectives and activities;
- To identify and prioritise communication, information and training needs for rangeland and wildlife management;
- To select appropriate extension/communication media, channels, activities and materials;
- To provide elements for the development of a coherent communication strategy and workplan and its implementation.
The assessment, planning and implementation process will be developed in several phases according to the following steps:
Step 1.
a. Development of a common framework which will unable defining the type of communication we are looking for and for what;
b. Participatory evaluation of the mandate, tasks, activities, constraints and results achieved by the extension/communication unit until now and proposals for improvement;
c. Assessment of the communication/extension objectives explicit and implicit for the unit;
d. Evaluation of the information gathered until now and the process of data collection, analysis and use;
e. Assessment of target audiences and principle communication needs (information, awareness building, training and people's participation) identified until now.
f. To select best suitable media and channels according to experiences already developed, communication objectives, needs and opportunities identified.
g. Development of a tentative strategy and workplan
Step 2.
a. Assessment of main findings of step 1 at field level
b. Assessment of communication strategy and workplan
c. Monitoring and evaluation system design
d. Production and field testing of communication materials
Step 3.
a. Assessment of main findings of step 2 and adjustment of the workplan
b. Implementation of the workplan
c. Monitoring
d. Evaluation
This is the process we will undertake until the end of the project. This time we concentrate on step 1. To this end, lets now share some ideas regarding development communication and its implication for participatory management of natural resources.
II. Communication as a process for natural resource management
Communication is a social process that contributes to decision making in natural resources management while, at the same time, stimulates action for development, facilitating the achievement of common goals through information sharing and action. It is a mean for different actors to gain shared understanding and to start group learning.
In general terms, communication links different actors in a process of joint action which requires:
- an understanding of common objectives
- a common "language" how each actor perceive the reality
- an agreement on the boundaries of the reality and/or the environment on which it is intended to intervene.
PRA activities help very much in creating the "participate environment" and are the basis for two way communication process. At the same time communication methods and tools can link different viewpoints and creating a common language between different stakeholders^2. In a participate environment this process serve as a medium of communication between individuals (e.g. Co-operatives, Ministry of Agriculture, Bedouins, the project and others), as they seek to understand and then build on each others' view of the relationship between the environment and the management.
^2 Stakeholders: all people involved in a social and/or development process.
Because environmental care activities have long term results, our focus is on learning and communicating as a permanent process. In synthesis we propose 3 main roles which communication can play in a natural resources management:
A. Making things visible: explaining biophysical information (increasingly with the aim of creating new perspectives rather then transferring pre-packaged solutions). In this case we are referring mainly to communication for training.
B. Fostering policy acceptance: promoting awareness through information among all actors involved in the development process and promoting interactive policy making by creating the climate for decision making rather then using persuasive advertising approaches.
C. Facilitating platforms processes: giving a voice to different stakeholders to engage platforms where negotiation among different parties can take place with regard to natural resources. This allow participatory decision making and what we call communication for people's participation.
By taking into account what we have just mentioned lets now try to set up our general framework for assessing communication activities for rangeland and wildlife management in the Syrian Steppe. This framework has to be clear (not implicit) so we can discuss and modify it, evaluate and share with other the model we try implement for our communication activities.
To this end we will use the term communication for collaborative natural resource management to describe the kind of communication which should be fostered by the project.
Collaborative management is a term used to describe a situation in which some or all of the relevant actors in a protected area are involved in a substantial way in management activities. The focus of their collaboration is on joint management, either at local, regional or national level. Communication for collaborative natural resources management implies to establish linkages among all stockholders involved, a common understanding, language, channels for two way communication flow, as well as respond to information and training needs to achieve sustainability.
III. Common framework for communication activities
Now we will see how to face communication planning and implementation. The main elements of communication planning are:
1) Situation analysis and communication research: at the very beginning we carry out a communication needs assessment. We will start identifying different audiences (even if this word is not correct en we prefer to use the word interlocutor). This will arise from a general participatory appraisal such as a PRA where people themselves will express their views about development and wealth. They will inscribe in some socio-economic, cultural or interest group with specific objectives and needs especially regarding information, education, training and participation.
2) The institutional framework: It requires careful consideration. Development communication acts very much as intermediary activity across several activities, disciplines and social groups. Communication activities should be flexible and adaptable to the institutional framework. There is not a fix solution but it will depend of the institutional framework of each country and the general socio economical and political situation. Communication bridges the gap between policy makers, research centres, extension workers and people. We should search sustainability of such activities, looking for an institutional setting which allows participation and continuity.
The creation of a so called communication or extension service is an important task and it should be done in a proper way. Sometimes it can be done within a Ministry, a local development agency, an NGO or a farmer organisation. Nowadays in many countries the trend is to start private and market oriented extensions services which will sustain themselves by selling their services. In the case of a subsidised extension/communication service, at list the 8-15 % of the total budget should be allocated for this kind of activities.
In the case of projects which start communication activities and or units they have to search the inclusion and sustainability of these within the institutional framework their are working, taking into consideration the existing opportunities and constraints.
3) Inventory of communication resources. Before to start with communication activities an assessment of already existing communication resources has to be done. We intend for communication resources: institutions, organisations and NGOs already involved in information, education, training and communication for development activities. They not always share the same view regarding the use of communication (e.g. commercial communication vs. development communication) therefore it has to be clarified the aim of communication activities. A very important aspect is also the identification of human resources and communication training needs. Human capital is the key element for the success of communication activities. Another fundamental element is the involvement and compromise of extension and communication specialist with the ultimate beneficiaries. Communication training needs should be clearly identified and a training programme should be set up. The communication inventory
also involves identification of equipment available, materials produced and physical and logistical facilities.
4) Communication channels and media selection: We consider as communication resources also media and channels already existing within a country and project area. We classify them in:
- mass media
- group media
- traditional media and channels
According to our target audience and communication objectives we can select one or more communication channels and media. Their selection will also depend from physical constraints, costs and feasibility of being incorporated in regular activities.
5) Type of communication required: Communication activities can have multiple uses. They main categories we will consider here are: communication for training; communication for awareness building and people's participation. The following steps will be undertaken to implement communication activities:
a. Once development actions have been decided upon through PRA, specific target groups will be identified. They have to be considered as interlocutors since the beginning, establishing with them horizontal and two way communication;
b. Audience analysis should be carried out identifying people literacy rate, traditional decision making process and communication channels
c. According to target audiences development and communication needs and characteristics, specific communication objectives have to be traced and shared both at grass root and institutional level for further participatory monitoring and evaluation;
d. Specific communication planing should be formulated according specific communication objectives and specific target audiences;
e. Media and channels selection should be also determined according to general communication strategy and communication resources available;
f. Message design should be carried on the basis of audience research, by involving people (each target audience) from the beginning. It should be taken into consideration appropriate ways of presenting the messages;
g. Production of materials and pre-testing at field level. Materials have to be produced always in a draft form and tested with target audiences, in small group of people representing such target audience. The pre-testing allows modification of the materials before the final version is produced;
h. Training of extension workers, field agents and community workers in the use of materials produced;
i. Implementation of the detailed communication workplan to production and use of the materials, with special attention to implementation of communication methodology at field level;
l. Ongoing monitoring and evaluation: a M&E system has to be set up from the beginning to understand which are the real effects of communication activities and to correct them;
m. Information fed back: messages and materials produced are revised to reflect the needs indicated by the M&E activities (formative evaluation);
n. Final summative evaluation: it is normally referred to the impact communication activities have reached at different level (policy, institutional, field, organisational, learning process etc.). It have to be carried out referring to each communication activities, so that lessons learned can be incorporated into the next activity.
The above communication process is resumed by the following scheme:
IV. From theory to practice
Now we have to see at what stage of our communication strategy development and planning we are. There are many questions but we already have the answers in our hands. The work done until now has been impressive and very good. Now we have to put in order our information, knowledge and experience and to prioritise our activities.
A possible criteria to be taken into consideration is that each activity to be carried out from now on must be useful, it should became an input for implementing actions which will support project objectives and respond to people's needs.
Now we have to start our communication assessment and planning based on what we already now, defining what, why, how, when and with whom communication activities have to be implemented. If we get lost we consult each others and the people we work with. Our role is to be facilitators of a learning process through which people will share knowledge and information. Communication tools will help us in this difficult task.
References:
FAO, 1989 Guidelines on Communication for Rural Development. A brief for development planners and project formulators. Development Support Communication Branch, FAO, Rome, Italy (also available in Arabic).
Ramirez, R. 1997 Participatory learning and communication approaches for managing pluralism: Implications for sustainable forestry, agriculture and rural development. Communication presented at the Working Group on Pluralism and Sustainable Forestry and Rural Development, FAO, Rome 9-12 December 1997.
Annex 5 - Questionnaire: Skills and tasks assessment
Name:
Age:
Education:
Languages:
Computer skills:
What are your tasks within the project (list in order of importance)?
What are the activities you usually carry out (list in order of importance)?
Do you have an individual workplan?
Since when are you working in the field of extension?
Did you received any formal training in extension and/or communication?
When? ____ By whom? ____ For how long? ____
With what kind of people do you work mainly (Bedouin men/women, children, settlers, others)?
What are the most important communication tools for extensions to work with Bedouin men and women? (e.g. interpersonal communication, visual aids, radio, television, others)?
Have you ever produced any communication material?
If yes, please describe the process you have undertaken (e.g. design, field testing, production, use).
What have been the main difficulties in the production and use of communication materials?
What are the main advantages of using such materials?
What kind of communication material do you think will be useful for your work and why?
What kind of training in communication planning and production would you like to have and why?
Please list any other kind of training you feel that is necessary for your work (e.g. language courses) and indicate why.
Annex 6 - Equipment available in the project
Item
Serial No.
Made
Model
Total item
Computer
UK
IBM/6542-103
Colour TV.
Japan
Sony/kv G25M1
Video
B5kk01377
Japan
Panasonic/NV-SD25AM
Video camera
D5HB00673
Japan
M3000/Panasonic
Stand
Japan
88M/4046/Slik
Battery
Japan
Panasonic/VW - VBF2E
Battery charger
C516263YD
Japan
VW-AM105/Panasonic
Slide projector
6914107/D-4000/Typ 369
Germany
Liesegang/3600AF/Selectiv
Overhead
D4000/Typ 625
Germany
Liesegang favorit
Flip chart
Screen
scanner
colour printer
photo cameras
GPS
Digital photo camera
- Vehicles and machinery:
2 taxis
2 pick ups
1 mini bus
6 motorcycles
2 tractors
1 pitter seder
1 chisel seder
Annex 7 - Guidelines: 1. Production of an information video programme about project activities
Title: Talila
Target: Sheep and camel nomadic herders
Duration: 20 minutes
Subject: presentation of project background, objectives and activities.
Objectives: to raise awareness of Beduins about the importance of the project
Format: VHS
The production of a video programme presenting the project to the target groups has been initiated several months ago. At the moment a video script and almost all the footage are already available within the project. These materials were analized with the national extension consultant and the following suggestions were made:
1. The video programme should be finalized as soon as possible in order to have the possibility of having a presentation of the project to be used in the field with different target groups. To this end an agreement should be reached with the Extension Directorate in order to have access to facilities for video editing (VHS format). Should the negotiation be unsuccessful, alternatives should be found with the private sector.
2. The script, according, to the oral translation given by the national extension consultant, seems to include all relevant elements the project wants to address. Nevertheless an English version should be sent to SDRE for final revision. The script should present the following resumed structure:
- original situation of Al-Badia and its environmental balance
- problems as they are felt by Bedouins (environmental degradation, lack of pastures etc)
- reasons which have generated the problem
- ways how the project is facing the problem
- alternatives for re-establishing the balance and return to the great Al-Badia.
Furthermore, the following criteria should be taken into consideration for producing the video:
- The duration of the video programme should not be longer than 30 minutes;
- The speaker should be a Bedouin or somebody presenting the problems and solutions under the Bedouins point of view. He should read the text in a very natural way and slowly in order to ensure comprehension of the contents. The problems should be expressed according to the way the people see them. The quantity of information should not be to much and too technical.
- There should be a clear reference to the participatory work the project is undertaking, especially the collaborative actions which have been identified and the way these have been agreed upon. Furthermore, special attention should be given to different rangeland and wildlife conservation measures the project is proposing in order to restablish the environmental balance.
The script and the images already available constitute a good start for the production of the video to be used at Bedouin level. Guidelines for the use of the video with the Bedouins should be written in order to facilitate discussion and understanding.
Annex 8 - Guidelines: 2. Production of a video programme on seed production techniques
Title: Seed Production Techniques
Target: technicians
Duration: 20 minutes
Subject: presentation of seed
Objectives: to inform about different seed production techniques
Format: VHS
The video programme is intended to serve as a base to inform technicians about different techniques and steps for seed production. Also in this case the script and most of the video footage is already available. Relevant images of seed collection have been missed but they could be replaced by photographs.
It is urgent that the project finalize the production of the video in order to facilitate the spreading of the information regarding this important aspect. Another agreement could be reached with the Extension Directorate in order to have access to editing facilities.
The programme should concentrate on technical recommendations for seed production the project is dealing with at the moment. These have to be presented in detail and with an easy presentation.
Different techniques should be described in specific modules of the same video, each of which separated by titles. Also in this case the speaker, who should be a technician, should speak clearly and slowly. The images should be edited in a didactic way, synthesizing production requirements and procedures. A comparison between different seed production techniques in order to select the most appropriate is also recommended to be presented as a resume at the end of the programme.
The preparation of a small booklet (mainly based on photographs) accompanying the video is also recommended. The structure of this visual aid should follow the same as that of the video.
Appropriate strategy for the use of this programme should be defined. It might be used for technical meetings but it could also be shown to Bedouin leaders in order to make them aware of project activities and technical recommendations. This element should be carefully considered by the extension staff of the project. It is urgent to finalize the programme as soon as possible.
Annex 9 - References
Abdulla, D. 1997. Rangeland Rehabilitation and Establishment of a Wildlife Reserve in the Syrian Steppe: A assessment study of Bedouin women situations in the project area. GCP/SYR/001/ITA Project. Directorate of Steppe, Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform. FAO.
Baas, S. 1997. Rangeland Rehabilitation and Establishment of a Wildlife Reserve in the Syrian Steppe: Back to Office Report, Backstopping Mission. SDAR, FAO, Italy.
Chatty, D. 1997. Rangeland Rehabilitation and Establishment of a Wildlife Reserve in the Syrian Steppe: Social Aspects and Community Participation. Report of PRA workshop, 6-16 April, (Palmyra). Queen Elizabeth House, Oxford University, UK
Chatty, D. 1997. Rangeland Rehabilitation and Establishment of a Wildlife Reserve in the Syrian Steppe: Social Aspects and Community Participation II. Report of PRA workshop, 20 - 25 September, (Palmyra). Queen Elizabeth House, Oxford University, UK
FAO, 1997. GCP/SYR/001/ITA Rangeland Rehabilitation and Establishment of a Wildlife Reserve in the Syrian Steppe (main phase), Report of the Tripartite Midterm Evaluation Mission, October 1997, Damascus
FAO, 1995. GCP/SYR/003/ITA Rangeland Rehabilitation and Establishment of a Wildlife Reserve in the Syrian Steppe (main phase), Project document, Directorate of Steppe, Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform, Syria. FAO, Rome, Italy.
FAO, 1991. Abdhulla Masri. The Tradition of Hema as a Land Tenure Institution in Arid Land Management-Syria. FAO/ESH Working Papers on Pastoral and Agropastoral Societies
FAO, 1989. Guidelines on Communication for Rural Development. A brief for development planners and project formulators. Development Support Communication Branch, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Nagel, U. J.; Bass, S.; Chiyanika, P.; Eckert, S.; Edsen, J.; Geiger, M.; Laue, R.; Lubke, G.; Marbach, H. 1992. Developing A Participatory Extension Approach. A design for Siavonga District, Zambia.
Nesheiwat, K. 1994. Rangeland Rehabilitation and Establishment of a Wildlife Reserve in the Syrian Steppe: Socio-Economic Component. GCP/SYR/001/ITA Project. Directorate of Steppe, Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform. FAO.
Ramirez, R. 1997. Participatory learning and communication approaches for managing pluralism implications for sustainable forestry, agriculture and rural development. Paper presented at the Working Group on Pluralism and Sustainable Forestry and Rural Development, FAO, Rome 9-12 December 1997
Razzouk, T. 1997. Rangeland Rehabilitation and Establishment of a Wildlife Reserve in the Syrian Steppe: First Agricultural Extension Mission. GCP/SYR/003/ITA Project. Directorate of Steppe, Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform. FAO.
Razzouk, T. 1997. PRA In Extension. A Special Methodology Design for the Bedouins of the Syrian Steppe (Draft). GCP/SYR/003/ITA Project. Directorate of Steppe, Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform. FAO
Wattenbach, H. 1996 Rangeland Rehabilitation and Establishment of a Wildlife Reserve in the Syrian Steppe: First Mission. GCP/SYR/003/ITA Project. Directorate of Steppe, Ministry of and Agrarian Reform. FAO.
Annex 10 - Maps
Map 1: Syria
Map 2: Project area
