<title>ADCP/REP/80/12 - Outline Research Programme for the African Regional Aquaculture Centre</title>
<section>1</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
One of the main activities of the African Regional Aquaculture Centre established in Port Harcourt, Nigeria, under the UNDP/FAO Regional Project RAF/76/009 (Establishment of an African Regional Aquaculture Centre) is multidisciplinary research to solve problems encountered in large-scale application of aquaculture systems and to improve the technologies involved. The farming systems selected for research are those that were selected for production programmes in the national ten-year development plans prepared by representatives of countries that participated in the first Regional Workshop on Aquaculture Planning organised by the FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) in Accra, Ghana, July 1975.
These systems, in order of priority, are:
(i) culture of Tilapia spp. and Clarias lazera in freshwater ponds;
(ii) fish culture in brackishwater ponds;
(iii) culture in coastal areas;
(iv) fish culture in open waters;
(v) fish culture in combination with animal husbandry; and
(vi) shrimp culture in coastal ponds.
The outline programme of research was formulated by a task force consisting of the following:
Mr. M.A. Afinowi - Nigerian Institute for Oceanography and Marine Research
Dr. K.W. Chow -FAO
Dr. A.G. Coche - FAO
Dr. S. Dadzie - FAO
Dr. V.G. Jhingran - FAO
Dr. T.V.R. Pillay - FAO
in consultation with a number of people who have direct knowledge of the problems faced in aquaculture development in the region, including Mr. B.F. Dada, Director, Federal Department of Fisheries, Victoria Island, Lagos, Nigeria, and Dr. W.Q.-B. West, Regional Fisheries Officer, FAO, Accra, Ghana.
In formulating the programme, the task force took into account the fact that the Centre is to operate from its temporary headquarters at the Rural Development Training Centre at Aluu (Port Harcourt, Rivers State) making use of the facilities at the Buguma Brackishwater Aquaculture Station and fresh water at a selected aquaculture station near Port Harcourt, pending the construction of a freshwater farm and permanent buildings for the Centre on the site acquired at Aluu adjacent to the Centre's temporary headquarters. It was noted that some expansion of facilities at the Buguma Station is already underway and some freshwater pond facilities can be developed in the near future at the permanent site of the Centre with the assistance of the Engineering Unit of the Rural Development Training Centre.
The programme of research described in this document is planned to be implemented in two phases; the first phase, which will consist of a start-up period of two years, followed by a second phase (five years) of intensive experimentation and testing of results under different conditions in national centres linked to the Regional Centre. Such a phasing was considered necessary because of the time it would take for (i) all the physical facilities to be developed, (ii) all the scientific staff agreed to be provided by the host government to become available and (iii) the secondment of scientific staff by other participating governments for research. It was also recognized that during the initial stages, the entire international staff of the Centre will have to devote a considerable part of their time to the training programme and to the building-up of laboratory, library and other support services,
From its discussions with extension workers and planning officials the task force realized that a major constraint to aquaculture development in African countries is the widespread scepticism about the economic viability of aquatic farming. The success of rural aquaculture programmes underway at present is judged more in terms of their contribution to food production and rural employment, rather than the financial return on investment. This is not to say that there is no economically viable aquaculture in Africa, but rather that there are, unfortunately, very few documented cases. Obviously, in the absence of the required documentation it has become extremely difficult to attract the required investment in aquaculture, either in the private or public sector. The task force, therefore, recommends a high priority to be given to (a) experimental work directed toward maximizing the economic efficiency of widely adopted farming systems, such as the pond culture of tilapia; and
(b) demonstration of the most economic methods of farming at the Centre and eventually in the national centres linked to it. The Regional Centre needs to develop essential capability in economic studies and ensure that appropriate economic measurements form an integral part of every experimental design.
Taking into account the recognized urgent need for demonstrating the economics of farming, the task force considered the species of fish to be selected for studies and the culture techniques that should receive priority in research. In so far as tilapia are concerned, the main concern would be to grow them to a marketable size in the minimum period of time, and before they begin to breed. In brackishwater ponds built on mangrove soil, which tends to. be acidic and often peaty, the development of benthic algae and other organisms or even adequate quantities of plankton, cannot be expected for the first few years after pond construction, due to the time it takes for soil conditions to improve. In such circumstances artificial feeding appears to be the best means of obtaining rapid growth so that the fish would attain marketable size in a reasonably short period of time. The task force therefore recommends a major effort at the Centre, to formulate, prepare and test feeds based
on ingredients locally available in African countries. Besides being nutritionally adequate, the feeds should also be economically acceptable. Even if inexpensive feeds cannot be made, it is imperative that feed costs do not exceed acceptable levels in the overall farming costs. The Centre should establish a well-equipped nutrition and feed laboratory with a pilot feed mill. The task force noted that the host institution (National Institute of Oceanography and Marine Research) has the essential equipment in its laboratories in Lagos and a staff member has already been trained in feed technology at the course organized by ADCP in 1978. The Centre should also undertake a survey of all available feed ingredients in Nigeria and other countries in the region, and determine their nutrient values, so that the appropriate modifications can be made in feed formulations based on the availability and costs of ingredients when the need arises.
Probably because tilapia, which is the fish most widely cultivated in Africa, breeds freely, not enough attention has so far been paid to controlled breeding and hatchery production of fry. In most of the fanning systems to be investigated at the Centre, with only the possible exception of the mangrove oyster, the development of reliable methods of breeding and mass-rearing of larvae appear to be essential. The Centre has therefore to develop adequate facilities and expertise for work on these aspects. While detailed genetic work can probably be started only during the second phase of the Centre's programme of research, identification of stocks or strains should start earlier by obtaining brood stock from different river systems or other natural habitats, and breeding and rearing them separately to determine their growth and behavioural characteristics. This would provide information on the variability of significant culture characteristics to plan future experiments in
selection and hybridization.
In the present state of aquaculture in Africa, it is believed that diseases do not present a major problem. However, with the adoption of more intensive farming methods and large-scale commercial operations, risks of losses due to diseases or environmental changes may become more significant. It is therefore considered essential for the Centre to develop a disease laboratory with adequate facilities for diagnosis treatment and overall health monitoring work. Local staff should receive specialized training and guidance in the establishment of a fish health programme.
Cost of construction of fish farms and other culture installations form a major element of investment in aquaculture and it is believed that high construction costs may often be responsible for the low returns on investment in some countries of Africa. Studies at the Centre should therefore pay special attention to developing farm designs and construction methods that will minimize capital costs. Suitable farm implements and installations also have to be designed to reduce operating costs. A small engineering unit and workshop would therefore be essential for the Centre's activities.
The development of adequate capabilities in economic studies, farm engineering, breeding and hatchery techniques, nutrition and feed technology, pathology and fish health, besides overall farm management, would enable the Centre to undertake the multidisciplinary research required for solving the problems encountered in aquaculture, which will be described in later sections.
Besides research that the Centre would carry out by itself, there are certain studies for which cooperation of other institutions or agencies will have to be sought. The most important of these will be on public health hazards that may be associated with aquaculture. Whether fish ponds will cause the spread of common water-borne diseases, such as malaria and schistosomiasis, will have to be determined with the help of public health scientists, and suitable pond management and other measures developed to combat the problem, if necessary.
<section>2</section>
2. CULTURE OF TILAPIA AND CLARIAS IN FRESHWATER PONDS
2.1 Tilapia culture in freshwater ponds
2.2 Clarias culture in freshwater ponds
2.1 Tilapia culture in freshwater ponds
2.1.1 Background
2.1.2 Research needs
2.1.3 Research approach
2.1.1 Background
Being native to Africa and widely distributed throughout the continent, tilapia have been the most commonly cultured species in the region for the last three decades. The first experiments were made with T. macrochir and T. rendalli, collected from the Luapula-Mweru (1946-47) and reared in south-eastern Zaire. From there tilapia culture rapidly spread into western and eastern Africa, using also other species.
Although more than 90 species of tilapia have been recorded, only four species, shown below, are commonly cultured in Africa on a relatively large scale:
Group
Species
Biological Characteristics
Tilapia
T. melanopleura^1/
Macrophagous herbivores; spawn on substrates
Sarotherodon
T. nilotica
T. mossambica
T. macrochir
Microphagous omnivores; incubate eggs and hold larvae in the mouth of female parent
^1^/ This species is described by some as T. guineensis
Experience so far has clearly shown the importance of the choice of species for culture. The best results have been obtained with T. nilotica which readily feeds on plankton and on various artificial feeds, grows well and can provide high yields under pond culture. T. melanopleura has also been popular because it feeds on higher vegetation and grows relatively well, yielding high production under intensive culture. T. mossambica and T. macrochir have slower growth rates. They reproduce when young and small, causing retarded growth, overpopulation and consequently stunted populations in ponds. On the basis Of experience gained, T. nilotica has been identified in most African countries as the most suitable species for intensive culture in freshwater ponds. The culture of this tilapia should therefore be given the highest priority for research at the Centre. As T. melanopleura also gives satisfactory results and probably has certain advantages over T. nilotica in brackish
water, this species should also be used for studies at the Centre.
To produce tilapia in ponds as an economic crop one has two basic options, either culture without sex separation or the culture of all-male (or predominantly male) populations.
Failure of tilapia culture in the past, has often been due to uncontrolled spawning, producing large numbers of fry and stunted populations. It has been shown in experiments and limited farm trials that this can be overcome in two ways:
(i) appropriate management which enhances the growth of fingerlings in order to attain a commercially acceptable size in as short a period of time as possible, and preferably before spawning occurs. For this to be successful, the pond should be completely drained after each cropping. It should then be treated, so as to destroy any fish left. The stocking of the pond should be done with healthy fingerlings of one age class, and intensive feeding should be done with a suitable protein-rich diet. The selection of strains with fast growth rate and late maturity would obviously contribute greatly to the success of this system;
(ii) the addition of a predator species to control the population by feeding on fry and fingerlings. Predator species such as Lates niloticus, Hemichromis fasciatus and Clarias lazera have been used for this purpose in research stations. In most cases, the results have been inconclusive. The application of this method outside the research Stations has rarely been successful. Observations on tilapia-predator relationship show that it is rather unclear. Stocking and size ratios may affect results very considerably. In general, it appears that the adoption of this method is unlikely to be successful, unless combined with some other method of reproduction control.
Monosex culture can resolve the problem of uncontrolled reproduction in rearing ponds. Since the males have higher growth rates than the females, production of larger fish and higher yields are possible when all-male stocks are grown. All-male tilapia populations can be produced in one of three ways:
(i) manual sexing: skilled personnel and relatively large-size fingerlings (50-80 g) are required for separating sexes manually. It is time-consuming and often results in a loss of 40-50 percent Of the fingerling production, due to the discarding Of females. Errors can easily be made even by skilled workers;
(ii) monosex male hybrids can be produced by the crossing of some tilapia species, but not all crosses will produce 100 percent males. The cross between T. hornorum males and T. nilotica females is reported to give all-male offspring, although some females may also be produced if the brood stock is not of pure line. The F1 generation, being fertile, may backcross with the female parent fish in rearing ponds and produce fry of both sexes. Culture of hybrids has not yet been adopted for farming to any appreciable extent in Africa. Several problems have been encountered in producing hybrids, such as maintaining the purity of brood stocks and the limited fecundity of parent fish which restricts fry production. Difficulties in preventing the entry of wild tilapia into culture ponds has also been one of the other major constraints;
(iii) sex reversal techniques have been adopted with some success. Feeding hormones (e.g., methyltestosterone) to the larvae between the second and sixth Week after hatching has been observed to reverse females into males. Though reported to be successful in experimental work, this technique has yet to be tried in pilot- or large-scale farming operations. Larvae have to be given specially prepared artificial feeds containing the hormone for about six weeks, excluding all natural food. The presence of hormone residue in adult fish has not yet been studied.
Of the three techniques described above for controlling tilapia reproduction in the production ponds, the last two seem the most promising, although not yet adequately developed and immediately applicable for commercial production. Since hybridization for the production of all-male tilapia will be a major item of research at the Latin American Regional Aqua-culture Centre in Brazil, with which this Centre will establish close liaison, it is recommended that research on these lines be considered only during the second phase of its research programme, if the results of work done in Brazil warrant it. The Centre should concentrate on detailed investigation on sex reversal.
Recent experience in a pilot-scale farm in the Ivory Coast indicates the relative efficiency of combining sexing with the use of predators, for successful control of reproduction. The production cycle in the farm is based on three separate age-classes, fry (5 g), fingerling (25-30 g), and adult fish (250 +g). The fingerlings are sexed manually by trained workers and only males are retained. The sexing error is estimated to be about 10 percent. To control the reproduction of residual females in the population, a small predator (10-50 g H. fasciatus) is used in the production ponds at a low 'stocking rate (3-10 percent of the weight of tilapia stocked). The predator may be re-used several times, as its growth is relatively slow and the size rarely exceeds 100 g. It can be bred easily in small ponds. This method deserves to be investigated further through critical experiments using either H. fasciatus or C. lazera as possible fry predators. Mechanical means of size grading for
separation of sexes may facilitate the adoption of this method in large-scale farming.
Although wild reproduction has been the major problem in tilapia culture, in actual practice the scarcity of fry and fingerlings in sufficient numbers has, somewhat strangely, been also a major constraint, particularly in small-scale rural farming. Mass production of fry and fingerlings cannot yet be considered a well-developed technique. Methods of brood stock selection and rearing, design and preparation of spawning ponds, breeding, larval rearing and nursery management, need to be developed. The most efficient sex ratio to be used for breeding has yet to be determined for each species. It has been reported that a ratio of 1 male to 2-3 female T. nilotica is the most appropriate. Recent evidence, however, suggests that a higher number of females (6-10) would increase the number of hatchlings in the breeding ponds. Another aspect of interest is the reported effect of water temperature on the sex ration of progeny. In the Ivory Coast, it has been observed in very shallow
ponds (30-50 cm) - and consequently relatively warm water - that the proportion of males among the progeny of T. nilotica could be as high as 70-80 percent. If this is proved to be true, the design of breeding ponds could be modified to attain predominantly male population of fry for more productive farming. The importance of intensive feeding with nutritionally adequate feeds to obtain rapid growth of tilapia to marketable size in a short period of time, has already been indicated. Experience so far shows that it will be extremely difficult to obtain such growth rates through the production of natural foods by fertilization in ponds. A variety of feedstuffs have been used in pond culture of tilapia, including cassava and brewery wastes can be fed to them from demand feeders, minimizing loss of feeds. This provides some basis for future work on the formulation of efficient and economic feeds.
2.1.2 Research needs
Based on a review of the state of technologies relating to the culture of T. nilotica and T. melanopleura in freshwater ponds, the following research needs were identified:
(i) development of suitable methods of brood stock selection and management, including design of spawning ponds or tanks;
(ii) determination of appropriate ratios of male to female pond brood fish in spawning ponds, and the influence of water depth and temperature on the sex ratio of progenies;
(iii) development of suitable hatchery systems; hatchery production of fry;
(iv) testing and standardization of sex reversal, using hormone-fortified feeds; monitoring of hormone residue in adult fish;
(v) development of easy and practical methods of sexing fry/fingerlings, including mechanical graders;
(vi) determination of the efficiency of controlling over-population in tilapia ponds by the use of selected predators (Hemichromis fasciatus or possibly Clarias lazera);
(vii) study of digestion physiology, with special reference to the production and character of digestive enzymes, in order to determine response to dietary patterns;
(viii) studies on nutritional requirements of different life stages and age groups;
(ix) formulation, preparation and testing of suitable feeds for larvae, fry, fingerlings and adult fish, based on locally available ingredients and testing their effectiveness in terms of cost and fish production;
(x) development and testing of suitable feed dispensers;
(xi) determination of the feasibility of producing marketable tilapia as a short season crop by intensive feeding;
(xii) economic evaluation of different culture practices and the determination of the most profitable methods of tilapia culture in ponds.
2.1.3 Research approach
A review of the research needed will clearly show that a systems approach is essential to obtain results that can be readily applied in farming. Almost all the studies need experimental work. However, each of the investigations would not need separate experiments. Many of the factors involved are inter-dependent and so through factorially designed experiments, it should be possible to study a number of parameters simultaneously. Monitoring of water conditions, including temperature, dissolved oxygen, pH, salinity if applicable, fish health, growth and behaviour, will have to be done on a routine basis to enable proper interpretation of experimental results.
In view of the observed differences in the growth potential, fecundity and breeding characteristics of tilapia populations from different environments, it is necessary to obtain brood fish from as many representative locations as possible and breed pure lines in order to describe their characteristics and evaluate the extent of variability of observed characters. It would be useful to segregate sexes and rear them separately on special feeds. The effect of such rearing methods on the breeding behaviour of the fish has to be observed.
As it is believed that the development of separate hatcheries, either on a centralized basis or at the farm level, would contribute to the availability of good quality fry and fingerlings for farming operations, suitable spawning and hatchery facilities have to be developed. Spawning ponds or tanks should be designed based on the breeding habits of the fish; the differences in the habits of T. nilotica and T. melanopleura make it necessary to have different designs for their spawning. A simple hatchery design can be developed for mass production of larvae.
Breeding experiments can easily be designed to test the hypothesis that water depth or consequent temperature regime in the spawning ponds would have a determinant role on the sex ratio of progenies. This could be further verified through laboratory-scale experiments where water temperature and other conditions can be controlled.
The efficiency of larval feeding with cultured zoo-planktonic organisms and artificial feeds will have to be compared. It is believed that a larval diet based on whole eggs, dispensed in the form of minute globules of yolk encased in albumin, would form an efficient and economic feed for larvae. This has to be tested under laboratory and field conditions.
The study on sex-reversal can be done largely through laboratory-scale experiments based on work already done in the Philippines, using methyltestosterone-fortified feeds. If found successful, pilot-scale production experiments will have to be undertaken, incorporating observations on the growth and behaviour of the treated stock and residue of the drug in adult fish. Comparative experiments may be required to determine the best dosage of hormones and feeding procedures for sex-reversal.
Although the development of a sex-reversal technique can render other methods of reproduction control in tilapia ponds unnecessary, parallel studies of other procedures should be undertaken because (a) one cannot be sure of the results of sex reversal studies and (b) even when found to be feasible, other methods may have to be adopted in rural areas where centralized fry production is not developed. It will be useful to try different methods of manual sexing to separate females and males in fry and fingerling stages. Mechanical grading by size is believed to be possible as males of a given age are larger, and the small percentage that cannot be separated can be either discarded or grown in separate ponds along with an adequate number of predators. Sexing procedures, as well as the efficiency of selected predators to control populations of tilapia fry in ponds, will have to be determined through production experiments. The species that are recommended to be tried as predators
are Hemichromis fasciatus and possibly Clarias lazera.
As stated earlier, the development of suitable feeds is considered to have special importance in successful culture of tilapia. This has been found to be the case in most other culture systems that show potential for development in Africa. It would therefore be necessary to make a detailed survey of the availability of feed ingredients and their costs and to undertake their proximate analysis to determine their nutritive values, if the necessary information is not already available. Laboratory studies of the digestion physiology of the two species of tilapia, with special reference to digestive enzyme characteristics and production, should be carried out. Through experiments with test feeds prepared on the basis of available information, the nutrient requirements of the species can be roughly outlined. Based on these data appropriate least-cost feeds should be formulated and tested initially on a laboratory scale and then in production trials. Data on nutritive value and
cost of feed ingredients should enable adjustments and substitutions to be made in diet formulae, if the need arises, either in the Centre itself or in the countries where the feed is to be used.
A series of factorially designed production experiments are suggested to determine the feasibility of producing marketable tilapia as a short-season crop and to evaluate the economic viability of such farming. The culture variables of significance, besides limnological conditions, would be size and sex composition of fry or fingerlings, as well as their genetic features, stocking rates, feeds, feeding procedures, health of stock, ratio of predators and type of predator(s) when present, and duration of growing period.
2.2 Clarias culture in freshwater ponds
2.2.1 Background
2.2.2 Research needs
2.2.3 Research approach
2.2.1 Background
Although not yet widely cultivated and not included as a priority species in the development plans of all African countries, the freshwater catfish Clarias lazera, has come to achieve some special importance in recent years because of a number of reasons. The success of catfish culture elsewhere in the world has encouraged the search for an African species that has culture potential and consumer acceptance. Experimental culture of catfish in some countries of the Region have yielded encouraging results. When compared to tilapia, which is the most widely cultivated group, this catfish can more easily be grown to a marketable size in a relatively short period of time. When cultured in combination with tilapia, Clarias is reported to serve sometimes as a predator of tilapia fry produced by wild spawning. It gives high yields in ponds and appears to be quite hardy and able to grow well even in relatively poor pond conditions. Because of these reasons, the task force suggests
that the culture of Clarias should form a subject of research at the Centre.
At present this species is cultured in some countries of Africa, alone or in combination with Tilapia nilotica. It is an omnivore, and cannot therefore be considered as complementary in its feeding habits with T. nilotica. However, as mentioned earlier, it is believed that Clarias can keep tilapia populations in ponds under control, by feeding on larvae and fry produced by wild spawning. It must, however, be noted that this belief has not been fully substantiated. In relatively turbid water it has been observed that Clarias does not feed on tilapia fry; even in clear water its efficiency as a predator has yet to be fully proved.
The growth rate of the species in ponds is relatively rapid, reaching a weight of 400-500 g in less than six months, providing yields of up to 7-15 t/ha/year.
The two major constraints to the wider cultivation of this species appear to be the availability of (a) fry and (b) suitable feeds. It has been demonstrated that Clarias can easily be induced to breed by the administration of fish or synthetic hormones. Breeding appears to be possible throughout most parts of the year under tropical conditions. However, methods for mass-rearing of larvae have not yet been developed. A suitable artificial feed may be one of the major requirements for successful larvae rearing, as apparently in the absence of proper food, large-scale loss of larvae occurs due to cannibalism.
Preliminary studies have shown that adult Clarias would feed on compounded feeds. They seem to be rather slow feeders as they did not feed from demand feeders. Because of this, the conversion ratios were always high, but in fertile ponds, with natural food, they seemed to need only supplemental feeds of relatively low protein content. These observations have to be verified through appropriate experiments.
Even though it is true that the scarcity of fry and feed are the major constraints to Clarias culture, and high yields have been obtained in experiments, it should also be pointed out that standard methods of producing marketable fish have not yet been developed. Once the main constraints are overcome, it will be necessary to evolve appropriate production techniques, including pond management and health protection measures.
2.2.2 Research needs
(i) Brood fish selection and rearing; standardization of induced breeding techniques;
(ii) development of hatchery methods, including mass rearing of larvae using special artificial feeds and natural foods;
(iii) nutritional studies and the preparation and testing of feeds for larvae, fry and adults, based on locally available ingredients;
(iv) studies to determine the possible value of Clarias as a predator in tilapia ponds;
(v) production trials to determine optimum stocking rates in mono- and polyculture, growth rates, yields and economies of operations;
(vi) determination of diseases or health hazards in intensive culture systems.
2.2.3 Research approach
As the first step in the development of an effective breeding and seed production programme, a system of brood fish selection and rearing of males and females in appropriate numbers has to be established. It is necessary to delineate more clearly the breeding behaviour and seasons, so as to schedule breeding operations for best results. Comparative experiments will be needed to determine the most efficient hormones to be used for induced breeding, as well as the dosages and procedures to be adopted.
A hatchery operation, including rearing of hatchlings up to the fry stage, has to be developed. Indoor hatchery jars and rearing tanks can be used for the purpose, but success would largely depend on the efficiency of the larval feed used. So priority has to be given to the formulation, preparation and testing of a suitable feed. Initially the whole-egg larval feed suggested for tilapia larvae should be tried. In comparative experiments zooplanktonic organisms collected from nature or raised in the farm should be used. Based on the results of initial tests, methods of large-scale production of larval food have to be developed.
Observations seem to indicate that adequate aeration and protection from direct sunlight are of importance for successful larval rearing. This has to be experimentally verified, and if found to be true, necessary modifications and additions should be made in the hatchery design. In indoor hatcheries it should not be difficult to incorporate the necessary provisions.
As for nutritional studies and the development of feeds, the approach should essentially be the same as suggested for tilapia. The observation that Clarias may need only feeds with low protein content, should be taken into account when formulating test feeds. It may also be necessary to incorporate some attractant in feeds to induce more ready feeding. As an alternative, feeds of higher water stability have to be developed so that loss of feeds will be minimized. Comparative studies on feeding methods should also be conducted.
Comparative fry and fingerling rearing experiments should be carried out, both indoors and in outdoor earthen ponds, to determine the most efficient methods, and to see whether direct sunlight has any unfavourable influence. Methods of reducing or avoiding cannibalism should be determined experimentally, as for example, by means of adequate artificial feeding, induced turbidity, or size manipulation of fry.
Factoriallv designed production experiments in monoculture as well as polyculture with T. nilotica should be conducted, incorporating all the significant variables. Possible losses due to fish escaping over dikes during rainy seasons should be prevented by fencing or other devices. Observations should be made on the extent of cannibalism among adult fish and culture experiments should be conducted with fingerlings of uniform size range and grading of fish at regular intervals, to prevent the occurrence of undersized fish (and consequent cannibalistic tendencies in the stock). The economics of Clarias culture should be determined by the evaluation of all operating costs and price of production obtained.
Experimental work needed to determine the efficiency of Clarias as a predator in tilapia ponds has been described earlier. In a polyculture system where a high production of both Clarias and Tilapia are aimed at, optimum stocking rates, feeding regimes and the influence of feeding on predation have to be determined through comparative experiments. Through cost-benefit assessments the relative advantages of polyculture should be determined.
Although diseases do not seem to present a major problem at present, it is very likely that health hazards would occur in intensive farming with high stocking rates and intensive feeding. It will therefore be necessary to monitor the health of the fish along with water quality conditions.
<section>3</section>
3. FISH CULTURE IN BRACKISHWATER PONDS
3.1 Background
3.2 Research needs
3.3 Research approach
3.1 Background
Brackishwater fish culture is still in the early stages of development in Africa. The present practices are based on the availability of natural fry and often several species are either purposely stocked or they gain entry with the tidal water, in spite of preventive measures. The more common species in brackishwater ponds are mullets, tilapia and catfish. The combination of species is only incidental and not actually based on their compatibility in terms of the use of food available or other habits. In so far as tilapia are concerned, the problem of prolific breeding, over-population and stunted growth occurs at least when all available species gain entry. Mullet fry are generally available in required numbers, but the growth and production achieved so far are not high. This is largely due to the nature of the soil on which brackishwater ponds are built. Coastal swamps and mangrove areas used for pond construction generally have peaty acid soils. Besides the difficulties of
building water-tight dikes with peaty soils, serious problems of maintaining favourable pH of water and soil for the growth of benthic as well as planktonic fish food organisms, are faced during the first few years of pond operation. Till the toxic salts are leached out from the soil and its texture improved by the deposition of silt brought in by high tides, which may take as much as two or three years, the growth of adequate quantities of natural food cannot be relied upon for high density culture of mullets or Other fish.
Different species of tilapia are cultivated in brackish water in several areas. Initial culture experiments with the catfish, (Chrysichthys) have given very encouraging results when fed with artificial food. It would appear that a high production cannot be expected with only natural food.
The economic viability of brackishwater pond culture, as freshwater pond culture, has yet to be convincingly demonstrated, and future work has necessarily to be focussed on this requirement.
In view of the above factors, the task force recommends that initial studies should concentrate on monoculture of three species, viz., Tilapia melanopleura, T. nilotica and Chrysichthys nigrodigitatus.
The problems of culturing tilapia in brackishwater ponds are essentially the same as in freshwater ponds. It is known that salinity would affect the breeding of T. nilotica, but the effect of different salinities on breeding has not yet been experimentally verified. If separate breeding and fry production facilities with supplies of fresh water are developed, this will not become a major constraint. Whether salinity will affect growth' rates of these species also has yet to be determined.
Although the culture of Chrysichthys has been attempted in a number of places in West Africa, very little scientific research has been done on this. C. nigrodigitatus, which is the more desirable species for culture, is a brackishwater species, which migrates up-river to freshwater areas for breeding during the rainy season (generally from July to September). This species seems to have only one restricted breeding season, unlike the other two slow-growing species of the genus (C. walkeri and C. auratus) which breed throughout the year. Even though the fish would attain up to the fourth stage of maturity in ponds they have not been observed to breed naturally in such water or in brackish water. Preliminary experiments show fast growth and the possibility of high production, when fed with artificial feeds such as oil cakes.
The main constraint to the farming of this species appears to be the scarcity of fry in adequate numbers. It is difficult to find enough fry in natural habitats. Induced breeding and larval rearing techniques have yet to be developed. Similarly nutritionally and economically suitable feeds have to be developed for larvae, fry and adults. Though the fish grows relatively fast, the growth and production that can be obtained in high density culture in short growing periods, have yet to be determined. In fact the whole farming system remains to be developed. The need for demonstrating economic viability applies to Chrysichthys culture also, even though it is a high-priced fish and there appears to be no major difficulties in growing them to a uniform marketable size with artificial feeding.
In addition to the problems related to the species cultured, there is also the inherent problem of design and management of brackishwater ponds built on mangrove soil. Methods of controlling the acidity and leaching out of toxic salts from the soil have not yet been adequately developed.
3.2 Research needs
The research needs for tilapia culture in brackish water are essentially the same as for their culture in fresh water and has already been described on page 3. In addition to these it will be necessary to determine the effect of salinity on the breeding of the two species selected and whether freshwater hatcheries will be needed for the production of fry for brackishwater culture.
Other factors that may need some special attention are the entry of extraneous species into the ponds and the maintenance of optimum salinity.
In regard to the culture of Chrysichthys, the following research needs were identified:
(i) Study of maturation and breeding;
(ii) development of brood-stock rearing methods and induced breeding;
(iii) hatchery systems and rearing of larvae and fry;
(iv) nutritional studies and development of suitable feeds for larvae, fry and adults;
(v) determination of stocking rates, feeding regimes, growth and yield in production ponds;
(vi) diseases and. disease control;
(vii) economic evaluation of culture system.
Of equal importance to both Tilapia and Chrysichthys culture in brackish water would be the design of ponds, methods of leaching pond soils and the control of pH of pond water.
3.3 Research approach
As regards tilapia culture in brackish water, besides the research described under freshwater pond culture, the effect of salinity has to be studied. This can be tested in the laboratory and based on the results obtained, breeding, larval rearing and production experiments should be carried out, using different salinity ranges as a major variable.
In research on Chrysichthys culture, field observations along with laboratory examinations would provide the basic information on maturity and breeding seasons. Induced breeding experiments have to be carried out with fish pituitaries as well as mammalian and synthetic hormones, to determine their relative efficiencies and the dosages to be used. Suitable hatching and larval rearing techniques have to be evolved by trying the methods already adopted in catfish hatcheries and making modifications found necessary.
The approach to be adopted for nutritional studies and feed preparation and testing, would be basically the same as for Tilapia and Clarias. A basic formulation may have to be used initially and necessary modifications incorporated when more precise information on nutritional needs and feed conversion ratios become available.
Well-planned production experiments using different stocking rates, feeds and feeding procedures and pond management, including salinity and pH control and growing periods, should be carried out. Full evaluation of cost-benefit ratios will be necessary to determine the most economic farming methods. Even though the species can probably be bred only once a year, it may be possible to obtain more than one crop a year by stock manipulation. Partial cropping from a very densely stocked pond, say after four or five months, may give the first crop of fish or minimum marketable size, and later in about ten months a second crop of larger fish. This possibility and related economics should be studied.
The introduction of improved designs of brackishwater pond farms should be considered. Improvement of the texture and acidity of the peaty soils of fish ponds built in mangrove swamps of ten takes two or three years. This period can probably be reduced by regular leaching of the soil with tidal and rain water. Suitable deep trenches may be built on the pond bottom to facilitate the leaching and draining of ponds. This, combined with liming should be tried to accelerate the improvement of pond soils. Inexpensive methods of consolidating pond dikes, and the prevention of pH changes of pond water due to rain water washing down the acidic soils of dikes, should be developed.
<section>4</section>
4. OYSTER CULTURE IN COASTAL AREAS
4.1 Background
4.2 Research needs
4.3 Research approach
4.1 Background
The most common oysters on the West African Coast are the mangrove oysters Crassostrea gasar and C. tulipa. It is not yet clear whether they are different species or belong to the same species, showing only local variations in taxonomic characters. They occur abundantly on mangrove roots and stems and the local populations collect and market them in most coastal areas. Owing to intensive exploitation and crowding of oysters on natural substrates, the size of oysters available in most markets is extremely small and consequently the prices obtained are also low.
Attempts have been made in the past to culture the mangrove oysters, using some of the well-known culture techniques. Recent work with the species described as C. tulipa in Sierra Leone has given very encouraging results. Spat collected from nature and grown on rafts produced oysters of 7-10 cm height in seven to eight months. This is about four times the size of wild oysters ordinarily marketed. Preliminary experiments in tray culture of C. gasar in Nigeria have shown a growth of 4-5 cm in size and 30 g in weight, in six to seven months. In raft culture faster growth rates were obtained, but mortalities due probably to predation or sudden changes of salinity, were observed to occur frequently.
Observations made in Nigeria and Sierra Leone show that spat can be collected from nature almost throughout the year, with two peak periods, viz., February to April/May and November to December, coinciding with periods of high salinity. The maximum spat settlement was observed at salinities around 20 ppt. Satisfactory growth of oysters was found within the salinity range of 12-25 ppt.
Studies made so far clearly indicate the potential, and indeed the need for culturing the mangrove oysters. Small-scale farming of these oysters can be developed as a means of increasing the income and nutrition of coastal populations. Attempts to introduce exotic species of oysters have not yet been successful, except on the North African Coast. In view of this, it is recommended that the Centre carry out investigations on the locally available C. gasar, which is probably synonymous with C. tulipa described elsewhere on the West African Coast. While raft culture would be feasible in deeper areas, it may be necessary to adopt rack culture in trays in shallow waters.
4.2 Research needs
(i) Definition of areas suited for raft and rack culture of oysters;
(ii) identification and mapping of spat collection areas and development of spat collection methods;
(iii) selection of substrates for hanging culture; design of rafts and hanging structures for raft culture, including methods of preventing predation and poaching;
(iv) development of raft culture procedures;
(v) design Of racks and selection of trays for rack culture;
(vi) development of rack culture procedures;
(vii) economic evaluation and comparison of rack and raft culture techniques;
(viii) monitoring of oyster diseases and contamination;
(ix) development of methods of cleaning oysters for marketing.
4.3 Research approach
Based on available data, supplemented by field studies on Salinity range, tidal range, water depth, currents, water quality, phytoplankton abundance, and safety, it should be possible to identify and describe the areas in the brackishwater zone of the Niger Delta. Spat collection grounds can be easily mapped out on the basis of observations on natural spat settlement and experiments in spat collection. Spat collection experiments should be carried out throughout the year using different types of spat collectors, so that the best substrates for collection and rearing can be determined. In the design of rafts and hanging structures, cost, durability and safety should be taken into account. For prevention of predation, some of the techniques already adopted elsewhere, like net covers, should be used. The same considerations would apply also for rack culture. If diseases are observed, necessary diagnostic and treatment measures should be developed.
Economics of different methods of culture should be compared, with special emphasis on the size of operations needed for a farmer to obtain a reasonable income. The income now obtained by the collection of wild oysters should also be used for comparison.
Besides health, the general condition of oysters and their acceptability for marketing should be studied. In order to meet public health requirements, possible contamination of oysters in the culture grounds should be studied. Although locally the oysters are likely to be consumed only after cooking, cleansing procedures may have to be developed for widening the market, when the technology has been sufficiently developed and the economic aspects determined.
<section>5</section>
5. FISH CULTURE IN OPEN WATERS
5.1 Background
5.2 Research needs
5.3 Research approach
5.1 Background
In many parts of Africa, small- and medium-size reservoirs built for irrigation or other purposes, have been used for an extensive type of fish culture, consisting of stocking and harvesting. In most cases, government or semi-government agencies do the stocking of finger-lings and it is left to the local populations to harvest as much of the production as they can, with available 'fishing gear. This has undoubtedly contributed in some degree to the availability of fish and the income of people in the neighbourhood, but the cost-effectiveness of this practice does not appear to have been properly studied. However, in recent years methods of utilizing open waters such as reservoirs, lagoons and rivers for controlled and more intensive fish culture, have been started in some countries.
Culture of fish in cages was attempted in Africa in Lake Victoria (Tanzania) and in Lake Kainji (Nigeria). Successful culture of Tilapia nilotica in cages was demonstrated in Lake Kossou (Ivory Coast) in recent years, with average production of up to 17 kg/m^3 of cage per month, with stocking densities up to 70 kg/m^3 and feeding with locally prepared diets. Commercial-size tilapia of 200-250 g weight could be produced in four to five months' time. Though the culture of all-male tilapia would be advantageous to increase the production, even unsegregated population would do well in cages, as breeding will be greatly reduced and even when breeding takes place, there is little likelihood of survival of fry in the cages. Besides T. nilotica, Clarias lazera also shows promise of being a suitable species for cage culture.
Locally fabricated cages have been used in the few places where cage culture has been attempted. However, a suitable cage design and economical cage-building materials have not yet been determined. Secondly, locally-produced feed, suited for use in floating cages, is not yet available. Thirdly, the economic viability of a commercial operation has not been demonstrated. The protection of cages in open waters presents a number of engineering and legal problems, which need to be solved for cage culture to become a widely accepted practice.
Culture of fish in pens has recently been initiated in the Ivory Coast in lagoons, using the catfish Chrysichthys as the main species, but this is, as yet, a local effort, and in very early stages of development to be included in the programme of work of the regional centre.
5.2 Research needs
(i) Collection of data from selected African countries on the cost-effectiveness of stocking dams and reservoirs and their analysis to determine future research needs, if warranted;
(ii) design of suitable cages and testing of cage construction materials for both standing and running water environments; design of rafts, floats, anchors and other requirements for installation of cages;
(iii) formulation, preparation and testing of feeds necessary for cage culture; development of suitable feeding procedures, including feed dispensers;
(iv) determination of stock density, feeding rates, growth and yield;
(v) monitoring of fish health and control of diseases, if they occur;
(vi) cage maintenance procedures;
(vii) economic evaluation of cage culture.
5.3 Research approach
The collection of data on the results of dam and reservoirs stocking will have to be done from countries maintaining adequate records, mostly through questionnaires and correspondence. The analysis of data can be done at the Centre's headquarters, jointly by aquaculturists and an economist.
The Centre's headquarters is located by a river and so there should be no major difficulties in conducting experimental cage culture in a running water environment. However, there is no reservoir in the neighbourhood for experimental work to be done directly by the Centre staff. One of the large ponds of the freshwater fish farm to be established in Aluu can be used for preliminary studies, but more detailed studies will have to be done elsewhere, preferably in Lake Kainji, with the assistance of the research staff of the Kainji Lake Research Institute in New Bussa.
Different cage designs are already available, and based on these, test cages and auxiliary equipment should be fabricated locally, and tested in both standing and running waters. The need to reduce fouling, ease of operation, including regular cleaning and protection from poachers, should all be taken into account, besides cost in designing cage installations. Floating cages would appear to be the most suitable ones to be tried.
Effort should be made to prepare suitable feeds for Tilapia and Clarias which are selected for cage culture experiments. For cage culture, particularly culture in floating cages, it will be advantageous to have a floating feed. In feed milling, the high temperature extrusion process is employed for producing expanded floating pellets. This requires expensive and sophisticated equipment and a diet with a high percentage of cereal grains. The Dravo process of feed preparation, which is relatively less expensive (but more expensive than ordinary pellet milling) can be adapted for the production of low density pellets of high water stability, with some modification in feed formulation. The Dravo process, originally developed for the manufacture of breakfast food, should be modified, taking into account the differences in ingredient texture and flow characteristics in fish feed preparation. Simple and inexpensive mechanical driers also have to be developed for drying the moist
product. Demand feeders should be tried for feed dispensation.
A series of cage production experiments should be conducted in both reservoir and riverine. environments, using factorial design as in other production experiments. In designing experiments, all significant factors including stock density, stocking size, feeds, feeding rate, method of feeding and growing period, should be incorporated. Environmental monitoring, as well as health inspection of the fish stock, should be undertaken regularly. The cost factor should be specially considered in each experiment, to determine economic viability.
Different measures for prevention of poaching should be tried with a view to recommending effective protection of stocks.
<section>6</section>
6. FISH CULTURE IN COMBINATION WITH ANIMAL HUSBANDRY
6.1 Background
6.2 Research needs
6.3 Research approach
6.1 Background
Though fish culture integrated with animal husbandry, such as pig or duck raising, is well established in other parts of the world, it is a relatively new system in Africa. Experience so far shows considerable potential for the development of the system, even though it would require much more skill on the part of the farmer than when he raises fish or animals only. In integrated fish culture trials in the Central African Republic with T. nilotica and C. lazera, yields of 7-10 t/ha of fish per year were obtained by the use of manure of pigs raised near the ponds and without feeding. In addition, some 6 400 kg of pig meat could also be raised, contributing substantially to the income from the farm. Because of the reported success, and the widespread interest in integrated rural development aimed at improving the income and standard of living of farmers, fish culture combined with some form of animal husbandry, is now planned in many countries. In view of this, it is
recommended that the Centre undertake essential studies for developing a system of integrated fish culture with fish (Tilapia and Clarias) as the major crops, and pigs as a subsidiary crop. Even though duck raising is also well adapted for integration with fish culture, it is not recommended at present, as duck is not a popular food item, and duck farming will be a rather new and unfamiliar activity in most areas.
In order to evaluate the possible role of fish culture combined with pig raising in integrated rural development, the complementary role of the two crops and the increased income and other benefits that a farmer can derive by integration should be clearly demonstrated. This should be the major objective of research in the Centre. The proposed Regional Lead Centre in China to be established as part of a regional network of aquaculture centres in Asia, would be carrying out critical research on the processes involved in integrated farming, and close liaison with that Centre should be established to benefit from the results of studies there.
Although no public health hazards have been recognized so far in this type of farming, this aspect has not yet been properly investigated. Such studies seem particularly warranted in rural areas of Africa.
6.2 Research needs
(i) Determination of suitable ratios of pond area, fish stock density and number of pigs for integrated farming;
(ii) monitoring of water quality, fish food production and utilization;
(iii) determination of minimum size of farming operation required to increase farmers' income to a required level;
(iv) development of suitable methods of integrated farming under African conditions;
(v) determination of health hazards, if any, involved in integrated culture of fish with pigs;
(vi) evaluation of economic and other benefits derived by integrated farming.
6.3 Research approach
An integrated production unit, consisting of a selected number of ponds with pigstys built on its bank, will be necessary for undertaking the necessary experiments. It is suggested that in the initial experiments all-male T. nilotica be used. Later, identical experiments can be conducted with C. lazera and if found useful, with a combination of the two species. Arrangements should be made for comparative studies of the relative merits of direct introduction of piggery wastes into the ponds and the introduction of wastes after fermentation in special tanks. Different ratios of piglets to pond area (say 40-70/ha) should be tried. The pigs, which should be of quick-growing strains (e.g., Large White) should be fed regularly with suitable feeds (if possible, prepared feeds). The quantity of manure produced should be determined and the water quality and fish food production in the ponds monitored. Management measures, like addition of water and aeration, should be adopted, if
found necessary.
The economics of the farming and the income and other benefits that can be derived by it, can be determined from the production of fish and pigs obtained, and a proper assessment of operating costs. Based on the results of production experiments, it should be possible to determine the size of operation (pond area, fish stock and pigs) needed for obtaining the' required level of income.
While the monitoring of fish health and diseases can be done by the Centre's staff, assistance of public health personnel may be necessary to examine whether public health hazards are involved, and to undertake necessary precautionary measures. The assistance of a veterinarian and possibly personnel experienced in pig raising may be required at least in the initial stages, to ensure the adoption of appropriate pig raising methods.
<section>7</section>
7. SHRIMP CULTURE IN COASTAL PONDS
7.1 Background
7.2 Research needs
7.3 Research approach
7.1 Background
As in other regions of the world, there is a growing interest in the culture of shrimps in the coastal states of Africa also. Preliminary attempts to grow local species or to rear imported species like Penaeus japonicus have not been particularly successful. However, many countries have plans to start pilot shrimp farms. This, as well as the potentials for large-scale farming in coastal areas, accounts for the selection of this system of farming as a subject for research, even though it is accorded only a low priority in the Centre's programme of work.
The most common and promising species for culture on the West African coast would appear to be P. duorarum. On the East African coast there are more proven species like P. monodon, P. indicus and P. semisulcatus. Since the importation of these species would present several problems, which the Centre in its initial stages would find difficult to deal with, it is suggested that in the first phase, attempts be made at the Centre to develop a technology for pond culture of P. duorarum based on post larvae and juveniles collected from natural habitats. Controlled maturation, spawning and hatchery production of seed should be attempted only if the initial production experiments show promise.
As described earlier, one of the problems of coastal ponds built on mangrove soil is the acidity of the soil and consequent low pH of water. Preliminary observations seem to indicate that the bottom-living shrimps are more susceptible to such low pH. The sudden changes of salinity that may occur as a result of heavy rains, may adversely affect the survival of shrimps in coastal ponds.
7.2 Research needs
(i) Determination of salinity and pH tolerance of different life stages of P. duorarum;
(ii) study of the availability of larvae and juveniles in coastal waters, including their distribution in time and space;
(iii) methods of field identification of shrimp larvae and juveniles; their collection and transport for rearing;
(iv) methods of pond preparation and management for shrimp culture;
(v) comparative experiments in feeding shrimp larvae and juveniles with cultured food organisms and artificial feeds;
(vi) development of suitable artificial feeds for post-larvae, juveniles and adult shrimps;
(vii) rearing of the shrimp to commercial size in ponds and comparative yield trials to determine the economic viability of culturing the species;
(viii) monitoring of health and diseases in culture ponds;
(ix) if culture experiments are promising, the development of methods of maturation, spawning and hatchery production of larvae of the species.
7.3 Research approach
Considerable information on the behaviour of P. duorarum, including its moulting frequency, cannibalistic tendencies if any, and its salinity and pH tolerances, can be obtained through laboratory experiments. Well-planned regular sampling with suitable collection gear will be necessary, to determine the distribution and availability of shrimp larvae and juveniles.
Laboratory rearing of larvae and even juveniles may be necessary to work out methods for their rapid identification in the field. Methods used elsewhere for the transport of larvae and juveniles can be tried under local conditions, and modifications found necessary made to improve their efficiency.
Methods to be tried for expediting the improvement of brackishwater pond soils through leaching and liming have already been referred to on page 12. These should be tested in shrimp ponds also and the behaviour of shrimps on improved pond bottoms observed.
The methods to be adopted for preparing feeds using locally-available feed ingredients, have been described earlier and these would apply also for shrimp feeds. Modifications will be necessary in the formulae and processing methods to meet the nutritional needs of the shrimp and its feeding habits. Use of clam meat readily available in brackishwater areas, may substantially improve the quality of feeds for shrimps.
Rearing of shrimp food organisms should be undertaken in laboratory or outdoor tanks. Comparative experiments of feeding larvae with live food and specially prepared artificial feeds should be carried out, to determine their relative merits.
A series of factorially designed production experiments, incorporating the main variables such as Stocking density, feed, feeding method, feeding rate, water quality, nature of pond bottom and growing period, should be carried out with proper monitoring of health and water conditions. Based on the yields obtained and Operating costs, economic viability should be determined.
As mentioned earlier, if the production experiments demonstrate the technical and economic feasibility of shrimp culture, the Centre should, at a later stage, start studies on controlled reproduction and hatchery production of larvae, so as to make farming less dependent on natural seed. For this, methods already developed elsewhere can be used. Modifications found necessary should be incorporated to make the system efficient.
