<section>i</section>
Chapter 17 Artificial Feeding in Intensive Fish Culture
I. Csengeri
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. INTRODUCTION
2. TABLES AND DIAGRAM USED FOR INTRODUCTION OF LECTURE
3. REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
An intensive fish culture unit, with its inputs and outputs, can be regarded as a system being supplied with fish - the stocking material - with feed and water and producing fish - the final product - and waste water. Among these inputs and outputs, stocking and harvesting are not discontinued, while feed and water and waste water are continuously supplied to or removed from the system. Such systems are efficient in producing fish when the characteristics of the water and feed, as well as other inputs, are well suited to the biological requirements of the fish. In planning and operating such systems, biological requirements need the greatest attention, although, at the planning stage, economic evaluation of feed sources and that of the final product could be of equal importance.
A short introduction will be given to the following subjects in this review paper; nutritional habit
- environmental effects on the metabolism
- nutritional energetics
- requirement of fish for specific nutrients
- nutritional diseases
- test diets and their application
- evaluation of feedstuffs
- formulation of fish feeds
- nutritional aspects of feed preparation
- feed quality testing
- biotechnological aspects of feeding regimes
2. TABLES AND DIAGRAM USED FOR INTRODUCTION OF LECTURE
Table 1 A classification of fish according to their feeding habit
particulate feeders
Mode of feeding
filter feeders
(parasitic fish)
carnivorous fish
Food quality
omnivorous fish
herbivorous fish
continuous feeders
Periodicity of feeding
discontinuous periodic feeders
discontinuous aperiodic feeders
Photoperiod preference
fish feeding in dark
fish feeding in daylight
Table 2 Temperature Optimum of some Fish Species for Growth
Species
Optimum (°C)
Reference
Oncorhynchus tshawygscha
Banks, et al., 1971
O. nerka
Brett, et al., 1969
O. keta
Kepshire, 1971
Salvelinus fontinalis
Baldwin, 1956
Salmo gairdneri
Hokanson, et al., 1977
S. trutta
Elliott, 1975
Ictalurus punctatus
West, 1965
Perca fluviatilis
Hokanson, et al., 1977
Stizostedion lucioperca
Hokanson, et al., 1977
Micropterus salmoides
Nelson, 1974
Pleuronectes platessa
Ursin, 1963
Table 3 Utilization of Feed Energy
Table 4 Protein and Amino Acid Requirements of Some Fish Species
Species
Rainbow trout
Chinook salmon
Common carp
Japanese eel
Channel catfish
Protein required (g/kg feed)
Amino acids
Requirement (as percentage of protein)
Arginine
Histidine
Isoleucine
Leucine
Lysine
Methionine^1^/
Phenylalanine^2^/
Threonine
Tryptophan
Valine
^1^/ In the absence of cystine
^2^/ In the absence of tyrosine
Table 5 Vitamin Requirements for Growth of some Salmonids^1^/
Vitamin (mg/kg dry diet)
Rainbow trout
Brook trout
Brown trout
Atlantic salmon
Chinook salmon
Coho salmon
Thiamine
Riboflavin
Pyridoxine
Pantothenate
Niacin
Folacin
Cyanocobalamin
myo-Inositol
Choline
Biotin
Ascorbate
Vitamin A^2^/
2 000- 2 500 I.U.
Vitamin E-
Vitamin K
^1^/ Fish fed at reference temperature with diets at about protein requirement
^2^/ Requirement directly affected by amount and type of unsaturated fat fed
* Denotes a requirement, the level of which has not been established
(Adapted from: J.E. Halver. In Fish Nutrition, 1972, 39 p; NAS/NRC, 1973;1977)
Table 6 Vitamin Deficiency Symptoms in Fish
Vitamin
Deficiency Symptoms
Thiamine
convulsions, neuritis, poor appetite
Riboflavin
cataracts, anaemia, dark colouration, photophobia, poor appetite
Niacin
swollen gills, intestinal lesions, poor coordination, flexing of opercles
Pantothenic acid
clubbed gills, anaemia, gill exudate, sluggish behaviour, prostration
Pyridoxine
anaemia, hyperirritability, erratic swimming
Cobalamin
anaemia, fragmented and immature erythrocytes
Folic acid
anaemia, fragility of caudal fin, lethargy, pale gills, dark colouration
Biotin
anorexia, pale gills, high glycogen in liver, colonic lesions
Ascorbic acid
spinal deformities, anaemia, lethargy, prostration, eye lesions
Inositol
anorexia, poor feed efficiency, skin lesions
Choline
haemorrhages, fatty livers, colonic lesions, poor feed efficiency
Vitamin A
cataracts, photophobia, anaemia, poor vision
Vitamin D
lethargy, increased lipid content of liver and muscle
Vitamin K
haemorrhages, pale gills, increased pro-thrombin time
Vitamin E
anaemia, exudative diathesis, dermal depigmentation
Table 7 Test Diet H440 Western Fish Nutrition Laboratory
Ingredient
Parts
Vitamin-free casein (g)
White dextrin (g)
Gelatin (g)
Premix No. 1 (vitamin) (g)
Premix No. 4 (oil) (g)
Premix No. 5 (mineral) (g)
Total
Water (ml)
PREMIX NO. 1 (VITAMIN)
a-Cellulose (g)
Choline chloride (g)
Inositol (g)
Ascorbic acid (g)
Niacin (g)
Ca-pantothenate (g)
Riboflavin (g)
Menadione (g)
Pyridoxine HCl (g)
Thiamine HCl (g)
Folic acid (g)
Biotin (g)
Premix No. 2 (ml)
PREMIX NO. 2
Vitamin B[12]
10 mg/500 ml water
PREMIX NO. 4 (OIL)
Corn oil (Mazola brand)
Cod liver oil
dl-a -tocopherol acetate
PREMIX NO. 5 (MINERAL) (g)
Salt mixture No. 2
AlCl.[3] · 6H[2]0
KI
CuCl
MnSO[4] · H[2]0
CoCl · 6H[2]O
ZnS0[4] · 7H[2]0
SALT MIXTURE NO. 2 (g)
Calcium biphosphate
Calcium lactate
Ferric citrate
Magnesium sulphate
Potassium phosphate (dibasic)
Sodium biphosphate
Sodium chloride
Total
Mixing instructions:
Premix No. 1 -
Blend all ingredients in shell blender and store in refrigerator.
Premix No. 5 -
Blend all ingredients in ball mill.
Diet H440 -
1. Put water and gelatin in mixing bowl from an electric kitchen mixer.
2. Heat on a double boiler unit until gelatin dissolves, using small stirrer for circulation.
3. Remove from heat, add dextrin and minerals, place in mixer, and stir until mixture is lukewarm.
4. Add casein and oils; continue stirring until cool.
5. Add vitamins, blend well, pour into container, and store in refrigerator.
Another method -
1. Blend all dry ingredients with oils for 5 minutes.
2. Add 75°C water; stir until cool (room temperature).
3. Pour into Teflon-coated pan and place in refrigerator to gel.
4. Store in plastic bags in refrigerator or freezer.
Figure 1. Effect of ration level on feed efficiencies
DIFFERENT FORMULATIONS FOR MEASURING FEED EFFICIENCY AND GROWTH RATE
Apparent digestibility:
for the whole diet
for one nutrient
where
I = feed intake
x[i,d] = concentration of ingredients in diet
F = faeces
x[i,f] = concentration of ingredients in diet
I[N] = nutrient intake
x[N,d] = concentration of nutrient in diet
F[N] = nutrient in faeces
x[N,f] = concentration of nutrient in faeces
where
B = final body protein
B[0] = initial body protein
I = protein intake
Growth efficiency
where
G = growth in kJ/day
I = food ration in kJ/day
M = maintenance ration in kJ/day
Growth rates (m, a, g)
where W[0] = the initial, W[t] = the final weight, t = time of feeding
3. REFERENCES
Andrews, J.W. and R.P. Stickney, 1972, Interactions of feeding rates and environmental temperature on growth, food conversion and body composition of channel catfish. Trans. Am. Fish. Soc., 101:94-9
Baldwin N.S. 1956, Food consumption and growth of brrok trout at different temperatures. Trans. Am. Fish. Soc., 86:
Banks, J.L., L.G. Fowler and J.W. Elliott, 1971, Effects of rearing temperature on growth, body form and hematology of fall chinook salmon fingerlings. Prog. Fish-Cult., 33:20-6
Braaten, B.R., 1979, Bioenergetics - a review on methodology. Schr. Bundesforschungsanst. Fish. Hamb., (14/l5) Vol.2 :461-504
Brett, J.R., J.E. Shelbourn and C.T. Shoop, 1969, Growth rate and body composition of fingerling sockeye salmon, Oncorhynchus nerka, in relation to temperature and ration size. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 26 (10):2363-94
Brett, J.R. and T.D.D. Groves, 1979, Physiological energetics In Fish physiology, Vol. 8. Bioenergetics and growth, edited by W.S. Hoar, D.J. Randall and J.R. Brett. New York, Academic Press, 279-352
DeLong, D.C., J.E. Halver and E.T. Mertz, 1958, Nutrition of salmonid fishes. 6. Protein requirements of chinook salmon at two water temperatures. J. Nutr., 65:589-99
Elliott, J.M., 1975, The growth rate of brown trout, Salmo trutta L. fed on maximum rations. J. Anim. Ecol., 44:805-21
Fischer, Z., 1979, Selected problems of fish bioenergetics. Schr. Bundesforschungsanat. Fisch. Hamb., (14/l5) Vol. 1:17-44
Garling, D.L. and R.P. Wilson, 1976, Optimum dietary protein energy ratio for channel catfish fingerlings (Ictalurus punctatus). J. Nutr., 106:1368-75
Harder, W., 1975, Anatomy of fishes. Stuttgard, Schweizerbartische Verlagsbuckhandlung (Nägele und Obermuller), Part 1:612 p.. Part 2:132 p.
Hokanson, K.E.F., 1977, Temperature requirements of some percids and adaptations to the seasonal temperature cycle. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 34(10):1524-50
Hokanson, K.E.F., C.F. Kleiner and T.W. Thorslund, 1977, Effects of constant temperatures and dial temperature fluctuations on specific growth and mortality rates and yield of juvenile rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri, J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 34(5):
Halver, J.E., 1972, The vitamins. In Fish nutrition, edited by J.E. Halver. New York, Academic Press, pp. 29-103
Halver, J.E., 1980, The vitamins. In Fish feed technology. Rome, FAO/UNDP, Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, ADCP/REP/80/l1:65-108
Kepshire, B.M. Jr., 1971, Growth of pink, chum and fall chinook salmon in heated seawater. Proc. Annu. NW. Fish-Cult. Conf., 22:25-6
Mertz, E.T., 1972, The protein and amino acid needs. Jn Fish nutrition, edited by J.E. Halver, New York, Academic Press, pp. 106-143
Nelson, D.J., 1974, Temperature effects on growth of largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides). Oak Ridge, Tennessee, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Environmental Science Division
NRC/NAS 1973, (National Research Council/National Academy of Science), Nutrient requirements of trout, salmon and catfish. Nutrient requirements of domestic animals Bull. Natl. Res. Counc., Wash., (11):57 p.
NRC/NAS 1977, Nutrient requirements of domestic animals, water fishes. Nutrient requirements of domestic animals. Bull. Natl. Res. Counc., Wash., (12):58 p.
Nose, T. and S. Aral, 1972, Optimal level of protein in purified diet for eel, Anguilla japonica. Bull. Freshwat. Fish. Res. Lab. Tokyo, (13):41-50
Ogino, C., 1980, Requirements of carp and rainbow trout for essential amino acids. Bull. Japan. Soc. Sci. Fish., 46:171-4
Ogino, C. and K. Saito, 1970, Protein nutrition in fish. 1. The utilization of dietary protein by young carp. Bull. Japan. Soc. Sci. Fish. 36:250-4
Satia, B.P., 1974, Quantitative protein requirements of rainbow trout. Prog. Fish-Cult., 36: 80-5
Smith, R.R., 1980, Nutritional bioenergetics. In Fish feed technology. Rome, FAO/UNDP, Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, ADCP/REP/80/l1:21-7
Ursin, E., 1963, On the incorporation of temperature in the von Bertalanffy growth expression. Medd. Dan. Fisk.-og Havunders.. C4):1-16
Wilson, R.P. Poe and E.H. Robinson, 1980, Leucine, isoleucine, valine and histidine requirements of fingerling channel catfish. J. Nutr., 110:627-3J
Wilson, R.P. et al., 1978, Trytophan and threonine requirements of fingerling channel catfish. J. Nutr. 108:1595-9
Zeitoun, I.H. et al.. 1976, Quantifying nutrient requirements of fish. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 33^ - (1): 167-72
<section>j</section>
Chapter 18 Fish Feed Production, Storage and Transportation
F. Majoros
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. INTRODUCTION
2. CEREALS
3. TYPES OF DRIERS AND SOME DRYING TECHNOLOGIES
4. STORAGE OF FEEDS
5. MACHINERY FOR PREPARATION OF COMPOUND FEED
6. IMPORTANT POINTS IN THE PREPARATION OF MEALY MATERIALS
7. TYPES OF MILL CONSTRUCTION
8. AUXILIARY PARTS OF THE FEED MILL
9. MACHINERY FOR TRANSPORTATION
10. REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
Fish feed - particularly in extensive pond fish culturing practices - is of plant origin, of which cereal grains form 60-100 percent.
2. CEREALS
2.1 Cereal Harvesting and Treatment
2.2 Moisture Content of Cereals
2.3 Storage of Cereals
2.4 Chemical Treatment
2.1 Cereal Harvesting and Treatment
In modern agriculture cereals are harvested mostly with combine harvesters, which reap, thresh and clean the grain. However, during the harvesting of cereals such as maize the grain often has a high moisture content which requires further treatment and conservation, so as to store it without any loss.
The most frequent treatment is drying, during which a physical change takes place, i.e., the decrease of moisture content, and biochemical processes occurring within the cells of the grains.
2.2 Moisture Content of Cereals
For optimal Storage the moisture content of cereals should not exceed 12-13%. A significant respiration starts above 15% moisture content, which impairs the quality of the grains (due to biochemical processes). The deterioration can be as high as 20-30%.
Respiration is markedly influenced by temperature. The higher the temperature the more intensive respiration becomes, and the greater the carbon dioxide generated.
This is illustrated as follows:
Cereal Moisture Content
Aerial Temperature
(°C)
Carbon dioxide generated
(mg/h)
If the humidity of air reaches or exceeds 74%, the maize starts to develop mould. An ideal condition of storing is a moisture content under 14% and a relative humidity of air under 70%.
To approach this ideal condition, the following should be noted:
(i) Only dry cereals should be harvested, if possible.
(ii) The following temperature limits should be considered when using hot-air drying:
- feed wheat
82°C
- bread wheat
65°C
- malting barley, seed grain
43-48°C
Air at ambient temperature may also be used for drying.
(iii) Chemical conservation is applied.
2.3 Storage of Cereals
2.3.1 Vacuum storage
2.3.2 Storage with ventilation
2.3.3 Cold storage
2.3.1 Vacuum storage
During vacuum storage microbiological processes are inhibited, even at a moisture content of 17-22%. However, certain anaerobic bacteria and yeasts are still able to survive and multiply under these conditions. This method of storage is generally employed in silo systems.
2.3.2 Storage with ventilation
Air is pumped through air tubes into the heap of cereal which results in water and heat loss, and as a result temperature decreases.
2.3.3 Cold storage
Storage time can be lengthened, in this way drying can be replaced.
2.4 Chemical Treatment
2.4.1 The freshly harvested grains are treated and conserved with propionic and formic acid and then hermetically covered. pH value is 2-3, which inhibits any microbiological process.
2.4.2 The cereals can be conserved after preliminary drying. A 80% dry matter content can be reached with good specific energy utilization.
If any material with 20% moisture content is conserved with organic acids, we can save energy and obtain a relatively 'dry' good feed.
3. TYPES OF DRIERS AND SOME DRYING TECHNOLOGIES
Convection drying is carried out with hot-air ventilation. If the ventilated air contains some smoke or gases it may impart an off-flavour to the grain.
There are driers where the heat is transmitted from incandescent wires, hot tubes or from the hot walls of the drier.
In contact driers the cereal is placed on the heated floor.
Cereals can be dried with heat generated directly into the material via an electric current, electric field, induced whirling current or chemical reaction.
Driers can be designed for periodic or continuous operation, according to their requirements.
4. STORAGE OF FEEDS
Bulk feed cereals, leguminous crops, coarse meals or green plant meals can be stored.
These feeds can be stored in buildings and barns or in the open air, covered with canvas or plastic foil. Apart from manual collection, a shovelling machine or screw feeder can be used. The latter is of a higher capacity, being 40-60 t/h.
Bulk raw materials or ready-made feed can be stored in silo systems made of concrete or insulated metal plate. Polyurethane foam is inserted between two metal plates, or a prefabricated 'sandwich' panel is used.
Blowing ventilators are used for the ventilation of modern storing silos, which- not only cools the stored material but also decrease the moisture content.
Cereals can be stored at 20°C for 2-3 weeks; 15°C for 4-5 weeks; and at 10°C for 10 weeks without any deterioration in quality.
The bottom of these silos can he flat, or of conical form. Emptying of smaller, 20-80 m^3 silos with conic bottoms is achieved by gravitation, while for larger silos by using built-in pulleys.
Other equipment which may be necessary for the storage of cereals include: loading hoppers, conveyor belts, trucks or dump trucks, and dumpers.
5. MACHINERY FOR PREPARATION OF COMPOUND FEED
Compound feeds are complete animal nutriments which contain different basic animal or plant materials, mineral and synthetic ingredients.
Preparation of compound feeds starts with the treatment of materials:
(i) Cleaning of grain - sifters are used only if the harvest is not modern or the corn contains some impurities of other origin.
(ii) Extracted meals - oil-seed cases are very often utilized.
In these processes the cakes or pellets are crushed with cogged-wheels, or spiky iron cones.
The material is then conveyed on to a sifter which saves energy since the grinding of the tiny parts is unnecessary.
(iii) There are several ways of preparing mealy materials:
- the material is conveyed into the silo by pneumatic pipes;
- a precompound material can also be prepared from mealy substances, e.g., bran and fish meal is mixed 1:1, resulting in a less greasy and more easy to grind material;
- the mealy substance can be poured directly into the mixer (mostly premixes, concentrates or complementary feed).
6. IMPORTANT POINTS IN THE PREPARATION OF MEALY MATERIALS
In the loading hopper there should be a protective screen of 20 × 20 mm mesh size which is necessary not only to avoid accidents but also to prevent paper, string, rubber, etc., from getting into the system.
Next to the hopper a magnet should be built in. Iron pieces mixed into the substance can cause serious problems and loss in time and production.
From the hopper the material is conveyed to a control sifter. The control sifter can be flat, which is more durable, or cylindrical, which needs smaller space, but damage is more frequent.
The materials from the sifter are transported to the storage silo by a pneumatic conveying system.
The coarse particles are usually ground again or collected separately and used. One of the most important machines used in compound feed preparation is the mill.
The mixing homogeneity, the possibility to granulate, and the quality and digestibility are largely influenced by the size of the substances.
Grinding can be performed:
(i) with two solid surfaces
(ii) by pumping the material onto a solid surface
(iii) by whirling without any solid surface.
7. TYPES OF MILL CONSTRUCTION
7.1 Types of Feed Mixing Apparatus
7.2 Preparation of Pellets
7.3 Types of Driers
Stone mills - the most ancient type of mill, needing constant maintenance and a lot of space. Their importance is decreasing.
Roller mills - originally used by the mill industry. They produce a lot of coarse, but little fine meal. They are not used in preparing compound food.
Combined mills - they are used mostly in Western Europe. They subject the substance to a pressing effect.
Plate grinders - they are used mostly in the U.S.A. The substance proceeds in a zig-zag way to the centre of the plates, being crushed in the process.
Pinned grinders - here the substance bumps into rotating pins - use not widespread.
Beating cross grinders - are similar to hammer mills, but the hitting parts are stable. The advantage is that the parts can be replaced easily. In the filling tube there is a magnet.
Swing - hammer mill - is the most widespread in the feed mill industry. It is very simple, the hammers being fixed on a rotor, and screens fixed. It is very practical as the parts can be easily replaced. Driving is with a V-shaped belt or with shaft coupling. Hammers can be easily changed and the mill can be connected to a pneumatic grain transporting system.
The generally used mesh size of the screen is 3.1-5.5 mm. In fish feed milling it is 1-1.5 mm.
Based on tests in grinding three types of substance, the following is known:
- grains - easy to grind
- resilient material - mostly their peel is difficult to grind, e.g., lupine
- greasy, smearing substances, e.g., fish meal, cannot be ground at all in themselves.
Pre-smashed, ground and sifted substances are conveyed to individual storing silos prior to formulae mixing. Mixing is very important, since even the smallest amount of a compound feed should reflect the proportions of the formula. Accurate measuring of the components has an equally great role.
Measurements can be periodic or continuous, and controlled manually or automatically.
The most modern is the punch-card system controlled machinery, furnished with a safety instrument, which immediately stops the operation if the automatic scale makes a mistake, or if the manual portioning (e.g., in the cases of premix or medicated pellets) does not comply with the designated formula.
From the storing silos the material is transported via conic pulleys with different speed rates.
These parts are also essential for accurate measurements. In the meantime the mixing of components starts in the balance tank.
Requirements:
(i) the balance tank should be easy to empty, and provided with a vibrator or automated closing valve
(ii) measurements should be accurate
(iii) the programme should be easily adjustable
The preweighed materials enter into the mixing tank through a flapping valve. The homogeneity of mixing depends on:
grain size
measurements
type of grinder
duration of mixing
7.1 Types of Feed Mixing Apparatus
Diffuse mixers - are mixing drums where the vessel rotates and the centrifugal forces are used for mixing. These are generally continuous mixers. In their improved versions baffles are mounted on the shaft.
Gravitation mixers - are used in the mill industry and in air-current vertical mixers. The most widely used mechanical mixers are:
- Vertical mixers: made up of a tank and a vertically located pulley within. The pulley can be stable or mobile.
- Horizontal mixers: mixing is performed with the mixing parts. They can be paddle or belt pulley types or a combination of the two.
These counter-current mixers work with an accuracy of 1:100 000. The 'Lödige' type mixers should be mentioned here, where even mixing is ensured by plough-iron elements and rotating knives.
These types are suitable for mixing liquids, meat-paste, oils, grease, and are an ideal mixer in fish feed preparation.
Fluidizing mixers - besides the effect of air-current and floating, the grains are also affected mechanically.
During mixing not only dry components are used, but liquids, e.g., fat and molasses. These are to improve the energy content, taste and durability of the pellet. They are generally stored in heatable, insulated tanks with a double wall. The heating is solved with a spiral pipeline with steam or hot water. Duration of mixing is 3-5 minutes.
7.2 Preparation of Pellets
The most important feature of the pellet is durability, crushing strength and water-resistance.
The following factors ensure the stability of a grain:
- solid adhesive medium, e.g., powdered milk, sugar, or carbamide, developed by steaming or heating of starch
- connection of interface strengths of liquid between the grains
- adhesion - capillary suction effect between two grains.
There is a buffer tank between the pelleting machine and the mixer. From here the feed goes into the conditioning block of the mill by gravitation.
This conditioning block works as a continuous mixer suitable for feeding both liquids or steam. The quantity of steam or liquid material is controlled manually. The most frequent pelleting method is "thread pelleting", where the material is pressed through a die. In modern mills the presser-rollers are stable and the die revolves; the gap between them being adjustable. Pelleting machines with high (10-25 t/h) capacity have three rollers. To change the dies within these types of mills is difficult and their life-time is short. The mill is prevented from overloading by a shear pin.
At the adjusted length, the pellet is cut by knives. The warm, wet and soft pellet from the mill should be dried and cooled. In the cooling system, the air stream alters the steam pressure, and results in water withdrawal and cooling of the pellet. The cooling process should last until the temperature of the pellet and its surroundings is the same.
7.3 Types of Driers
Vertical:
their capacity is high and they need relatively small space.
Horizontal:
the advantage of these driers is that the belt moves and not the grain, which does not crumble. If the pellet layer on the belt is 15-20 cm thick, it needs 16-20 min to dry. A 4-6 cm thick layer of pellets generally needs 5 min to dry. These are then sifted to select the broken pellets, which go back to the pellet press. The intact pellets are packed in sacks or shared in silos.
If fry feed is manufactured, and the pellet emerging from a 3-4-5 mm die is still too large and has to be crumbled with rollers and then sifted to the appropriate size range.
8. AUXILIARY PARTS OF THE FEED MILL
- rotating portioning chambers which are to prevent the accumulation of material -they generally have six blades;
- portioning screws - with adjustable speed and lead;
- dust separators;
- dust sucking devices are to prevent losses from crumbling.
9. MACHINERY FOR TRANSPORTATION
- gravitation runways;
- scraping conveyor;
- bucket conveyor;
- pneumatic conveyors with sucking, pressing or combined types.
The pneumatic transportation is influenced by the specific weight of the material, the size of the grains and by the flotation speed limit of the material.
10. REFERENCES
ADCP 1980, (Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme), Fish feed technology. Lectures presented at the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology, held at the College of Fisheries, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 9 October-15 December 1978. Rome, FAO/UNDP, ADCP/REP/80/l1:395 p.
Csávás, I., F. Majoros and L. Váradi, 1979, Technology of pellet feed manufacturing for warm-water fishes in the experimental fish feed mill of the Fish Culture Research Institute, Szarvas, Hungary. Schr. Bundesforschungsanst. Fisch., Hamb., (14/l5), Vol. 2 :75-86
Horn, A., 1976, Állattenyésztés. Budapest, Mezögazdasági Kiadó
Horváth, Z. and N. Boien, 1972, Takarmányártalmak hiánybetegségek. Budapest, Mezögazdasági Kiadó
Tomay, T.,1973, Gabonaipari kézikönyv. Technológiai gépek és berendezések. Budapest, Mezögazdasági Kiadó
Tomay, T.,1973, Keveréktakarmánygyártás. Budapest, Müszaki Könyvkiadó
<section>k</section>
Chapter 19 Mechanized Feeding in Aquaculture
L. Váradi
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. INTRODUCTION
2. FISH FEED STORAGE FACILITIES
3. FEED TRANSPORTING EQUIPMENT
4. FEED DISTRIBUTORS
5. REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
Equipment that is connected with fish feeding can be divided into three major groups, as follows:
- feed storage facilities
- feed transporting equipment
- feed distributors
2. FISH FEED STORAGE FACILITIES
In fish-feed storage the same facilities can be applied that are widely used in animal husbandry.
In large fish farms and in integrated farms there can be a central or primary feed store and individual secondary storage facilities at the fish ponds.
The primary store is usually a building in the centre of the farm, while the secondary storage facilities are silos with a capacity of 5-20 m^3.
These silos can be filled by mechanical bucket elevators (Figure 1) or pneumatically (Figure 2). The feed can be discharged into the feeding boats or into other feed distributors through a discharge pipe by gravity (Figure 1) or by a discharging screw (Figure 2). The application of this latter type is limited as the discharging screw needs an electric energy supply.
The storing of different feed grains in silos is trouble-free and convenient, however the storage of coarse-meal type feed materials tends to make them arch which can make discharge difficult.
When a feed storage silo is decided to be installed on a fish farm, adequate foundation should be designed and accessibility ensured.
3. FEED TRANSPORTING EQUIPMENT
Feed transport is a complex operation that forms a link between feed production, preparation, storage and distribution. Those facilities and equipment therefore, that are connected with feed transport have to be designed carefully. Within the fish farm different transporting methods can be taken into account as follows:
- waterway
- paved road
- railway
- cableway
- earth road
- combination of the above
For feed transport, all vehicles, and loading and unloading equipment can be used that are available on agricultural farms. The most common feed transporting vehicles are different types of trucks.
The trucks have to meet certain requirements, as follows:
- ability to move on rough and wet surfaces (taking into account fish pond conditions)
- tipping platform
- power take-off for driving different adaptors (loading, unloading, etc.)
- ability to tow a trailer
For feed transport special vehicles have been developed with a large-size container and feed discharging device that can be mechanical (Figure 3) or pneumatic (Figure 4).
Figure 1. Feed storage silo in fish farm (USSR)
Figure 2. Type Hungaria 20 fibreglass feed storage silo with unloading screw (Hungary)
Figure 3. Type ESZK 10 feed transporting truck with mechanical loading screw (USSR)
Figure 4. Type IFA W-50 L/SM-1 special feed transporting truck with 9 tons carrying capacity (GDR)
Figure 5. Tractor pulled feed transporting and filling cart
Figure 6. Feed pick-up and loading devices
Figure 7. Pendulum type demand feeders (a) MORITZ demand feeder (GDR)
Figure 7. Pendulum type demand feeders (b) UKA-25 demand feeder (USSR)
Figure 7. Pendulum type demand feeders (c) EWOS demand feeder (Sweden)
Figure 8. Submerged plate type demand feeder
Feed transporting trailers pulled by multi-purpose tractors are also common on fish farms.
A special tractor-pulled feed transporting trailer can be seen in Figure 5.
For loading the feed transporting vehicles, different loaders can be applied. Two major types of loader are shown in Figure 6.
4. FEED DISTRIBUTORS
4.1 Stationary Feeding Equipment
4.2 Mobile Feeding Equipment
Feed distributors are specially designed feeding equipment. Whilst for feed storing and transport, normal agricultural equipment can be used, for fish-feed distribution, specially designed feeding equipment is needed. There are two major ways in which fish feeding technology, and thus equipment, differ from those generally used in animal husbandry.
- the feed has to be placed in water
- very small-size feed is used.
At present there are many different types of feeding equipment being used world-wide. The feeders can be divided into groups according to the fish species farmed, e.g. special feeders have been developed for eel; age of the fish (different types of feeders are needed for fry, fingerlings and market fish); type of feed (dry and wet feed dispensers). However, these types are based on a few basic principles. Fish feeders can be divided into two major groups, as follows:
- Stationary feeding equipment
- without supplied energy; demand feeders
- with supplied energy; automatic feeders (electric, pneumatic, hydraulic)
- Mobile feeding equipment
- feeding carts
- feeding boats
4.1 Stationary Feeding Equipment
4.1.1 Demand feeders
4.1.2 Automatic feeders
4.1.1 Demand feeders
Demand feeders are controlled by the fish themselves according to their appetite. These feeders are easy to install and operate. The level of the feed in the container is a good indication of the condition of the fish.
Demand feeders can be divided into two main groups, namely bait-rod or pendulum-type feeders and submerged plate-type feeders.
Different pendulum-type feeders are shown in Figure 7. These feeders are not suitable for young fish since they are not able to operate them. The outlet size of these feeders should be adjusted carefully, otherwise uncontrolled pouring of feed can be caused by the spontaneous touching of the fish.
The submerged plate-type demand feeders are controlled not by the contact of the fish, but the removal of all feed from the plate (Figure 8). This type of feeder can be operated by small fish as well; however, their operation is more troublesome, and are not as popular as the pendulum-type feeders.
4.1.2 Automatic feeders
Automatic feeders can be classified according to their energy supply as being electric, pneumatic and hydraulic-type feeders.
(a) Electrically operated automatic feeders
These feeders consist of three main parts; feed container; feed distributing and portioning device; timber.
The designs differ from each other in the applied feed distributing device, and can be grouped as follows:
- electromagnet operated with alternative movement
- electromotor operated with revolving movement
- vibrator powered
Two electromagnet-operated feeders are shown in Figure 9. When the timber operates the electromagnet it slides apart and opens an outlet under the container through which feed falls into the fish tank.
Three typical designs of electromotor-operated automatic feeders are shown in Figure 10.
In Figure l0a the revolving plate placed under the container moves slowly and the feed falls directly down into the water.
In some cases, instead of a vertical shaft revolving plate, a horizontal shaft screw and belt is used for discharging and portioning the feed into the fish tank (Figures 10b and 10c).
When the revolving plate rotates quickly, the feed is spread over a large surface of the water (Figure 10d).
Recently vibrator powered feed distributors have been developed. Figure 11a shows a simple vibrator where the direction of vibration is vertical. Another type of vibrator is shown in Figure 11b when the vibration is generated by a small electric motor with an unbalanced rotor.
The electric automatic feeders are controlled by a timer with which the length of the feeding time and the time interval between two feedings can be adjusted. A single control unit can be used for one individual feeder or a central control unit can operate more feeders.
(b) Pneumatic-type automatic feeders
These feeders shoot the feed by means of compressed air, spreading it over the water surface.
A typical design is shown in Figure 12.
The compressed air supply of the feeders is usually ensured by a central air supplying system, but the feeders can be controlled by a separate electric system centrally, or individually as well.
(c) Hydraulic-type automatic feeders
These feeders can be used on farms where electric energy supply is not available, but where there is a continuous water flow.
As shown in Figure 13, the discharging screw is driven by a water wheel. The rate of feed portioning can be adjusted by changing the gear drive.
Some hydraulic feeding systems are known where the water is used not only for driving a mechanical feed distributing device, but for transporting the feed into the fish culturing unit through a pipeline.
Figure 14 shows a hydraulic feeding system that is used for feeding nursery ponds.
These systems can also be applied for distributing wet food like chopped trash fish, etc.
4.2 Mobile Feeding Equipment
4.2.1 Feeding carts
4.2.2 Feeding boats
This group of feeders can also be divided into two major groups: feeders distributing the feed along the side of the pond and feeding equipment applying feed from a boat.
Figure 9. Electromagnet operated automatic fish feeders a) Neilsen trough feeder (USA)
Figure 9. Electromagnet operated automatic fish feeders a) Neilsen double tank feeder (USA)
Figure 10. Electromotor operated automatic feeders a) EWOS No. 700 fish feeder (Sweden)
Figure 10. Electromotor operated automatic feeders b) Screw type fish feeder (FRG)
Figure 10. Electromotor operated automatic feeders c) Belt type fry feeder
Figure 10. Electromotor operated automatic feeders d) Neilsen fish feeder Model 5-0101/01-02 and its dispersion pattern
Figure 11. Automatic feeders with vibrator powered distributing device a) Automatic feeder with vertical direction vibration (Hungary)
Figure 11. Automatic feeders with vibrator powered distributing device b) TESSOMAT 100 A and B automatic feeder with MA or MB rotating vibrator
Figure 12. EWOS pneumatic type automatic feeder (Sweden) a) The scheme of the feeder
Figure 12. EWOS pneumatic type automatic feeder (Sweden) b) The scheme of the pneumatic feeding system
Figure 13. Water-wheel type automatic feeder
Figure 14. Hydraulic feeding system for nursery ponds (Hungary)
Figure 15. Neilsen Type 5-1300 Mobile pellet feeder
Figure 16. Milanese mobile pellet feeder with 2 tons capacity (Italy)
Figure 17. "Lachs" feeding boat with 1 t capacity (GDR)
4.2.1 Feeding carts
Feeding carts can be used efficiently in intensive fish farming with centralized pond systems connected via suitable roads.
Their operation is not automatic (unlike the stationary feeders) but fully controlled by the operator. The feeding carts can be self-propelled or tractor pulled. The basic working principle of these feeding carts is the same; the feed is blown into the fish pond by a turbo blower or large-capacity ventilator.
Figure 15 shows a tractor-pulled feeding cart that is operated by an individual gasoline engine and can be controlled from the tractor by an electric remote control panel. Figure 16 shows a self-propelled feeding cart where the feed distribution and portioning can be controlled by a mechanical transmission.
4.2.2 Feeding boats
In fish farms having large ponds, feeding boats can be used efficiently. There is a longitudinal slot in the bottom of these boats through which the feed grain is washed out by water current during the movement of the boat (Figure 17). These boats can also be used for fertilization of fish ponds.
They are, however, not suitable for applying pelleted feed because the feed swells up in the bottom of the boat and cannot flow out through the slot.
In order to make these boats suitable for feeding pellet a pellet-distributing adapter can be mounted on top of the conventional boat (Figure 18).
There are feeding boats that are specially designed for fish farms both for pellet and feed grain distribution.
Figure 19 shows one of these types of feeding boats where the feed is discharged from the containers by screws driven by a paddle wheel that rotates during the movement of the boat.
5. REFERENCES
Berka, R., 1973, A review of feeding equipment in fish culture. EIFAC Occas. Pap., (2):32 p.
Kuli, B. and I. Csávás, 1976, A tógazdasági haltermelés gépesitése (Mechanization of pond fish production). Budapest, AGROINFORM
Tjuktjaeva, J.S. and V.Ja. Lysenko, 1974, Handbook on mechanization of processes of pond fish culture. Moskva, Pischevaja Promyshlennost
Torban, S.S., 1977, Mechanization of processes of industrial fisheries. Moskva, Pischevaja Promyshlennost
Figure 18. Adaptor mounted on feeding boat for pellet distribution
Figure 19. KRB-2 Feeding boat (USSR)
<section>l</section>
Chapter 20 Mechanized Harvesting in Fish Culture
L. Váradi
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. INTRODUCTION
2. HERDING OPERATIONS
3. CATCHING OPERATIONS
4. FISH SORTING
5. REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
Harvesting is a complex operation that can be divided into three major parts, as follows:
- driving and concentrating the fish stock to the catch basin;
- lifting the fish out of the catch basin and placing them on a sorting table;
- sorting the fish and loading them on the transporting vehicle.
2. HERDING OPERATIONS
2.1 Mechanical Driving
2.2 Hydraulic Driving
2.3 Electrical Driving
The driving and concentration of fish can be accomplished by three different ways, or by a combination of these, as follows:
- mechanical driving by different nets;
- hydraulic driving, i.e. draining the fish together with the water;
- electrical driving (by electric grid).
2.1 Mechanical Driving
The mechanical driving of the fish by seines is the most commonly used method. When the fish pond is large, the netting should be mechanized because of the high pulling force. In some cases conventional motorboats, tractors or trucks can be applied for pulling the net, but special winches have been developed for this purpose (Figure 1).
2.2 Hydraulic Driving
During hydraulic driving the fish are carried from the pond into the catch basin by water current as the water is draining from the pond. The pond and the drainage canal should be drained completely. The hydraulic drive is sometimes combined with mechanical or electrical drives. Open drainage canals are proposed to be built in these systems because the fish have a tendency to remain inside the dark underground pipe, even if the conditions are not good there.
2.3 Electrical Driving
Electric grids or electrified seines can also be used for driving, where the electric field forces the fish to swim towards the catch basin. Electrified fish driving devices are shown in Figure 2.
Since some species of fish have a habit of swimming towards fresh inflow water, these fish species can be attracted to the catch basin by ensuring oxygen rich inflow water there. This can be combined with the above mentioned driving methods.
3. CATCHING OPERATIONS
3.1 Mechanical Fish Lifting
3.2 Hydraulic Fish Lifting
Lifting the fish out of the catch basin is a critical process because the fish are separated from their natural living medium: therefore, gentle handling is needed. Moreover, this process has to be intermeshed with the driving of fish into the catch basin and with sorting and transporting. Different lifting devices have been developed for fish harvesting, but the two major groups are mechanical and hydraulic devices.
3.1 Mechanical Fish Lifting
Mechanical fish lifting can be classified as follows:
- devices with intermittent operation
mechanized dip net
bucket with alternate movement
- devices with continuous operation
conveyor belt
screw
bucket with rotating movement.
Figure 1 Seine pulling devices a) Type ML-43 motor operated seine pulling winch (USSR)
Figure 1 Seine pulling devices b) Schematic of haul seining procedure by winch with two drums (USA)
Figure 2. Electric fish driving devices a) The electrode system of ERG-1-8/1 electric fish driving device (USSR)
Figure 2. Electric fish driving devices b) Electric diagram of MG screen (Poland)
Figure 3. Mechanized dip net (GRD)
Figure 4. Bucket elevators a) Mobile bucket elevator (USSR)
Figure 4. Bucket elevators b) Bucket elevator built in a concrete structure (Poland)
Mechanized dip nets are usually a mobile type of equipment and can be used widely, but two or three men are needed for the operation. Figure 3 shows a mechanized dip net.
The fish can be lifted out of the catch basin by a mechanized bucket elevator (Figure 4). One man can operate this device with a control panel but its installation is fairly complicated. It can only be installed in a well built concrete structure. During harvesting, the fish may have contact with hard solid surfaces and one should account for some injuries.
Ordinary agricultural conveyor belts can be used for fish lifting as well, but specially designed conveyor belts have also been developed with soft rubber belts and covers (Figure 5). These belts are mobile equipment and can be widely used, especially when the fish have to be lifted up to a fairly high elevation. The lower hopper of the belts can be filled by hand or by some device like a mechanized dip net, air lift pump, etc.
Special fish screws have been developed recently for lifting fish (Figure 6). The internal spiral ribbon and the pipe housing revolve together lifting up the water in the space between the spiral ribbon and the housing. The applicability of the fish screws is the same as that of fish conveyor belts. However, the screw makes for more careful fish handling since the fish are lifted in water.
Some other types of fish lifts with continuous operation have also been constructed where buckets are fixed to an endless chain or when a big rotating wheel with chambers is lifting the fish (Figure 7). However, these are not so widely used, mostly because of their fairly complicated installation and operation.
3.2 Hydraulic Fish Lifting
The working principle of hydraulic fish lifting is basically different from that of mechanical lifting, as it is the water which is lifted directly and not the fish. Hydraulic fish lifting devices are usually water pumps which have been modified according to the special needs of fish lifting.
Hydraulic fish lifting devices or fish pumps can be divided into three groups, as follows:
- centrifugal fish pumps
- air lift pumps
- vacuum pumps
Centrifugal fish pumps were first used in marine fishing vessels and, later on, in pond fish farming. These centrifugal pumps caused serious damage on 2-5 percent of the harvested fish by their impellers (Figure 8a). Special impellers were later developed (Figure 8b) and the damage to the fish decreased. Recently, well designed centrifugal fish pumps became available and are commonly used, mostly in trout farms (Figure 9). However the size of the fish is limited when using a centrifugal fish pump.
Air lift pumps are used in water management for delivery of water containing solid particles. The principle was adapted successfully for fish lifting, and special air lift pumps have been designed. Even big fish can be lifted without any damage, as there is no moving part inside the delivery pipe, only air bubbles. Figure 10 shows a plan of a mechanized harvesting place with air lift pump. In Figure 11 the water delivery pipe is shown.
Vacuum pumps are shown in Figure 12. The operation of these pumps is intermittent and they can, therefore, be used most efficiently in small units (cages) where the whole stock can be sucked into the container during one cycle. These pumps can also be used for mud removal.
4. FISH SORTING
The harvested fish stock can be sorted according to size and, in polyculture, according to species. When the fish stock is sorted into species it has to be done by hand and the mechanization is restricted to transporting the fish to the feeding table. Usually a horizontal conveyor belt is built into the table that conveys the dominant fish of the polyculture, and only the other species have to be touched by hand and placed aside.
The fish can be sorted into size by different screens. The screen can have several pairs of ribs with an increasing distance from top to bottom (Figure 13). The distance between two ribs is adjustable according to the grading requirement. There are graders where, instead of having fixed ribs, revolving rollers are used, as shown in Figure 14.
In order to achieve more accurate grading, there are graders where the fish does not merely slide down on the slope of the table by gravity but is led by an electric motor-driven endless rubber belt with soft rubber fingers above the slot.
Different types of scales are available to weigh the fish, but the four major types are described below:
- steelyard
- spring balance
- tipping balance
- displacement type of balance.
Figures 15 shows these types of scales.
A mobile fish conveyor belt or fish screw is the most efficient method of loading the fish from the sorting table to the transporting vehicle.
The mechanization of fish harvesting does not necessarily mean total mechanization. In some cases, only one phase of the operation is mechanized but there are farms where complex mechanized harvesting lines have been installed.
Diagrams of three of these complex mechanized harvesting systems are shown in Figure 16.
5. REFERENCES
Fonarev, A.L., 1977, Studies on hydraulic transportation of fish. Moskva, Pischevaja Promyshlennost
Greenland, D.C., 1974, Recent development in harvesting, grading, loading and handling pond raised catfish. Trans. Am. Soc. Agric. Eng., 17(1)
Kuli, B. and I. Csávás, 1976, A tógazdasági haltermelés gépesitése (Mechanization of pond fish production). Budapest, AGROINFORM
Kuli, B., 1976, Különbözö gépesitett lehalászási rendszerek összehasonlitó vizsgálata (Comparative trial of different mechanized harvesting methods). Gödöllö, MÉM Müszaki Intézet
Tjuktjaeva, J.S. and V. Ja Lysenko, 1974, Handbook on mechanization of processes of pond fish culture. Moskva, Pischevaja Promyshlennost
Torban, S.S., 1977, Mechanization of processes of industrial fisheries. Moskva, Pischevaja Promyshlennost
Vibert, R. (ed.). 1967, Fishing with electricity: its application to biology and management. London, Fishing News (Books) Ltd., 276 p.
Figure 5. Belt conveyor for fish lifting
Figure 6. Type CM screws for fish lifting (France)
Figure 7. Continuous operation mechanized fish lifts a) Fish lifting device with rotating bucket (Poland)
Figure 7. Continuous operation mechanized fish lifts b) Fish lifting device with chambered wheel (USSR)
Figure 8. Special impellers for centrifugal fish pump a) Impeller of Type RB centrifugal fish pump (USSR)
Figure 8. Special impellers for centrifugal fish pump b) Impeller of Hitachi type centrifugal fish pump (Japan)
Figure 9. Neilsen type hydraulic fish pump with dewatering tower and grader Model 5-1516 (USA)
Figure 10. The installation of the air lift pump in a mechanized harvesting place
Figure 11. Water delivery pipe of the air lift pump
Figure 12. Vacuum pump for fish harvest (GDR) a) Scheme of the operation
Figure 12. Vacuum pump for fish harvest (GDR) b) Mobil vacuum fiah pump
Figure 13. EWOS fish grader No. 2038 (Sweden)
Figure 14. Fish grader Type RSG 4 with rollers (GDR)
Figure 15. Scales for weighing fish a) steelyard
Figure 15. Scales for weighing fish b) SALTER spring balance (UK)
Figure 15. Scales for weighing fish c) METRIPOND No. 271. Tipping balance (Hungary)
Figure 15. Scales for weighing fish d) water displacement type fish weigher (GDR)
Figure 16. The scheme of complex fish harvesting systems in Hungary a) Mobile mechanized fish harvesting system (Bikal State Farm)
Figure 16. The scheme of complex fish harvesting systems in Hungary b) Stationary mechanized fish harvesting system (Hortobágy State Farm)
Figure 16. The scheme of complex fish harvesting systems in Hungary c) Central fish harvesting place with indoor sorting (Biharugra State Farm)
<section>m</section>
Chapter 21 Aeration and Oxygenation in Aquaculture
J. Kepenyes and L. Váradi
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. OXYGEN BUDGET OF FISH PONDS
2. AERATION DEVICES FOR FISH PONDS
3. UTILIZATION OF PURE OXYGEN IN INTENSIVE FISH CULTURE SYSTEMS
4. BASIC PRINCIPLES OF THE DESIGN OF FISH POND AERATORS
5. DIMENSIONING OF AERATORS
6. REFERENCES
1. OXYGEN BUDGET OF FISH PONDS
1.1 Diurnal Changes of Dissolved Oxygen Content
1.2 Factors Influencing the Dissolved Oxygen Content of Pond Water
Dissolved oxygen content of the water of fish ponds is one of the most important parameters of water quality, as the oxygen is a vital condition for all the organisms living in the water and having an aerobic type of respiration. The solubility of oxygen is influenced by several factors (e.g. air pressure, hydrostatical pressure, salt content), but in pond fish farms it is generally enough to consider only water temperature.
Table 1 shows values of oxygen saturation of water as a function of water temperature. In pond fish farming the dissolved oxygen content of the water can be expressed as the absolute quantity of oxygen in one unit of water (mg/l; ppm) or as relative oxygen saturation (%).
1.1 Diurnal Changes of Dissolved Oxygen Content
Diurnal changes of the dissolved oxygen content of pond water during a period of time t¢ ¢ - t¢ can be expressed by the following equation:
O[2]¢ ¢ - O[2]¢ = P - R - Y ± A
where
P = quantity of oxygen produced during the photosynthetic process of the phytoplankton, the phytobenthos and the water plants,
R = quantity of oxygen consumed during the respiration of bacterial-, phyto- and zooplankton and organisms of animals and plants,
Y = quantity of oxygen fixed by the mud of the pond bottom,
A = quantity of oxygen dissolved from the atmosphere or in case of supersaturation released to the atmosphere.
Since the most significant positive value (P) of the above formula is dependent on light conditions (the photosynthesis can take place only by utilization of solar energy), the dissolved oxygen content of the fish pond varies over a period of 24 hours.
Figure 1 shows a typical daily change of oxygen concentration of a fish pond. The photosynthesis starts gradually from the early morning hours while the dissolved oxygen content of the water is increasing. The maximum value, in several cases much higher than the saturation level, can be observed early in the afternoon.
From the late afternoon hours photosynthesis is rapidly decreasing and is stopped after dark. The dissolved oxygen content of the water is also decreasing during this period, the minimum value occurring during the summer months.
1.2 Factors Influencing the Dissolved Oxygen Content of Pond Water
1.2.1 Production of macro- and microorganisms in the water
1.2.2 Oxygen consumption by pond water
1.2.3 Oxygen consumption by the pond bottom
1.2.4 Oxygen consumption by fish
1.2.5 Natural diffusion caused by wind action
1.2.6 Artificial control of the dissolved oxygen content of water
1.2.1 Production of macro- and microorganisms in the water
Those organisms which live in the water of a fish pond and have chlorophyll, produce carbohydrates from the carbon dioxide and the water in the process of photosynthesis by utilization of solar energy, while oxygen is produced as a by-product of the process. In deeper water ponds the biggest part of the oxygen produced comes from the phytoplankton, but in shallow ponds the macrovegetation, the algae and the benthic algae have a dominating role. Among the factors influencing production of fish ponds water temperature and illumination are the most important.
Table 1 The oxygen saturation concentrations in the water as a function of water temperature at 760 torr
t °C
mg O[2]/l
t °C
mg O[2]/l
t °C
mg O[2]/l
Figure 1. Diurnal change of the dissolved oxygen concentration in intensive fish pond
Figure 2. Relationship between the oxygen production and illumination in fertilized fish pond
The relationship between illumination and oxygen production can be seen in Figure 2. The intensity of light affects significantly the oxygen budget of pond water. If the intensity of solar radiation is high during a day without overcast, a quantity of dissolved oxygen is produced. This covers the oxygen demand of respiration during the night. In the cases when solar radiation is less intensive because of cloud cover, the oxygen production and thus the oxygen reserve for the night is less. During the night the respiration of organisms in the water does not decrease - or at least not in the same rate - and the oxygen reserve of the pond water can be exhausted. Thus the concentration of dissolved oxygen can decrease below the lethal level for fish.
This situation can be extremely dangerous at the end of a growing season in August, when the length of the days is shorter (Figure 3), the quantity of daytime production is less, and at the same time the biomass is the highest.
Studying the values of oxygen saturation at 2 p.m. and 5 a.m. throughout the growing season, it has been found that in the case when the dissolved oxygen content at 2 p.m. did not reach 10-12 mg/l, the oxygen content decreased to a dangerous level during the hours of sunrise, and depending on the length of the oxygen shortage period, it caused fish kills (Figure 4).
Transparency of the water can be decreased by over-production of phytoplankton too. The over-produced mass of phytoplankton has a self-screening effect and it can be a significant factor in intensively manured and foddered ponds. In these ponds production is limited only to the upper water layer and the production here can not cover the oxygen demand of the lower water layer where respiration is dominant.
If the light conditions are not favourable a very dangerous situation can develop (short day, cloudy sky).
After over-production of phytoplankton, production can be decreased not only because of the self-screening effect but by the disruption of nutrient equilibrium. In critical cases heavy losses of plankton can take place.
The relationship between oxygen production and water temperature in an intensive carp production pond is shown on Figure 5. Although the oxygen production of pond water will be higher and higher due to the increase of temperature, a critical situation occurs in the case of high water temperatures because the rate of oxygen consumption exceeds the rate of production.
1.2.2 Oxygen consumption by pond water
Oxygen is consumed in pond water by decomposition of organic materials in the respiration of macro-vegetation, phyto- and zooplankton and bacteria. On the basis of measurements carried out in large scale fish ponds of Hungary it was found that oxygen consumption of the water in a pond full of weeds was nearly completely the result of respiratory action of macro-vegetation.
In another case in a manured but empty fishpond the mass of phytoplankton decreased nearly to zero due to over-production of zooplankton. In this case the zooplankton was the main consumer of oxygen. In the case of a stocked fish pond on the other hand, the mass of zooplankton decreased to such a minimum level due to the consumption by fish that even the chemical destruction of the remaining zooplankton did not make any demonstrable change in oxygen consumption of the pond water.
Fish pond water is a complicated biological complex, thus its oxygen consumption is different from pond to pond under different conditions.
While oxygen production is dependent mainly on light conditions, respiration is mainly determined by water temperature and dissolved oxygen content of the water.
In an intensive channel catfish production pond a correlation has been found between oxygen consumption of pond water and water temperature as shown in Figure 6.
Determination of primary production and of oxygen consumption of pond water has been carried out by the Fish Culture Research Institute. Based on a mathematical analysis of daily oxygen curves, it was found that the intensity of respiration in the fish ponds studied has shown a significant daily rhythm, with an afternoon maximum, and that it has been in direct proportion to oxygen concentration (Figure 7).
Figure 3. Sunrise and sunset at Budapest according to Central European Standard Time
Figure 4. The oxygen concentration in the surface of a fish pond at 0500 and 1400 hours
Figure 5. The oxygen production in intensive fish pond as a function of water temperature
Figure 6. The oxygen consumption of the water of a fish pond as a function of water temperature
Figure 7. Relationship between the oxygen concentration and respiration
Figure 8. Routine oxygen consumption in representative cyprinid and salmonid species following thermal acclimation
Source: Chavin, W.: Responses of Fish to Environmental Changes, Springfield, 1973, C.C. Thomas, 459.p./
Figure 9. The oxygen consumption of some fresh water fishes
Figure 10. The oxygen consumption of different fish species as a function of the dissolved oxygen content of the water (in closed system)
1.2.3 Oxygen consumption by the pond bottom
Oxygen consumption by the pond bottom is dependent on the oxygen requirement for decomposition of organic material accumulated on the pond bottom and for vital functions of benthos. Oxygen fixation taking place in the water mud interfacial area can also not be neglected. The dissolved oxygen content of the water layer directly in contact with the mud is much lower than that of the upper layers of water.
According to some studies the 24 hour-long oxygen consumption of the pond bottom is 1-3 grams per m^2. Calculating with 1 m water depth, the 24 hour-long oxygen consumption of the pond bottom changes between 1 and 3 mg/l.
1.2.4 Oxygen consumption by fish
The different fish species have become adapted to different living conditions during their evolution. Generally all those fish species which live in fast flowing and oxygen rich streams (e.g. Salmonids) need high quantities of oxygen, and only a small decrease of dissolved oxygen can cause losses. At the same time the species which became accustomed to slow motion of the water or stagnant water (e.g. several Cyprinids) need less oxygen and are able to tolerate short periods of oxygen deficiency.
Some fish species are also known, mainly in the tropics, to utilize the oxygen of the atmosphere by cutaneous respiration, intestinal and swim-bladder respiration or by a respiratory organ similar to lungs.
Oxygen consumption by fish is generally given in mg/body weight and kg/hour. Standard oxygen consumption means the quantity of oxygen consumed by the fish without swimming and feeding (quantity of oxygen necessary for subsistence). Standard oxygen consumption is not dependent on oxygen saturation of the water but it is significantly influenced by water temperature.
Figure 8 shows standard oxygen consumption of some fish species as a function of water temperature on the basis of the data of several authors. In the practice of fish culture the active oxygen consumption (the oxygen consumed by swimming and feeding fish) can be used.
Active oxygen consumption by fish has been analyzed very rarely till now because of the technical difficulties of measuring, and available data can not be compared because of inaccurate or imperfect description of the circumstances of measurement.
Table 2, showing oxygen consumption of different fish species, gives the size of fish and an idea of the motion where they have been cited. From Table 3 it is obvious that oxygen consumption by fish can significantly change at a given water temperature depending on the activity of fish. Table 2 shows that in identical conditions oxygen consumption by smaller size fish is higher.
Figure 9 shows changes of oxygen consumption by common carp, grass carp, silver and bighead carp against body weight.
Active oxygen consumption by fish has a strict connection with oxygen saturation of the water. Figure 10 shows the correlation between oxygen saturation and oxygen consumption by fish, for seven fish species. Some scientists are of the opinion that fish are able to sense a decrease of dissolved oxygen content of the water before it causes troubles in their respiration and therefore they look for water of higher oxygen content. If this is not successful and the dissolved oxygen content of the water decreases further, the respiratory motion of the fish is increased as long as the oxygen supply to respiratory muscles permits. This reaches a limit when further acceleration is hindered by lack of oxygen. Fish are tolerant till this level. If the dissolved oxygen content of the water decreases further, the pulsation of the heart slows down and the fish dies after a time depending on the resistance characteristic of the species. Lethal oxygen concentration is the dissolved oxygen
content that can not be tolerated by the given fish species for a given period of time.
Table 2 The oxygen consumption of several fish species (Source: J. Oláh, Manuscript, Fish Culture Research Institute, 1979)
Fish species
Size (g)
Feeding
Swimming
Temperature
Oxygen consumption
mg/kg . day
Authors
Cyprinus carpio
Nakanishi, Itazawa, 1974
Cyprinus carpio
Houston, 1973
Cyprinus gibelio
Houston, 1973
Hypophthalmichthys molitrix
Muhamedova, 1977
Hypophthalmichthys molitrix
Vetskanov, 1975
Hypophthalmichthys molitrix
Vetskanov, 1975
Lepomis gibbosus
Roberts, 1973
Anguilla anguilla
Jedryczkowski and Fischer, 1973
Anguilla anguilla
Jedryczkowski and Fischer, 1973
Anguilla japonica
Nakanishi and Itazawa, 1974
Ictalurus punctatus
Andrews and Matsuda, 1975
Ictalurus punctatus
Andrews and Matsuda, 1975
Brevocrtis tyrannus
Hettler, 1976
Spicara smaris
Muravskaya and Belokopitin, 1975
Spicara smeris
Muravskaya and Belokopitin, 1975
Lutjanus campechanus
Moore, 1973
Rhomboplites aurorubens
Moore, 1973
Lutjanus campechanus
Moore, 1973
Rhomboplites aurorubens
Moore, 1973
Lutjanus apodus
Scholander et al., 1953
Haemulon boneriense
Scholander et al., 1953
Scarus croicensis
Scholander et all. , 1953
Cynoglossus brevis
Edwards et al., 1970, 1971
Cynoglossus puncticeps
Edwards et al., 1970, 1971
Halophryne dussumeri
Edwards et al., 1970, 1971
Lagodon rhomboides
Wohlschlag et al., 1968
Porichthys porosissimius
Moore, 1971
Salmo gairdneri
Nakanishi and Itazawa, 1974
Salmo gairdneri
Houston, 1973
Salvenilus fontinalis
Houston, 1973
Oncorhynchus nerka
Davis, 1975
Oncorhynchus nerka
Davis, 1975
Table 3 The oxygen consumption (ing/kg/hour) of 100 g rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri) as a function of water temperature and fish activity (the dissolved oxygen concentration in the water is 80-90%)
Water temperature (°C)
Reduced metabolism
Natural conditions without stress effects
Active metabolism (intensive feeding)
Forced swimming
Figure 11 shows that there were no significant losses of fish in an intensively manured fish pond with 0.3 mg/l dissolved oxygen content if the period of oxygen shortage was brief. But more than ten hours of oxygen shortage caused serious losses of fish.
On the basis of investigations on intensive pond culture of common carp in Central Europe, the probability of oxygen deficiency (less than 1 mg/l dissolved oxygen) is nearly continuous from the beginning of July till the beginning of September, but losses caused by oxygen deficiency occur generally in August. This can be explained by the fact that in July the period of oxygen deficiency is only 1-2 hours but in August sometimes twelve hours of oxygen deficiency can occur.
In the practice of pond fish farming oxygen deficiency has been regarded as dangerous mainly because of mass losses of fish. But recent investigations have shown that decreased oxygen saturation can have serious effects on the economy of a fish farm as well.
Increase of toxic effect of different toxic materials can not be neglected in water bodies with low oxygen supply. The low oxygen content disadvantageously influences both the food intake and the utilization of food. Investigations have shown that lower than 25% oxygen saturation occurring before sunrise has a disadvantageous effect on fish-growing.
Keeping the dissolved oxygen content of the pond water nearly at the saturation level makes it possible not only to avoid mass losses of fish but ensures better conversion rates and higher yields in intensive culture.
1.2.5 Natural diffusion caused by wind action
Diffusion is caused by partial differential pressure of oxygen in the air and in the water.
As the oxygen content of the air is considered to be constant, the rate of diffusion is determined by oxygen saturation of the water layer interfacing with the air. In the case of stagnant water the uppermost layer of water becomes saturated quickly and the convection current of oxygen into the water slows down. The mass transfer rate which determines the rate of diffusion (g/O[2]/m^2/hour) varies in a wide range. It can be seen from a collection of the data of several authors that the mass transfer rate has varied between 0.03-5.0 g/m^2/hour depending on the circumstances (Table 4).
In fish ponds the rate of diffusion is dependent on the mixing of water layers caused mainly by wind action. The oxygen intake from the atmosphere by diffusion is 1.5 g/m^2/day in small ponds and 4.8 g/m^2/day in big ponds, where the wind action is stronger.
Depending on oxygen saturation of the water, diffusion can show a reversed direction. In case of over-saturation of the water oxygen diffuses to the atmosphere. Diffusion is assisted by the mixing of water caused by wind action in this case.
It is well known that wind action has a good effect on the water quality of fish ponds through increased diffusion. In the case of construction of new fish ponds the prevailing wind direction has to be taken into account in order to utilize natural diffusion.
In intensive fish ponds where the oxygen budget of the pond water can be regulated artificially, diffusion by wind action has less importance.
1.2.6 Artificial control of the dissolved oxygen content of water
Artificial control of the oxygen budget of water of fish ponds in this case means technical and practical measures which have direct effect on the dissolved oxygen content of the pond water.
Oxygen content of the pond water can be influenced by two methods; by change of flow rate, and by aeration of pond water.
Figure 11. The length of the periods of oxygen shortage (0.3 mg/l) in the surface water layer of a fish pond
Figure 12. The basic principles of fish pond aeration 1. Hydraulic type aeration
Figure 12. The basic principles of fish pond aeration 2. Air intake type aeration
Table 4 Coefficients of gas transfer for oxygen Source: Odum, H.: Primary production in flowing water. Limnology Oceanography 1956 1/2 (102-107 p.)
Water type,
Source of data
Velocity
m/sec
Depth
m
Temp.
°C
K
g/m^2/hr at 0% saturation
Still water (Hutchinson, Becke, quoted by Haney, 1954)
(Adenay, quoted by Kehr, 1938)
Moving water
Stirred water (quoted by
Haney, 1954)
Shallow circulating through
(Streeter, Wright and Kehr, 1936)
Sewage in circulating through
(Kehr, 1938)
Stream and ponds (Imhoff and Mahr, 1932)
New York Harbour (Gould, 1921)
tidal
Tank with a wave machine (Borst, quoted by Phelps, 1944)
Sea Surface (Redfield, 1948)
Summer
Winter
Silver River, Florida, July 21, 1955 (Odum)
Subtraction-of-respiration method
Dye-measured-turnover method
Green Cove Springs, Florida (Odum) From carbon-dioxide by respiratory-quotient method
Small rivers, diurnal oxygen curve analyses in Table 2
Ohio River below Cincinnati (Velz, 1939)
Bubbles and drops (K given per area of drop or bubble)
Air bubble (Krogh, quoted by Redfield, 1948)
Air bubbles (Ippan, Adenay, Spuler and Schaab quoted by Haney, 1954)
Water drops (Whitman, quoted by Haney, 1954)
In the case of intensively manured and fed fish ponds, where a significant part of the feed of fish is produced in the water of the fish pond itself, increase of flow rate can not be applied for oxygen saturation.
Artificial aeration means increasing the oxygen content of all or part of the pond water to limits which ensure the oxygen supply to the fish without limiting the production at a given management level.
In extensive fish culture, aeration of fish ponds has a "life-saving" role only in case of oxygen deficiency. With the increasing of the intensity of pond fish culture, because of the accelerated biological activity (intensive manuring, feeding, high stocking density) the natural oxygen supply becomes more and more insufficient and will be a limiting factor in production. Intensive aeration of fish ponds has not only a life-saving role, but it becomes one of the basic factors of production, and ensuring optimal oxygen supply makes possible the maximal utilization of the given biological possibilities.
As already mentioned, food intake of fish is influenced disadvantageously by the decrease of dissolved oxygen content of the water below 20-30 percent. In intensive fish culture the proper oxygen supply has an important role in the economy of production. At the same time saturation values much higher than 100 percent are disadvantageous for the normal vital processes of fish, as they are forced to an increased respiration. Consequently the aeration of fish ponds means the regulation of dissolved oxygen content of the pond water and not necessarily the increase of it.
During the planning of fish pond aeration, one can count on extended water surface areas as potential air intake areas.
Oxygen over-saturation of the surface water layer can be decreased by mixing of the water, and the oxygen can be uniformly distributed in the total water body of the pond. Mixing of the water in shallow ponds such as fishponds has no influence on oxygen production of plankton. Mixing the water during daytime can ensure that significant quantities of oxygen are reserved for the night hours when consumption is predominant.
2. AERATION DEVICES FOR FISH PONDS
2.1 Hydraulic Type Fish Pond Aerators
2.2 Air Diffusion Type Fish Pond Aerators
In pond fish farming the oxygen content of the atmosphere is utilized for enrichment of pond water with oxygen. Basically there are two methods for oxygen enrichment. In the first one energy is transferred to the surrounding air by some kind of air compressor and the air penetrates into the water where it transmits a part of its oxygen content to the water. In case of the second one energy is transferred directly to the pond water or other water source and the water having a higher energy content will be able to take up air from the atmosphere and dissolve part of its oxygen content. The principal schemes of these aeration processes are shown in Figure 12.
A water pump is the basic device for the hydraulic type of aeration with which the energy content of the water can be increased. The air intake device can be a cascade, a sprinkler, an ejector or an air intake head. These are generally connected to the pump through a pipeline. In the group of hydraulic type aeration devices, the surface aerators are shown in a separate group in the figure, because of their special construction. Surface aeration can be provided by a simple open impeller or by a centrifugal pump without housing, and its construction is designed specially for pond aeration. The basic unit of air diffusion type aeration devices is the air compressor which can be a root-type blower, a ventilator, a compressor or a membrane pump. The air penetrates the water through porous material such as a perforated tube placed in the pond.
2.1 Hydraulic Type Fish Pond Aerators
In case of aeration with sprinklers the water jet comes out from the nozzle with high velocity and falls into the water in drops, thus contacting the air on a large surface and dissolving oxygen from it. When the water drops hit the water surface of the fish pond turbulence occurs increasing the diffusion of air into the water. The water jet can be directed down into the water surface forcing air bubbles into the water.
In aeration with an ejector the water is passed through a venturi-type diffusor where its pressure decreases below the atmospheric pressure thus air can penetrate into the water.
Specially designed air intake heads can also be used for aeration. These usually involve a propeller inside a pipe through which water is passing. The propeller is driven by the water current and on the surface of the blade the pressure decreases and an air sucking effect takes place.
Cascades can also be used for aeration, in which the water is broken into small drops, increasing the interfacial area.
Hydraulic type aerators can be applied usefully when water is pumped through a pipeline but they are particularly useful when a natural head is available.
Surface aerators are placed directly in the fish pond and due to the rotation of a paddle type device, either with vertical or horizontal axis, the water is discharged into the air. These aerators generate a vertical or horizontal water current in the fish pond that has an advantageous effect on the oxygen budget.
2.2 Air Diffusion Type Fish Pond Aerators
During air diffusion the air is supplied by various types of compressors or blowers into the water where it is diffused through a variety of diffusors. When the air is diffused through a perforated pipe large bubbles of up to 10 mm in diameter are formed and when the diffuser is a porous material fine bubbles of 2-5 mm in diameter are produced. When the bubbles emerge and pass up to the water surface a part of their oxygen content is dissolved in the water, and also a secondary upwards water movement is generated, creating a mixing effect.
3. UTILIZATION OF PURE OXYGEN IN INTENSIVE FISH CULTURE SYSTEMS
3.1 Oxygen Absorption and its Devices
3.2 Pipeline Injection of Oxygen
3.3 U-tube Oxygenation
Intensive fish culture systems are generally established in areas where there is a large quantity and good quality of flow-through water. In such systems the oxygen requirement of fish is ensured by the inflow water. This means the fish load capacity of these systems is dependent on the rate of water flow. The water flow can not be increased beyond a certain limit because of technical, economic and physiological reasons, although the other elements of the system would make possible a higher stocking density. The fish load can be increased to a certain extent by direct aeration of the water, but there are technical and economic limitations on individual aeration of fish tanks.
By application of pure oxygen, the oxygen supply no longer limits the fish load of the system. Furthermore the oxygen supply can be regulated and the safety of the operation increases. The significant advantage of application of pure oxygen is the high mass transfer rate between the pure oxygen and the water, because of high differences in concentration. In application one has to take into account the costs of oxygen and the investment in devices to dispense it. A well-designed and well-operated oxygen supply system can compensate for the higher investment costs because of its low energy requirement.
Pure oxygen is available in gas or liquid form. For the supply of intensive fish culture systems usually liquid oxygen is used, produced by cryogenic separation. The liquid oxygen of 99 percent purity is stored in tanks with vacuum insulation and evaporated before utilization.
Recently "oxygen generators" have been designed which can produce oxygen of 90 percent purity, removing the nitrogen from the air by a molecule filter.
3.1 Oxygen Absorption and its Devices
In order to minimize oxygen consumption devices are needed which ensure the most perfect absorption of oxygen. The operating principle of these is the same as that of aeration devices, but in order to increase the contact time between the gas and the water some technical modifications are needed.
One is bubbling oxygenation where the oxygen gas comes in contact with the water by breaking into bubbles. The rate of oxygen dilution depends mainly on the depth of the water layer, the length of travel of bubbles in the water body and the rate of oxygen feeding. Higher efficiency can be achieved by decreasing the bubble size, thus the contact time and the contact surface increases. But the decrease of bubble size needs a significant quantity of extra energy, and coagulation of bubbles also can happen. The efficiency of oxygen bubbling can be increased by counterflow of oxygen and water (Figure 13/a). Undissolved oxygen can be collected and circulated back to the oxygen supply system (Figure 13/b), or a closed system can be constructed in which oxygen and water are continuously mixed (Figure 13/c).
3.2 Pipeline Injection of Oxygen
Where oxygen is injected into the water flowing in a tube at a given point, the efficiency of oxygen dissolving depends on the time the oxygen stays in the pipeline and on the pressure in the tube. Oxygen can be fed into the pipeline through a Venturi tube, as shown in Figure 13/d.
3.3 U-tube Oxygenation
U-tube oxygenation is shown in Figure 13/e, in which bubbles of oxygen are carried along the water current. Thus the contact time and efficiency of oxygen dilution depends on the difference of inflow and outflow water levels and on depth of the "U" tube. This process seems to be very effective in fish culture practice because of its high efficiency, low energy requirement and simplicity.
The above mentioned basic dissolving principles can be found simultaneously in the same device as shown in Figure 13/f.
4. BASIC PRINCIPLES OF THE DESIGN OF FISH POND AERATORS
4.1 Equilibrium Concentration of Oxygen in Water
4.2 Mass Transfer Processes of Aerators
4.1 Equilibrium Concentration of Oxygen in Water
The equilibrium concentration is the maximum concentration of oxygen which can be dissolved in the water relative to the concentration of oxygen in the gas under the prevailing conditions of temperature and pressure. In fish pond conditions the gas means the atmospheric air, although pure oxygen also gets into the fish pond water by the oxygen production of phytoplankton and other water plants. In some intensive fish farming systems pure oxygen is applied in order to meet the oxygen requirement of the fish.
The equilibrium concentration in gas-liquid systems is expressed by Henry's law as follows:
where
H = Henry's constant (P[a]). (Henry's constant depends on the temperature).
The partial pressure of one component of a gas mixture is proportional to the volume fraction of that component.
where
P = the pressure of gas mixture (P[a])
Figure 13. a) Counterflow column
Figure 13. b) Gas recycling
Figure 13. c) Enclosed Operation
Figure 13. d)Venturi oxygenator
Figure 13. e) U tube oxygenator
Figure 13.f) Complex system
21 percent of the atmospheric air is oxygen thus the volume fraction is:
^1^/ In the following equations the notations k^-1 and m^-1 are used to denote per kg or per m^3
where
thus
(kg . m^-3)
where
C[s] = weight concentration of oxygen at saturation (kg . m^-3)
The density depends on temperature as shown in Table 5.
Based on the equations given above, the weight concentration of oxygen at saturation (C[s]) can be calculated as follows:
(kg . m^-3)
(g . m^-3)
Table 5 Density of pure water
Temperature
°C
Density
kg/m
Temperature
°C
Density
kg/m^3
When calculating the pressure (p), the atmospheric pressure and the water head have to be taken into account (1 mm H[2]0 = 9.80665 P[a]). In the case of a surface aerator, one has to calculate only with the atmospheric pressure. The C[s] values at normal atmospheric pressure are shown in Figure 1.
In those places where the elevation is different from sea level, the atmospheric pressure can be calculated with the "barometric level formula" as follows:
using the "gas law"
where
z = elevation above sea level (m)
p[z] = atmospheric pressure at z elevation above sea level (P[a])
p[0] = atmospheric pressure at sea level (P[a])
The normal atmospheric pressure at 45° north at sea level and at 273 K (0°C) temperature is:
101325 P[a] (= 760 torr = 1 atm)
g = acceleration due to gravity (ms^-2) its value for practical calculations is: g = 9.81 ms^-2
S[0] = the density of air (sea level, normal atmospheric pressure, 273 K (0° C) temperature)
S[0] = 1.2928 kg . m^-3
q = temperature (K)
R = gas constant
its value for air is:
R = 287.041 s . kg^-1 K^-1
The changing of the local atmospheric pressure usually is + 10 percent.
4.2 Mass Transfer Processes of Aerators
The amount of oxygen that can be dissolved in the water by an aerator during a time unit can be expressed as follows:
where
K[L]a = modified mass transfer coefficient (h^-1)
C[s] = the equilibrium concentration of dissolved O[2] (g m^-3)
C = the dissolved oxygen concentration in the water (g m^-3)
t = time (h)
The solution of the differential equation when the initial condition is C[0] is as follows:
where
K[L] = mass transfer coefficient (m h^-1)
A = diffusion area (m^2)
V = volume (m^3)
K[L] is dependent on the temperature
where
q = temperature (°C)
b = constant with a value between 1.016 and 1.047
In sewage treatment with bubbling aeration usually b = 1.02 is used during the calculations
Generally:
The organic and inorganic materials in the water have an influence on K[L]a.
K¢ [L]a = a K[L]a
where
K¢ [L]a = the modified mass transfer rate of an impure water
a = constant, its value lies between 0.7 and 0.9 when the water is biologically treated and 0.5 when the water is mechanically treated.
The Oxygenation Capacity (OC) expresses how many grams of oxygen can be dissolved in 1 m^3 of water during one hour by the aerator investigated, at normal atmospheric pressure when the water temperature is 10°C and its initial dissolved oxygen content is zero.
The relation between the Oxygenation Capacity and modified mass transfer rate is shown as follows:
OC = K[L]a (10°C) . C[s] (10°C)
The value of OC at different temperature and atmospheric pressure can be computed with the equation:
where
When the same aerator is used for the oxygenation of a larger water volume than 1 m^3 less oxygen can be dissolved. This is why total oxygen intake (O[t]) is introduced.
O[t] = V . OC
(g h^-1)
The value of O[t] is related to 10 or 20°C temperature, normal atmosphere pressure and C = 0 initial dissolved oxygen concentration.
The specific total oxygen intake O[ts] shows the efficiency of the oxygenation related to the power input.
(g h^-1 kW^-1)
where
P = power input of the aerator (kW)
5. DIMENSIONING OF AERATORS
5.1 Bubble Aeration
5.2 Examples for Dimensioning Fine Bubble Aerators
5.3 Aeration with Ejectors
5.4 Aeration with Paddle Wheels
5.1 Bubble Aeration
The air intake type aerators can be classified according to the size of bubbles produced as follows:
a) Fine bubbles d[B] = 1 to 5 mm
b) Medium bubbles d[B] = 5 to 10 mm
c) Coarse bubbles d[B] = larger than 10 mm
The size of the bubble can be expressed as follows
where
d[B] = bubble diameter (mm)
s = surface tension of the liquid (N m^-1)
S[f] = density of the liquid (kg m^-3)
S[g] = density of the gas (kg m^-3)
When fine and medium size bubbles are produced, the diameter of the bubbles is larger than the size of the hole through which the air enters into the water . When a large bubble is produced its diameter is smaller than the hole size.
The elevation velocity of the bubbles in ease of different bubble size is shown as follows:
d[B] < 0,15 mm
V[B] = 478 500 d[B]^2 (ms^-1)
0,15 mm < d[B]- < 2.10 mm
V[B] = 758 d[B]^1.25 (ms^-1)
2.10 mm < d[B] < 7.20 mm
V[B] = 0.0164 d[B]^0.5 (ms^-1)
d[B] > 7.20 mm
V[B] = 2.24 d[B]^0.5 (ms^-1)
In bubble aeration the following ratio is used as a reference to the efficiency of oxygen dissolving:
The value of this ratio in different systems is as follows:
a) fine bubble aeration:
9-10 percent
b) medium bubble aeration:
5 - 6 percent
c) coarse bubble aeration:
3.5- 5 percent
where
Q = air volume (m^3h^-1)
S = density of air (kgm^-3)
OCV = (g h^-1)
The manufacturers of different aerators use characteristic curves that can be expressed as follows:
or
where
S = density of air (kg m^-3)
w = mole fraction of O[2] in air (kg kg^-1)
Generally the air volume (Q) is related to normal atmospheric air. In this case:
S = 1.293 kg m^-3
and
S . w = 1.293 . 0.232 = 0.3 kg m^-3
The equations above are related to a given water depth. The different parameters can be converted from one water depth to another using the formula:
Table 7 shows the result of a test during which a bubble aerator (2.3 mm long 25 mm diameter perforated plastic pipe with 1.5 mm diameter holes in two lines with a distance of 20 mm between holes) was utilized in a tank with a surface area of 7.5 × 17.5 m.
5.2 Examples for Dimensioning Fine Bubble Aerators
The scheme of the NOKIA fine bubble aerator is shown in Figure 14. The air intake part of these aerators is made of porous polyethylene material, in pipe (HKP 600) or in disc (HKL 210) form.
They can be dimensioned using the curves given in Figures 15 and 16.
The Flygt 763 type fine bubble aerator is shown in Figure 17. The equation below shows how much oxygen can be dissolved from 1 m air when the temperature of the water is 10°C, its initial oxygen content is zero and when the aerator is placed 1 m below the water surface:
if the value of Q lies between 6 m^3h^-1 and 30 m^3h^-1
where
Q = the amount of air flowing through the aerator (the amount of air is calculated for normal conditions, 0°C and 101325 P[a]) (m^3h^-1)
The relation between the air flow and the required pressure is shown in Figure 17.
5.3 Aeration with Ejectors
The cross-section of an ejector for fish pond aeration (Flygt type 4803, 4804) is shown in Figure 18. The primary water flow (1) passes through a Venturi inlet (2) where its velocity increases while its pressure decreases. The low pressure suction chamber (3) is connected to the atmospheric air by a pipe (4) through which air enters the chamber. In the mixing pipe (5) the air and the primary water are mixed together. As the air-water mixture passes through the ejector its velocity decreases in the diffusor pipe while its pressure rises to the pressure at the end of the pipe in the outside water. As an example, graphs are given in Figure 18 that can be used for the dimensioning of Flygt type 4803 and 4804 ejectors.
Temperature
(°C)
Figure 14. HKP 600 aerator
Figure 15. Oxygen absorption capacity of an HKP 600 tube aerator
Figure 15. Oxygen absorption capacity of an HKL 210 disc aerator
Figure 16. Pressure loss
Figure 17
Figure 18. Flygt ejector 4803, 4804
5.4 Aeration with Paddle Wheels
The basic technical data of two paddle wheel type aerators are given below. These aerators were tested in a concrete tank with 7.5 × 17.5 m surface area. The aerator has a horizontal shaft with two paddle wheels on each end. The shaft is driven by an electric motor and chain. The device is mounted on floats.
Dimensions
Type "A"
Type "B"
Width
3 550 mm
1 635 mm
Length
2 060 mm
1 720 mm
Diameter of paddle wheel
1 000 mm
650 mm
Kidth of the paddles
250 mm
180 mm
Number of paddles
Capacity of electric motor
2,2 kW
2,2 kW
The values of the oxygen intake are shown in Table 7,
Table 7 Oxygen intake of paddle wheel type and perforated pipe type aerators
Aerator
Water depth (m)
Working parameters
Average oxygen intake (kg/h)
Power input (kW)
Specific oxygen intake (kg/kWh)
Paddle wheel
n = 115 l/min
Type "A"
h = 65 nnn
n = 90 l/min
h = 90 mm
Paddle wheel
n = 126 l/min
Type "B"
h = 210 mm
Perforated PVC pipe
15 pcs.
160 Hgmm
587 m^3/h
20 pcs.
135 Hgmm
512 m^3/h
20 pcs.
120 Hgmm
410 m^3/h
20 pcs.
135 Hgmm
312 m^3/h
20 pcs.
120 Hgmm
228 m^3/h
1 Hgmm = 133.322 P[a] = 13.5957 mm H[2]O
Source: KULI: Részjelentés a halastavi vizlevegöztetö berendezések viszgálatáról MÉM Müszaki Intézet, Gödöllö, 1982
6. REFERENCES
Abeliovitch, A., 1967, Oxygen regime in Beit-Shean fish ponds related to summer mass fish mortalities: preliminary observations. Bamidgeh, 19(1):3-15
Albrecht, M.L., 1977, Bedeutung des Sauerstoffs un Schädigungen durch Sauerstoffmangel um Kohlensäureübersättigung bei Fischen. Z. Binnenfish. D.D.R., 24(7):207-13
Barthelmes, D., 1975, Elemente der Sauerstoffbilanz in Karpfenteichen ihre Wirkungsweise sowie die Optimierungs Möglichkeiten durch Silberkarpfen. Z. Binnenfish. D.D.R., 22 (II): 325-33. (.12): 355-63
Boyd, C.E., 1973, The chemical oxygen demand of waters and biological materials from ponds. Trans. Fish. Soci., 102(3):606-11
Busch, C.C., J.L. Koon and R. Allison, 1973, Aeration, water quality and catfish production. Pap. Am. Soc. Agric. Eng., (.73-559)
Chavin, W., 1973, Responses of fish to environmental changes. Springfield, Illinois, C.C. Thomas Publishers, 459 p.
Horváth, I., 1975, Levegöztetö rendszerek a szennyviztechnológiában. Budapest, Budapest, Müszaki Egyetem Továbbképzö Intézete
Horváth, I., 1976, A csatornázás és szennyvizkezelés hidraulikája. Budapest, VIZDOK
John, H.,1976, Vegyészmérnökök kézikönyve. Budapest, Müszaki Könyvkiadó
J.P.F. Scientific Corporation, 1971, Engineering methodology for river and stream reservation. Water Pollut. Control Res. Ser., (16080.F.S.N. 10/71)
Juhász, J., 1976, Hidrogeologia. Budapest, Akadémiai Kiadó
Knösche, R.,1971, Möglichkeiten zur Belüftung von Wasser in Fischzuchtbetrieben. Z. Binnenfisch. D.D.R., 18(11):331-40
Knósche, R.,1976, Der Sauerstoffgehalt in Pelletintensivteichen und technische Möglichkeiten zur Verbesserung. Z. Binnenfisch. D.D.R., 23(2):48-56
Knósche, R.,1979 Sauerstoffproduction urn Zehrung in Belüften und unbelüften Pelletintensivteichen. Z. Binnenfisch. D.D.R., 26(6):205-6
Menyhért, J.,1977, Az épületgépészet kézikönyve. Budapest, Müszaki Könyvkiadó
Nikolskii, G.V., 1963, The ecology of fishes. London, Academic Press, 352 p.
Odum, H.,1956, Primary production in flowing water. Limnol. Oceanogr., 1(2):102-17
Oláh, J.,1979, Halak oxigénfogysztása (kézirat). Szarvas, Haltenyésztési Kutató Intézet
Oláh, J., A. Zsigri and A.V. Kintzly,1978, Primary production estimations in fishponds by the mathematical evaluation of daily 0» curves. Aquacult. Hung., 1:3-14
Paulát, M., and P. Hartman, 1974, Overovani a posozovani ucinsosti ruznych typu pritoku a nove aeracui techniky na sadkach. Cesk. Rybn., 2:13-9
Petit, J.,1981, Utilisation de l'oxygène pur en pisciculture. Schr. Bundesforschungsanst. Fisch., Hamb., (16/l7) Vol. 1:429-54
Rappaport, V. and M. Marek, 1975, Results of tests of various aeration systems on the oxygen regime in the Genosar experimental ponds and growth of fish there in 1975. Bamidgeh. 28(3):35-49
Ruttkay, A., 1978, A halastavak anyag és energiaforgalmának vizsgálata. In Halhustermelés Fejlesztése, 5. Szarvas, Haltenyésztési Kutató Intézet
Ruttkay, A., 1978, Ivadék utónevelés polikulturaban. Halászat, Tudományos melléklet, 71:16-7
Sarig, S. and M. Marek, 1973, Results of intensive and semi-intensive fish breeding techniques in Israel in 1971-1973. Bamidgeh, 26(;2):28-50
Schroeder, G.L., 1975, Nighttime material balance for oxygen in fish ponds receiving organic wastes. Bamidgeh, 27(3):65-74
Sowerbutts, B.J. and J.R.M. Forster, Gases exchange and reoxygenation. Schr. Bundesforschungsanst. Fisch. ,Hamb., (16/l7)Vol. 1:199-217
Steeby, J.A., 1976, Effects of compressed air aeration in a heavily-fed farm pond stocked with channel catfish. M.S. Dissertation, Auburn, Alabama
Váradi, L.,1969, Air-0-Lator AF-12 tószellöztetö berendezés üzemi vizsgálata. Halászat, 62(3):72-4
Uhlmann, D. and R. Wegelin, 1967, Oxydationsteiche, Theorice, Betriebverhaltungen. Hinweise für Bau und Betrieb. WTZ - Mitt., Leipzig, 36(3)
Warren, S.E., 1971, Biology and water pollution control. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 434 p.
Winberg, G.G., 1961, Novie dannie ob intenzivnoszti obmena u rib. Minsk, Beloruskovo Gosudarstvennovo Universiteta Imena V.I. Lenina, 1(18):157-65
Zsigri, A., J. Oláh and P. Szabó, 1973, Átfolyóvizes, in situ metaboliméter a természetes vizek oxigénfogyasztásának, termelésének, és diffuziójának mérésére. Hidrol. Közlöny, Budapest, 5:216-8
<section>n</section>
Chapter 22 Maintenance of Fish Farms
I. Tóth
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. FISH POND MAINTENANCE
2. RECONSTRUCTION WORKS
3. MECHANIZATION OF MAINTENANCE AND RECONSTRUCTION WORKS
1. FISH POND MAINTENANCE
1.1 Maintenance of Earthworks
1.2 Maintenance of Biological Slope Protection
1.3 Maintenance of Water Control Structures
1.4 Steel Structures
1.5 Stone and Concrete Linings
1.1 Maintenance of Earthworks
During the first years of operation fish ponds need the most maintenance, as the unforeseen, hidden faults occur at this time. For example, the unexpected subsidence and settlement of dikes, and the more serious erosion on the surface of dikes and excavations occur . Maintenance must be carried out continuously from the first year of operation. One can expect the following troubles with dikes: slope failure, soil slip, notch, slight erosion of the slope, etc.
- Slight erosion in most of the cases is caused by precipitation and its trickling down the slope. Thorough soaking and drying of the surface and negligence in dike maintenance can also cause spalling of the upper surface of the slope. If there is a more serious erosion of slope, shoulders must be constructed on the slope and new horizontal layers must be compacted onto the top. After reconstruction the dikes have to be protected against erosion.
- Soil slip is caused most frequently by bad quality of compacting, drenching of the dike or quick water discharge. In such a case a bigger quantity of soil slips down from the slope in some places. The slipped soil has to be replaced with well compacted horizontal layers of earth and possibly with a retaining wall.
- Slope break-through is caused by the same things as soil slip. In this case a part of the slope slips down in a round shaped form. For reconstruction of such a failure first of all a foot wall should be constructed then good quality earth material should be filled and compacted in thin layers.
- Slumping is generally caused by a lack of proper compacting of the dike. It can also occur if the layers containing humus or organic matter were not removed from beneath the dike. Reconstruction in this case is carried out by putting a new layer of earth onto the top of the dike.
Not only the base of the dike but the dike itself may also settle. Settlement of smaller dikes is generally not higher than 2-4% of the height of the dike. If the settlement of the dike is higher the dike may have lost its load capacity after construction or its load capacity is not suitable. Protection generally can be made by constructing protecting shoulders/foot walls on one or both sides of the dike.
Bigger scale erosion generally occurs in canals of higher water current capacity or after a longer operation time.
Maintenance must ensure the original water supply capacity of the canals. Erosion occurring on the bottom level and on the surface of the slope, soil slip and notch must be corrected at least once a year. At the same time accumulated silt and mud must be removed and vegetation obstructing free water flow must be moved or removed.
On the bottom level of the fish ponds the mud must be removed from the internal harvesting canals after the drainage of the pond. Maintaining of good condition can be assisted by setting the feeding places in these canals.
1.2 Maintenance of Biological Slope Protection
Biological slope protection needs constant thorough checking and maintenance, as wave action can cause erosion of the slopes. Usually a strip of planted reed is applied for biological slope protection. Where the reed is not strong enough temporary brush work protects the earth slope.
The deficiencies in the reed strip must be replaced. The protecting reed strip must be treated continuously.
Recently new biological slope protection methods have been elaborated, when some plastic materials (geotextile, plastic net) are applied on the earth slope desired to be protected and the plastic together with the plants and roots forms a protecting layer.
1.3 Maintenance of Water Control Structures
Checking of structures must be carried out by separate checking of the elements (concrete parts, steel structures, flash boards). Sediments and the mud must be removed from the structures before operation begins.
Leakages occurring at the joints of structures can cause cavities which must be filled with properly compacted earth, and where it is necessary, with concrete. Leakage can be eliminated by repairing the joint or by application of bitumen filler.
If there are settlements of the structures or as a consequence of them there are cracks in the structures, the method of reconstruction must be determined separately in each ease depending on the given problem.
1.4 Steel Structures
Elements of steel structures must be protected against corrosion. Each year, built-in structures must be cleaned with a wire-brush during breaks of operation then one layer of rust-preventing paint and two layers of oil paint must be applied. Moving elements of the structures must be regularly oiled or lubricated.
1.5 Stone and Concrete Linings
If the stones become loose in the linings or the filling material is damaged the stones must be replaced. Settlement of the dike can cause damage of the lining. The same damage can occur if waves wash away the bed of lining or the supporting earth. In such a case the lining must be removed from the damaged areas, the slope must be filled up with bedding material, then new lining must be made.
The most frequent fault of concrete lining is under-washing. Reconstruction is the same as in the case of stone lining.
Erosion at the ends of the lining must be filled with gravel as soon as possible, as otherwise the lining will be destroyed very easily.
2. RECONSTRUCTION WORKS
2.1 Reconstruction of Earthworks
2.2 Reconstruction of Water Control Structures
The aim of reconstruction is the rebuilding of earth and concrete structures to their original size and shape, and the replacing of some seriously damaged structures. Reconstruction means a constant modernization as well.
2.1 Reconstruction of Earthworks
2.1.1 Dikes
2.1.2 Internal drainage canals and harvesting pits
2.1.3 Canal
2.1.1 Dikes
When a large size earth dam is reconstructed, specially classified construction material should be applied on the basis of individual testing, while the dikes with lower load can be constructed of material dug out from the pond bottom in dry condition or by hydromechanical work.
In case of reconstruction of an old dike or construction of a new dike the existing biological slope protection should be saved as much as possible.
When dikes are reconstructed or new dikes are built space should be left along the dikes for the free movement of canal cleaning machines and for the deposition of the mud removed from the canal.
When a new dike is designed its crown width should be wide enough to allow movement of farm vehicles on the top of the dike if necessary.
2.1.2 Internal drainage canals and harvesting pits
Internal drainage canals must be reconstructed with a slope angle at least 1:4 and 5.0 m bottom width. The worked out earth must be removed from the pond or must be spread on the surface of the pond bottom. To make the harvesting easier construction of an external harvesting basin or a central external harvesting basin can be useful.
2.1.3 Canal
When the canals are reconstructed their shape and size have to meet the requirement of those machines that are used for cleaning.
2.2 Reconstruction of Water Control Structures
Purpose of the reconstruction is to resettle the structures to their original condition. At the joints of elements of structures the water resistance must be renewed (by bitumen fixation, etc.). Cavities occurring along the joint linings must be reconstructed as described in the chapter on lining.
During reconstruction, some new structures can be added if necessary for the modernization of the farm.
3. MECHANIZATION OF MAINTENANCE AND RECONSTRUCTION WORKS
3.1 Mechanization of Fish Pond Maintenance
3.2 Mechanized Maintenance of Canals
Mechanization of maintenance and reconstruction in pond fish farms is needed both because of the decreasing level of labour supply and the increasing level of technical development. Moreover it has been also recognized that economical production can be carried out only in well maintained fish ponds. Taking into account the possibilities of mechanization in pond fish farms the maintenance works can be divided into three groups:
- maintenance and reconstruction of the pond bottom and the dike,
- maintenance and construction of water supply canals and drainage canals,
- maintenance of water control structures and their surroundings.
The works of the first two groups can be mechanized easily, but maintenance and reconstruction of inlet and outlet structures must be made manually.
3.1 Mechanization of Fish Pond Maintenance
After a few years operation, fishponds are silted up and their dikes are damaged. The length of this time depends on the dike material, the method of operation and the level of dike protection. Ageing is highly influenced by the capacity of duck production in the ponds. That is, it is advantageous from the point of view of economics, but requires more maintenance.
The necessity for maintenance and/or reconstruction is shown not only by external visible factors (the damages to dikes, pond bottom and the slope protecting lining) but by the decrease of production level of fish ponds. As an effect of erosion, the operational water level has to be lowered, thus the useful water volume in the fish pond decreases as well.
During reconstruction of fish farm facilities the future needs of production have to be taken into account as well.
Where the construction of fish ponds was carried out by machines, the conditions of mechanized reconstruction work are suited to this type of work. But in case the ponds and their connected facilities were constructed by manual labour, as is done many times in practice, a complete renewal is needed. Conditions of mechanized maintenance of such pond systems can be ensured only by total rational reconstruction of the ponds, or more exactly the pond fish farm itself.
When mechanized reconstruction is carried out, the following procedures are needed:
- reconstruction of crown of dikes,
- replacement of eroded slopes,
- elimination of unevenness of pond bottom,
- partial removal of mud in order to ensure harvestability and drainage,
- removal of water weeds,
- reconstruction of dike protection.
The larger extent of reconstruction work can be done only when the fish pond is dried out.
But in some cases it is impossible to have dry conditions during the time of reconstruction. In such cases maintenance and reconstruction can not be carried out without special machines. For this purpose single-purpose machines must be applied. Mechanical construction appeared in the early fifties of this century, though there were some simple machines utilized in pond construction before this time. For maintenance and reconstruction the same machines are used as for construction.
For excavation works different types of crawler and wheel excavators dredges can be used with mechanical or hydraulic operation (Figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 13, 14).
For transportation of earth, dumpers of 3-6 m^3 volume or dump trucks are generally applied.
Application of these machines is economical only over a 600 m transportation distance.
For compaction of soils smooth steel drum, sheepsfoot and rubber-tyred rollers as well as vibratory compactors (Figure 5) can be used. They may be self-propelled or towed. For slight compaction the earth transporting trucks can also be used.
For short distance earth transportation at the site, crawler (Figures 6, 7) or rubber-tyred bulldozers or motor grader (Figure 8) can be applied economically. These machines are of such a design that they can work on the slopes too.
The spreading of earth material and levelling of the surface can be carried out with good efficiency by the above-mentioned bulldozers and the self-propelled or towed grader (Figure 9). The most efficient machines for maintenance and reconstruction are those which can be applied on slopes too. Self-propelled or tractor-drawn scrapers (Figure 10) can be applied for such purposes.
The scraper can be used both for the spreading and for the levelling of earth transported to the field. At the same time it compacts the dikes as it has to move on the dike being constructed. The scraper can be utilized for both the processes needed in construction, maintenance and reconstruction of fish ponds, but for economical application of it no longer than 600 m transportation distance is allowed.
Tractor-drawn scrapers with a capacity of 3-6 m^3 are the best for maintenance works of fish ponds (Figures 11-12). They need 50-100 kW tractive power. Their capacity is 30-40 m^3 at 200 m transportation distance if crawler tractors are applied. Those scrapers that are pulled by rubber-tyred tractors have a higher capacity, but their ability to move on muddy surfaces is much less, therefore use is not advised for fish pond construction. The tractor-drawn scrapers generally have one container, that allows easy mobility. Application of scrapers with two containers is advisable only for construction of new large size fish ponds.
If needed, the above-mentioned processes can be carried out by rubber-tyred tractor shovels or rubber-tyred front end loaders too. Using them - although they increase the costs - the quality of the earthwork can be improved.
Figure 1. Crawler excavator
Figure 2. Operation diagram of crawler excavator
Figure 3. Buckets and booms for excavators
Figure 4. Wheel excavator
Figure 5. Vibratory compactor
Figure 6. Crawler bulldozer
Figure 7. Crawler bulldozer
Figure 8. Motor grader
Figure 9. Towed grader
Figure 10. Self propelled scraper
Figure 11. Tractor-drawn scraper
Figure 12. Tractor-drawn scraper
Figure 13. Wheel excavator
Figure 14. Operation diagram of wheel excavator
If maintenance or reconstruction works in the ponds must be carried out in or under water, hydraulic dredges can be applied. They can be equipped with buckets or cutter heads . Some types of dredges have a rotating upper body mounted on floating base. If such a machine is applied the mud can be placed in a floating container fixed to the dredge and it is periodically transported out of the pond.
3.2 Mechanized Maintenance of Canals
During the growing season the operating canals are covered with vegetation that increased the roughness of the slopes of the canals. If this vegetation is not removed, the water supplying capacity of canals decreases and mud accumulates on the bottom of the canal.
It has been found that the water supplying capacity of a canal decreases to one sixth when it is covered with dense vegetation. Thus the regular mowing of vegetation is important.
Overgrowing of weeds is basically influenced by the length of operation of canals. If the annual average water depth is 40-60 cm not only rotted plants will grow but floating water vegetation as well.
The hydraulic conditions of canals deteriorate if there is overgrown vegetation, and at the same time the settling of mud is speeded up. In general, mud removal is needed when the cross section of a sediment layer reaches 15Z of the wetted surface of bigger canals and 25% of the wetted surface of smaller canals.
Prior to mechanized maintenance, first the terrain correction of dikes must be carried out in order to ensure the free movement of the machines along the canals.
For this purpose, rubber-tyred or crawler bulldozers and graders can be used, preferably with adjustable blade.
For removal of vegetation in medium size canals bucket mowers can be applied. These mowers cut the weed and remove it from the slope. From an economical point of view the removal of mud must be carried out together with removal of water weeds. This work can be done by special type of dredges.
Removal of mud from the smaller and medium size canals in case of low water depth is carried out by machines moving along the canal and equipped with a hydraulic dredging device, by one-purpose machines or by dredging boats if the water depth is sufficient.
Mud placed on the dike of the canal must be spread after drying. For this purpose simple bulldozers can be used.
Agricultural tractors with 40-60 kW capacity can be used for the maintenance of canals. In Hungarian farms the multi-purpose tractor MTZ-80 is applied with high efficiency for maintenance works if equipped with special attachments. These are the following:
- hydraulically operated booms equipped with small size excavating bucket, dirt cage, or mower, rotary scraper, which can be applied for reshaping of smaller dikes of canals,
- dozer blade mounted to the back of the tractor and adjustable hydraulically, and manually. Its working depth is 0-1.50 m, working width is 900 - 24 000 m ,
- two-disc rotary mower mounted to the tractor for mowing the shoulder, the crown and the slopes of the dike. Mowing width is 1.65 m.
The tractor equipped with about 7 m long booms has to be supplied with hydraulic supporting legs for the sake of stability.
The hydraulic tractor in general can be equipped with the following devices:
- dirt cage
- silt pump
- rotary mower
- swinging blade mower
- bucket mower
- sawblade cutter.
These devices can be applied for the following maintenance works:
- a dirt cage: excavating the mud from the bottom of the canal and placing it on the dike of the canal.
Its capacity is 10-15 m^3/hour .
- silt pump: pumping out the silt from the bottom of the canal and sprinkling it on the shoulder of the canal,
- rotary mower: mowing the weeds on the dry slope and chopping them, then spreading on the slope. Its capacity is 1 500-2 000 m^2/hour.
- swinging blade mower: it can be equipped with an attachment that collects the cut weeds and removes them to the dikes. Its mowing capacity is 5-9 000 m^2 per hour, depending on evenness of the ground .
- bucket mower: it can be applied efficiently in highly overgrown canals. The cut weed can be placed on the top of the dike by the bucket. Its capacity is 120-200 m^2/hour.
Hydraulic excavators can be applied efficiently only if they are mounted with special devices that are developed for maintenance work. To the K-406 type wheel excavator , a bucket mower with 4 m working width and a dirt-cage of 2.5m width and 0.25 m^3 volume can be mounted. These bucket mowers and dirt cages can be mounted on the K-408 type, rubber-tyred excavator, the working beam of which is 10 m long
Slope mowers have been developed in those countries where intensive forage production is carried out on sloped areas. In Hungary the Austrian made RASANT type two wheeled and four wheeled mowers are commonly used. They work with a cutter bar which consists of rows of blades. Working width of the blade is 1.6-2.5 m.
For mowing vegetation in about 1 m deep canals and ponds mowing boats can be applied with high efficiency. In Hungary the Czechoslovakian made mowers are popular, but recently a Hungarian type has been developed. Its T-shaped blade can be used not only in vertical position but with an angle of 40°. Thus this mower can cut the grass both from the slopes of canals and from dikes of ponds .
For operation of the mower a minimum 0.6 m water depth is needed.
The main technical data of this mower are as follows:
- mowing depth under the water surface is 1.1 m,
- length of the boat is 4.93 m,
- width of the boat is 1.35 m,
- mowing capacity is 2 000-6 000 m^2/h
For transportation of the mower a trailed transporting truck has been developed.
Mud removal from bigger sized water supply and drainage canals and fish ponds can be carried out economically by a hydraulic suction dredge . Technical data of the dredge designed in Hungary are the following:
- length: 10.9 m
- width: 2.4 m
- draught in operational state: 0.6 m
- biggest dredging deepness: 2.9 m
- capacity: 25 t/h
- transportation distance: 500 m
- energy requirement: 90 kW.
The suction pipe is situated in the front of the dredge and works hydraulically.
<section>o</section>
Chapter 23 Fish Health Viewpoints in Planning Fish Producing Systems
J. Farkas
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. INTRODUCTION
2. FISH DISEASES
3. TECHNICAL ADVICE FOR PLANNING FISH BREEDING SYSTEMS
4. PLANNING FISH PONDS
5. INTENSIVE FISH BREEDING SYSTEMS
6. REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
In fish culture, a number of fish diseases may cause large losses from time to time. In this short paper the different fish diseases are not detailed. There is a short introduction on development of fish diseases and some practical information which can be useful for aquacultural engineers in planning fish breeding systems. The advice perhaps is not always very exact but it is geared to the present state of fish disease research. This is characterized by rapid progress in recent years, together with intensification of fish culture. Unknown diseases are appearing, and new views and theories are being made or taken over from other fields of science. Since fish disease research is not sufficiently advanced, we can give general advice only, but at the present level of our knowledge even this can be useful in practical planning work.
2. FISH DISEASES
2.1 Important Types of Fish Diseases
A fish is a cold blooded animal that lives in water, so there are some characteristic differences from other warm blooded animals.
- symptoms generally are simple and similar in various diseases, e.g., signs of O[2] deficiency are very frequent. Fish go to the inlet water, air breathing 'piping' and so on. Mucus production on the gills and skin is very frequent, too.
- in the case of fish no individual prevention and treatment is possible. Only in special cases are individual treatments applied. Normally the population of a pond are controlled by medicated foods/bathings.
- Intensification results in new diseases.
The modern concern for fish diseases was introduced by Snieszko, 1974, who applied the stress theory to fish and water animals. The theory was established by the fact that the effect of water environment was much higher on animals living in water than the air effect on air living animals. Snieszko put the environment-caused stress in fish disease in the foreground of sciences. A triple circle figure (Figure 1) well demonstrates this theory.
The essence of the theory is that environmental stress effects impair fish condition, and the weak fish are invaded by parasites.
The environment in a fish culture system depends on:
- water quality
- food quality/artificial foods
- breeding circumstances.
Parasites of fish are always present in water and mud. Healthy fish, generally adults, are always hosts of pathogenic agents. For this reason every fish is a potential host organism, and all waters where any marine life exists should be considered infected'. The important and well-known fish parasites are facultative pathogens.
The task for aquacultural engineers is double:
- make the best conditions for the fish in the planned systems
- keep out parasites from the water of the systems.
2.1 Important Types of Fish Diseases
2.1.1 Not infectious diseases
2.1.2 Infectious diseases
2.1.1 Not infectious diseases
The cause of diseases: lethal effect on environmental factors (Figure 2).
Figure 1. Sublethal environmental effect
Figure 2. Lethal effect on environmental factors
Important kinds of environmental diseases:
- toxicoses
- O[2] deficiency
- temperature (hot-cold) caused diseases
- food-caused diseases (deficient artificial foods).
2.1.2 Infectious diseases
The first is a sub-lethal environmental effect (see Figure 1).
Important agents of diseases:
- viruses (obligate pathogens)
- bacteria
- fungi
- parasites.
3. TECHNICAL ADVICE FOR PLANNING FISH BREEDING SYSTEMS
3.1 Location of Fish Farms
3.2 Organizing Water Supply System
3.3 Hatcheries
3.4 Nursery Ponds
3.5 Ponds for Larger and Marketable Fish
The price of investment may be frequently higher than losses caused by diseases. For this reason the economical points of view are primary in the case of planning fish breeding systems, but if it is possible, economic consideration of fish disease aspects is advisable (Molnár and Szakolczai, 1980).
3.1 Location of Fish Farms
It is desirable to place new fish farms and other systems at the source area of rivers, far from well-known, constantly polluted waters. At the source area the river is generally clean, and wild fish (the hosts of fish parasites) are not present. However, the area of a new farm generally depends, from an economic point of view, on whether the water supply system of a given area is readily available.
3.2 Organizing Water Supply System
3.2.1 Insufficient water supply (figure 3)
3.2.2 Good water supply (figure 4)
3.2.1 Insufficient water supply (figure 3)
The water quality deteriorates progressively in the four ponds, with the concentration of toxic materials from fish metabolism and the number of parasites always increasing. This system should never be planned. However, in the case of a given situation, we suggest the first pond for breeding small fish, and ponds 2, 3 and 4 for larger fish and adults; older fish are not so sensitive.
3.2.2 Good water supply (figure 4)
In this case the quality of water is similar in all the ponds. Keep wild fish out from water supply canal and stock pond, because of parasites.
3.3 Hatcheries
Hatcheries always need the best quality water. Plan to have well or spring water for water supply. If well or spring water is not available the hazard is higher. In this case plan stock pond (without fish) and use filtered water. Filtering (e.g., sand) keeps out or reduces the number of parasites.
3.4 Nursery Ponds
During the nursery period the small fish need good water quality and parasite-free water.
Figure 3. Common inlet water supply system
Figure 4. Separate inlet and outlet water supply system
Water supply is best from well or spring. If this is not possible, supply nursery ponds with the best quality water available in the given area. Keep out fish/parasites from the inlet water.
3.5 Ponds for Larger and Marketable Fish
The larger and marketable fish are not so sensitive. Being a host of parasites, they can live in a worse environment. Be careful! In spite of lower sensitivity we must supply them with good quality water, if possible! If this is not done, their condition deteriorates and benefit is lower.
4. PLANNING FISH PONDS
4.1 Water Change
4.2 Aeration of Ponds
4.3 Bottom Treatments
4.4 Removal of Mud
4.5 Bird Problem
4.1 Water Change
Sometimes very quick water change is necessary in the fish ponds. It is advisable to prepare new ponds in these cases.
Quick water change is important:
- in case of O[2] deficiency of water
- absolute O[2] deficiency: really low O[2] content of water
- relative O[2] deficiency: is caused by gill damages in case of sufficient O[2] content of water
- some treatments of fish need quick water change, for example malachite green treatment of white spot disease (Ichtyophthiriosis).
4.2 Aeration of Ponds
Advisable to plan aeration systems. O[2] deficiency frequently needs this kind of treatment. O[2] content of the water may be increased by sprayed water, like irrigation systems.
4.3 Bottom Treatments
The bottom of the ponds should always be planned flat, without holes and puddles which hinder bottom treatment, like dry bottom, freezing and disinfection (the pond being empty, of course). Treatment is important in killing parasites in the bottom mud.
4.4 Removal of Mud
A thick mud layer on the bottom is dangerous for fish, as parasites can well survive the bottom treatments and dangerous chemical processes may produce toxic chemicals in the mud, for example H[2]S.
Removal of mud is important from time to time. Ponds should be suitably designed for this work.
4.5 Bird Problem
The presence of birds is not good on a fish farm.
- birds eat fish and cause direct losses
- the presence of birds is necessary for the life cycle of some fish parasites. These parasites cannot exist without birds. The hunting of water birds (herons, egrets) is generally forbidden as they are normally protected. They can be driven off by the sound of carbide guns.
5. INTENSIVE FISH BREEDING SYSTEMS
In intensive breeding systems (e.g., recirculation systems) fish are crowded or overcrowded. This is a stress factor and increases the hazard of diseases. In the case of intensive systems fish health measures are more rigorous for both small and adult fish. It is advisable to supply water from a well or spring.
In recirculation systems generally three or four pieces of equipment provide constant good water quality.
Aeration supplies suitable O[2] content of the water. Sedimentation collects on the bottom of the tank (faeces, food wastes). Mechanical filters remove small waste materials, and by nitrification/denitrification the toxic ammonia from the fish metabolism is micro-biologically subtracted from the water.
A UV lamp kills pathogenic fish parasites, especially bacteria. A UV lamp or osonation system are the disinfecting units of recirculation systems. These are well-known and useful in cold water (salmonid rearing) systems. The suggested wave-length is 2 537 Å, and the capacity of the lamp is 25-30 000 MWS/W . s/cm^2.
In warm water systems (22-25°C), UV light is not so effective (Farkas et al., 1983). The UV light generally kills bacteria and the inlet water is practically sterile, but the number of pathogen germs are significantly increasing in the fish basins and may cause disease in spite of UV treatment. This phenomenon originates from the warm water which is optimal for the multiplication of bacteria.
The number of germs remains very high in outlet waters and in the sedimentation tank, but is radically decreased by filters (zeolit, gravel). In warm water systems the high number of fish pathogens seems to be a self-preservation process in the fish basins; for this reason the UV treatment is not sufficient to stop fish diseases. Other measures are important together with the UV lamp (bathing, medicated foods, disinfection of the whole system).
6. REFERENCES
Farkas, J., J. Oláh and K. Magyar, 1983, Effect of UV lamp on microflora of recirculation fish breeding system. Paper presented to the Eighth Scientific Conference on Fisheries, Szarvas, 1983 (in Hungarian)
Molnár, K. and J. Szakolczai, 1980, Fish diseases. Budapest, Mezögazdasági Kiadó, 254 p. (in Hungarian)
Snieszko, S.F., 1974, The effects of environmental stress on outbreaks of infectious diseases of fishes. J. Fish. Biol., 6:197-208
<section>p</section>
Chapter 24 Economic Aspects of Aquafarm Construction and Maintenance
Y.C. Shang
University of Hawaii
Honolulu, Hawaii
1. INTRODUCTION
2. ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS IN SITE SELECTION
3. ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS IN CONSTRUCTION
4. ESTIMATION OF CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT COSTS
5. ECONOMIC EVALUATION
6. REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, increasing attention has been given to aquaculture in many parts of the world. This is due in part to:
(a) the growing awareness of problems in the marine fisheries sector, such as the rising costs of fuel, water pollution, over fishing and the extension of exclusive fishing zones;
(b) the major development possibilities in view of the extensive inland, brackish and marine water areas available for aquaculture in different parts of the world, and
(c) the suitability of aquaculture to small-scale and integrated operations.
However, for aquaculture to realize its potential, it should be technically, economically and socially feasible in a given area.
Profitability is the major concern of commercial fish farms. The farmers' profit is mainly affected by the level of production per unit of water area and the costs of production. Site selection and construction are crucial factors affecting the operating efficiency of the farm, thereby influencing initial capital costs, operating costs and level of yield.
2. ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS IN SITE SELECTION
2.1 Topography
2.2 Hydrology
2.3 Soil Conditions
The primary physical factors to be considered in site selection are topography, hydrology and soil conditions, as mentioned in other sections. There are also many bio-physical parameters which are equally important but are more species dependent. This section relates these physical factors with economics. As pond culture is the most prevalent kind of aquaculture practised today, it is emphasized in this section.
2.1 Topography
The ideal site for a fish farm is on land that is flat or nearly so. A slope of more than 5 percent is not desirable because of extra construction costs associated with back-filling, and the increased possibility of run-off problems. Areas with flooding possibilities are undesirable for aquacultural use because of the detritus effects on water quality, erosion potential and the introduction of undesirable species into the pond. Topography, aided by engineering, should permit the pond to be drained completely. Otherwise pumping is necessary with extra costs.
2.2 Hydrology
A constant supply of high-quality water must be available throughout the year to replace losses due to evaporation, seepage and drainage during management operation.
Surface water sources often fluctuate in quality and quantity. Well water tends to be more dependable and is usually free of disease organisms, parasites, predators and pollutants. In addition, consistent supplies of well water may permit more crops per year and increase farm income. However, it is costly to drill wells.
Discharge of untreated effluent from aquaculture systems is disallowed in some areas. Treatment of large quantities of water can be extremely costly. One alternative which has been practised in some developed countries is deep well injection of effluent. This will increase the initial capital cost and pumping costs of the operation.
2.3 Soil Conditions
Two aspects of soil quality are important: fertility and water retention. The fertility of the soil should be adequate enough to encourage the development of a benthic community. In culture systems where fish derive most of their food from naturally occurring organisms, fertility is very important and affects the cost of feed. Soils of high organic content should be avoided in level construction because of settling from decomposition which might cause cracking and seepage and thereby increase maintenance costs. In addition, the soil should be free of residual pesticides or other contaminants. Otherwise it affects the yield.
It is best to construct the pond on soil which retains water well. This will reduce or eliminate leakage problems and repair costs.
Besides the physical factors mentioned above, the cost of land and the clearing works involved are two other factors to be considered in site selection. If land has to be purchased, efforts should be made to avoid the selection of sites with competing uses. Sites with competing uses are usually highly valued. If suitable sites can be leased, then the terms of lease are important considerations. It is also essential that the operator is entitled to the legal or right use of the site to protect his investment. The clearing work involved in cutting trees, digging up roots, removing rocks, etc., should be minimal in order to reduce costs.
3. ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS IN CONSTRUCTION
The size, depth, and shape of pond and the method of construction, are the major factors affecting the costs of construction.
There is no universal answer to the optimal size of pond. Generally, the larger the pond size the lower the cost of construction per unit of water area and the greater the efficiency in land utilization. Larger ponds require less land for road and ditches per unit of pond. Costs of equipment and other facilities per unit of pond are also less for larger ponds, therefore the depreciation of the capital investment is lower.
Large ponds, however, are relatively less productive than small ones because: (a) they cannot be drained well or take a longer time to drain; (b) unsatisfactory ratio of the shore line to the area. The shore line of one large pond is shorter than that of several small ponds of the same area. The shore lines are the most productive zones of a pond, and the food resources of this zone are much higher than in the central part of ponds; (c) feed cannot be distributed easily in the central part of a pond; (d) difficulties in exercising effective control of weeds and predatory fish. Large ponds usually have higher losses compared to small ones; (e) difficulties in harvesting; and (f) higher maintenance costs caused by wind erosion.
On the other hand, the smaller the pond size the greater the convenience of pond management, but construction costs are relatively high. Smaller ponds require more land area and restrict automation.
The depth of the pond depends mainly on the climatic conditions and the species to be cultured. The ponds can be shallower in warm than in cold regions. As costs of construction increase in proportion to depth, excavation should be minimized. Ponds can be any shape but rectangular may be more convenient for feeding and harvesting.
In general, economy of construction, efficiency of operation and productivity of the pond are usually the primary factors in determining the size, shape and depth of a pond.
Fish ponds can be constructed in a number of ways. For instance, a fish pond can be constructed by manual labour or machines; machines can be rented or purchased; a water system can be supplied by PVC piping or by canal; pipes can be made with bamboo, plastic or cement; the sluice gate can be wooden or concrete; water tanks can be concrete or fabric made, etc. The choice from these alternatives should be based on the relative costs and efficiency of construction.
4. ESTIMATION OF CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT COSTS
4.1 Construction Costs
4.2 Equipment Costs
4.3 Case Study
4.1 Construction Costs
Construction of a fish farm includes five major types of work: farm layout or design, land clearing, earthwork, water system and sluice gates, and buildings. A fee is usually charged if the farm is designed by an engineering company. The cost of land clearing depends mainly upon the clearing works involved and labour and machine hours required.
Earthwork for a fish farm includes the excavation and completion of ponds and canals. These constitute the major cost of fish farm development and the bulk of the construction period. Ponds can be constructed by manual or mechanical methods. The choice depends mainly on the nature of the work, cost of construction, and time requirement. Generally, the mechanical method has the advantage of shortening the construction period, lessening the cost of construction and improving the quality of the work; whereas the manual method will generate employment. The cost of earthwork is usually estimated by calculating the expenses of moving and unit volume (cubic zone) of earth for excavation and diking. The cost can be also estimated on the basis of actual expenses for machinery, labour, tools, materials and management.
The cost of a water system and sluice gates can be estimated based on materials used, labour days required, and their unit cost. Cost of buildings can be estimated by square foot or by actual expenses.
4.2 Equipment Costs
Major equipment needed on a farm usually includes a pump, truck, holding tank, oxygen meter, and pH meter, etc. The amount of equipment required per farm depends mainly on the size of the farm.
4.3 Case Study
4.3.1 Costs of construction
4.3.2 Costs of equipment
Estimation of the costs of construction and equipment of a freshwater prawn farm in Hawaii (Shang, 1981).
4.3.1 Costs of construction
Pond construction costs vary according to the topography of the site selected, the size of the farm being developed, and the size and shape of an individual pond. Current excavation and compaction costs for employing a licensed contractor to construct a rectangular-shaped 0.4 ha earthen pond on a properly selected site are approximately US$ 1.00 per 0.9 m^3 (1 cubic yard) for earth moving and US$ 2.00 per 0.9 m^3 for construction and compaction of berms/embankments and the pond bottom, including the costs of pond design, permits, insurance, etc.
For this study, the construction cost for an earthen pond was estimated based on a 0.4 ha pond with a total wetted area measuring 120.7 m long × 33.5 m wide × 0.9 to 1.2 m deep (396 feet long × 110 feet wide × 3 to 4 feet deep) and based on the volume of cut equalling the volume needed for constructing the embankments. The total amount of land required for a 0.4 ha pond farm is approximately 0.6 ha (1.5 acres) or 146.7 percent of the wetted area. For a large size farm with numerous ponds, however, only one half of the surrounding embankment is required for each pond. In this case, the total amount of land required for a 0.4 ha pond is about 0.5 ha (1.2 acres) or 117.6 percent of the wetted area.
Moreover, due to economics of scale, excavation and compaction costs per 0.9 m^3 for larger farms are lower. As the construction project expands in terms of total acreage, the aggregate work effort required decreases (Table 1).
Table 1 Estimated Excavation and Compacting Costs by Farm Size
Farm Size
0.4 ha
4 ha
8 ha
20 ha
40 ha
(1 acre)
US$
(10 acres)
US$
(20 acres)
US$
(50 acres)
US$
(100 acres)
US$
Excavation cost
per 0.9 nr
Compaction cost
per 0.9 m-
About 40 percent of all prawn farmers in Hawaii hired licensed contractors to construct their ponds. The rest constructed their own ponds by renting, purchasing, or borrowing construction equipment. The cost for constructing a pond by renting heavy industrial equipment can be estimated using the following information:
(a) Renting a medium-sized bulldozer at US$ 2 500 per month, plus a required insurance fee of US$ 500.
(b) Using diesel fuel at a rate of 18.9 to 56.8 litres per day (5 to 15 gallons per day) .
(c) Hiring a unionized construction equipment operator at the current wage rate of about US$ 11 per hour.
Only a few prawn farmers can operate a bulldozer, thus eliminating the need to hire a licensed operator. The cost of renting construction equipment and hiring an operator often exceeds the cost of hiring a licensed contractor to build the pond.
The cost for constructing a well, if the site selected does not have an available water supply, is high and dependent upon the size of a farm, the quantity of water required (per minute, per hour, or per day), and the depth required. For example, a 0.3 metre (1 foot) diameter well built by a licensed contractor currently costs US$ 1 150 per metre (US$ 350 per foot). If drilled to a greater depth than 60 metres (200 feet), the total cost will be at least US$ 70 000, and possibly more.
Because there are public restrictions on well construction, a permit must be secured before drilling begins. The City and County of Honolulu's Board of Water Supply is the governing municipal body on Oahu which issues permits based strictly upon the available supply of water for uses other than human consumption. The neighbouring islands have no well permit requirements. However, all the existing farms in Hawaii have had an available source of water at hand; therefore, the construction cost for a well is not included in the calculations.
For a water delivery system the cost per pond varies with the following:
(a) the distance from the existing water supply to prawn pond(s);
(b) the type(s) and sizes of pipe accessories used;
(c) the size and shape of a pond;
(d) total farm size.
Based on a 0.4 ha pond measuring 120 m long × 33 m wide of the wetted area as mentioned earlier, only the purchasing cost for approximately 45 m (148 feet) of PVC equipment is used in the calculations. The installation cost shall be assumed to have been included during the initial construction of the earthen ponds. The size, and hence the cost, of PVC equipment increases as farm size increases.
In addition, the construction cost for a sluice gate system at the deeper end of a pond, which allows rapid discharging of water with minimal maintenance and easy regulation of water level, is about US$ 800 per 0.4 ha pond.
Lastly, the construction cost for a work and storage building is estimated for a 0.4 ha and a 4.4 ha farm at between US$ 100 and 1 000 for an easily assembled metal hut sold by most major department Stores. For 8, 20 and 40 ha (20, 50 and 100 acre) farm sizes, the average market construction costs are about US$ 20/0.09 m^2 (1 square foot) by hiring a contractor. This generally includes a concrete foundation, prefabricated walls, and electrical wiring and water pipe installation.
The total average construction cost per 0.4 ha pond varies with farm size. It costs about US$ 7 000 per pond for a 0.4 ha farm, and about US$ 6 400 for a 40 ha farm (Table 2).
Table 2 Estimated Average Construction and Equipment Costs per 0.4 ha Pond by Farm Size
Farm Size
0.4 ha
4 ha
8 ha
20 ha
40 ha
(1 acre)
(10 acres)
(20 acres)
(50 acres)
(100 acres)
US$
US$
US$
US$
US$
Construction Costs
Pond
PVC
Gate
Storage
Sub-total
Equipment Costs*
Seine and net
Holding and transporting tanks
Portable pump
Mowing equipment
Truck
Freezer
Water pump
Oxygen meter
pH meter
Ice machine
Miscellaneous
Sub-total
Total
*Does not include the automatic feeder which costs about US$ 400 to US$ 2 000
4.3.2 Costs of equipment
Major equipment needed on a farm includes: net, holding transportation tank, portable pump, mowing equipment, truck, freezer, water pump, ice machine, oxygen meter, pH meter, etc. The amount of equipment required per farm by farm size is estimated. The estimated average cost for equipment per 0.4 ha pond varies also with farm size (see Table 2). The total cost of equipment decreases from US$ 10 205 per pond for a 0.4 ha farm to about US$ 814 for a 40 ha farm, due to economies of scale.
The total construction and equipment cost per pond decreases with an increase in farm size. The cost per pond for a 0.4 ha farm would be about US$ 17 000, whereas it would be about US$ 7 200 for a 40 ha farm (Table 2).
5. ECONOMIC EVALUATION
5.1 Comparison of Initial Costs
5.2 Cost-Return Analysis
5.3 Partial Budgeting
5.4 Present Value Method
Four basic methods can be used to evaluate the economics of different ways of construction: comparison of the initial construction costs, cost-return analysis, partial budgeting and present value analysis.
5.1 Comparison of Initial Costs
Once the costs of construction and equipment are estimated for different facility designs, their initial capital cost can be compared. The one with the lowest cost would be a better design if the physical life of these systems were comparable and if there are no significant differences in the operating costs and in the levels of production. Otherwise, comparison of average annual costs and returns may be more appropriate.
5.2 Cost-Return Analysis
5.2.1 Capital costs
5.2.2 Annual operating costs
5.2.3 Gross revenue
5.2.4 Indicators of performance
5.2.5 Example of cost-return analysis
Cost-return analysis needs detailed input and output data, both in quantitative and value terms.
5.2.1 Capital costs
The capital costs include the costs of assets and services incurred in the establishment of facilities, such as engineering design, permit fee, land clearing, construction and installation, equipment and tools. The estimation of the value of assets, their useful life, and their salvage value are important for the calculation of annual depreciation on each item. The simplest way of calculation of annual depreciation is the straight line method:
5.2.2 Annual operating costs
Operating costs can be classified as variable costs and fixed variable costs. Variable costs are those varying with the level of production, such as fry, feeds, fertilizers, hired labour, electricity, fuel, supplies. For each item, the kind, unit, number of units, unit price and total cost should be specified. Fixed variable costs are those that do not change with the level of production, such as land lease, interest payment, depreciation, maintenance, wages of management personnel, etc.
5.2.3 Gross revenue
It is defined as the quantity of production multiplied by the unit farm price of output. Gross revenue should include the cash and credit sales, the inputed value consumed on farm, given away, and used for in-kind payments by using the market price.
5.2.4 Indicators of performance
After all of the cost and revenue data are estimated, different indicators can be calculated as measurements of economic performance.
(a) Profit: the difference between gross revenue and total annual operating cost of production:
(b) Rate of return on initial investment:
Return on capital
(c) Productivity per unit of major input: kg/ha, kg/man-month, US$/kg, kg/unit of feed, etc.
(d) Payback period: number of years required to recover the initial investment (profit + depreciation)
(e) Break-even analysis: the level of price and production at which the project just covers its operating cost
5.2.5 Example of cost-return analysis
(a) Initial capital costs:
Item
Cost
US$
Useful
life
Salvage
value
Annual depreciation
US$
Pond construction
Well
PVC
Storage
Nets
Pump
Miscellaneous
Total
(b) Annual operating costs:
Variable cost
Quantity
Unit price
US$
Total cost
US$
Fry
Feed
2 000 kg
Electricity
Hired labour
2 man-months
1 000/month
Sub-total
Fixed variable cost
Quantity
Unit price US$
Total cost
US$
Land lease
Interest on capital (10%)
Depreciation
Operator's labour
1 man-month
1 500/month
Sub-total
Total operating cost
(c) Revenue
Item
quantity of production
Unit price US$
Revenue US$
Shrimp
2 000 kg
(d) Indicators
(a) Profit = 10 000 - 7 960 = US$ 2 040
(b) Rate of return on initial cost = (2 040 + 1 620) ÷ 16 200 = 22.6%
(c) Productivity:
kg/ha = 2 000 kg
kg/man-month = 2 000 ÷ 3 = 667 kg
kg/unit of feed = 2 000 ÷ 2 000 = 1 kg
(d) Payback period = 16 200 ÷ (2 040 + 1 240) = 16 200 ÷ 3 280 = 4.9 years
(e) Break-even price = 7 960 ÷ 2 000 = US$ 3.98
(f) Break-even production = 7 960 ÷5=1 592 kg
This method has also been used quite often to evaluate the economic performance of a farm or to compare the economic aspects of different farm management systems, such as monoculture versus polyculture, extensive versus intensive, etc.
5.3 Partial Budgeting
5.3.1 Example
When there is a minor change in a facility design resulting in a partial change in cost-return structure, the partial budgeting method may be used to recalculate economic viability without going through the detailed procedures of the cost-return analysis.
Four basic stages are involved in the partial budgeting analysis:
Benefits
1. Estimation of the increase in income due to the change. Ignore the income that will not change as the result of the venture.
2. Estimation of the reduction in costs if one proceeds with the venture.
Costs
3. Estimation of the cost that will be added due to the change. Again, ignore the cost that will not change.
4. Estimation of the income foregone due to the change.
Once these calculations are completed, the sum of increased cost should be subtracted from the sum of increased benefit. A positive result would mean that the change would be profitable. A negative result would mean that the change would not be economically feasible.
5.3.1 Example
Adding a nursery pond to production ponds costs about US$ 2 000 with a useful life of about 10 years. Money needed for construction is withdrawn from the bank savings account which is earning 5 percent interest. Adding a nursery pond will reduce the mortality rate of the stock and thus increase production by about 500 kg at a farm price of US$ 3/kg. The increase in production will also add feed cost of US$ 500/year. Estimate the economic feasibility of this change:
Benefit
1. Added income = US$ 500 × 3 = US$ 1 500
2. Reduced cost = none
Cost
3. Added cost = US$ 2 000 ÷ 10 = US$ 200/year
4. Income foregone = US$ 2 000 × 0.05 = US$ 100
Benefit minus cost
US$ 1 500 - US$ 300 = US$ 1 200
In this case, it is highly profitable to add a nursery pond.
5.4 Present Value Method
5.4.1 Example
The weakness of the cost-return analysis is the failure to consider the timing of expected earnings and costs. Future money is not as valuable as present money. Usually the initial capital costs have to be paid at the beginning of the project, but benefits begin to accrue only at some future date. The economic feasibility of a project can be measured more accurately by discounting the future benefits and costs into present value. Five basic steps are involved in the discounting benefit-cost analysis:
(a) Estimation of the capital costs and the timing of the capital costs over the life of the project. The capital costs include the costs of assets and services incurred in the establishment of facilities and the renewal and replacement costs. If there is salvage value at the end of the project, it should be treated as income in the end year.
(b) Estimation of the annual operating cost for various inputs over the life of the project. Inflation in the future must be considered.
(c) Estimation of annual revenue based on the expected yield and prices.
(d) Discounting annual benefit and cost into present value (or the annual net revenue can be calculated by subtracting the annual cost, both capital and operating, from the annual revenue and the net annual revenue then be discounted into present value). The discount rate used should reflect the rate of return that one might reasonably expect to be the best alternative investment of comparable risk.
(e) Benefit-cost ratio and net present value calculation
Where
B = annual gross income
C = annual cost
S = sum
i = interval of time in years from year zero
r = discount rate
Figure
Where
NB = Net annual income
Figure
Different facility designs may all be economically feasible, but the one which gives highest benefit-cost ratio or net present value would be the best choice.
5.4.1 Example
Initial Capital Costs (in US$)
Year
Pond construction
Well
Office and storage
Pump
Nets
Miscellaneous
Sub-Total
Operating Costs (excluding interest and depreciation)
Gross Revenue
Net Income
Calculation of Present Value
Year
Total Revenue (US$)
Total Cost (US$)
Net Income (US$)
Discount Rate (12%) (US$)
Discounted Revenue (US$)
Discounted Cost (US$)
Discounted Net Income (US$)
Net Present Value = US$ 1 836
6. REFERENCES
Gedney, R.H., Y.C. Shang and H.L. Cook, 1983, Comparative study of tidal and pumped water supply for brackishwater aquaculture ponds in Malaysia. Manila, South China Sea Fisheries Development and Coordinating Programme, SCS/83/WP/l17
Shang, Y.C., 1981, Aquaculture economics: basic concepts and methods of analysis. Boulder, Colorado, Westview Press, 153 p.
Shang, Y.C., 1981a, Freshwater prawn production in Hawaii: practices and economics. Honolulu, Hawaii, University of Hawaii Sea Grant Program
<section>q</section>
APPENDIX A - Fish Pond Technologies
1. POSSIBILITIES FOR FISH PRODUCTION
1.1 Fish Production of Natural Waters
The oldest way of fish production is the utilization of existing water bodies. Here the yields are generally low (20-50 kg/ha/year) and the possibilities for human intervention are rather moderate (supply of fish regularly caught).
1.2 Fish Production in Ponds
Fish ponds are constructed generally in areas with poor soil quality (sodic soils or marshes) where at the same time water in good quantity and quality is available. Thereby fish farms utilize first of all the land areas, with a relatively high production (1-5 t/ha/ year). Control of this production involves the selection of the cultured species, their size and age, feeding, fertilization of the pond, design of stocking and harvest.
1.3 Industrial, Large-Scale Fish Production
In this type of fish production first of all the potential of running water is utilized. Thus, this can be established in places where either the natural endowments are satisfactory, or effluent water from an industrial plant (e.g., power station) can be utilized. The dimensions of an industrial fish farm are always determined by the amount of water available. This type of fish farming is extremely productive (100-300 t/ha/year). Every step of a given technology here is carefully designed and controlled.
The above three types of fish production show great differences in their intensity. Though the natural waters have low production, it is 'spontaneous' (i.e., the natural reproduction is prerequisite), and the fish feed on natural feed exclusively. Naturally, the production is always a function of the natural feed available. The primary function of fish ponds is fish production, 50-70 percent of the yield is from the feed consumed during the culturing period, the rest is from fertilizer-stimulated natural feed from the pond itself.
This yield can be increased by some technical interventions, such as aeration, automatic feeders, or biologically complete, formulated feed (pellet). The yield, which is a maximum 7 t/ha, is limited however, by the amount of metabolic products of the fish, which increases along with the weight gain of the animal, until it cannot be decomposed any more by the natural circulation of the pond. In industrial fish production it is solved with a higher flow rate of the water, which eliminates the metabolic products. Here the production is limited by the specific flow rate, which is about 100 l/kg/h, with aeration of 25 I/kg. In this technology only artificial feed is given, with increased cost. If the temperature of running water is constant, the system can be operated throughout the year. If not, there should be either a break in the operation or a change in the cultured species. Since the industrial fish culturing system operates independently from the environmental, 'external'
temperature, it is capable of producing market fish continuously.
One type of industrial fish producing system is the recirculation method, which ensures constant water temperature and quality. Related to the recycled water of the system, a small amount (2-5 percent daily) of water has to be supplied externally.
Table 1 shows the most important technological and technical parameters of the above system.
2. MAIN PHASES OF FISH POND CULTURE
2.1 Propagation
Fish cultured in fish farms are generally propagated artificially. Since a separate chapter is dealing with this theme, only the most important figures of design and technology are dealt with here. Some important technological features of propagation are summed up in Table 2, and illustrated through a simple example.
Table 1 Characteristic Features of Different Types of Fish Production
Management
Production
Water requirement
Fish Population
Feed
Oxygen Supply
Metabolite Elimination
t/ha
kg/m^3
(m^3/kg)
Quality
kg/kg
Natural water
Mixed
Natural
Natural
Natural
Cage
Single species
Pellet
Natural + artificial
Natural
Fish pond
(extensive)
Single-multispecies
Wheat
Natural
Natural
Fish pond
(intensive)
Multispecies
Wheat + Pellet
Natural +
Natural
Industrial
Single species
Pellet
Artificial
Artificial
Recirculation
Single species
Pellet
Artificial
Artificial
1^/ 100 m^2 free water surface is equivalent to 1 m^2 cage (still water system)
^2^/ Trout, conventional concrete tanks
^3^/ Calculated at 4 percent supplemental water daily
Table 2 Main Technological Parameters of Fish Propagation
Item
Unit
Common carp
Silver carp
Bighead carp
Grass carp
Sheat fish
Average weight of matured
kg
female/male spawners
Number of eggs in 1 kg:
dry
1 000 pc
swollen
1 000 pc
Larvae developing from
1 000 pc
1 kg dry eggs
Optimal temperature of
°C
hatching and nursing
Incubation
daily temperature
Duration of larvae nursing
daily temperature
Amount of swollen eggs
litre
in 1 small Zuger glass (7 1)
1 000 pc
Average water requirement
l/min
of 1 small Zuger glass
Number of larvae in 1 big Zuger glass (200 1)
Average water requirement of
l/min
1 big Zuger glass
Volume of tank for spawners
I/kg
Specific water requirement:
with aeration
without aeration
l/kg/min
1^/ Data corresponding to sheat fish larvae kept in hapa of 0.2-0.3 m^2
Example:
Item
Carp (millions)
Silver Carp
Larvae needed (million)
Eggs needed:
dry (kg)
swollen (1)
Necessary brood stock:
female (kg)
(no.)
male (kg)
(no.)
Zuger glass needed:
small (no.)
big (no.)
No. of batches of eggs
Total hatching time (days)
No. of batches of larvae
Duration of larval rearing (days)
Required water flow (l/min):
spawner tank
small Zuger glass
big Zuger glass
total
In the above example we have a hatchery with, 40 small and 10 big Zuger glasses, where the total volume of tanks for brood stock is 10 m^3 and its water supply 300 l/min. The hatchery is to produce 50 million carp and 20 million silver carp larvae.
We calculate, by using the figures of Table 2, the number of spawners (male and female) necessary for a certain amount of larvae and the time and water flow necessary in a hatchery with the given facilities, and as a general rule consider that (1) the egg production of a mature female spawner is 0.1 kg per 1 kg body weight and (2) for two females one male is required.
2.2 Nursing of Larvae
The hatched larvae would be under endogen nutrition, thus it is necessary to keep them in the hatchery. Afterwards they are transferred to nursery ponds where natural food in sufficient amount and quality must be available. These relatively small (0.5-0.8 ha) nursery ponds, therefore, should be well prepared. This must be started about seven days before the stocking.
2.2.1 Main steps in nursery pond preparation:
Day
The dry and vegetation-free bottom of the pond should be treated with 500 kg/ha CaO and 200 kg/ha ammonium-nitrate (NH[4]NO[3])
The pond should be filled with up to 20-30 cm water
3-5 t/ha organic fertilizer is applied
Water level should be raised to 50-60 cm
Fast decomposing (maximum 1 week) insecticide of phosphorous acid ester content must be added to the pond water in a sufficient amount to eliminate cladocera and copepoda zooplankton species.
Stocking of larvae
2.2.2 Feeding in the nurseries:
The pond preparation can be regarded successful if the filtrate of 100 1 pond water reaches 1 ml and Rotatoria are dominant in it. Feeding of larvae must be started on the 3-4th day with 2-4 kg/ha mealy feed. This period lasts 20-25 days and the feed ration of the last days must be 25-30 kg/ha. On the 4-5th day the pond must be filled up (120-150 cm) . An important precondition of the success in this period is to fertilize with 200 kg/ha of organic fertilizer daily.
2.2.3 Guideline for pre-nursing period (Cyprinidae)
Stocking
1-1.5 million larvae/ha
Harvest
0.6-1.2 million larvae/ha
Individual weight
0.3-0.8 g
Production (average)
500 kg/ha
Fertilizer necessary
4+4 t/ha
Feed necessary
200-250 kg/ha
These ponds can be used for nursing of three consecutive groups, each batch needing 30 days (one group 7 + 23) or, altogether, 90 days. For nursing the 50 million carp and 20 million silver carp larvae, cited in our example,
of nursery pond are necessary.
2.3 Nursing Period
During the prenursing period the larvae grow very fast. Presuming that 1 million 0.5 g/larvae are harvested, the weight gain per hectare is 500 kg in 20-25 days.
This mass of fish cannot feed sufficiently any more, due to the lack of zooplankton, so it should be harvested and restocked at a lower stocking density. The optimal size of a nursing pond is 3-5 ha with an average depth of 1.2-1.4 m. Generally 50-80 000 prenursed larvae are stocked.
As illustrated in our example, 50 million carp and 20 million silver carp larvae were produced, out of which prenursing in three groups in an 18 ha pond area resulted in recoveries of 30 million carp (50 × 0.6) and 14 million silver carp (20 × 0.7). So far monoculture has been used, the next part of the nursing period being carried out in polyculture, where altogether 44 million prenursed fry would need a total pond area of:
The ratio of the pond-area requirement of pre- and post-nursing period is 18:700, i.e., 1:40. If we use a culture period of 100-120 days, with the expected survival at 70 percent, recovery is 31 million fry (44 × 0.7). At an average of 60-80 g body weight the expected total weight of the whole stock is:
31 million × 70 g = 2 170 t or 3.1 t/ha
Production per hectare is 2 170:700 = 3.1 t.
In the post-nursing period the ponds should be regularly fertilized and the fry feed dispensed at 3-4 percent of body weight daily.
2.3.1 Guideline for post-nursing period
Stocking
50-80 000/ha, 25-40 kg/ha
Harvesting
35-56 000/ha, 3 000 kg/ha
Fertilizer necessary
400 kg/ha mono-ammonium phosphate or 140 kg/ha superphosphate
Feed necessary
3 000 kg/ha pellet (minimum protein content 25 percent)
2 500 kg/ha grain
2.4 Market-size Fish Production
The 60-80 g fingerlings should reach 500-800 g body weight in 150-200 days. The stocking rate is 5-6 000/ha, the survival of which is 80 percent. Since we have altogether 31 million fry,
The ratio of the pond-area requirement for nursing and growing of market-size fish is 700:5 640, or 1:8. Considering an 80 percent survival rate, the total number of marketable fish is 25 million, with a total weight of 16 250 t if the average body weight is 650 g. Regular fertilization and feeding should also be considered.
Guideline to market size fish production:
Stocking
5-6 000/ha, 350-400 kg/ha
Harvest
4-5 000/ha, 2 600-3 200 kg/ha
Fertilizer necessary
500 kg/ha ammonium nitrate
180 kg/ha mono-ammonium-phosphate or
500 kg/ha superphosphate
Feed necessary
1 500 kg/ha pellet (minimum protein content 25 percent)
3 000 kg/ha grain
3. THEORETICAL PRINCIPLES OF POND FISH CULTURE
3.1 Biological Production of Waters
Algae in the waters absorb a part of solar energy and grow (propagate) correspondingly. This is the single energy source of water biocenosis, as the algae are then consumed by fish to provide a rich source of natural feed. Metabolic products and organic materials are decomposed by bacteria.
Parallel to energy binding and consumption, biological processes are going on, the essence of which is that energy binding of algae involves oxygen release and organic material composition. While other organs utilize the energy carried by this organic material together with the released oxygen, the process results in inorganic materials which are used by algae again in binding solar energy. The schematic illustration of the process is as follows:
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of biological processes in fish pond
The figure on the left illustrates a water body without any human interference, thus the matter content of the pond is relatively constant and biological production is limited by the spontaneous speed of material-cycling. In this case the sun is the only source of energy. The scheme on the right illustrates a pond, whose matter content is continuously supplied, i.e., there are additional energy sources, in order to increase fish production. Fish production is profitable, if the fish population in the pond is a constant consumer of natural food as well as of the additionally given energy (food). Thus, it is of primary importance to have the necessary protein produced by the pond. In addition, cheap, energy-rich (i.e., protein poor), feed can be applied. This is always defined by the size of fish (protein demand of young fish is higher than that of the older ones), and the expected production.
The change of oxygen concentration is a relatively simple indicator of the intensity of energy turnover in the pond. The following figure shows the fluctuations of the oxygen concentration in two fish ponds with high and low productivity, respectively.
Figure 2. Oxygen fluctuations in fish ponds
It is clear from the above that the algal population is bigger in the pond with higher productivity (which accounts for intensive oxygen production), but the number of oxygen consuming organisms is higher as well, resulting in an early morning minimum.
3.2 Polyculture
Feeding habits and food preferences differ from species to species. This is the reason that stocking different species together gives a higher yield than monoculture because of better utilization of natural food resources. After many years of experience the following stocking ratio is given as fairly optimal:
Common carp
Silver carp
Bighead carp
Grass carp
Sheat fish
As a basic rule it should be noted that in order to increase yield, the share of common carp must be increased as intensified feeding increases the yield of the common carp only.
3.3 Fertilization
As described in the section on material and energy turnover, the biological production of a pond is limited by the amount of energy bound by the algae. This, however, is defined by the quantity of 'algal-food'. Since energy-binding is a sunlight-dependent process, energy and the material release mostly take place in the dark. These two complementary processes are often asynchronic. The aim of fertilization is to overcome these gaps in turnover and maximize the energy-building properties of algae.
Both organic and inorganic (artificial) fertilizers can be applied. The effect of organic material on primary production of the pond is relatively slow, since most of the nutriments must first be decomposed by bacteria into minerals. This is of great benefit however, to zooplankton growth. Inorganic fertilizers directly promote primary production, and are optimal given in small portions daily, with, as experience has shown, a 4:1 = N:P ratio. In waters with poor buffer capacity, lime (CaCO[3]) can be very useful.
3.4 Feeding
In pond fish culture, feeding is of a complementary nature, i.e., a part of production is from natural, and the rest from artificial feed. For a low production target (below 1 t/ha/year) feeding is unnecessary, but the population structure should be established accordingly (e.g., common carp: 20-30%). To attain higher production (e.g., common carp: 2 t/ha/year), however, feeding is necessary with grains. Really high production (above 3 t/ha/year) can be reached only with additional protein, vitamin and mineral premix complemented pellet, where the stocking combination is dominated by the pellet-feed consuming species (e.g., common carp: 70%).
Feeding in pond fish culture has always to be adjusted both in quantity and quality to the natural food production of the pond and to the mass of the fish. If the temperature of the fish pond markedly fluctuates in the culturing period, it should also be considered.
The feeding strategy in a properly populated and fertilized fish pond is shown in the following diagram.
The diagram demonstrates that in the first part of the culturing period, the protein requirement is met by natural food, zooplankton, thus only supplemental energy is needed (wheat). In the second half of the culturing period, the existing zooplankton stock cannot meet the requirement of the increasing mass of fish, thus the demand of the carp must be fulfilled by additional protein. The zooplankton requirement of silver carp and bighead carp is met by the small Rotatoria.
Figure 3. Feeding diagram
The body composition of carp is greatly influenced by the quantity and quality of feed given. An ad libitum strategy generally leads to the fattening of the carp. However, this impairs the food-conversion rate, as well as imparting a bad taste to the product. Therefore, in the post-nursing and market fish producing periods, the daily 5% and 3% feeding intensities respectively should not be exceeded.
<section>r</section>
APPENDIX B - Aquacultural Rotation
1. INTRODUCTION
Aquacultural rotation (AR) is a production method developed for unproductive soils. It allows mutual and beneficial biological effects on cultures of different types. With the help of AR, the most economic utilization of sodic soils can be achieved, by producing foods rich in protein (fish, duck, rice) and high quality forage crops (alfalfa, red clover) ameliorating, at the same time, the structure and quality of soil.
1.1 Application of AR
In Hungary, this method offers possibilities for production of important foods on flat soils of the poorest quality. Its introduction into areas where fish and rice are essential foods may be desirable. Protein production per unit area achieved by "fish-cum-duck" rearing is much higher than that achieved with any other land use. During the dry phase the pond bottom is utilized, its hygiene is improved and at the same time reconstruction of ponds may be carried out. Leguminous plants are the best crops for preparing the soil for rice production.
1.2 Conditions for Application of AR
AR may be adapted for any flat area where the soil is suitable for fish farming or rice cultivation, but areas not suitable for agriculture can also be used for this purpose. Ponds under 1 ha cannot be used for AR (wintering ponds, rearing ponds, etc.). The optimal size of ponds in Hungary is 20-30 ha.
Dikes of fish ponds should be constructed in such a way that the thin layer of fertile soils on the pond bottom will remain intact. Inner sides of the dikes are to be constructed with a moderate slope (1:5, 1:4) thus assuring their protection.
The filling and drainage system of every pond must be independent, using irrigation water of good quality and a drainage system by gravity. The pond bottom should be large enough for rice fields of 2-3 ha. Within the rice fields the bottom level differences should not exceed ± 5 cm, sloped to allow inundation and drainage through each other. Within the ponds, one or two artificial islands should be constructed and planted with trees for the purpose of duck breeding.
2. DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF AR
2.1 First Phase - Double Meat Production
Young ducks are prepared and trained for living under natural circumstances. This training has three steps. During the first step, ducks are held in warm rearing rooms on a wire-screen 1 m above the floor (mesh size 15 × 17 mm) at a temperature of 28-30°C. Ducklings are fed with pelleted starter feed 3 mm in diameter, ad libitum, and drinking water is supplied by a flow-through system. After the arrival of the one-day old ducks, the temperature is lowered by 2°C every day. On warmer sunny days (20-25°C), 2-3 days old ducklings are allowed to enter the open run and to bathe in the bathing channel after 4-5 days. During the first step 30-50 ducklings are kept on a 1 m^2 wire screen.
In the second step, ducklings of 8-10 days are transferred to cool rearing rooms, which may be heated in cold weather (+ 5-15°C). Here they are kept in a density of 20-30/ m^2, and are fed pellets made with less protein. Healthy, well developed ducklings are kept in the open run and in the bathing basins, which are deeper than those of the first step.
For the third step, ducks of 12-14 days are kept on illuminated rearing ponds 24 hours a day. In extremely bad weather they can enter a shelter. Feeding is carried out by the use of self-feeders and pelleted feed. During this procedure, weaker ducklings are lost (2-3 percent), which is more economical than losses occurring at a later stage.
In summer, the ducks are transferred to the fish ponds at 16-18 days old, while in early spring (March), they are transferred at 21-22 days, their average weight being 750-900 g at that time.
The self-feeders are situated on the wind-protected sides of the islands. They have to be 20-30 cm above the water level and, consequently, their height should be adjustable. Ducks are fed ad libitum with feed of low protein content. The rest of their growing period (totalling 45-46 days) is spent on the artificial island and on the water surface. Losses caused by predators (weasels, foxes, etc.) are minimal (0.5-1 percent). On a fish pond of 20-30 ha, 5 000-6 000 ducks may be kept at the same time, and this can be repeated 3 to 4 times a year.
In good weather, well fed ducks spend half of their time on the water surface, thus manuring the pond in an ideal way. They control the growth of undesirable water weeds, which serve as natural food for them. Average weight of marketed ducks of 45-46 days is between 2 600 and 2 800 g, and of first quality.
2.2 Effects of Duck Breeding on Fish Farming
Ducks can be reared on any fish pond where the weight of fish stocked has reached or surpassed that of 5-10 g. Natural fish yields doubled in those ponds where duck rearing had been practised for 2-3 years.
Production Results (kg/ha)
Increase in weight of fish
Natural yields
Increase in weight of ducks
Total increase of weight
The effect of duck breeding was studied in an experiment conducted in the experimental ponds of the Fish Culture Research Institute at Horvátpuszta. Two similar ponds (E-9 and D-9) of 8 ha each were stocked with 6 920 one summer-old carp and 530 two summers-old silver carp. During the growing season, both ponds were treated in the same way (feeding, artificial fertilization, inundation, etc.). Pond E-9 served as a control, while on pond D-9 13 274 ducks were reared (1 659/ha).
At the end of the experiment, the following result was obtained. In the control pond (E-9) 1 654 kg was the increase in fish weight per hectare, out of which 498 kg/ha was the natural yield. At the same time, pond D-9 produced a 2 334 kg/ha increase, the natural yield being 1 185 kg/ha. As a result of duck breeding, the natural yield was 687 kg/ha higher than that of the control pond. Total meat production (duck and fish) of pond D-9 surpassed that of pond E-9 by 3 680 kg/ha, being 5 334 kg/ha (322 percent), while 1 654 kg/ha (100 percent) was produced in the control pond.
Beneficial effects of duck breeding on the production of marketable fish in polyculture are also illustrated by the data of pond No. 10 at Horvátpuszta.
Results Achieved in Fish Pond No. 10 at Horvátpuszta
Stocking
Number of fish/ha
Total weight kg/ha
Harvesting
Total weight kg/ha
Increase in weight kg/ha
Natural yield kg/ha
Weight of ducks kg/ha
Total meat production kg/ha
During the growing season from March to October, in addition to organic fertilization by ducks, artificial fertilization and feeding is carried out. The quality of feed is determined by daily control.
The percentage of monthly amounts of feed is given below:
Month
Feed consumption Percentage
April
May
June
July
August
September
Total
Fish are fed cereals (maize, wheat, rye, corn, etc.), and fry are fed pellets.
Chemical studies proved that, as an effect of fish-cum-duck farming, the organic material content of the pond bottom increases significantly, and the content of easily soluble phosphorus as well as easily soluble potassium increases.
2.3 Second Phase - Forage-Crop Production on Pond Bottoms
Organic matter and mud deposited during the first phase of AR (5-6 years) offer an opportunity for agricultural crop-production on the dry pond bottom. Experiments were carried out with 27 different plants, selected on the following bases:
- Which species or varieties give the highest yields on dried pond bottom.
- Which crops offer the highest incomes.
- Which crops improve the quality and structure of the soil.
- Which crops best secure the conditions for rice production in the third phase of AR.
It was found that leguminous plants, particularly a red clover mixture, proved to be the best.
The results were as follows:
Ton/ha
green weight
Ton/ha
hay value
Red clover
Alfalfa - red clover mixture 1:2
Alfalfa - red clover mixture 1:1
Alfalfa - red clover mixture 2:1
Alfalfa
Smallest SD[5] percent
In 1965, new experiments started with leguminous plants in pond No. 6 at Horvátpuszta. This pond was used for fish-cum-duck production for the previous three years. Five varieties of clover and the best variety of alfalfa were used, and even in the first year the experimental area yielded 260/346 t/ha in green weight.
Production data of the second year are given below:
Green weight
Ton/ha
Hay value
Ton/ha
Red clover of Tápió
Red clover of Táplán
Red clover "0"
Red clover of Fertód
Red clover of Táplán 120
Alfalfa of Martonvásárhely
It was found that poliploid red clovers (Hungaropoly Táplán 120) secured higher yields than those of diploid red clovers and adapted very well to pond bottom conditions.
Harvesting of leguminous crops can easily be mechanized. They can be used in the green stage for feeding of duck breeders and herbivorous fish species, or they can be preserved and utilized as components of fish and duck feeds.
Experiments showed that during the second phase of AR, the production of leguminous crops are the most suitable. Among these, the alfalfa and red clover mixture proved to be the most economical because results of the first harvestings are secured by the red clover, while, particularly in dry years, those of the last harvestings by the alfalfa. With irrigation, polyploid red clovers provide the highest yields. The soil is enriched in nitrogen and calcium by alfalfa.
2.4 Third Phase - Rice Production on Pond Bottom
The structure of pond bottom soil considerably improves during the first two phases of AR, increasing its organic matter content and nitrogen level significantly. This richness of nutrients can be favourably utilized for rice production.
This third phase lasts for three years. Highest yields of rice were obtained following production of alfalfa and its mixtures. Yields were by 0.7 to 1 ton higher than those following sunflower, sorghum and maize production. Channels and structures of fish ponds are also of good use for irrigation and drainage of rice fields. Dams of rice fields are constructed along the contour lines after sowing, so that level differences will not exceed ± 5 cm within one sector.
The sectors of the rice field within the fish ponds should be situated in such a way that inundation and drainage are possible through one another.
In this phase we achieved yields 50-100 percent higher than the average yields of our country. The highest yield was achieved in a 16 ha fish pond. After three years of rice production, the dams of the rice fields are levelled and fish-cum-duck production starts again.
3. CONCLUSION
Fish ponds utilized for AR assure higher income than those utilized for fish farming alone, producing a variety of products at the same time. The production structure of AR is more adaptable to changing demands of the market. In comparison with fish farming, production of commodities takes a shorter time (duck meat produced in 46 days; fodder production 3-4 times a year). Consequently, incomes are more balanced during the year.
AR is a successful method of utilizing soils of poor quality. Besides improving the quality of the soil, high yields are achieved by AR.
AR may be introduced not only to areas of sodic soils in Hungary, but also to those countries with climates favourable for fish farming and rice production.
4. REFERENCES
Dyke, J.M. and E. Green, Jr. 1974, Interrelations of agriculture and aquaculture in multicropping rice and fish. Il Riso, 13(4):365-71
Fábry, I.,1975, A szarvasi vizes forgóban kezelt halastavak talajainak kémiai vizsgálata (Chemical analyses of pond soils treated with aquacultural rotation in the Fish Culture Research Institute). In Halhustermelés fejlesztése, edited by Fish Culture Research Institute. Szarvas, Hungary, Fish Culture Research Institute, vol. 3:1-35
Müller, F.,1975, A szikes talajok hasznositásának gazdaságossága vizes forgóval (Economics of utilization of alkali soils by aquacultural rotation). In Halhustermelés fejlesztése, edited by Fish Culture Research Institute. Szarvas, Hungary, Fish Culture Research Institute, vol. 1:1-19
Ribianszky, M., 1967, A halastó talajának müvelése (Agricultural cultivation of soils of fish-ponds). Halászat, 3(5):162-3(5):162-3
Tevjasova, L.E., 1975, Agrobiologicseszkaja meliorácija i ee vlijanie na fiziko-himicseszkie szvojsztva gruntov rübovodnüh vodoemov (Agrobiologic melioration and its influence on the physical and chemical properties of soils of fishponds). Rybn. Khoz., Mosk., (7):14-7
<section>s</section>
APPENDIX C - Fish-cum-pig Culture
1. INTRODUCTION
In modern concentrated animal farms, a lot of manure arises which contains dissolved and undissolved organic material in large quantities. This secondary product can be used in plant cultures or in fish ponds. This utilization procedure has several steps. The organic material disposed in the pond is transformed by micro-organisms under aerobic conditions. The resulting organic material is nutriment for algae. Algae transform this inorganic material into organic plant material by using solar energy. The algal biomass thus resulting is food for the next consumption level for zooplankton.
Phyto- and zooplanktons together form plankton biomass which is the natural food for fish.
Utilization of organic fertilizers in fish culture has a long tradition. It is an accepted practice in Far Eastern countries where climatic conditions result in rapid metabolic processes.
Considering the allegation of Wohlfarth (1978) the manure can be a fodder replacing feed, it would be negligent not to exploit this source.
Only a part of the huge amount of pig manure accumulating in pig farms is utilized in the fields, so the excess, which contains high amounts of direct and indirect proteins (Moav et al., 1977), can be well used in increasing natural nutrient content of fish ponds.
Schroeder and Hepher (1975) found that manure load causes a profound change in the natural nutrient cycle of fish ponds, coming about by the organic matter decomposing activity of bacteria and protozoa. Micro-organisms getting into the water with the manure also become fish feed. Water bacteria of 20-30 m m size are also consumed by pelagic fish (Kuznetsov, 1977).
The optimal utilization of manure depends greatly upon the stocking structure. Yashow (1971) demonstrated that on the influence of feeding interaction there is a nutrient movement among the different specific zones in polycultural fish ponds. The findings of Wohlfarth (1978) unequivocally proved the yield stimulating nature of polycultural fish pond management. Leventer's (1981) studies also confirmed it when he proved that algal production is higher in polycultural than in mono cultural fish ponds. Put the yield is influenced by the way manure is used as well, for example, to preserve useful compounds by keeping them away from air. It is also important to ensure the proper balance between loading and decomposition of the manure in a pond: therefore, we followed the practice of daily disposal proposed by Moav et al. (1977) and Schroeder (1974).
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The aim of our experiment performed in 1980 was to find the optimal dose of manure ensuring the highest yield of fish as well as the best water quality. In 8 earthen experimental fish ponds of 0.17 ha each, we applied different manure loadings. The liquid pig manure from a nearby pig farm was rather diluted, due to the great amount of water used in the management regime. Dry matter content was about 1 percent. The composition of the manure was regularly analysed. The total nitrogen content was 8 g/l, while the total phosphorus was 1.2 g/l.
In each pond an identical stocking structure was used, with a dominance of silver carp. Considering the feeding competition between common and bighead carp, the stocking rate of the former was only 27 percent. The third member of the structure was grass carp. One and two year old silver and common carps were stocked in order to get an answer to the question as to which age group could better tolerate the new conditions.
In a follow-up experiment in 1981, the aim was to find the optimal stocking structure. Six combinations of stocking structure were employed in 8 experimental ponds, with 2 fish species only, silver and common carp, the former in varying numbers. The optimal amount of manure applied (with 1 percent dry matter content) was 1 035 m^3 in 1980. Since the manure used had 4 percent dry matter content, this amount was 200 m^3 in 1981. Nitrogen content was 8.6 g/l and phosphorus was 1.4 g/l. In the control ponds, inorganic fertilizer was applied containing only 150 kg/ha nitrogen and 20 kg/ha phosphorus.
The aim of the third year's experiment in 1982 was to compare the polycultural and bicultural systems. We wanted to get an answer to the question of which stocking structure was better in respect of water quality and fish production.
2.1 Short Description of Technology
The liquid manure from the pig farm was transferred in tank vehicles into a tank, from which it was pumped to the sprinklers through aluminium pipes and then sprayed into the ponds. Clean water for rinsing the pipes was taken from the water supply channels of the ponds. The pump had two forks, one for the manure and the other for cleaning water.
2.2 Equipment and Facilities
The CSN-301 type revolving pulley-pump has two main parts: a flexible rubber cylinder and a revolving metal pulley sucker. The pump is suitable to transfer pulpy, fibrous material of high, viscosity. By changing the rpm its carrying capacity can be controlled between 4.5 m^3/h and 16 m^3/h. The pump operates according to the volumetric displacement principle.
3. RESULTS
Two factors were considered when establishing the optimal dose of liquid manure applied. One was the highest fish yield, the other the quality of effluent water (Figure 1). Taking the yield of the control pond as 100 percent, we reached 109 percent when using 1 030 m^3 liquid manure, which corresponds to a net yield of 2.4 t/ha. The net yields of the other treatments were far behind this value. Similar yields were obtained with 1 or 2 years old common carp, with the exception of one pond where the lack of feed was obvious, i.e. 560 m^3 liquid manure was insufficient.
Both age groups showed very good growth rate at 1 030 m^3 manure loading. The highest or lowest doses did not favour the growth rate of the 2 years old group.
Grass carp showed the best growth rate in ponds with a low amount of liquid manure. Due to good light conditions, the well growing macrophytes ensured the specific nutrient demand of grass carps, but the increase of manure loading did not result in increased yield at the same light conditions. There was a considerable mortality when we increased the manure loading, especially with the 1 year old silver carp. The loss with the 2 years old stock was far less. During the regular pilot harvests, we investigated the gill and general health condition of all the fish. No ill or deteriorated fish could be seen.
Based on experience obtained in 1981 (Figure 2/a), further work is needed to; find the optimal rates and stocking structure. A yield of 1 000 g fish was obtained only at a very low stocking rate (1 500/ha), which should be increased. While the weight of common carp was above 1 000 g in each combination at a stocking rate of 1 000/ha, the weight of grass carp decreased along with the increase of stocking rate (Figure 2/b). The highest net yield was obtained with the treatment resulting in the lowest individual growth rate. However, silver carps had not even doubled their original weight.
In 1982, the best net yield of 2.5 t/ha was obtained in a bicultural pond (Figure 3). The population was of good quality and healthy. Comparing the yield of the 4 bicultural and 4 polycultural ponds with identical stocking structure, the bicultural form proved to be better, with an average net yield of 2 064 kg/ha. The yield of the pond with polycultural stocking was 1 444 kg/ha.
The quality of effluent water did not show any difference with the two stocking structures applied.
4. REFERENCES
Kuznetsov, Y.A., 1977, Consumption of bacteria by silver carp. J. Ichthyiol., 17:398-404
Leventer, H.,1981 Biological control of reservoirs by fish. Bamidgeh, 33:1
Moav, R. et al. 1977, Intensive polyculture of fish in freshwater ponds. 1. Substitution of expensive feeds by liquid cow manure. Aquaculture, 10:25-43
Schroeder, G.L., 1974, Use of fluid cow-shed manure in fish ponds. Bamidgeh, 26:84-96
Schroeder, G.L. and B. Hepher, 1975, Wastewater utilization in Israel aquaculture. Ann Arbor, Michigan, Michigan University
Yashow, A.,1981, Interaction between common carp and silver carp in fish ponds. Bamidgeh, 23:85-92
Wohlfarth, G.,1978, Utilization of manure in fishfarming. In Report of the Proceedings. Fish-farming and wastes: an International Conference sponsored by the Institute of Fisheries Management and the Society of Chemical Industry, Water and Environment Group. University College, London, 4-5 January 1978. Edited by C.M.R. Pastakia. Carlisle, Institute of Fisheries Management, pp 78-95
Figure 1. Relationship between fish yield and liquid manure
Figure 2 a. Fish yield in 8 earthen experimental fish ponds
Figure 2 b. Relationship between weight and stocking density of common carp
Figure 3. Fish yield in polycultural and bicultural systems
<section>t</section>
APPENDIX D - Silver Carp Culture in Sewage Ponds
1. SUMMARY
Significant seasonal fluctuation characterizes the amount of domestic sewage water around recreational areas in the temperate zone. The summer peak overloads the purification plants and destabilizes the steady state and its normal efficiency. To purify and utilize this surplus summer domestic sewage, we have developed a domestic sewage oxidation fish pond technology.
Herbivorous fish have a paramount role in this technology, since they constitute some 90-95 percent of the stocking population as well as that of the yield. They utilize natural food not utilized by common carp and, at the same time, favourably increase the efficiency of water reclamation.
The best result was achieved at a sewage water load of 100 m^3/ha/day. With 100 m^3/ha/day sewage water during the culturing period, 400-600 kg nitrogen and 80-120 kg phosphorus was introduced into the pond system.
In a properly operating system, the elimination of 80-90 percent of phosphorus and nitrogen load is warranted.
With the stocking structure described, 1.8-2 t/ha net output could be achieved at a 100 m^3/ha/day sewage water load.
2. INTRODUCTION
As a consequence of intensive urbanization, our lakes and rivers are exposed to a gradually increasing pollution, urging the protection of a "healthy" aquatic environment.
Lake Balaton, with its unique natural endowments, provides pleasant sporting and recreational conditions for 10 000 national and international tourists. The water quality still meets the requirements of a resort, but a series of threatening signs calls the attention of authorities and experts to take measures for its improvement. Under our climatic conditions, the period between May and September is suitable for visiting the Lake area, during which time the amount of domestic sewage water increases three to five-fold. This summer peak overloads the conventional purification plants and destabilizes the steady state and its normal efficiency.
In the knowledge of biological features of this area, our aim was to establish artificial ecosystems (fish ponds), thereby utilizing and purifying the seasonally accumulating domestic sewage water.
Utilization of domestic sewage water dates back to the beginning of the 1900's. It was Hofer who applied it first in 1904 and 1911 (Falck, 1935; Kisskalt, et al, 1937). His work was followed by Demoll, whose experience was used when, in 1926, a fish pond system of 223 ha was established near Munich. This system worked properly even after 25 years, according to Kaufman (1958). Several European countries, such as Czechoslovakia (Pytlik, 1957), the Soviet Union (Unberg, Ljahnovics, 1965) and Poland (Németh, 1968) followed this example. Experience and data collected proved that notwithstanding some operational problems, the fish ponds worked fairly efficiently (Imhoff, 1956; Liebmann, 1960) .
In Hungary, the problem of domestic sewage water utilization in fish ponds had already emerged in 1914 (Halmi, 1914; Répássy, 1914), but no positive results were achieved. The problem, based on favourable experience abroad, came up again in 1958 (Gaál, Donászy, 1958) and launched publication of numerous papers (Woynárovich, 1959 and 1959a; Fóris, 1961; Holényi, 1962) which, besides discussing theoretical and practical questions, urged large scale experiments. In spite of all this, the attention was focused on the so-called domestic sewage oxidation fish ponds (Brinck, 1961; Uhlmann, 1962) since this management has no extra water requirement. We should note, however, that the two management systems cannot be sharply separated (Pytlik, 1957), since tench (Tinca vulgaris) and carp culturing can be managed in closed systems as well.
In spite of the controversy, trials were made by introducing domestic sewage water into the lakes. These attempts gave rise to the study of operational problems, such as formation of hydrogen sulphide (Vámos, 1959, 1961, 1967), algal bloom (Vámos, et al., 1963) and O^2-CO[2] circulation.
3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The technology has six main units. The first is the pretreating block, where there is a wire netting system for primary filtering. The pollutants with finer structures are filtered through a sand trap, then the water is introduced into a depositing tank. The mud collected in the first unit is treated in the second one, in the pre- then in the post-putrefactor. The mud is then phase distributed; the liquid phase is chemically treated, and the solid part is pasteurized. The effluent water of the sterilization can be directly introduced into the ponds, while the mud is used in agriculture. The chemical treatment is done in the third unit in the following steps: preparation of chemicals, dosing, mixing. Thus, treated sewage water is retained and qualitatively tested in the fourth unit. The fifth unit, a sewage oxidation pond system is made up of three well defined blocks: fish ponds sewage water spraying block, and a monitor block for checking the purifying process.
3.1 Fish Ponds
The total area of this unit is 10.7 ha and is distributed between 12 ponds, 6 of which are 1.65 ha each and the other six are 0.18 ha each. For economic use of the area at disposal, the ponds are located in a fan shape. The average depth of the ponds is 1.0-1.3 m, the the bottoms are covered with peat. The above layout makes the individual treatment, filling and draining of the ponds, possible. The harvest is done from a pit moulded along the longitudinal axis of the ponds.
3.2 Sewage Water Spraying Block
The mechanically treated sewage water is pumped under high pressure to the sprinklers in the ponds. In each pond six sprinklers of Gemenc T type are used, both for aeration and spraying of sewage water. Sewage water spraying is generally done daily, in the morning hours. In the case of aeration, pond water is pumped into the sprinklers, instead of sewage water, thereby solving the problem of morning oxygen depletion in the ponds.
3.3 Monitor Block
This unit ensures smooth operation of the system as well as checking the purification procedure. There is a pump of low capacity in each pond to introduce the water to a testing laboratory. It is automated and works for 15 minutes, passing the water through the electrodes which are connected to recorders. There is an alarm unit in the monitor connected to the oxygen electrode and, if the concentration of soluble oxygen is lower than 3 mg/l, a sound gives alarm that aeration should be switched on.
Figure 1 shows the schematic layout of the technology. Units marked with an asterisk are not always necessary to build in.
In 1974, the first year of the five year research project, untreated ponds were used with a stocking density of 1 300-1 400 fish/ha. The technology was accomplished in 1975 when the spraying unit was put into operation. 50 m^3/ha/day sewage water was sprayed in 1976 at a stocking rate of 3 000-5 000 fish/ha. In 1977, at the same stocking rate, we varied the sewage water loading, in doses of 75, 100, 150, 200 m^3/ha/day, trying to find the optimal dose and applying, at the same time, the best stocking structure tried in 1976. In the last year of the project (1978) 100 m^3/ha/day sewage water loading was applied at a stocking rate of 3 500 fish/ha. Cyprinid fish gave the best stocking material in a structure of 2-year old common carp, silver carp, grass carp and bighead, with 300-350 g individual weight.
Figure 1. Schematic layout of domestic sewage utilization in fish ponds
4. RESULTS
Our main problem was to find the dose of sewage water which does not cause any harm to fish, providing, at the same time, a proper grade or purification. Extreme doses of sewage water were used in 1975 at a uniform stocking structure. We found that, compared with the control, a load of 5 m^3/ha does not significantly change the water quality and fish yield. At the highest loading of 250 m^3/ha/day, however, a mass mortality occurred due to the early morning oxygen depletion in the ponds. The best result was achieved at a dose of 50 m^3/ha/day, with a yield of 1.2 t/fish/ha.
In 1976 we optimized the stocking structure at a load of 50 m^3/ha/day considering the feeding activity of the species, as well as the quality and quantity of natural nutrient sources of the pond. Considering the results of experiments carried out in 1976, we established that the rate of common carp could not be more than 10 percent in the stocking structure if we wanted to yield market size fish and properly purified water at the same time. Grass carp should have a share of 5-7 percent due to the huge mass of macrovegetation. The greatest problem was the rate of bighead which was the most aggressive species of the stocking structure. Its optimal rate was established as 22-25 percent. Silver carp grazing on zooplankton and phytoplankton had a great significance in the structure. The best purification grade and highest yield was achieved with the stocking structures, where the share of silver carp was 50-65 percent. The yields, as the function of stocking structure and
number, ranged between 1.3-1.6 t/ha, which can, however, be enhanced by increasing sewage water loading, maintaining at the same time the water quality. In 1977 experiments were conducted using the experience of 1976, to find the optimal dose of sewage water loading.
The best result, 1.8-2.0 t/ha, was obtained at a water disposal of 100 m^3/ha/day. The water quality obtained this way met all the requirements. In the case of sewage water loading higher than 100 m^3/ha/day, the quality of water was significantly impaired and the yield decreased.
In 1978 we made final tests in the sewage water utilizing system, and found that the technology operated perfectly and fulfilled our expectations in every respect. Results of our five year research project are summarized in Figure 2.
4.1 The Most Important Parameters of the Technology
Optimal dose of sewage water disposed: 100 m^3/ha/day
Which means
400-600 kg nitrogen/year
80-120 kg phosphorus/year
Stocking structure
Carp
150 - 300 per ha
Silver carp
1 500 - 1 650 per ha
Bighead
750 - 900 per ha
Grass carp
240 - 300 per ha
Total
2 640 - 3 150 per ha
Yield: 1.8-2.0 t/ha
Grade of purification; 80-90 percent
Qualitative parameters of purified water
BOI[5]
4-5 mg/l
pH
Soluble 0-
8-10 mg/l
Total nitrogen
2-3 mg/l
Total phosphorus
0.7-1 mg/l
ANA
0.2-0.3 mg/l
Figure 2. Diagrams of loading and stocking rates and yield in domestic sewage fish ponds
5. CONCLUSIONS
The purification technology of domestic sewage water in fish ponds is suitable for purifying and utilizing the summer surplus in recreational areas.
Applying the described method, domestic sewage water produced by 800-1 200 persons/ day can be purified in a 1 ha pond area.
This technology, besides the disposal and purification of sewage water, solves the problem of its utilization as well.
With the technology, 1.8-2.0 t/ha fish yield can be produced.
6. REFERENCES
Brinck, C.W., 1961, Operation and maintenance of sewage lagoons. Water Sewage Works, 1961: 466-8
Csanády, M.,1967, Szennyviziszap aerob lebontásának vizsgálata. Hidrol. Közl., 47(8):371-9
Donászy, E.,1958, Szennyvíz és halastó. Halászat, 2
Falck, T.,1935, Entwicklung der Abwasserreinigung in Fischteichen. Peg. Ing., 58
Fóris, Gy., 1961, Városi szennyvizek tisztítása és hasznosítása tógazgadásokban. Gödöllö. Kulturtechnikai jegyzet, ATE
Gaál, E.,1958, Városi szennyvizek tisztítása és hasznosítása halgazdaságokban. Viziterv Ert., 1
Halmi, Gy., 1914, Városi csatornaszennyvizek tisztítása halastavakban, Halászat, 15:147-9
Holényi, L.,1956, Szennyvízelhelyezes a Balaton környékén. Hidrol. Kozl., 42
Imhoff, K.,1956, Taschenbuch der Stadtenwasserung. Chapter 16. Oldenbourg, München, (cit. H. Liebmann (1960))
Kaufmann, J.,1958, Chemische und biologische Untersuchungen an den Abwasserfischteichen von München. Z. Angew. Zool.. 45:433-81
Kisskalt, K. and H. Ilzhöfer, 1958, Die Reinigung von Abwasser in Fischteichen. Arch. Hyg., 118:1-65
Liebmann, H.,1960, Biologic der Abwasserfischteiche. Biologic der Abwasserteiche. In Handbuch der Fischwasser und Abwasser-Biologie, by H. Liebmann. Jena, VEB Gustav Fischer Cerlag, Vol. 2:531-50
Németh, S.,1968, A halastavi trágyázás módszerei. Budapest. AGROINFORM, 90 p.
Pytlik, R.,1958, Oczyszczanie sciekow domowych oraz organichnych sciekow przemyslowych metoda statow akumulacyjnych i asymilacyjnych. Biul. P.A.N. Zaklad Biol. Statow Krakow., 11:132
Répássy, M.,1914, Halastó és szennyvíztisztítás. Halászat, 15:264-5
Uhlmann, D.,1962, Oxydationsgraben und Oxydationsteiche. Wiss. Ztsch. Karl-Marx-Univ. Leipzig, 11:187-99
Unberg, G.G. and V.P. Ljahnovics, 1965, Tavak trágyázása (Udobrenie prudov). Moszkva
Vámos, R.,1959 A kénhidrogén képzödésének akadályozása elárasztott talajokban. Agrokém. Talajtan, 8:321-30
Vamos, R.,1961, H[2]S képzödés és a klimatikus tényezök szerepe a tömeges halpusztulásban. Hidrol. Közl.. 41(4):343-8
Vamos, R., J. Zsolt and M. Ribianszky, 1963, A vízvirágzás és a halpusztulás. Hidrol. Közl., 43(6):528-33
Woynárovich, E.,1959, Városi szennyvizek hasznosítása halgazdaságban. Halászat, 3:48
Woynárovich, E., 1959a, Létesíthetö -e szennyvíz-tógazdaság Magyarországon? Halászat, 4:64
<section>u</section>
APPENDIX E - General Characteristics of Hungarian Fisheries
1. INTRODUCTION
Hungary is a typical land-locked country in Central Europe, in the Carpathian basin. Because of culinary traditions the population is first of all inclined to consume freshwater fishes which are made available by domestic production. The other factor with dominant influence on the development of Hungarian fish production is that the most important fish species belong to the families Cyprinidae and Percidae, that is to the group of warm-water fishes from an aquacultural viewpoint.
Management and control of the fishery sector are under the responsibility of the Hunting and Fisheries Department of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food. The administrative work based on the Fishery Act and the management and development of productive activities are carried out here.
Over the past three decades the Hungarian fisheries sector has undergone a major expansion, as is indicated in Figure 1. This figure also indicates the share of different fishery and aquacultural activities within the sector.
The two major fields of production are: natural waters (capture fisheries or pond management, depending on the water bodies) and pond farm fish production. These two areas are closely related.
2. UTILIZATION OF NATURAL WATERS BY FISHERIES
The fishing rights belong to the State on all the natural waters of the country which comprise about 135 000 ha including reservoirs. It should be noted here that according to the Hungarian Fishery Act reservoirs also belong to the category of natural waters, since they were not constructed for fishery purposes. The fishing rights are granted by the State, on the basis of given conditions, to organizations which are considered to be the most suitable for the utilization of a certain water area. The organizations utilizing natural waters may be of the following types: State farms, agricultural cooperatives, fishery cooperatives, research institutes and the Hungarian National Angling Union. Anglers are entitled to use waters not constituting the area of anglers' organizations as well. The only exceptions to this are the intensively utilized water reservoirs and oxbow lakes.
The data in Figure 1 indicate that fish captures from extensively used natural waters have also increased steadily. It should be noted here that in accordance with the Hungarian statistical system, the anglers' catches are recorded and the fish captured by anglers have risen sharply with rapid increase of sport fishing activities.
Fisheries management and production of natural waters in Hungary have been adversely affected by river training works and rising pollution levels. This tendency can only be countered by stocking more and more fish into the waters. The production of increasing quantities of stocking material is the task of the pond farms.
3. POND FARMING
The production of common carp (Cyprinus carpio L.) is the most important type of fish farming in Hungary. Climatic and topographical conditions in the country are particularly advantageous to the development of pond farming; thus as early as the end of the nineteenth century people began to construct fish ponds. Many fish ponds were constructed after 1950. The general approach here was to construct fish ponds on areas which were very difficult to use for other farming purposes. Most of the fish ponds were constructed on the worst, frequently alkaline soils.
The total pond area in operation is about 22 000 ha.
Fish ponds may be found mostly on State farms with an integrated farming profile and in agricultural cooperatives. On these farms there is a separate branch for fish production which is, however, closely associated with other farming activities, primarily with the crop production branch, which supplies the fish production with feed.
Figure 1. Diagram of fish production in Hungary
As with other Central European countries the principal fish in pond farming is the common carp. Production is generally in 3-year cycles. In the first year fingerlings of 25-35 g, in the second year fingerlings of 200-250 g, and in the third year market fish of above 1 kg body weight are produced. The 2-year production cycle is less extensively followed; this pattern is applied mainly in certain years as a supplementary system. In this scheme in the first year fingerlings of 80-100 g are produced, the fish being raised to market size, mainly under 1 kg weight, in the second production year.
The successful introduction of Chinese carps involved important changes in Hungarian pond farming. The acclimatization programme started in 1963 with the following species: grass carp (Ctenopharyringodon idella, Cuv. et Val.), silver carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix, Cuv. et Val.), and bighead (Aristichthys nobilis, Rich.). These were in general terms herbivorous fishes.
The main objective of this venture was to find a way to a better utilization of the natural nutrients in the ponds, so as to be able to increase yields without alteration of feeding methods. The main principle of feeding in pond farms in Hungary is to enable the ponds themselves to produce the animal protein required for the fish, by means of various fertilization methods, so that only cereals need be fed directly. Farms stock their ponds with common carp and herbivorous species in highly different proportions. The composition of the stocking population is determined by natural conditions and by market requirements. The stocking pattern itself involves to some extent alterations in the technology applied.
With the widespread introduction of polyculture (common carp + herbivorous fishes) a new pond farm model has been developed as illustrated in Figure 2.
The figure shows farming activity which includes the entire production cycle in which the marketing of both mature fish and stocking material are of great importance. A complete production cycle can only be found on certain large fish farms; there is a strong tendency towards specialization. Specialization is in its most advanced stage in the field of reproduction. About 30 percent of fry production is concentrated in the Warm Water Fish Hatchery at Százhalombatta.
The production of supplementary fish species is also practised. These are predatory fishes like wels (Silurus glanis L.) and pike-perch (Stizostedion lucioperca L.) in the first instance, and tench (Tinca tinca L.) which help to better utilize available nutrients. The share of supplementary fish species in the stock of a given pond is not more than a few percent.
In addition to the previously mentioned pond farm fish species, the farm units specialized in reproduction are also concerned with fishes which play a major role as stocking material for natural waters. Therefore, induced propagation methods are applied for pike (Esox lucius L.), sterlet (Acipenser ruthenus L.), asp (Aspius aspius L.), and barbel (Barbus barbus L.).
Certain farms undertake duck production on fish ponds as well. Following a brief initial rearing period, young ducklings are kept on the ponds; thus the ponds are fertilized by duck droppings. On the pond farm of the Fisheries Research Institute at Szarvas the fish-cum-duck production system is augmented with agricultural rotation as well.
3.1 Trout Farming
Trout farming in Hungary does not belong to the traditional fish production activities. Until 1976 only two minor trout farms were operating in the country. Their task was to supply fish for the domestic market and to provide stocking material for various natural water areas. A really large-scale type of trout operation was established in 1976. This farm is supplied with water from an adjacent bauxite mine. The species farmed here is the rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri, Rich.). Production on this farm in 1982 was 304 t.
4. FISH PRODUCTION IN RESERVOIRS
Fish production in water reservoirs is of secondary importance. The primary purpose of water utilization from the reservoirs imposes restrictions on fishery possibilities.
Figure 2. Polyculture model in fish farm
For some of the reservoirs (the so-called 1-year storage facilities) the same technology has been developed as for pond farm fish production. For these reservoirs the ancillary facilities necessary for fishery utilization are designed. The water level in these reservoirs is considerably reduced by the end of the productive season, and the residual water is removed to facilitate harvesting. The fish yields attained and the profitability of production are roughly the same as for traditional pond farming.
Recent legal provisions for land protection compel reservoir constructors to pay a fine as land redemption for the area removed from agricultural usage. The amount paid is progressively rising, depending on the quality of land in question. The only way to reduce this cost is to design supplementary fishery facilities for the reservoirs. In this case 50 percent of the penal land redemption tax is cancelled. These central measures are expected to lead to a larger number of reservoirs being built in future years for intensive fish production.
At present the majority of reservoirs are suitable only for traditional capture fisheries and angling. The fishing rights in certain water reservoirs are now granted to the Hungarian National Angling Union. These reservoirs primarily serve recreational purposes; commercial fishing is carried out in them in exceptional cases, usually for stock regulation. Water reservoirs for exclusive use of anglers also contribute to the profitability of pond farming, by the purchase of large amounts of fingerlings from State-owned and cooperative pond farms for re-stocking.
5. UTILIZATION OF OXBOW LAKES
The large-scale river training operations had a double effect on fisheries. The drainage of large flood areas led to a reduction of fish spawning grounds, and consequently, to a reduction in stock in rivers. This set-back could only be partially ameliorated by extensive capture fisheries and sport fishing activity. Over the last two decades, when construction costs of traditional pond farms were rising, the fishery cooperatives operating over oxbow lakes recognized the possibility of using the different oxbow lakes for a much more intensive fish production than hitherto practised.
Oxbow lakes in flood plains and outside protected river banks have basically different features and possibilities for fishery utilization.
The oxbow lakes in the flood plains are connected to the main river bed for a shorter or longer time during the year. The development of an intensive pond-like production technology can not be undertaken in these water areas. It is advisable, therefore, to develop them in such a way as to make them more suitable for anglers compelled to quit waters taken under intensive utilization. By a minor technical civil engineering intervention a part of the oxbow lakes can be connected with the main river bed for a longer period of the year, even at low water levels. In this way, the role of these areas in the re-supply of the main water course with fish can be restored and the cost involved in restocking rivers can be substantially reduced.
The majority of oxbow lakes outside protected banks may be used for intensive, pond-like fish production. This requires different levels of technical improvement on different areas, but it generally involves the following:
(i) Conditions should be provided for safe, economic drain-off and replenishment, independently from the water level in the main water course.
(ii) Conditions for internal water management and water control, required for high-level fish farming, should be created (internal drain-off canals, fishing pits, embankments).
(iii) In certain cases the construction of fish storage ponds, wintering ponds and granaries might become necessary.
Only oxbow lakes with special endowments can be drained perfectly. Consequently, the aeration, freezing, and cultivation of the bottom are impossible. Since oxbow lakes are used for water storage purposes as well, water retention and removal can only be carried out in accordance with, or subordinated to the interests of water management and agricultural water usage. The quality of incoming water also varies greatly. All of these factors combine to give a much shorter lifetime and suitability for intensive fish farming in comparison with traditional fish ponds.
At present, about 1 500 ha of oxbow lakes are under intensive fish production in Hungary. About 90 percent of this area produces market fish from yearlings, by polycultural methods. About 10 percent of the area produces yearlings through stocking with fingerlings. This latter area is confined to waters difficult to protect against fish poachers; its importance is expected to decline in the future.
The composition of fish stocks in intensively utilized oxbow lakes differs from that of the traditional pond farms. The share of herbivorous fishes is much higher and the stocking rate of common carp is very low. Because of this the production technology is also different. Fertilization plays a decisive role, while only moderate supplementary feeding is practised.
6. CAGE FISH CULTURE
Technologies of cage fish culture have been developed under Hungarian conditions for such fish species as the common carp, the wels, the channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus), the black bullhead (I. melas), the hybrid of sterlet and beluga (Acipenser ruthenus × Huso huso), as well as for some polycultural combinations.
Actually, cage fish culture is practised on a pilot-farm scale. Pilot farms have been established on backwaters, irrigation channels, reservoirs, and gravel pits.
The price of high animal protein content feed stuffs is so high that it makes common carp farming in this way uneconomical under Hungarian conditions. The pilot scale operations are concerned with fish species which meet a demand by export markets or which meet special needs in the domestic catering industry. The best results thus have been reached with wels and sterlet/beluga hybrids.
Technological development is aimed at fish production on water areas which presently serve primarily angling purposes, or which are of low value from the fisheries point of view, such as gravel pits and irrigation channels.
7. INTENSIVE EEL FARMING
Intensive eel farming is the newest venture in Hungarian fisheries. The Tuka eel farm, belonging to the State farm of Hortobágy, started its production activity in 1981; the Héviz eel farm, belonging to the State Fisheries of Balaton, in 1983. Previously market-size eels in the Tuka farm were produced from imported fingerlings. In the Héviz farm a rearing unit has been established as well, so from 1983 onwards, only elver imports have been needed.
The quantity of fingerlings produced in the Héviz farm is sufficient for intensive farms and also enables the stocking of Lake Balaton with fingerlings instead of elvers.
The main target of these ventures is the utilization of geothermal energy for fisheries purposes. The warm water supply in Tuka has been provided by the help of a thermal well; in the case of the Héviz farm, from the effluent of a natural geothermal pond.
The technology for both farms has been provided by the firm British Petrol Nutrition (UK) with the reservation that its details should be regarded as confidential information.
8. MARKETING
Marketing plays a decisive role in the economics of fish farming. The different marketing possibilities have an effect on production technologies and on the structure of production by fish species and age groups.
Stocking material is mostly marketed through direct deliveries between fish farms, frequently on the basis of package contracts extending for several years. In marketing of stocking material there is a considerable competition between the demands of fish farms, natural water fisheries and angling associations. This market is less affected by export possibilities, because the amount of export-ready stocking material is limited by the State. Stocking material exports have to be authorized by the Hunting and Fisheries Department of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food. The price of stocking material of predatory fishes is relatively stable on the domestic market but the prices of common carp and herbivorous species vary greatly from year to year according to supply and demand.
Fish in Hungary can not be considered as a regularly consumed foodstuff. It represents only 1 percent of total expenditures for foodstuffs and there are very high seasonal changes. A representative datum is that the amount of fish sold during the days preceding Christmas corresponds to the total turnover in fish of two average months.
As an overall indication the per caput annual fish consumption from domestic production varies between 2.0-2.3 kg. This quantity is increased by an annual per caput consumption of approximately 1 kg of salt water fish from import sources. The total fish consumption is thus extremely low but within this level the consumption of freshwater fish is outstanding on an international scale.
In particular the common carp is in high demand by the population because special fish dishes of the Hungarian cuisine are usually prepared from this species. Common carp is mainly commercialized as live fish in aquaria. Carps above 1 kg in weight are rated as a first-class commodity.
The herbivorous fish species are less in demand on the domestic market. Their domestic turnover can be increased only in the form of kitchen-ready products.
Actually, the demand for predatory fish (e.g., wels, pike and perch) captured from natural waters or produced as supplementary fish in fish farming can not be matched by production. The consumer price of these species is about 2.5 times the price of common carp. The same applies to the price of trout, although in this case the high price is a result of the high production costs rather than of excessive demand.
In fish marketing the producer has the possibility of choosing between several channels in order to maximize profitability. Fish commodity prices in Hungary are not directly controlled; they belong to the so-called 'free price' category.
The largest producers generally offer their fish crop to the single fish wholesale trade company 'Halért'. About 50 percent of all farmed fish are sold through this company.
The price margin for the wholesale and retail trade is centrally controlled at 12 percent and 16.5 percent respectively. At the same time, in order to keep consumer prices down the State provides a 13 percent subsidy (consumer price promotion) on farm raised carp and herbivorous fish. Price margins and levels of subsidies are calculated backwards on the basis of consumer prices. Taking into consideration the stable price margins and the way of calculation, the consumer price promotion acts to improve the rentability of fish farms.
Consumer prices are subject to seasonal variations. Thus, for example, the consumer price of first-class common carp in May-June-July is on average 50 percent higher than in October, the main period of pond harvesting. The farms, therefore, which undertake the delivery of their fish in the summer season may receive quite high price proceeds. On farms where the necessary technical conditions are available, the amount of fish to be captured during selective harvests in summer is planned at the time of stocking in springtime. On other farms the current economic conditions are taken into consideration in order to decide on summer harvesting, with its difficulties, risks, higher price possibilities and lower production volume.
In view of its preponderant role, the commercial channel described above has a decisive effect on possible consumer prices attainable through marketing by other existing channels. There is, however, a possibility to realize a part of the retail and wholesale price margins within the fishery branch or at least within the given State-owned or cooperative farm itself. This is made possible through the following schemes:
(i) The farm operates its own fish processing plant for which the raw material is supplied by its own fishery branch at a given accounting price or purchased from other farms without the involvement of the wholesale trade. These prices are higher than those paid by the Halért Fish Trade Company, whereby higher profits are obtained in the fishery and in the fish processing branch of the farm, mainly from the distribution of the 12 percent wholesale trade price margin.
(ii) The farm operates its own fish selling shop or catering trade establishment, e.g., a fishermen's inn. The internal accounting prices follow the same pattern as in the case above. The fish shop gets the 13 percent consumer price promotion from the State. The profit increment is distributed between the farm's fishery and retail trade or catering trade branch.
(iii) The fish are marketed directly for the State-managed cooperative or private catering trade units without involving the wholesale trade. This possibility is extremely limited because the catering trade requires continual delivery of small lots and it is easier for the wholesale trade company to meet this demand.
(iv) There is a possibility to operate fee-fishing ponds for anglers, and in this way to offer fish and services directly to the consumer. This channel has not been established yet but we can expect its development in the near future. There is a very similar way of marketing in fishery and agricultural cooperatives utilizing natural waters. These cooperatives stock their waters with a large amount of fish which is partly recaptured by anglers who booked their licences from the cooperatives.
Formerly, the income of farms was appreciably enhanced by marketing fish for export. Actually the importance of this, from the point of view of the producer, not the national economy, is smaller as the export and domestic prices approach equality. Fish farms are not endowed with export rights, which are the responsibility of designated foreign trade companies. In exports of fish, the decisive role is played by the Fish Export Bureau which is a joint venture of the Terimpex Foreign Trade Company, the Halért Fish Trade Company and the most important fish producers of the country.
9. ORGANIZATIONS INVOLVED IN THE TECHNICAL DEVELOPMENT AND INTEGRATION OF HUNGARIAN FISHERIES
Production activity and technical development of all State-owned fish farms are supervised and coordinated by the Central Office of State-owned Farms in Budapest. In the case of fishery cooperatives the same role is played by the Association of Fishery Cooperatives. Agricultural cooperatives can also join this Association if they choose. All angling associations are members of the Hungarian National Angling Union.
The special integrating organization of the Hungarian pond farming is the Bikal Fish Production System. State farms and cooperative farms can join the System voluntarily. Technology for production is developed by the State Farm of Bikal for each member farm. The State Farm, as the integrator of the system, ensures advisory service during the production season, supply of stocking material, medicated feeds and machinery and also organizes the sale of the end-products. Member farms pay a fee for these services yearly, the amount of which is dependent on the pond area.
The fish health service is provided by the Central Veterinary Institute and 19 county veterinary stations.
As has already been mentioned, the general supervising authority of the Hungarian fisheries sector is the Hunting and Fisheries Department of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food. Supervision of fisheries research activities is carried out by this Department in cooperation with the Education and Research Department of the same Ministry. Research programmes are planned for five-year periods and financed by the Ministry. The Fisheries Research Institute at Szarvas is responsible for the execution of the programmes. Research works are partly carried out in the Institute, and partly on the basis of contracts with other institutions and universities. Some problems, which are especially important from the point of view of fisheries practice, are solved by the fish farms themselves, but research work concerning fisheries, is coordinated by the Fisheries Research Institute.
10. REFERENCES
Antalfi, A. and I. Tölg, 1971, Graskarpfen. Gunzburg. Donau Verlag. Issued also in Hungarian and Polish
Biró, P.,1975, Observations on the fish production of Lake Balaton. Symp. Biol. Hung., 15:273
Dobrai, L., Z. Thuránszky and Gy Pékh (eds), 1980, Fisheries in Hungary. Budapest, Interpress. Issued also in Spanish, Russian and Hungarian
Müller, F., The aquacultural rotation. Aquacult. Hung., 1:73-9
Müller, F. and L. Varadi,1980, The results of cage fish culture in Hungary. Aquacult.Hung., 2:154-67
Pinter, K.,1978, Socio-economic aspects of the development of sport fisheries in Hungary. In Recreational freshwater fisheries: their conservation, management and development, edited by J.S. Alabaster. Stevenage, U.K., Water Research Centre, pp. 181-94
Pinter, K.,1980, Exotic fishes in Hungarian waters: their importance in fishery utilization of natural water bodies and fish farming. Fish. Manage., 11(4):163-7
Tölg, I., L. Horváth and G. Tamás, 1981, Fortschritte in der Teichwirtschaft. Spezielle Methoden. Budapest, Akadémiai Kiadó and Hamburg, Verlag Paul Parey. Issued also in Hungarian
Woynárovich, E. and L. Horváth, 1980, The artificial propagation of warm-water finfishes: a manual for extension. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (201):183 p. Issued also in French and Spanish
Foto-tipo-lito Sagraf - Napoli
M-44
ISBN 92-5-102168-6
<title>ADCP/REP/84/21 - Inland Aquaculture Engineering</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
With the expansion of aquaculture in many countries, the importance and crucial role of engineering expertise in sound developmental work, have come into sharper focus. Poor selection of sites, and defective design and construction of facilities have often been the cause of failures in the past. The shortage of qualified and experienced aquaculture engineers is felt the world over, but is particularly serious in developing countries. Since institutionalized training in aquaculture engineering is very scarce, ADCP decided to organize a series of ad-hoc inter-regional courses, to impart specialized instruction in the subject to qualified civil, irrigation or agricultural engineers. For a number of reasons, including problems of finding a suitable location and institution, where training in both inland and coastal aquaculture engineering could be organized, the first course was restricted to inland aqua-culture. It was held from 6 June to 3 September 1983 in Hungary, in
association with the ADCP Inter-regional Aquaculture Centre in Szarvas. The Government of Hungary, besides hosting the course, offered the cooperation of its institutions, especially the Institute for Postgraduate Education of Agricultural Engineers and Leaders, and the Research Centre for Water Resources Development, in Budapest. The main objective of the course was to build up a small core of aquaculture engineers in selected developing countries, to assist in planning and execution of development projects and the establishment of institutional facilities. A total of 20 candidates, who were assured of opportunities for working in aquaculture development projects, attended the course.
This volume contains the texts of lectures presented at the course. Mr. C. H. Clay and Mr. J. Kövári assisted in editing the manuscripts. Although it is recognized that further editing could improve the texts, they are published in the present form to make them available without further delay, for use in connection with other training programmes or as a reference source.
T. V. R. Pillay
Rome
October 1984
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1. Considerations in the Selection of Sites for Aquaculture
J. Kövári
Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations
Rome, Italy
1. INTRODUCTION
2. FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN SITE SELECTION
3. REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
The success of an aquaculture project depends to a large extent on the proper selection of the site to be developed into a fish farm or hatchery. A substantial number of papers have been published in the past on the subject of site selection for both freshwater and brackishwater farms. In compiling this paper, the author has made an attempt to summarize all the factors to be considered and the investigations to be carried out for the selection of sites for aquaculture projects.
2. FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN SITE SELECTION
2.1 Ecological factors
2.2 Biological and operational factors
2.3 Economic and social factors
In order to select a suitable site for aquaculture, the following factors have to be considered on the site (Pillay, 1977).
2.1 Ecological factors
2.1.1 Water supply
2.1.2 Water quality
2.1.3 Climate
2.1.4 Hydrological characteristics
2.1.5 Soil characteristics
2.1.6 Land
2.1.1 Water supply
An assured water supply of sufficient quantity and adequate quality is the most important factor to be considered when deciding on the suitability of a fish pond site. Therefore, the investigations for a proper water source should be most thoroughly conducted in site selection. The statement of the Irrigation Division or other Water Authority for the required amount of water to the ponds or the hatchery, and any restriction on water supply to the fish farm (for example, periods of maintenance in an irrigation channel), must be acquired.
The source of water may be an irrigation canal, river, creek, reservoir, lake, spring, rainfall runoff and dug or deep wells. Water can be supplied via feeder channel, storage tank or pipeline by gravity or by pumping to the ponds. The most economical method is by gravity. For a pond built in suitable soil, the minimum supply of water should be 5 l/sec/ ha of pond throughout the year.
If rainfall runoff is to be used, and stored in a reservoir to supply the ponds, a ratio of 10 to 15 ha of catchment area to 1 ha of pond is required if the catchment area is pasture; a slightly higher ratio is needed for woodland, and less for land under cultivation (Hora, 1962).
The drainage possibility of the ponds should be carefully investigated during the site selection. Gravity drainage of the ponds is preferable. For draining a pond by gravity, its bottom should be at a level higher than that which the maximum water table reaches during the harvesting periods in a normal year.
2.1.2 Water quality
Quality of water is one of the most significant factors to be considered in site selection. It should be investigated by taking a number of water samples from the proposed water source for laboratory analyses of physical, chemical, biological and micro-biological properties, including health hazards. Water test procedures should be in accordance with the relevant Standard Classification in the country on water quality. From a production point of view, emphasis should be placed on the following:
(i) physical properties - temperature, colour, odour, turbidity, transparency, suspended solids.
(ii) chemical properties - pH, dissolved oxygen, biochemical oxygen demand, free carbon dioxide, alkalinity, salinity, dissolved solids, ammonia, all as regards both useful and toxic qualifies; also whether pollutants of agricultural or industrial origin are present, and if so, to what extent.
(iii) biological properties - quality and density of plankton. (iv) micro-biological properties - species and quantity of parasites.
2.1.3 Climate
Important climatological factors to be obtained from the meteorological station nearest to the site are as follows:
- mean monthly temperature
- mean monthly rainfall
- mean monthly evaporation
- mean monthly humidity
- mean monthly sunshine
- mean monthly wind speed and direction
Obviously, the longer the period of record, the better the data will be.
Information on the pattern of precipitation (maximum in any 24 hours) and incidence of high winds, heavy storms or cyclones, should be considered. The incidence and amount of damage caused by storms or earthquakes in the project area should also be noted.
2.1.4 Hydrological characteristics
The most important data needed for site selection can be gathered from such sources as Irrigation Departments or other Water Authorities. The following are needed:
data for discharge, yield, floods and water elevations of existing water sources (rivers, irrigation channels, reservoirs, springs, etc.).
2.1.5 Soil characteristics
Field investigations to determine surface and sub-surface soil conditions at the site should be made as early as possible. Often money can be saved if proper soil explorations are made before the site is procured. They may reveal soil conditions undesirable for pond construction, in which case another site may have to be found. Investigations should be carried out in order to ascertain the suitability of soil both for construction and operation of ponds.
For engineering purposes, the techniques used for soil investigations vary from relatively simple visual inspection to detailed sub-surface exploration and laboratory tests. Visual inspection of the site is an essential preliminary step. In order to provide data on sub-surface soils, a test pit measuring 0.80×1.50 m with a depth of 1.50 to 2.0 m, depending on the land form and the elevation of the water table, should be dug in each hectare of the site. Digging of a test pit permits visual examination of soil and also makes it possible to obtain disturbed and undisturbed samples of soils encountered in the different layers below ground level.
Soils have characteristics that can easily be determined by sight and feel. Visual examinations are employed in place of precise laboratory tests to define the basic soil properties. A sandy clay to clayey loam is the best type of soil both for pond construction and growing natural foods at the pond bottom. Areas with a layer of organic soil over 0.60 m in thickness are unsuitable for any kind of fish pond, because it would be difficult to maintain water levels in the ponds due to high seepage; also, it would be necessary to transport suitable soils for dike construction to the site, and this will be costly. Big surface stones or rock outcrops may make an area unsuitable for anything except lined ponds or concrete raceways.
In general, a site will be suitable for construction of fish ponds if soils below the proposed pond bottoms have a grain-size curve which can be plotted to the left side of the grain-size curve A in Figure 1, together with a coefficient of permeability less than k = 5 × 10^-6 m/sec. Dikes without any impervious clay core may be generally built from soils having grain-size curves plotted between the grain-size curves A and B in Figure 1 or having a coefficient of permeability between k = 5 × 10^-6 and 1 × 10^-4 m/sec (MI., 1972).
Figure 1. Semilogarithmic grain-size curves of soils
Clay used for impervious core in the dike should have a liquid limit < 80 percent, a plastic limit < 20 percent, and a plasticity index > 30 percent. On the other hand, using the boundary classification, the following soil groups are suitable for dike construction as follows (IS, 1970).
Stability of dike
Permeability cm/sec
GM
Reasonably stable; may be used for impervious cores or blankets
10^-3 to 10^-6
GC
Fairly stable; may be used for impervious cores
10^-6 to 10^-8
SM
Fairly stable; may be used for impervious cores or dikes
10^-3 to 10^-6
SC
Fairly stable; use for impervious cores
10^-6 to 10^-8
ML, MI
Poor stability; may be used for dikes with proper control
10^-3 to 10^-6
CL, CI
Stable; impervious cores and blankets
10^-6 to 10^-8
CH
Fair stability with flat slopes; used for cores, blankets and dike sections
10^-6 to 10^-8
For production purposes, a chemical analysis of the soil should be conducted by using representative samples from the different layers found in the test pits. In general, the pH, available nutrients such as phosphorus, potassium, organic carbon and nitrate, etc., are determined by chemical analysis of soil.
2.1.6 Land
It should be confirmed that the proposed land area is suitable. The general conformation of the land should be with slopes not steeper than 2 percent. If wasteland, unsuitable for agriculture or other direct use, is selected for a project, the cost of the land will be low. Land elevation and flood level are important factors in determining the suitability of the area for the construction of a fish farm or hatchery. The land should be free from deep flooding; the maximum flood level for the past 10 years should not be higher than the top of the dikes. Observation of the marks left by flood waters on bridges or other structures at the site, or questioning of local people, may give information about the expected heights of floods. The shape and size of available land should be considered: land with a regular shape and extensive enough for future expansion is ideally suitable for a fish farm. It is very important to know the development plans for the area as it would be unwise
to select a site for a project in a region where future industrial activity may cause air and water pollution. Similarly, if a site is adjacent to a heavily populated area, the risk of pollution should be borne in mind. However, some industrial and agricultural wastes may be utilized in fish farming. In such cases, special investigations should be conducted on their utilization or required treatment.
Underground utilities crossing the site (oil pipelines, etc.) may render otherwise good sites unsuitable for a project. Generally, high electric power poles, radio masts and the like are not allowed in the pond area.
The type and density of vegetation depend partly on the land elevation. Vegetation is also an indicator of soil types and of the elevation of the water table. The type and density of vegetation, its size and the root systems of trees largely determine the method of clearing the site and, therefore, the construction time and cost.
Grassland, abandoned paddy fields, open woodland or land covered with low shrubs and bushes allow cheaper construction than land with very thick jungle or swampy areas with high trees. However, in the cyclone belt or in areas where strong winds are frequent, it is very important to have a wide and high windbreak of thick vegetation against the direction of the prevailing wind.
2.2 Biological and operational factors
Before a site can be selected for a project, the following should be ascertained:
- species to be cultured
- resources and availability of stocking materials (spawners, fry or fingerlings)
- type of project
(i) small-scale rural project
(ii) large-scale rural project
- system of culture adopted
(i) extensive
(ii) semi-intensive
(iii) intensive
- operational method
(i) monoculture
(ii) polyculture
(iii) integrated
- production target
- estimated size of area required.
2.3 Economic and social factors
The most important economic and social factors are as follows:
- development plans for the project area
- ownership, availability of land and land values, land regulations and rights, as well as any legal restrictions relating to land
- proximity to all-weather road connections
- availability of electricity, telephone or radio connections, as well as unit power cost
- availability of equipment, services and supplies needed for running the project
- availability of construction materials
- location of markets for the produce and determination of demand
- availability of organic and artificial fertilizers, drugs and chemical materials
- availability of supplementary feeds
- costs of equipment, materials, feeds, etc. needed for running the project
- availability of suitable transport facilities
- availability of ice for marketing
- availability of staff with adequate experience of pond management
- availability of skilled and semi-skilled labourers
- reasonable amenities for permanent staff, for example, schools, shopping facilities, hospital, etc.
- information on the local financing methods or credits
- political realities
3. REFERENCES
Hora, S.L. and T.V.R. Pillay, 1962. Handbook on fish culture in the Indo-Pacific region. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap.. (14):204 p.
Indian Standard, 1970. Classification and identification of soils for general engineering purposes. New Delhi, Indian Standards Institution; (IS:1498-1970):24 p.
Pillay, T.V.R., 1977. Planning of aquaculture development - an introductory guide. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News Books Ltd., for FAO, 72 p.
Szabványügyi Hivatal, 1972. Müszaki irányelvek (MI:15218-53) Vizépités - Foldgátak tervezési irányelvei. (Hungarian Standard (MI:15218-53) Planning Standard of earthfill dams for hydraulic engineering). Budapest, Szabványügyi Hivatal; 5 p.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2. Hydrological Information for Design and Operation of Agriculture Systems
Gy. Kovács and A. Szöllösi-Nagy
Research centre for Water Resources Development
Budapest, Hungary
1. TYPE OF INFORMATION NEEDED FOR DESIGN AND OPERATION
2. HYDROLOGICAL FORECASTING FOR OPERATION PURPOSES
3. DETERMINING DESIGN PARAMETERS
4. DETERMINATION OF AREAL PRECIPITATION
5. THE REGIME OF SOIL MOISTURE
6. EVAPORATION AND EVAPOTRANSPIRATION
7. GROUNDWATER PROBLEMS ARISING IN CONNECTION WITH AQUACULTURE STRUCTURES
1. TYPE OF INFORMATION NEEDED FOR DESIGN AND OPERATION
Water is one of the continuously renewable natural resources of the globe. The large cycle of the hydrosphere (the natural hydrological cycle) includes the evaporation of water from the surfaces of the oceans and the continents into the atmosphere, its return to the land-surface in the form of precipitation, and the surface and subsurface runoff conveying the water back to the lake basins, seas and oceans. It establishes a connection between the other spheres of the earth and it is an important component of the human environment (Figure 1). Economic development has created a second smaller cycle of water inside society. Water is taken out from natural resources, utilized in various forms and the effluents, having in most cases a modified quality, are released into the environment. The social cycle of water (water management) includes also those actions which modify the natural runoff to protect society against the harmful effects of water, including floods, erosion, and
pollution.
Hydrology is a branch of water science describing the transport and storage of water through the cycles as well as the interactions between the water and its environment. Its task is to provide water management with information needed for designing and operating aquaculture structures and systems. These systems modify the natural water regime according to the requirements of society, to avoid damages and to best utilize the water. Hence all users of water, aquaculture among them, need hydrological information produced by collecting and processing hydrological data as well as by analysing the processes described by these data.
Considering the task of hydrology, it is evident that not only the natural processes have to be analysed, but the modification of the water regime due to human intervention must also be investigated. Data from both the natural hydrological cycle and the use of water in the social sphere, therefore, should be collected and evaluated. The description of a water regime includes not only the determination of the quantities transported and stored, but also the qualitative properties of water. Hence the hydrological information systems must provide data about the instantaneous condition of and the expected changes in water quantity and quality.
The information provided can be divided into two groups:
(i) Forecasts, prepared to inform the operators of existing hydraulic systems on the present condition of hydrological processes already in motion and the expected further development of these processes in a relatively short period (real time forecasting).
(ii) Information required for planning, designing and constructing aquaculture structures and systems. This is composed of data on the extreme or average conditions of the hydrological processes expected to develop in the future without any limitation of time, other than the life span of the systems (design values).
In both cases forecasts have to be calculated from the hydrological data observed in the past. The basic difference between the two types of analysis is that in the first case the further development of a process started already is estimated and the actual time point of the occurrence of the predicted condition is determined, while the design values are calculated by using statistical methods and analysing long records without indicating the time of the development of the average or extreme conditions. Hence hydrological investigations providing the basis of forecasting, and the determination of design values, together with the utilization of their results, should be discussed separately.
There is another aspect which can be used to sub-divide the hydrological analysis, i.e., the character of the processes. From this point of view the analysis, and the application of the information is basically different depending on where and how the data are gathered:
(i) Transport processes developing in the network of rivers with data measured at sections of the river, which are used for problems of water conveyance, sediment transport, and transport of dissolved solids.
(ii) Areally distributed processes maintaining water exchange between the various water horizons and measured in the form of point values within the catchment such as precipitation, evapotranspiration, and infiltration.
Figure 1. Natural and social hydrological cycles
Hydrological information needed for planning, design, construction and operation of any structures and systems of aquaculture is summarized in Table 1, which follows:
Table 1 Hydrological Information needed for Operation and Design of Aquaculture Systems
Areally distributed processes (vertical water exchange)
Linear transport processes in rivers (horizontal transport)
Information for the operation of aquaculture systems (real time forecast)
quantitative forecast of precipitation
continuous forecasting of discharge and water level
forecast of critical meteorological conditions (e.g., storm forecasting)
flood forecasting
danger of accidental pollution
Determination of design data for planning and design of structures and systems
design parameters of climatic data
mean and variance of both the multi-annual averages and the expected extreme values of discharge and water level
area-depth-distribution of precipitation
expected development of water quality and its relationship with water quantity and climatic data
areal average of evapotranspiration
regime of soil moisture
balance of shallow ground-water
2. HYDROLOGICAL FORECASTING FOR OPERATION PURPOSES
2.1 Forecasting on Headwaters and Small Rivers
2.2 Forecasting the Regime of Large Rivers
Forecasts of flow volumes and water elevation are essential to making the most efficient use of rivers and in minimizing damage due to floods. On rivers uncontrolled by dams and reservoirs, the river forecast is the basis of flood warnings, permitting removal of people, livestock and movable goods from the flood plain, and reinforcement of fixed river structures, such as bridges. On rivers controlled or partially controlled by dams built for power production, water supply, irrigation or flood control, reliable river forecasts permit operation of the dams for maximum benefit. River forecasts are essential to the reconciliation of joint use of reservoir capacity for water supply and flood control purposes. The flood control capacity in some cases must always be available to store flood runoff, or in other cases the reservoir must be drawn down in advance of a flood, to a level which will permit accommodation of the anticipated flood volume. When a flood occurs the reservoir is
restored to its normal supply level. Accurate forecasts are obviously essential because, if the reservoir is lowered too much and the water supply level cannot be restored after the flood, the water users may be short of water. Contrarily, if not lowered enough, more water may have to be discharged than would have been necessary and flood damage may result.
All potential users of rivers can benefit from reliable river forecasts. Efficient operation of multi-purpose reservoirs and issuance of flood warnings, navigation and pollution control benefits can accrue. On some rivers bearing heavy pollution loads, regulation agencies have insisted on many industries and municipalities developing storage facilities to enable them to discharge wastes into rivers only when flows are great enough to give safe dilutions of the effluent. Forecasts of likely flows a day or two in advance permit scheduling of effluent discharge to minimize storage requirements and still keep pollution concentrations below a safe level.
Hydrological forecasting is, by definition, the prediction of the occurrence of a hydrological event specified both with respect to its quantitive measure and its actual time of occurrence. The following classification is made according to the purpose of a forecast:
Quantity
Quality
Forecast of extreme situations
Flood, low-flow, ice, droughts
Sudden pollution
Continuous real-time forecast of possible future states
General purpose, for operation and control
On headwater tributaries and drainage areas smaller than a few thousand square kilometres, precipitation observations and predictions must be used to produce river forecasts early enough to be of value for reservoir operation, flood warnings, etc. On the other hand, for larger rivers with longer lag times, forecasts can often be based to a large extent on observed upstream flows.
2.1 Forecasting on Headwaters and Small Rivers
For small drainage areas there are two main steps in the preparation of river forecasts. The first is to predict the volume of runoff by means of rainfall runoff correlations, and the second to forecast the distribution in time of the runoff volume. Rainfall runoff correlations can be derived from past records of storms and resulting river flows in a basin, either graphically or analytically. Such correlations permit forecasts of runoff volume from: (i) depth of storm rainfall over the watershed, (ii) a seasonal factor, (iii) an index of pre-storm moisture conditions in the basin, and sometimes (iv) storm duration.
Having determined the volume of rain and/or snowmelt which will run off, the timing of this runoff volume, and the peak flow that will result, must also be predicted. The unit hydrograph for the stream location in question is used to give the distribution of the runoff with time.
Different methods are used in preparing the unit hydrograph, such as:
- direct techniques (matrix method, use of orthogonal expansion, Fourier-series, etc.)
- conceptual models (linear channels and reservoirs, Nash-cascade, soil-moisture accounting models, etc.)
For some purposes, such as reservoir operation, the unit hydrograph may be used to give a complete forecast of the rise and fall of a stream following a storm. For other purposes, such as flood warnings, and rapid forecasts to determine whether a given flood is likely to yield critical inflow rates to a reservoir, the important factors may be simply maximum stage and flow and the time at which they will occur.
It is possible to combine the rainfall-runoff correlations and the unit hydrograph peak values into a forecast graph which will give a rapid prediction of peak flow or stage. This is derived from the rainfall (or snowmelt) volume, the antecedent precipitation, a seasonal factor and the storm duration.
The trend in river forecasting is toward the use of physical parameters directly rather than through empirical correlations and index techniques. This has been made possible by the application of high-speed computers for rapid solution of more complex predictive equations.
2.2 Forecasting the Regime of Large Rivers
Forecasts for large rivers and the lower reaches of principal tributaries generally make use of the dependable and consistent relationships between factors involved in stream-flow routing. The technique employed in a particular case depends upon whether the complete hydrograph is to be forecast or only the peak stage or discharge. On larger rivers the time between the end of the rainfall or snowmelt event and the occurrence of the peak of the resulting hydrograph at the point of interest is often measured in days, rather than hours as in headwater forecasting.
One of the simplest techniques in river forecasting makes use of the peak stage relation. This relation is easily constructed by plotting from past flood records the peak stages at the upstream station against the corresponding peak stages at the downstream station. The success of such a relation in providing an accurate estimate of the peak water level at a downstream station is dependent upon two assumptions: (i) the volume of inflow between the upstream and downstream station is small in comparison with the flow at the upstream station or is a constant proportion of that flow; and (ii) the peak of the local inflow always bears the same time relation to the peak of the flow at the upstream station.
A complementary relation is the time-of-travel curve which, as the name implies, provides an estimate of the time for the peak stage to travel from the upstream to the downstream station. The time of travel may vary directly with the stage throughout the range of stage or it may begin to increase more rapidly or less rapidly after a certain stage is reached depending upon the stream channel and valley characteristics.
Headwater hydrographs derived from rainfall-runoff correlations and unit hydrographs can be translated to downstream points on the main river by the techniques of streamflow routing. These techniques are essentially simplifications of the gradually varying unsteady flow equations.
3. DETERMINING DESIGN PARAMETERS
3.1 Reservoir Design
3.2 Wind Effects
An important application of hydrometeorology is the provision of criteria for the design of various water control structures, such as dams and storage reservoirs, storm sewers, bridges and irrigation systems. In order to determine the design values statistical techniques are used.
Hydrology and meteorology are concerned with natural phenomena, and the analysis of problems arising from these phenomena are dependent upon observations of their magnitude, duration and location. There will be little likelihood of obtaining successive measurements of the same event. Using statistical methods, a multiplicity of data can be reduced to manageable form and so enable the relevant data to be distinguished from the irrelevant. Statistical methods are particularly useful in checking the validity of a hypothesis involving complex natural phenomena. Having formulated an hypothesis, a statistical analysis of whether the observations fit that hypothesis would show whether or not there are good reasons to doubt it. Statistical analysis deals with probabilities and cannot provide conclusive proofs.
The procedures for estimating design values can be grouped as follows:
(i) Frequency analysis of flood flow records or frequency analysis of precipitation records and relating of precipitation to runoff from the catchment using the unit hydrograph or some other method.
(ii) Transposition of storms.
(iii) Transposition of depth-area-duration relationships.
(iv) Probable maximum precipitation (PMP) method.
(v) Regional methods.
(vi) Empirical methods.
Determination of both probable maximum storm and standard project storm depends on the idea of storm transposition. The purpose of storm transposition is to increase the storm experience of a basin by considering not only storms which occurred in that basin, but also those which released their heaviest rainfall on adjacent areas that are meteorologically 'similar'. There are two difficult problems in storm transposition. The first is to define the region of meteorological similarity over which a particular storm can be transposed. The second concerns the permissible change in orientation of the storm rainfall pattern to yield critical runoff rates and volumes.
3.1 Reservoir Design
One of the design problems which is common to most uses of water is the degree to which the seasonal and annual fluctuations of streamflow can be modified by storage to correspond with the demand requirements; that is, the problem of gearing the supply to the demand by means of storage reservoirs. A reservoir design requires solutions to many problems.
The storage capacity of a reservoir may be required for one or several of the following uses: irrigation, municipal and industrial water supplies, power, flood control, sediment storage, navigation, recreation, and fish and wild-life habitat. However, in a given drainage basin the amount of storage available to serve one or a combination of these uses may be limited by economic considerations or by physical limitations such as topography, foundation strength for supporting a dam, and water supply. Economic factors involve such items as incremental costs of additional capacity, cost of right-of-way, cost of transportation facilities and many other factors peculiar to a particular reservoir location. Field surveys will provide data on reservoir capacity and reservoir area related to elevation of the water surface at the dam site. These non-hydrologic data are necessary for relating available supply to probable demands for the water.
The first hydrologic problem is to determine the supply of water that will be available for the proposed project. The best information on supply would be obtained from long-term flow records at the reservoir site. Records from a station a short distance upstream or downstream from the point in question would also be valuable. If adequate data are not available, the existing record can be extended or streamflow data synthesized.
An important consideration in determining reservoir capacity is the minimum annual runoff. The available storage determines the magnitude of demand that can be met during a period of low runoff. It is desirable, therefore, that the record or estimate of stream-flow volume embraces at least one dry period, which may encompass from one month to several years. Most reservoirs operate on an annual cycle, with each year's runoff, modified by storage, capable of meeting the demand. Some reservoirs are operated so that storage is carried over for several years to be certain of meeting a specific minimum demand even during a most severe drought.
In addition to deficient precipitation, drought may be associated with increased evapotranspiration losses. During such periods the flow in many drainage basins is from groundwater so that the flow in the stream is closely related to groundwater depletion. If the groundwater should drop below the bed of the stream, then the flow of the stream will cease except for surface runoff from snowmelt or intense local precipitation.
At high latitudes, minimum flows commonly occur during the months associated with long periods of freeze-up. The precipitation is held in storage in the form of ice and snow and the moisture in the soil layers may be frozen. In these regions temperatures are well below freezing over large areas, therefore runoff conditions also exhibit a fair degree of uniformity. This enables more than usually reliable comparisons to be made between adjacent streams and hence estimates of low flows at ungauged sites may be made more readily.
3.2 Wind Effects
On lakes and reservoirs, both wind and differences in atmospheric pressure can cause changes in water levels which may seriously affect human safety, design and operation of dams, dikes, breakwaters, water intakes, and other lake structures, and the flow of outlet rivers. The wind exerts a horizontal stress on the water, raising the level from normal at the leeward shore and lowering the level on the windward shore. This is called a set-up effect which lasts as long as the force continues to be applied by the wind and is sometimes known as a wind tide. However, if the wind dies down quickly, or changes direction, an oscillatory motion takes place with alternate high and low levels being observed at both ends of the lake, with a periodicity characteristic of the dimensions of the water body. The oscillations are known as seiches.
The calculation of the magnitude of the initial set-up may be an important factor in assessing the amount of freeboard allowance required on dams, dikes, embankments or other retaining structures. It should be noted that set-up is greatest on long, shallow lakes and least on small, deep water bodies.
The transport by lake currents of water and materials in suspension and solution may have practical implications. Pollution from municipalities along lake shores and from ships on a lake will move with the currents. Under unfavourable conditions such pollution may enter water intakes. Currents also cause erosion of the shoreline. For these and other reasons, it is often necessary to know something of the currents in a lake or reservoir and the factors which cause them. The theory of currents in an infinite water body, applicable to the oceans, is also useful in dealing with lakes.
Wind-induced currents in a lake are closely interlinked with seiche and set-up effects because there must be currents to permit motion of large masses of water. When the wind which produces a set-up dies down, a current will flow from leeward to windward to restore the lake to its natural level. However, the current will continue due to its inertial energy and result in the temporary piling up of water at what was the windward end while set-up winds prevailed. This produces the seiche oscillations previously discussed. These oscillations are thus accompanied by currents, sometimes very strong ones.
Littoral drift is the transport, primarily by waves and coastal currents, of beach material along the shores of large lakes and reservoirs. As waves approach a coastline in a direction determined by the direction of the wind which generated them, they are refracted, since the portion of the wave first reaching shallow water slows down first. This tends to change the wave direction to one more parallel to the bottom contours and thus to the shoreline. However, this is rarely completely achieved and the breakers still retain a component of velocity along the shore, and shore currents are established. These currents can move eroded material along the shore.
4. DETERMINATION OF AREAL PRECIPITATION
Precipitation is the input to the continental branch of the hydrological cycle. Its best known forms are rain and snow, although there are areas where the amount of water reaching the surface in other forms (e.g. dew, fog, etc.) is not negligible either.
The amount of precipitation is measured by various standardized rain gauges, which might be supplemented with recording and telemetering devices. Without going into the detailed analysis of the reliability of gauge-readings, it is necessary to mention that there are systematic errors (due to evaporation, splashing, aerodynamic effects, wetting the instrument), apart from the random ones caused by erroneous readings or by the defects of instruments. The observed amount of precipitation is, as a rule, generally smaller than the true value.
In spite of the systematic errors of rain gauges the determination of the depth and intensity of precipitation at the observation points (point values) is more reliable than the measurements of other hydrological processes (e.g., river discharge or evaporation). More serious uncertainties are involved when the areal average of the precipitation is calculated, than those disturbing the basic data.
The information required for any hydrological study dealing with either surface run-off or groundwater regime is the total amount of precipitation reaching the ground surface of the catchment within the time interval investigated. The observation of precipitation provides, however, only point-values (the sample caught by one gauge having an orifice of 200 cm). The most important task of the hydrological analysis of precipitation data is, therefore, to calculate areal averages from gauge readings by constructing area-depth-distribution maps (Figure 2) and to consider the change of precipitation between the measuring level and the ground surface.
Considering the problems explained, the actual input of continental hydrological systems should be improved by ensuring a double transformation of the measured precipitation data. The most efficient increase of the accuracy of hydrological computation can be achieved by:
(i) Calculating the average of the areal precipitation from point values (investigating also the structural character of the field of precipitation); and
(ii) reducing the measured values by considering the losses from precipitation between the measuring level and the terrain (characterization of interception).
5. THE REGIME OF SOIL MOISTURE
The soil moisture zone is the heart of the continental branch of the hydrological cycle, because its structure and instantaneous condition determine the ratio of surface to subsurface runoff and even a considerable amount of evapotranspiration is also covered from the water stored below the terrain and above the water table.
The lower boundary of the soil moisture zone is the water table, which is a theoretical surface, where the total pressure prevailing in the water phase of the porous medium is equal to the atmospheric pressure. The excess pressure, which is the difference between total and atmospheric pressures, is, therefore, equal to zero. Hence the basic physical difference between soil moisture and groundwater is that the former is under suction because the pressure prevailing in the water above the water table is smaller than the atmospheric pressure.
It is necessary to consider that the water content of a porous medium is a function of the suction of the soil moisture. Hence both the storage capacity (soil moisture retention curve) and the transport capacity (unsaturated hydraulic conductivity) must be investigated depending on the suction distribution in the soil moisture zone. The field measurements should provide, therefore, information not only on the vertical distribution of moisture content, but the suction value must be measured at several points along the vertical profile. From this double observation both the change of the stored amount of water and the direction of the propagation of the moisture can be determined.
Figure 2. Area - depth - distribution map
In practice the information required most frequently for solving engineering problems includes the infiltration through the surface and the water exchange between soil moisture and groundwater (groundwater accretion). The former is needed to calculate surface runoff, which is the difference between precipitation reaching the terrain and infiltration. Ground-water accretion provides information on the vertical recharge and drainage of groundwater systems. Therefore both infiltration and groundwater accretion require the simulation of the complete soil moisture system (Figure 3) .
The detailed analysis of the regime of soil moisture has two main parts:
(i) The theoretical investigation should give methods to determine the interrelationships between suction and water content (soil moisture) retention curve or pF curve) as well as between suction and unsaturated hydraulic conductivity. Substituting these basic relationships into the transport equation (Richards equation) and combining the condition of continuity and the resistivity against the movement in unsaturated porous media in this way, the regime of the soil-moisture zone can be simulated. The model is suitable to determine any practical information required for hydrological studies such as infiltration, groundwater accretion, and instantaneous condition in and transport through the soil moisture zone.
(ii) The practical part of the study deals with the observations and the measuring methods applied to determine the hydrological processes developing between the land-surface and the water table. The most important components are the vertical distribution of both the moisture content and tension, the amount of infiltration through the surface and the water exchange between soil moisture and groundwater.
6. EVAPORATION AND EVAPOTRANSPIRATION
Evapotranspiration is the main form of drainage from the continental branch of the hydrological cycle. Among its two components evaporation is basically a physical process of transforming a liquid into vapour. When this transformation is made by plants (transpiration) the process is influenced also by biological, biophysical and biochemical factors.
Unfortunately there is no direct method to measure the vapour flux, and indirect observations provide only point values similar to the measurement of precipitation. For the determination of the areal average of evapotranspiration the whole system transforming liquid water into vapour should be investigated (Figure 4). It is divided into two subsystems: (i) the vapour receiving air-mass; and (ii) the vapour producing terrain. The character of the interface between the two subsystems where the evapotranspiration actually occurs, and the amount of energy available here, are important factors in the system. The availability of water and the rate of saturation of the air may be also limiting factors.
To design and operate hydraulic structures and systems the areal average of actual evapotranspiration should be determined. For this calculation the amount of water actually drained from each part of the catchment having different surface-conditions should be estimated. Hence the investigation of evaporation and evapotranspiration includes the following:
(i) Measurement of evaporation from free water surface by use of evaporation pans. The determination of the pan-to-lake coefficient considering the oasis effect due to energy advection must be taken into consideration.
(ii) The main components of evapotranspiration. To determine the best methods suitable for measuring evapotranspiration, distinction should be made according to the origin of water evaporated and transpired, i.e., interception, soil moisture, groundwater.
(iii) Methods to estimate actual evapotranspiration. The use of lysimeters, the measurement of the decrease of stored water and the calculation of evapotranspiration from the deficit of heat balance are investigated.
Figure 3. Soil moisture system
Figure 4. Evapotranspiration system
7. GROUNDWATER PROBLEMS ARISING IN CONNECTION WITH AQUACULTURE STRUCTURES
Groundwater, when it is under natural conditions, should be in balance, i.e., the multi-annual averages of its recharge and drainage respectively have to be equal. If not balanced, continuous rising or lowering of the water table would be observable. Any human intervention disturbing this equilibrium will have far reaching consequences. The exploitation of groundwater introduces a new drainage activity without changing the natural inputs and, therefore, it causes the continuing depletion of the groundwater resource. Aquaculture structures which raise the level of surface waters (e.g., dams or river barrages, canals, fish ponds) change the natural conditions, initiating artificial recharge or decreasing the natural drainage maintained by percolation from groundwater reservoirs to rivers. This change causes a rise in the water table until the development of a new equilibrium.
The design of aquaculture structures requires a forecast of expected changes in the groundwater regime due to the structures, followed by continuous observation after they are built. When the aquaculture structure modifies the movement of groundwater only in its close vicinity, the application of the principles of seepage hydraulics gives sufficient results, while more complicated groundwater systems have to be simulated to determine the far reaching effects of large engineering structures. In this case the hydrological processes interconnecting the groundwater systems with the surface and atmospheric branches of the hydrological cycle should be considered as boundary conditions.
For the investigation of complicated groundwater systems, it is necessary to include:
(i) The geological structure of aquifers and aquitards using geological mapping, geophysical prospecting and drilling.
(ii) Hydraulic conductivity and storage coefficient, calculated from the physical parameters of the layers and measured either in laboratory or in the field.
(iii) The observation of potential-head by using test wells.
(iv) The boundary conditions influencing the development of seepage in the system.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 3. Hydraulic Aspects in Designing Aquaculture Systems
Z. Hankó
Research Centre for Water resources Development
Budapest, Hungary
1. WATER CONVEYING CAPACITY OF PIPELINES
2. WATER CONVEYING CAPACITY OF OPEN CANALS
3. OUTFLOW UNDER GATES AND MOVABLE WEIRS
4. FLOW OVER WEIRS
1. WATER CONVEYING CAPACITY OF PIPELINES
1.1 Calculation of Head Loss
1.2 Fundamental Equation for Calculating Head Loss in and/or Discharge of Pipelines
Most important notations:
Q (m^3/s) = discharge
l (m) = length of the pipeline
d (m) = diameter (inside) of the pipe
A = d^2p /4 (m^2) - area of the pipe cross-section
v= Q/A (m/s) - mean velocity in the pipe cross-section
g = 9.81 (m/s^2) - acceleration due to gravity
n = (m^2/s) = kinematic viscosity of water at
10°C temperature n [10] = 1.31 × 10^-6 m^2/s
20°C temperature n [20] = 1.00 × 10^-6 m^2/s
l (-) = friction factor.
1.1 Calculation of Head Loss
Transport of water in a pipe-line involves head loss. The most important part of head loss is due to friction which is proportional to the length of the pipeline. The second most important part of head loss consists of the sum of local head losses caused by changes in direction, changes in diameter and pipe fittings such as tap, valve, etc. The general form of the equation for head loss, measured in height of water column is:
where h[v] (m) = head loss in height of water column, x [i] (-) = resistance coefficient, v^2[i]/2g (m) = velocity head in height of water column. It is generally calculated by the downstream cross-section of the head loss producing cross-section. The main part of the head loss is due to friction, the resistance coefficient of which is:
The friction factor, l, may be calculated by the Colebrook-White equation
where
e (m) = surface roughness of the pipe material (Table 1)
R[e] = vd/n (-) = Reynolds Number of the flow.
Table 1 Surface Roughness of the Pipe Material
Pipe material
e (m)
Riveted steel
(90 to 9) × 10^-4
Concrete
(30 to 3)×10^-4
Wood stave
(20 to 2)×10^-4
Cast iron
Galvanized iron
Asphalted cast iron
Commercial steel
Wrought iron
Drawn tubing
Equation (1.3) is represented in Figure 1, originally found by Nikuradze and later completed by Colebrook and White, in which the friction factor, l, is the function of the Reynolds Number, R[e], and the third parameter is the relative surface roughness of the pipe material, e /d. Supposing n = 1 m/s mean velocity, d = 100 to 500 mm diameter, e = 1×10^-4 m surface roughness and n = 1×10^-6 m^2/s kinematic viscosity the region of practical value is:
1×10^5 < R[e] < 5×10^5 and
0.02<l <0.03
The resistance coefficient of local head loss is mainly characterized by the type of fitting causing it. The numerical values of the various resistance coefficients are determined by experiments. The empirical relationships and numerical values of the most important causes of local head loss are summarized below.
a) Elbow pipe
a - sudden change in direction (if a = 90°, then x [a] = 1).
Figure 1. Friction factor vs. Reynolds Number and relative surface roughness of pipe material
b) Bend (Table 2)
Table 2 Resistance Coefficient (x [b]) of Right-Angled Bend (a = 90)
R
Re = 1.0×10^5
Re = 1.4×10^5
Re = 1.8×10^5
Re = 2.2×10^5
d
Smooth
Rough
Smooth
Rough
Smooth
Rough
Smooth
Rough
The roughness of the pipe-wall and relative radius of curvature, R/d, has a similar effect in order of magnitude on the resistance coefficient, while the variation of Reynolds Number, Re, involves hardly any change.
If the change of direction is different from a right angle, then
c) Sudden expansion (increase of diameter from d[1], to d[2]) 2
and
d) Sudden contraction (decrease in diameter from d[1] to d[2]; Table 3)
Table 3 Resistance Coefficient (x [d]) of Sudden Contraction
(d[1]/d[2])^2
x [d]
Calculated by the velocity head of the "2" cross-section in accordance with Equation (L.6).
e) Gradual expansion or diffusor (increase of diameter from d[1] to d[2]) The resistance coefficient in Equation (1.6).
x [e] = y k
where
k = l/d[1] length of the diffusor and
y = function (b °, k), b ° = expansion angle of the diffusor, (Figure 2)
f) Gradual contraction (decrease of diameter from d[1] to d[2])
The resistance coefficient in Equation (1.6)
where
l = friction factor and
l = length of the contraction.
g) Entrance (from a still water body to a pipe with diameter d). The resistance coefficient in Equation (1.6) (from sharp edged to bell mouth) can be estimated as
x = 0.5 to 0.04
h) Exit^1^/ - (from a pipe with diameter d to open air or a still water body)
^1^/ Previously the head loss has always been calculated by the velocity head of the downstream cross-section. The exception is the exit head loss which must be calculated by the velocity head of the upstream cross-section
j) Valve produces head loss when fully opened (in decreasing rate by increasing diameter), but it is much more important to consider the effect of the closing rate, which is characterized by the relative increment, a/d (Table 4).
Table 4 Resistance Coefficient of Valve (x [j])
a/d
d mm
k) Foot-valve and protecting screen involves a definite head loss at the suction side of a pump (Table 5)
Table 5 Resistance Coefficient of Foot-Valve and Protecting Screen (x [k])
d mm
x [k]
l) Suction shaft of vertical shaft with semi-axial flow pump
For a suction shaft of 3.5 d width and 4 d depth, with a gap of 0.8 d between the bottom and suction pipe, the resistance coefficient can roughly be estimated by the empirical relationship:
and consequently:
Figure 2. Diagram for calculating resistance coefficient of gradual expansion (diffusor)
Figure 3. Diagram for calculating resistance coefficient of screens
m) Screens^1/ (e.g. at the entrance cross-section of a suction shaft) with a flow direction perpendicular to the screen and horizontal. The general relationship of the resistance coefficient is:
^1^/ Similar to the exit head loss, the head loss of the screen must be calculated by the upstream velocity head
x [m] = k[f] k[a ]x [1]
where k[f] is a correction factor for the cross-section shape of the bars and k[a ]is a correction factor for inclination of the screen, while x [1] is the basic resistance coefficient of the screen with rectangular bars, the cross-section of which is s times l (s is perpendicular to flow direction), with a gap, b, between the bars, and with an inclination of the screen of 70° to the bottom. That means:
x [1] = F[1] (s, l, b)
as shown in Part A of Figure 3, while k[f], is indicated as Part B and k[a ]as Part C of the same figure.
1.2 Fundamental Equation for Calculating Head Loss in and/or Discharge of Pipelines
As indicated in Equation 1.1 (or 1.6) the head loss and discharge in a pipeline are mutually interrelated by the velocity head. The general relationship can be rearranged
where
Q(m^3/s) = discharge,
x [i ](-) = resistance coefficient and
d[i ](m) = diameter of the pipe, while
h[v] (m) head loss in height of water column, or conversely
Pipelines are regarded as short pipelines if local head losses must not be neglected compared to friction head loss. As an example see Figure 4, where as well as the manometric head of the pump, the suction head can also be calculated.
a) Manometric head of the pump is
where
H(m) is the geometric head and
- screen:
- suction shaft:
- foot-valve:
- bend (1):
- bend (2):
- valve:
- exit:
As a consequence the manometric head of the pump equals:
where on the right hand side all of the numerical values are known (as d[i], l[i], Q, g, p) or can be calculated (as x [m], x [k], l [1], x [b],l [2], x [j], l [3 ]) according to the previous section.
b) The suction head, H[s], of the pump must be less than the head of vacuum, H[vac] = 10 m:
For practical purposes H[s max] = 6 to 7 (m)
Pipelines can be regarded as long pipelines if local head losses can be neglected compared to friction head loss. (l/d > 500 to 1 000). As an example see Figure 5. For calculating discharge or pipe diameter the basic equation is:
and by rearranging
The denominator in the square root can be replaced by the same group of parameters corresponding to the "equivalent pipe" as follows:
where
l [e] = friction factor of the "equivalent pipe",
d[e] (m) = diameter of the "equivalent pipe". Supposing
l [1] = l [2] = ... = l [i] = ... = l [e] = 0.02 to 0.03 = constant, the "equivalent pipe" diameter amounts to:
and the discharge transported equals:
Figure 4. Sketch of a short pipe-line for calculating manometric and suction head of pumps
Figure 5. Sketch of a long pipe-line for calculating head-loss in or discharge of a pipe line
The diameter of the pipe cross-section can be calculated by re-arranging Equation (1.20)
2. WATER CONVEYING CAPACITY OF OPEN CANALS
2.1 Fundamentals for Calculating the Characteristics of Uniform Steady Flow in Open Canals, the Chézy Formula
2.2 The Velocity Coefficient (Chézy's C)
2.3 Characteristics of the Canal Cross-Section, Permissible Velocity
2.4 Computation of Cross-Section Dimensions or Discharge
Most important notations (beyond those summarized in Section 1) are:
D (m) = water depth,
P (m) = wetted perimeter of the cross-section,
R = A/P (m) = hydraulic radius of the cross-section,
S (-) = slope (energy grade line, water surface or pressure grade line in longitudinal section),
C (m^1/2/s) = Chézy (velocity) coefficient.
Before embarking upon any detailed treatment of open channel flow, it is advisable to review the different conditions of flow. As is known, the flow in open channels may be classified according to variation with respect to both location and time.
Considering variation with respect to location, distinction is made between:
- uniform flow, in which the cross-section and the mean velocity remain constant along the stream lines, and
- varied flow, in which the wetted area (A) and/or the mean velocity (v) undergo changes, viz.
= gradually varied flow (changes in A and v are gradual and continuous), and
= suddenly varied flow, where abrupt changes occur in A and v at certain sections.
Considering variation with respect to time, the flow may be classified as:
- steady, in which the characteristics of the flow remain unchanged at the cross-section under consideration, and
- unsteady, in which the flow characteristics are varying in time at the same point.
Combining the two kinds of classification, the flow in open channels may be:
- uniform steady (e.g. prismatic canal, the water surface parallel to the bottom),
- gradually varied steady (e.g. back-water reaches),
- suddenly varied steady (e.g. at overfalls),
- gradually varied unsteady (e.g. the passage of flood waves),
- suddenly varied unsteady (e.g. surge waves).
Taking into account the aims of the present course the most important flow-types are the uniform steady flow in open canals (the calculation methods of which will be summarized below), and the suddenly varied steady flow (the calculation methods of which will be introduced in Sections 3 and 4).
2.1 Fundamentals for Calculating the Characteristics of Uniform Steady Flow in Open Canals, the Chézy Formula
In uniform steady flow the slope of the water surface, S[w] , is parallel to the slope of the bottom, S , and to the energy grade line, S[e] . Consequently the water depth, D, and the mean velocity, v, are constant. In other words the loss in energy is due to friction (Figure 6). That means the energy loss. D h , over the length, D l¢, equals D h, the height difference between cross-sections "A" and "B", respectively. The work performed by the water body (the cross-section area of which is A and thickness in flow direction 1 m), due to gravity from cross-section "A" to "B", equals
G = g A (1 m) D h
in which g = r g (g specific gravity, r = mass density and g = acceleration due to gravity). The resistance force due to friction is proportional to the square of velocity (turbulent flow), v^2, and the area of contact, P (1 m), and to some kind of friction coefficient, f. So the work performed by friction over the length, D l¢, equals
F = f v^2 p (1m) D l¢
making the work performed by the two forces equal (because the flow is uniform and steady, and therefore is in dynamic equilibrium)
r g A (1 m) D h = f v^2 p (1 m) D l¢
and thus
2.2 The Velocity Coefficient (Chézy's C)
The fundamental term in the Chézy formula is the velocity coefficient, C, for which many investigators have suggested a variety of relationships and determined experimental values. Some of these are Basin, Strickler-Manning-Lindquist, Kutter and Kutter-Ganguillet, Agroskin and Pavlovsky. For less sophisticated practical application the formula adopted by Strickler-Manning-Lindquist may be used:
for water with moderate temperature and with a flow depth, D £ 6 to 8 m. The values of roughness coefficient, n, must be substituted according to Table 6.
Taking into account that Chézy's velocity coefficient, C, and the friction factor l (used mainly in pipelines), are related as
the Colebrook-White relationship (Equation 1.3) can be rearranged for calculating the velocity coefficient of open channel flow (without any restriction concerning type and temperature of fluid and depth of flow, etc.), as follows:
The numerical values of roughness elements, e, are also compiled in Table 6. (Szesztay)
It should be noted that dimensional homogeneity of Equations (2.5) to (2.7) is very important.
Figure 6. Longitudinal section of open channel flow. Explanation for Chézy formula
Table 6 Values of Roughness Coefficient, n, and Roughness Elements, e, in Open Channels and Flumes
No.
Type of channel and description
Roughness
coefficient n (s/m^1/3)
element e (m)
Exceptionally smooth, painted or enamelled surfaces
Plank planed with great care, accurately jointed; surface finished with neat cement mortar
Good cement mortar (1/3 sand) finish, planed planks
Well jointed unplaned plank, careful concrete work
Sound plank surface, good brickwork
Fair concrete lining
Brickwork, or dressed stone lining both of medium quality
Sound rubble masonry; old (crumbling) brickwork; unfinished, coarse concrete; exceptionally smooth, uniformly finished rock
Channels with a thick, consolidated silt layer; such excavated in dense loess or gravel covered with a thin silt layer (all in perfect condition)
Rubble lining of fair quality (good working condition); canals excavated in rock, loess, dense gravel, dense soil, with silt deposits, (average condition)
Canals excavated in dense soil (loess, gravel, loam) with local silt deposits; earth canals in better than average condition
Good dry rubble; earth canals with average maintenance; streams under very good conditions (clean, straight banks, no scours or bankslides, unobstructed flow)
Earth canals in poorer than average condition
Earth canals in rather poor condition (e.g. local scours, cobbles, rocks) with conspicuous weedy spots, slopes locally slumped; streams with good channel conditions
Canals in poor condition (irregular section, heavy weeds, or sediment deposits); streams with fair bed conditions, minor gravel deposits and little aquatic vegetation
Canals in very poor maintenance (great scours and slope slides; reed, dense roots, large boulders in the channel, etc.); deteriorated streams (poorer than above) with heavy stands of aquatic vegetation, extensive gravel deposits, meandering flow, minor scours and sand bars
2.3 Characteristics of the Canal Cross-Section, Permissible Velocity
In the formula Q = A v, for computation of discharge, an important role is played by the cross-sectional area, while in the Chézy formula, for calculating mean velocity in the cross-section, the hydraulic radius is an important feature. The cross-sections of canals and regulated channels of small water courses are mainly trapezoidal. For bank slopes in trapezoidal canals the values in Table 7 are suggested.
Table 7 Bank Slopes Suggested in Trapezoidal Canals
Type of channel material
Bank slope: r = tan b
Fine-grained silt
Silty clay
Sand, gravel and clay
Stiff clay or stone lining
1:1 to 1:1.5
Rock
2:1 to 10:1
The actual mean velocity in the channel cross-section has to be between the permissible limits. The acceptable minimum for avoiding siltation is
v[p min] = 0.2 to 0.6 m/s
depending on the permissible maximum.
The maximum velocities recommended are shown in Table 8.
Table 8 Maximum Velocities Recommended (v[p max¢ ]) in m/s
Type of channel material
Clear water flow
Water flow with
clayey
sandy-gravel
sediment load
Fine sand (non colloidal)
Sandy loam (non colloidal)
Silt loam (non colloidal)
Alluvial silts (non colloidal)
Dense clay loam
Volcanic tuff
Fine gravel
Stiff clay
Cobbles in loam matric (non colloidal)
Alluvial silts (colloidal)
Cobbles in silt matrix (colloidal)
Coarse gravel (non colloidal)
A typical trapezoidal cross-section of a canal is shown in Figure 7, while Figure 8 illustrates a compound trapezoidal cross-section mainly applied for regulated small watercourses. The first one is recommended if the hydraulic characteristics of flow (e.g. D, Q) are more or less constant. The second one is used if the main parameters vary to a large extent (e.g. Q[min] << Q[max] and D[min] << D[max] etc.).
Figure 7 indicates also two more measures, viz. free-board of lining, s, and freeboard of embankment, f, the recommended values of which are shown in Table 9.
Figure 7. Simple trapezoidal cross-section
Figure 8. Compound trapezoidal cross-section
Table 9 Free-boards of Lining, s, and Embankment, f, Respectively
Discharge, Q (m^3/s)
Free-board of
lining, s (m)
embankment, f (m)
2.4 Computation of Cross-Section Dimensions or Discharge
The water conveying capacity of an open channel is fundamentally determined by the slope (bottom, surface, energy grade line). It is advisable to use as a guideline for slope of the canal the mean slope of the valley (that is the most economical solution). So supposing the slope is known, the task is either to compute the discharge of a known cross-section or the dimensions of a cross-section if discharge is known.
The first one is easy to solve because it is only necessary to apply the Chézy formula
in which the numerical values are all known or can be calculated.
If the aim is to design a cross-section for a known discharge capacity the following considerations apply:
a) The slope, S, should equal (or be slightly less than) the mean slope of the valley;
b) The bank-slope, r, of the cross-section should be according to Table 7;
c) The mean velocity should be between the limits of permissible velocities (Table 8);
d) Roughness coefficient, n, or roughness element, e, should be according to Table 6);
So the values, known originally or adopted, are as follows:
Q, S, r, v[pmin] and v[pmax], n, or e
Adopting the continuity equation
Q/v[pmin] ³ A ³ Q/v[pmax¢ ],
while applying the Chézy formula (Equation 2.4) in the form proposed by Strickler-Manning-Lindquist (Equation 2.5).
Figure 9. Free outflow followed by a shooting tailwater flow
Figure 10. Free outflow followed by an undulating hydraulic jump in the tailwater
Figure 11. Free outflow followed by a perfect hydraulic jump with surface roller in the tailwater
This means the most important geometric characteristics of the cross-section, viz. cross-sectional area. A, and hydraulic radius, R, have to lie between the above limits. Considering that the characteristics of the hydraulically optimum cross-section may be computed, viz.
the actual water depth may vary between the limits:
If a decision is made concerning actual (or design) water depth, D[d], the other characteristics can be calculated.
3. OUTFLOW UNDER GATES AND MOVABLE WEIRS
3.1 Various Types of Outflow Under Gates and their Hydraulic Computation
3.2 Hydraulic Computations for Estimating Characteristics of Tailwater Apron and the Hydraulic Jump
Movable weirs form a large group of hydraulic structures characterized by the fad that, under the action of the differential head between headwater and tailwater, the discharge is passed under the structure through a variable cross-section, the magnitude of which depends on the gate opening. The flow thus resembles flow through an orifice that can be described as suddenly varied steady (or unsteady) flow. The structure itself can be built flush with the canal bottom, on a bottom sill or on the crest of a fixed weir. From the foregoing, calculations of the most simple case will be reviewed.
3.1 Various Types of Outflow Under Gates and their Hydraulic Computation
Three main types of outflow may be classified, viz. free outflow, submerged outflow and outflow under pressure.
Applying Bernoulli's energy equation the discharge of unit width, q, flowing out of the opening, e, under the sharp edged movable gate equals
in which e is the contraction coefficient and f the velocity coefficient of the sharp edged gate (Figure 14), and D is the water depth in the headwater and e the gate opening.
The range of validity of Equation (3.1) can be limited by the tailwater depth, D[2], with respect to headwater depth, D, viz.
If the relative opening, e/D, is less than 0.1 and the relative tailwater depth, D[1]/D[2] is less than 0.44 a simplified relationship can be used:
Figure 12 illustrates a typical submerged outflow under a sharp edged gate which occurs if the tailwater depth exceeds the upper limit of Equation (3.2). Discharge can only be computed as a rough estimation because the hydraulic conditions are very unstable. Applying Bernoulli's energy equation between headwater and cross-section "0-0" in the tailwater, D' has to be taken as pressure head (water depth) which is hardly possible to determine. It is necessary, therefore, to apply an approximation for calculating D[o]¢. Adopting the momentum (impulse) theorem between cross-sections "0-0" and "2-2", respectively, the undeterminable D' can be replaced by the tailwater depth, D[2]. The resulting equation, serving only for a rough estimation of the discharge of unit width q is as follows:
in which D and D[2], are water depths in the head and tailwater, respectively, while e is the gate opening. Then e and f are the contraction and velocity coefficients, respectively, of the sharp edged gate (to be adopted as functions of relative gate opening, e/D, (Figure 14).
If the relative opening, e/D is 0.1 or less and if the tailwater depth with respect to headwater depth, D[2]/D, is 0.44 or more, a simplified relationship can be used:
If the tailwater depth is increased it reaches a limit where the submerged outflow transforms into outflow under pressure as shown in Figure 13. The relevant and more or less simplified relationship for computing discharge of unit width, q, equals
which is the limit of Equation (3.4) if
Figure 12. Submerged outflow (the hydraulic jump with surface roller shifter upstream to the gate so that the "0-0" cross-section is submerged)
Figure 13. Outflow under pressure
Figure 14. Contraction coefficient, e, and velocity coefficient, f, vs. relative opening, e/D, respectively
In practical applications the two latter conditions have to be simultaneously satisfied.
If the relative gate opening, e/D, is less than 0.1 and if the tailwater depth with respect to headwater depth, D[2]/D, tends to unity, a simple relationship can be used for rough estimation of discharge per unit width, q, as follows
3.2 Hydraulic Computations for Estimating Characteristics of Tailwater Apron and the Hydraulic Jump
As indicated in the introduction to this section the outflow under gates can be described in terms of suddenly varied steady (or unsteady) flow. The sudden variation of water depth and velocity is dangerous from the point of view of scouring. The hydraulic structure which protects against this is called the tailwater apron.
flow is tranquil.
Because of the magnitude of velocities and of their sudden variation the canal bottom has to be protected against scouring by the tailwater apron up to cross-section "2-2". The main task of hydraulic computations is the determination of the length of the tailwater apron.
The length (in meter units) of tailwater apron consists of three main parts:
- gate opening to cross-section "0-0" (shooting, gradually decreasing water depth and increasing velocity),
- cross-sections "0-0" to "1-1" (shooting, gradually increasing water depth and decreasing velocity),
- cross-sections "1-1" to "2-2" (hydraulic jump, sudden increasing water depth and decreasing velocity).
The horizontal length between gate opening and cross-section "0-0" can be estimated as equal to gate opening, say:
l[0] = e
The length between cross-sections "0-0" and "1-1" can be calculated by the differential equation of gradually varied steady flow, applying the Chézy formula in the form proposed by Strickler-Manning-Lindquist. The resulting relationship (also called distance of hydraulic jump) is as follows: ^1^/
^1^/ It is important to remember that the numerical values of roughness coefficient, n, as shown in Table 6 are in s/m^1/3 units, and so the numerical values of both the various water depths, D[1],e e, gravitational acceleration, g, and the discharge of unit width, q, have also to be applied in meter and second units
The characteristics of the hydraulic jump can be computed by applying the momentum theorem. According to this theorem the resultant of the outside hydraulic forces has to be balanced by the change of momentum. If this dynamic equilibrium is not established the jump moves either upstream or downstream. Assuming the velocities over the entrance and exit sections (cross-sections "1-1" and "2-2"), to be uniform and horizontal, only the difference of the horizontal hydrostatic forces (wall friction neglected) needs to be balanced by the change of momentum. The resulting equation expresses the relationship between the so called conjugate depths of the hydraulic jump, as follows:
(3.10/a)
(3.10/b)
The horizontal length between cross-sections "1-1" and "2-2", the length of the hydraulic jump, may be estimated as
In designing a plane, horizontal tailwater apron the following are the steps to be taken:
a) Known variables are:
discharge of unit width, q,
headwater depth, D, tranquil flow,
tailwater depth, D[2], tranquil flow.
b) By applying Equation (3.10/b) the conjugate upstream water depth, D[1], of the hydraulic jump can be calculated (shooting flow) from the tailwater depth, D[2] (which is the conjugate downstream water depth of the hydraulic jump).
c) By rearranging Equation (3.1) the water depth in cross-section "0-0" can be computed as:
in which the velocity coefficient, f, can be taken as unity as a first approximation, and later on reiterated according to Figure 14. Otherwise, for rough estimation. Equation (3.3) may be rearranged as
d) By comparing the results obtained in items b) and of) the possible alternatives are
e e (or 0.6 e) £ D[1]
If e e (or 0.6 e) is less than D[1] it indicates that a stretch of gradually varied steady shooting flow exists between cross-sections "0-0" and "1-1", respectively. The total length of plane horizontal tailwater apron then can be computed by summing up the particular lengths of the three stretches (by applying Equations (3.8), (3.9) and (3.11) above, viz.
L[pf] = e + l[1] + l[2]
If e e (or 0.6 e) is more than D[1] it indicates that no free outflow exists, and the computation has to be repeated by assuming submerged outflow. The first step is the calculation of the necessary gate opening, e. Taking into account that no explicit form exists for Equation (3.4), either the application of a trial-and-error method is advised for computing gate opening, e (or e e), or Equation (3.5) can be re-arranged for a rough approximation, viz.
Then the necessary length of the tailwater apron may be estimated as
If the contracted water depth, e e, in cross-section "0-0" is much less then the upstream conjugate water depth, D[1], of the hydraulic jump according to the consideration c) above the distance of the hydraulic jump, l[1] may be very large and so the tailwater apron will be very costly. In that case a depressed tailwater apron can be designed by which l[1] can be eliminated.
Applying Equation (3.10a) and substituting e e for D[1] according to Equation (3.12) or (3.13) above, a new D[2]' can be calculated as
and the measure of the depression by which the bottom of the apron has to be sunk below the bottom of the tailwater canal is
D D[2] = D[2]¢ - D[2¢ ]
while the length of the depressed apron may be estimated as
L[df] = e + 6(D[2]¢ - e e)
4. FLOW OVER WEIRS
4.1 Sharp Crested Weirs
4.2 Weir Section Shaped to fit the Nappe, or Ogee Profile
4.3 Special Weirs
4.4 The Tailwater Apron Following Weirs
Where an obstacle is constructed on the bottom of an open channel, the water surface is raised and passes over it. Structures of this type are called weirs. Aside from special cases, flow over weirs may be regarded as steady, i.e. unchanging with respect to time, and suddenly varied, as in most hydraulic structures.
Weirs are a familiar structure in hydraulic engineering, for they are applied to a wide variety of barrages, bottom drops, spillways, etc.
Weirs can be classified according to several aspects:
- Width and shape of crest (Figure 15)
- Location of crest in plan (Figure 16)
- Location with respect to canal (Figure 17)
- Type of flow over the weir (Figure 18)
4.1 Sharp Crested Weirs
The most important problem arising in connection with weirs is the relationship between the discharge over the weir and the characteristics of the weir. Many authors have suggested various relationships (e.g. Poleni, Weissbach, Boussinesq, Lauck, Pikalow) generally along the same theoretical lines and with similar results. So it seems satisfactory to introduce only the relationship of Weissbach (free overfall on sharp crested weir without any side contraction, Fig. 15a)
in which Q (m^3/s) is discharge, b (m) is the width of the rectangular canal and that of the weir, g = 9.81 (m/s^2) is the acceleration due to gravity, h (m) is the overfall height (measured about a distance of 5 h upstream from the crest), v = Q/b (M + h) (m/s) is the mean velocity in the headwater, M(m) is the height of the weir crest above the headwater bottom, and m is a dimensionless discharge coefficient.
If h/(M+h) tends towards zero (because h is small compared to M) then v^2 /2gh also tends towards zero; so a simplified relationship can be reached as introduced first by Poleni about 250 years ago:
In Equations (4.1) and (4.2) the only remaining problem is the dimensionless discharge coefficient, m , which may be computed by using the relevant one of the following empirical relationships.
a) Free overfall on a sharp crested weir with free jet without side contraction (Figure 15c) (Basin):
b) Free overfall on a sharp crested weir with adhering jet without side contraction (Figure 18b) (Rehbock):
c) Free overfall on a sharp crested weir with depressed jet without side contraction (Figure 18a):
The magnitude of the discharge coefficient depends on the rate of depression and it has to lie between the limits of Equations (4.3) and (4.4), respectively.
d) Submerged overfall on sharp crested weir without side contraction (Figure 17c) (Basin):
m [s] = s m[s'] in which
e) Free overfall on sharp crested weir with free jet and with side contraction (Figure 17a) (The Swiss Society of Engineers):
^1^/ Equations (4.3) to (4.8) are empirical relationships. The numerical values of the symbols have to be substituted in meter units
Figure 15. Classification of weirs with respect to width and shape of crest: a) sharp crested weir, b) broad crested bottom sill, c) Ogee-type weir, d) broad crested weir
Figure 16. Classification of weirs with respect to location of crest in plane: a) perpendicular, b) oblique, c) broken, d) curved, e) lateral, f) circular
Figure 17. Classification of weirs with respect to location in canal: a) side contraction, b) without side contraction, c) both with bottom contraction
Figure 18. Classification of weirs with respect to flow over the weir; free overfall with satisfactory ventilated free jet (see Fig. 4.1, a) and d)): a) free overfall with unsatisfactory ventilated, depressed jet; b) free overfall with unventilated, adhering jet
4.2 Weir Section Shaped to fit the Nappe, or Ogee Profile
The trajectory of the nappe after springing clear of the weir crest is approximately parabolic. It is therefore of advantage in hydraulic engineering to adjust the dam cross-section required for structural reasons to the nappe.
At the downstream edge of a broad crested weir the water depth is critical. That means the water depth, h[1], and the mean velocity, v[1], at the cross-section are interrelated by the equation
and so the energy content of this section equals
Because the energy content above the weir crest is characterized by the overfall height or head on the weir, h, the water depth at the downstream edge cross-section of the broad crested weir equals
and its centre line is the height of h/3 above the weir crest. This point is the origin of a co-ordinate system in which the trajectory of the nappe will be calculated (Figure 19).
The shape of the dam profile is obtained simply by determining the co-ordinates of the centre line of the overfalling nappe and by plotting its thickness perpendicular thereto. In this method of approximation friction is neglected and the velocity in the origin is considered to be horizontal. This constant horizontal component of the velocity vector then follows the falling nappe.
The constant horizontal component of the velocity vector equals
while the variable vertical component of the velocity vector can be computed as
and because the magnitude of the velocity vector equals
the thickness of the nappe is
and it is a function of y.
The co-ordinates of the centre line are interrelated with the equation
and so both the centre line and the upper and lower shape of the nappe can be plotted. The lower shape of the nappe approximates the dam-section.
It is important to remember that for calculating a hydraulically favourable dam-section a design discharge, Q[d], or weir head, h[d], has to be selected (Q[max] ,or h[max ], respectively). If the actual discharge (or weir head) is less than the design one the falling of the nappe will be no more "frictionless" and so the discharge coefficient will be affected.
For weirs with a vertical upstream face and free overfall, Pawlowsky suggested the following empirical relationships:
and
in which
and
The basic discharge coefficient derived by Knapp with due regard to losses is
If instead of free overfall a submerged (or drowned) overfall exists, the discharge coefficient of free overfall has to be multiplied by the submergence coefficient and so
m [so] = s [o ]m [o]
The submergence coefficient of Ogee type weirs is tabulated in Table 10 (according to the notations of Fig. 18c).
Figure 19. Explanation for calculation of nappe trajectory
Figure 20. Cross sections of rock fill weirs
Table 10 Submergence Coefficient,s [0], of Ogee Type Weirs
s [o]
s [o]
s [o]
4.3 Special Weirs
Rock fill weirs are often applied as regulating structures e.g. bottom drops in small watercourses. Various dam sections can be used depending on the construction methods (Figure 20). The relationship between overfalling discharge and hydraulic characteristics is the same but the discharge coefficient depends, besides the characteristics of M, a and h, on the type, the material and the construction method of the weir, and varies from 0.5 to 0.65.
Circular weirs are often used as spillway shafts for maintaining a nearly constant water level in a reservoir or pond (Figure 16f). The vertical section (Figure 21) of the so called "morning glory" type illustrates its functioning. The usual relationship can be applied for calculating discharge but 2p R is substituted for b. Because of the favourable shaping of the entrance section a relatively high discharge coefficient exists, between 0.5 and 0.8, with a decreasing coefficient as weir head is increased. This structure can function as a circular weir only up to a certain limit of weir head, h[o] , the corresponding discharge, Q[o] , of which equals the discharge capacity of the shaft. The discharge capacity of the shaft can be approximated by a "short pipeline" calculation. If the actual discharge exceeds the discharge capacity of the shaft then the free overfall transforms into submerged overfall which results in an increased level in the headwater. By further increasing
discharge the structure will be submerged and it will function as a short pipeline with a favourable "bell mouth" entrance. This indicates how important the determination of the discharge capacity of the structure is.
The limit of oblique weirs (Figure 16b) is the side weir of Figure 22, the crest of which is parallel to the main flow direction. The discharge capacity of a side weir is significantly less than that of a weir with a crest perpendicular to the main flow direction. As illustrated in Figure 22 the weir head varies along the crest and the maximum is reached at the downstream end of the crest. The discharge capacity of the side weir can be approximated using this maximum weir head, h, with a discharge coefficient corresponding to the actual types of weir and overfall, respectively, but it has to be multiplied by the side coefficient which can be estimated (Pawlowsky and Engels) as
So the overfall discharge equals
in which m as the relevant one of the discharge coefficients, can be applied.
4.4 The Tailwater Apron Following Weirs
The sudden variation in water depth and mean velocity over weirs is similar to that which has been illustrated in the previous section concerning outflow under gates and movable weirs. The consequences of these variations are obvious: a siltation process can be foreseen in the headwater, and a scouring in the tailwater will endanger the stability of the structure if no appropriate tailwater apron is constructed.
The same considerations can be applied as in designing a tailwater apron to a fixed weir, with the amendments summarized below.
The shape and the geometric and kinematic characteristics of a nappe (jet) have been illustrated. These can also be applied in designing the tailwater apron as follows:
a) The distance between the downstream edge of the weir crest and the cross-section "0-0" of the tailwater apron can be estimated by rearranging Equation (4.15)
b) The water depth of the shooting flow in cross-section "0-0" can be approximated by the relevant thickness of the nappe and can be calculated by rearranging Equation (4.14)
c) Considerations a), b) and d) of the computations in Section 3 apply with the only difference that instead of e and e e (or 0.6 e) always l[o] (Equation 4.24) and D[o ](Equation 4.25), respectively, should be understood.
Figure 21. Morning glory (vertical section)
Figure 22. Side weir in plan and cross section
<section>5</section>
Chapter 4. Input Load Determination and Ecosystem Modelling
G. Jolánkai
Research centre for Water Resources Development
Budapest, Hungary
1. INPUT LOAD DETERMINATION AND ECOSYSTEM MODELLING IN THE DESIGN AND CONTROL OF PERFORMANCE OF FISH FARMS
2. WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PRINCIPLES AND SYSTEMS VIEWING
3. INPUT LOAD DETERMINATIONS
4. AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM MODELS
5. SUMMARIZING REMARKS
6. REFERENCES
1. INPUT LOAD DETERMINATION AND ECOSYSTEM MODELLING IN THE DESIGN AND CONTROL OF PERFORMANCE OF FISH FARMS
Although the mathematical modelling of aquatic ecosystems is not yet a common tool in the design and operation of fish farms, the knowledge and quantitative evaluation of a system (the sources of nutrients and their fate along the food chain) could, even today, provide for a better understanding of the processes that are taking place. This knowledge and understanding may be the basis of exercising control over the system that could provide for more efficient performance, the prediction of emergency situations such as oxygen depletion and algal blooms, and the saving of fodder costs. These are only a few of the probable advantages. As a general rule, the description of a system using quantitative terms, and an investigation of the cause and effect or input-response relationships and interactions (instead of relying only on qualitative data) will give more possibilities to the operator in controlling this system.
To elucidate these general statements let us examine a common situation. Due to increased input of nutrients and organic matter, combined with high temperatures, the dissolved oxygen content of water may drop drastically, resulting in severe effects such as fish kills. If one has a validated model that describes oxygen depletion as a function of the organic matter present in the water and sediment, the photosynthetic and respiration activity of algae, the wind velocity, the temperature and other affecting factors, then one may be able to predict such situations in advance and take the necessary counter measures of aeration, removal of organic sediment and decrease of external load. On the contrary, if one only knows by qualitative experience that such situations may be developing on hot and windless days, but does not know the other causes and interrelationships in quantitative terms, then one's action may be too early or too late, or entirely ineffective.
This does not mean, of course, that experience is not of vital importance. Without experiments and field measurements the best mathematical model will be only a mere game to play.
These notes do not intend to give full details of ecosystem modelling, since this could be the subject of two or three semesters and not three lessons. They are intended to give a brief introduction into the basic principle of such system viewing and model developments, on the basis of which those interested may be able to start to read the relevant literature and to develop their respective models gradually, using their own measurement data.
2. WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PRINCIPLES AND SYSTEMS VIEWING
Man, the water user, and the water that is available for the user, form the main components of an ever continuing interactive cycling process, both in terms of water quality and quantity (Figure 1). With his uses, man alters the quality and quantity of the water resources and their allocation which, in turn, alters man's activity. Thus, altered availability of water, in terms of quantity and quality, both in time and space, will induce man to alter his activities to get better and more water during periods of former shortage, and also in places where there has not previously been water.
This refers to any water uses and the same principles of management should be followed (Figure 2). Having set the objectives, availability and qualitative composition of the water should be defined, providing a data base. Next comes the planning of water utilization facilities, and one has to predict their effect both in terms of quality and quantity. Following implementation and a continuing monitoring, one has to control the performance of the altered system, and this goes on and on for ever. In the core of all these processes there is, or at least there should be, a basic tool; a system model that provides simulation and prediction capabilities. On the basis of this, one is able to tell with some accuracy what will be the result of his planned activities or his management strategies.
For a regional water management plan and operation, these briefly described processes may form a very complex system, in the core of which there should be a computer that houses a complex and ever refined data bank as well as all the models.
Figure 1. Water cycling process
Figure 2. water management system
On a smaller scale, however, such as the planning, operation and maintenance of an impoundment for aquaculture, objectives are clearly defined by the volume of water needed and by the quality that is required. Monitoring could be confined to a couple of observation points, measuring discharge, and a well defined list of water quality parameters selected as a function of the water use concerned. Inputs and outputs in terms of water and water quality are measured. But, in addition, selected parameters that describe conditions within the system, the so-called "state variables", are also measured. Models for design and operation can be simplified to some extent. For example:
- a rainfall runoff model to predict the inflows
- a storage model to describe the change of water volumes in the impoundment, or to provide a basis of regulating the outlet, and
- a water quality model that describes the changes of the state variables within the impoundment.
Management strategies are also relatively well definable. They consist of two main groups of activities:
(a) Control of the input and output.
(b) Control exercised within the system.
The first group encompasses such activities as the regulation of inflow and outflow, the control of pollution sources on the watershed, and the dosage of fodder for fish feeding if a fish pond is being used. Such alternatives as release of water from the upper or from the lower layers belong also to this group. Generally speaking, the control of everything in terms of quality and quantity that gets into the system, or out of the system, belongs here.
In-lake control activities, such as artificial aeration, dredging, removal or planting of macrophytes, etc. belong in the second group (see Figure 3).
3. INPUT LOAD DETERMINATIONS
The sources of materials that enter a given water body, whether it be an impoundment or a pond may be grouped into the following categories (Figure 4):
(a) Direct point sources such as an effluent discharge.
(b) Indirect point sources such as effluent discharges on the watershed that is drained into the water body.
(c) Direct non-point sources such as input from the atmosphere, or via surface or sub-surface runoff.
(d) Indirect non-point sources such as diffuse sources of materials on the watershed that enter the given water body via the inflowing stream. For example, fertilizers belong to this group.
Pollutants and other materials not necessarily harmful to aquatic life originating from these sources may significantly alter the aquatic ecosystem. Some examples are:
- toxic substances may partly or fully kill living things, thus causing severe disturbance, or even total breakdown, of the system.
- nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen originating from domestic sewage and fertilizers are important factors in an aquatic ecosystem, having effects throughout the food chain.
- organic matter originating from sewage and from natural sources is decomposed by bacteria which, in turn, use the dissolved oxygen of the water, thus depleting oxygen levels.
Figure 3. Aquatic ecosystem
Figure 4. Sources of water management
As a generalization, it may be stated that almost any substances that enter the system from the outside have potential to alter the system.
It follows from the above statements that for the establishment of any control or management strategies, a knowledge of the inputs has to be gained in terms of both quality and quantity.
As a general rule, all sewage inputs in the catchment should be measured with due regard to diurnal and seasonal variations, both in terms of discharge and quality. The main concern should be focused on the determination of pollutant loads entering the system via the inflowing stream(s). In the case of a smaller impoundment surrounded by dikes, the effects of direct non-point source input can be neglected.
The most straightforward solution to the problem of pollutant loads entering the system is to establish a continuous monitoring station directly upstream of the intake consisting of:
- a hydraulic structure such as a weir or venturi flume that enables discharge determination, equipped with a continuous water level recorder;
- an automatic sampler that takes water samples from the stream at regular intervals, including rising and falling floods.
If this equipment is installed then mass flux of materials (load) can be defined for any point of time as
L = Q × C
where
L = the mass flux (load) of the material concerned in mass per unit of time (i.e. g/sec, kg/day, tons/year, etc.)
Q = the discharge of the stream (in m^3/sec)
C = the concentration value of the material concerned in mass per unit volume dimensions (i.e. g/m^3, mg/l, etc.)
The calculation can be for any period of time as
where T = T[2] -T[1] is the length of the period of time concerned.
However, what one really needs is a prediction of load conditions. For this, the following methods can be used:
(i) time series analysis, to be followed only when records of reasonable length such as 4 to 5 years are available
(ii) a rainfall runoff model can be coupled with regression models developed between flow rate and concentration or flow rate and load values, as indicated in Figure 5.A
(iii) other non-point source runoff models may be calibrated using observation data (Jolánkai, 1983, Novotny, 1980).
Flow versus concentration and flow versus load regressions have other applications too. When flow records exist but an automatic water sampler is not available (which is frequently the case), the flow series can be converted into load series (Figure 5.B) if reliable load versus flow relationships exist. It should be noted that the actual relationship between flow and load varies according to the parameter being measured or according to many other factors such as seasonal variations, land use activities, application of agricultural chemicals, etc. Thus, the relationship is not bivariate but multi-variate and, consequently, should be developed in such a manner as to allow for seasonal variations and for rising and falling water level differences as indicated in Figure 5 A and B.
Figure 5. Rainfall-load and flow-load models
Figure 6. Water quality model
Regressions of these types should be developed by plotting all the available flow and load data pairs on a sheet, then separating data corresponding to different seasons, flood waves, and base flows. The type of the regression curve should then be selected (i.e. exponential, logistic, power, logarithmic, linear, etc.). Note that it is desirable to carry out regression analysis using different theoretical curve, equations and then to select the one that gives the best fit.
There may be an additional problem of input load determination if the main polluting source is somewhere far upstream on the watershed. In this case the removal of pollutants at the source may only result in a lessened decrease of input load at the reservoir or pond intake. In such cases, longitudinal water quality profile studies of the stream in question should be performed, and the data analysed by a water quality model that describes the transport and transformation processes along the stream. This problem is briefly outlined in Figure 6.
The corresponding water quality model considers the following:
- transport of the material caused by turbulent dispersion
- transport of the material caused by flow itself (convective transport)
- internal transformation of the material (degradation, settling, uptake by organisms, decay, scouring from the bottom, etc.)
- external sources of the material.
The corresponding mathematical model is shown in a generalized form in Figure 6.
Actual application of such models is usually made in a much simplified form: for example, neglecting dispersion terms and considering only longitudinal transport and a decay term of first order kinetics type, one may end up with an equation as simple as:
Assuming steady state conditions, this under initial conditions C = C[o] at x = 0 can be integrated resulting in a simple exponential decay profile of the type
where
C is the concentration of the material (in mass per volume dimensions, i.e. g/m^3)
v[x] is the longitudinal flow velocity in length per time dimension (i.e. m/sec)
K is the decomposition (decay or other loss) rate coefficient in time^-1 dimensions (i.e. day^-1)
C[o] is the initial concentration downstream of the pollution source in question, computed as:
where
C[r] and C[s] = the concentration of the substance in the river upstream and in the effluent discharge respectively, and
Q and q are river and effluent flow rates respectively.
Note, however, that models could be much more complex in the case of an actual problem, where the effects of interacting quality components, internal sources and sinks, etc. should be considered. For more details consult the works of Velz (1970), Tohomann (1972), Jolánkai (1976), Jolánkai (1979), Chen and Orlob (1972), Jörgensen (1983).
4. AQUATIC ECOSYSTEM MODELS
These are the models that would describe the response of the system to inputs as discussed above (see also Figure 3).
The basic theoretical principle behind these models is the same as was discussed before. The main differences in the case of a smaller pond or lake are that dispersion and convective transport of the materials can be neglected, thus assuming the principle of a fully mixed reactor (Chen and Orlob, 1972). Thus, transformations of the substances and their cycling within the components of the ecosystem should be described as a function of time, and a function of other (usually time dependent) factors.
Taking a closer look at the ecosystem, one may end up with a schematic representation of the complex processes such as shown in Figure 7. It should be noted that
- such a systems approach is always an idealisation and simplification of the reality, and
- this simplication should focus on the selection of components (state variables) that are important in the system in question, and the quantification of which can be assured on the basis of real measurements.
Before entering into a discussion of somewhat more detailed system interactions, let us examine the basic principles of model building. Consider an ecosystem that is described by five state variables A, B, C, D, E, as shown in Figure 8. Assume the following:
- They are represented by their concentration, that is, mass per unit volume of water (or rather by the concentration of a single element forming part of their mass, for example a nutrient) to avoid the use of conversion factors for the time being.
- A is the only component that receives an external input in the form of L[A].
- A and B are interexchangeable (for example, scouring and settling of a material)
- A will be taken up by C for its growth and C will be a food for D
- Both C and D will decay into E
- E will convert into B
- Components in the water body (A, C and D) will flow out of the system at a rate of Q
- Assuming first order reactions in all of these processes (which is nonsense in reality), the system processes can be described by the equations shown in Figure 8.
It should be noted that all terms in the equations are in concentration per time dimension. Consequently, external loads like L[A], are expressed as the load value divided by the lake volume, and outflow rate is expressed as the flow rate divided by the lake volume. For example, outflow rate in m^3/day divided by lake volume in m^3 will result in specific outflow rate of day dimension. In a similar manner, reaction rate coefficients are also expressed in time^-1 dimensions.
Figure 7. Schematic representation of an aquatic ecosystem (after Chen and Orlob)
Figure 8. Fictitious ecosystem representation to explain model building rules
As general rules for checking the mathematical correctness of the model equations one should keep in mind that:
- all terms in model equations should be in the same dimension
- the number of model differential equations equals the number of state variables
- the number of terms on the right side of these equations equals the number of arrows pointing towards and away from components on the model diagram of the system (as shown on Figure 8).
Models of this type are usually solved by finite difference approximation methods, such as the Runge-Kutta approximation.
A somewhat more realistic representation of a lake's ecosystem is presented in Figure 9. Following the above principles of model building, the basic model system of this scheme would consist of 16 basic differential equations and a large number of subsidiary models that describe reaction rates, growth, predation, mortality, etc. , Models of a similar type can be found in the works of Jörgensen (1983), Chen and Orlob (1972), Park et al,(1975), Kelly (1973) and King (1973), to mention a few of the extensive works dealing with this subject. At this stage of model building, modellers have to consult the relevant literature and/or the expert in this field. Instead of presenting model equations some general considerations are given below:
(i) Material flows of abiotic components (neglecting dispersion and convection, i.e. assuming a fully mixed reactor) will be described as
Mass transfer =
Input-Output + scouring - sedimentation
± reaeration - decay or decomposition
± chemical transformation ± biological uptake
± respiration
(a) Sedimentation is usually taken into consideration as a simple first order kinetic process where the settled mass of material is proportional to the material present in the water with a proportionality factor (k). Scouring (or uptake from the bottom compartments) can also be considered as a first order relationship, but in some cases effects of wind velocity should also be considered. In some cases diffusion across the sediment-water interface predominates in the processes and should be described with diffusion equations similar to the dispersion terms in Figure 6.
(b) Reaeration across the water surface is usually taken into consideration as a first order kinetic term, where the reaeration factor K can be related to surface diffusion factors of depth, wind velocity, etc.
(c) Decay and chemical transformation processes are usually considered as first order kinetic terms.
(d) Biological uptake and respiration of abiotic substances are usually considered to be proportional to the growth and respiration of the biota (with constant conversion factors such as the amount or fraction of phosphorus in the algae biomass).
(ii) Flows of materials in the biotic compartments are usually described by the following four processes:
(a) Feeding (or nutrient uptake for plants), that is the uptake or ingestion of a material from another compartment.
(b) Predation (when the flow is considered from the compartment being fed upon, the feeding is termed predation).
(c) Excretion (plus egestion) is the difference between the material taken into a compartment and that part of the ingested material applied to growth, respiration and death.
(d) Respiration.
Figure 9. Lake's ecosystem
It should be recognized that there is a physical limitation to the amount of material taken up by any organism or group of organisms per unit of time. This has been observed experimentally for uptake of nutrients by algae and has been shown to be true also for feeding animals. The most widely accepted mathematical form of this limitation is the so-called Michaelis-Menten or Monod type of kinetics described as
where F is the rate of transfer, a is the rate constant, b is the concentration at which half the maximum rate occurs (the half saturation constant) and C is the concentration of the material being eaten or taken up. Thus, the feeding rate of algae, zooplankton, fish and bacteria as a function of their food supply can be described by the above expression.
To convert this formulation (and some of the above statements) into mathematical terms one can construct a differential equation, for example for fish, as follows: (King, 1973).
where
F
is the concentration of fish (grouped into various categories, such as cold and warm water zooplankton feeders, benthic animal feeders, etc.)
KB[1]
is the biota activity rate adjustment coefficient (assumed to be temperature dependent).
KB[1] is found as follows:
where
R
is a temperature rate coefficient and T is the temperature in C
FG
is the fish growth rate at 20 C°
FMAX
is the maximum specific fish growth rate at 20 C°
ZB
is the quantity of zooplankton or benthic animals available for grazing
ZB[2]
is the half saturation constant for fish grazing on zooplankton or benthic animals. That is, zooplankton concentration at which the fish in question achieve half of the maximum growth rate
FM
is the fish mortality rate at 20 C°
FR
is the fish respiration rate at 20 C°
HARVEST
is the rate of fish removed by fishing.
It should be noted that this equation is only one of the sixteen equations related to Figure 9. Similar equations can be written for other biotic compartments (zooplankton, algae, etc.) and abiotic compartments (phosphorus, nitrogen, oxygen, etc.).
Note also that different factors may have to be considered in other compartments. For example, algae growth will be limited by light availability (where the self-shading effect also plays a significant role, and by the availability of phosphorus, nitrogen and carbon. All of these factors may be represented by monod kinetics. Wind, light and temperature correction factors have to be applied in many equations.
5. SUMMARIZING REMARKS
The main objectives of these notes are:
- to provide guidelines for the papers to be presented in this course.
- to outline some basic principles of a systems approach to such problems as aquaculture design, management and operation.
- to illustrate with some simple examples the basic concepts of model building that can be used as tools for management and control of systems such as impoundments and fish ponds.
6. REFERENCES
Chen, C.W. and G.T. Orlob, 1972, Ecologic simulation for aquatic environments, Walnut Creek, California, Water Resources Engineers Inc., (WRE 1-0500)
Jolánkai, G., 1976, The role of transversal mixing in the simulation models of water pollution control. Res. Water Qual. Water Technol. Ser.. Budapest
Jolánkai, G., 1979, Water quality modelling. In Vizminõség szábalyozás a Környezetvédelemben, edited by P. Benedek and P. Litheraty. Budapest, Mülszaki Könyvkiadó. (in Hungarian)
Jolánkai, G., 1983, Modelling non-point source pollution. In Application of ecological modelling in environmental management, edited by S.E. Jörgensen. Amsterdam, Elsevier Scientific Publishing Company
Jörgensen, S.E., 1983, Application of ecological modelling in environmental management. Amsterdam, Elsevier Scientific Publishing Company
Kelly, R.A., 1973, Conceptual ecological model of the Delaware estuary. In Systems analysis and simulation in ecology. Vol. 4, edited by B.C. Patten. Washington, D.C., Resources for the Future Inc.
King, I.P., 1973, A river basin ecological model. Walnut Creek, California, Water Resources Engineers Inc.
Novotny, V., 1981, Handbook of non-point pollution. New York, Van Nostrand Reinhold Co.
Park, A., 1975, A generalized model for simulating lake ecosystems. Publ. Environ. Sci. Div. Oak Ridge Natl. Lab.. Tenn., (691)
Thomann, R.V., 1972, Systems analysis and water quality management. New York, McGraw-Hill
Velz, C.J., 1970, Applied stream sanitation. New York, John Wiley and Sons Inc. 1970
<section>6</section>
Chapter 5. Soils Engineering for Design of Ponds, Canals and Dams in Aquaculture
Z. Szilvásszy
Research Centre for Water Resources Development
Budapest, Hungary
1. INTRODUCTION - THE PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED
2. SITE EXPLORATIONS
3. LABORATORY TESTS
4. DESIGNING FISH-POND DIKES AND DAMS
5. CONSTRUCTION SUPERVISION
1. INTRODUCTION - THE PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED
1.1 Cohesive Soils
Ponds are essential components of most fish and aquaculture farms. Lowlands or valleys less suited to other agricultural development are usually selected as sites for these ponds and this is often the decisive consideration in selecting the site for the entire project. The ponds are normally shallow, cover relatively large areas and are surrounded or impounded in the majority of cases by low earth dikes or dams. The ponds are usually filled and drained through open canals; other methods, such as filling through a pipeline, being exceptional.
Potential seepage losses from the ponds and the canals connecting thereto, in particular the supply canal, and the long-term stability and performance of the low dikes surrounding the ponds and flanking the canals are the main problems encountered by the soils engineer.
In dealing subsequently with methods of exploration, laboratory and field testing, and with the interpretation of the results obtained and their use in dimensioning and analysis, familiarity with the conventional soil mechanics practice will be assumed, so that reference will merely be made thereto, as well as to some excellent handbooks in which the subject is treated exhaustively. Attention will be concentrated instead on problems due to the particular conditions to which the earth structures of fish farms are exposed, on the methods of testing which enable us to recognize any potentially adverse soil properties under these particular conditions and to indicate the remedial measures.
Seepage losses are liable to occur mainly by underseepage and infiltration from the ponds and the supply canal, since the embankments are built normally of cohesive soils, placed and compacted carefully so that they will be practically watertight. The soils to be used in the embankments must be checked for their susceptibility to long-term changes in permeability caused by atmospheric factors, such as development of 'stable density', or aggregation of particles. Leakage losses may be caused by burrowing animals, and after extended times of operation by the decaying roots of vegetation.
The losses due to underseepage and infiltration into the subsoil can be estimated by the usual methods, provided that the areal pattern and vertical position (stratification) of any previous soils, and the permeability coefficient, 'k', thereof are determined with the accuracy required.
When considering seepage losses over longer time ranges, the sediment content of the water feeding the ponds should also be determined. This will indicate whether in the course of time natural sealing (colmatation) can be anticipated. This may result also from decaying debris, fish feed, wastes, algae, etc.
Embankment stability in the 'as-built' condition can be checked by the conventional methods of soil mechanics. For appraising the long-term performance of the earth structures, the particular conditions under which these are expected to function must be remembered.
As mentioned before, these low embankments are built normally of cohesive soils, with a uniform, homogeneous cross section. Rising above the terrain, they receive little or no capillary moisture from the groundwater, and are, owing to their small cross sectional area and low mass, more exposed than large earth dams to atmospheric effects, such as repeated drying and wetting, and, in some areas to cycles of freezing and thawing. Under hot, arid climates, or during the dry season, virtually the entire embankment body may become desiccated and shrinkage cracks are liable to develop, which facilitate the entrance of water into the embankment at times of rain, or upon filling the pond. The soil will swell, but the extent of swelling at any particular point within the embankment will depend not only on the swelling potential of the soil, but also on the magnitude of the confining pressure exerted by the surrounding, mainly overlying soil masses. Repeated cycles of drying and
rewetting, thus shrinking and swelling, will result in the development of a stable density distribution, with higher densities encountered normally in the interior of the cross section. At any particular point in the embankment, the actual density will fluctuate about this stable value.
These atmospheric effects trigger, however, other adverse changes as well in the silty-clayey fraction of cohesive soils. These changes will be evaluated by studying the cohesive components of the soil, the clay minerals, the clay-water system and the mechanisms which control their interactions. Because of their fundamental importance in controlling the properties and response to atmospheric effects of the earth structures involved in fish and aquaculture farms, the cohesive plastic soils will be dealt with first.
1.1 Cohesive Soils
The soils displaying a certain degree of plasticity are called cohesive, e.g., the Hungarian Standard Specifications MSZ 4487-58 define a soil as cohesive if the index of plasticity surpasses the value 15.
Plasticity in cohesive soils is due to the interaction between water and the cohesive plastic components present in the soil. These plastic components may be classified into microscopic and submicroscopic clay minerals, with a definite crystal structure (kaolinite, illite, montmorillonite, etc.) and into the amorphous components. The latter are either originally vitreous volcanic ashes, or clay minerals weathered and decomposed by the lime present in the soil. Over the extremely large specific surface (up to 800 m^2 /g) of the clay minerals, the unbonded interface atoms produce a strong negative electric field, the role of which surpasses by several orders of magnitude that of gravity related to the negligible mass of these particles.
The amorphous components are polisilicate and polialuminate hydrates, which have a gel structure. In the case of weathered clay minerals the amorphous gel may form a thin coat on the surface, or may be present as a separate phase, once the mineral is totally decomposed. In a dry, desiccated condition these policompounds form a hard xerogel of considerable strength, but are capable of absorbing extraordinary amounts of water, swelling and becoming spontaneously liquid in the process. The gel coat will act as a lubricant reducing the shear strength and causing even fairly coarse soils to flow.
Non-plastic components are invariably present in cohesive soils. These are mostly mineral particles with a low surface-to-mass ratio (e.g., sands and gravels), which have an influence on the plastic properties, such as plasticity, shrinkage, etc., but are not essential elements, in that their presence is not a prerequisite to the development of clay properties. Still, in desirable proportions they have a beneficial effect.
The other element involved in plastic soil is water. The fundamental feature is the dipolar nature of the water molecules, with a positive and a negative pole making them thus behave like minute magnets.
In the liquid phase these dipoles tend to aggregate into loose tetrahedron-like crystalline clusters, but owing to thermal movement these are unstable, and are rearranged continually. The state and size of these aggregations depend on temperature. Water in this state is called a Newtonian fluid.
Under high pressures (about 2000 atmospheres) water turns into a solid phase even at normal temperatures, but with a structure differing from that of normal ice. Calculated from the heat of hydration, some clay minerals were found to bond the first few layers of water molecules with energies corresponding to 20-25 thousand atmospheres pressure. Such water is necessarily solid even under the hottest climate and has a specific density of 1.2 to 1.4 g/cm^3.
Clay-water interaction is due to the aforementioned negative charges prevailing on the surface of the clay minerals. These cause forces of attraction, which may be classified as direct, when the positively charged atoms of the dipolar water molecule are attracted, and indirect, when a cation is adsorbed and this relays the attractive force toward the water molecules. The cations control decisively the hydration properties of the clay minerals, since the magnitude of the attractive force between the clay particles and water, and the range over which this attraction is effective, depend on the kind and amount of the cations present. The water molecules are oriented with their positive pole toward the negative clay surface, their negative poles point outward and attract the positive poles of further water molecules, although with a force decreasing exponentially with distance. It has been demonstrated experimentally that in some clays the attractive force is still 4 atmospheres
(around 40 m water column) at a distance of 1-micron (around 3000-4000 water-molecule 'diameters') from the clay surface.
In clay-water systems attractive and repulsive interparticle forces act simultaneously. The distance between the discrete clay particles, their relative orientation and thus the permeability and strength, etc., of the clay will depend on the equilibrium between attraction and repulsion, or the predominance of one or the other.
Repulsion is due to the negative poles of the water molecules oriented outward. This is termed Coulomb repulsion of the diffuse electric double layer, and varies with the square of distance.
Attraction between the clay particles is due to the van der Waals-London force of mass attraction, which varies with the fifth, or sixth power of distance. This becomes effective whenever the clay particles approach each other closer than 1-2 millimicrons (roughly 4-8 water molecules) and produces usually irreversible changes in the clay structure (e.g., burning brick or pottery).
These conditions may be visualized by the force versus distance diagram in Figure 1, showing the attraction, repulsion and the resultant potentials. If the resultant curve displays a pronounced minimum, then the clay is said to be in a stable condition, the particles are situated at the distance corresponding thereto and any change can be brought about only by introducing external energy. In the absence of a minimum the suspension is said to be dispersed, while a weak minimum is the case of thixotropic gels, where equilibrium is upset already by very low external energies.
Any change in the clay-water systems is due to a disturbance of the equilibrium, thus to a change in the attraction or repulsive forces prevailing between the particles. In such cases the distance between the particles is changed, and the clay shrinks or swells until a new equilibrium is established.
The attractive forces depend exclusively on the mass of the particles and at a given distance no spontaneous change is possible. The distance may, however, change under external load, capillary or seepage pressure, and thus the attractive force may increase suddenly (since it varies with the fifth, or even sixth power of distance), causing the clay to consolidate, coagulate and shrink.
The magnitude of the repulsive force is, on the other hand, influenced by the ions absorbed on the particles, and by the concentration of electrolytes in the water. Any change in these entails necessarily - even under otherwise identical conditions - a volume change, coagulation or dispersion of the clay.
The interstices between the particles (the pores) are however filled with water, so that any volume change due to a change in the external forces or electric charges is only possible if interstitial water is squeezed from or drawn into the pores. Since the pores are submicroscopic in size and the non-Newtonian water has, because of the surface forces, a very high viscosity, the transition into the new equilibrium state is a very slow one, tending asymptotically to the terminal state. The mechanism outlined in the foregoing is suited to explaining the changes brought about by atmospheric effects in the condition and properties of cohesive clay soils. Of these changes those due to a reduction in moisture content (drying) are most important. Using Kelvin's equation u[w] = 45 000 log H (u[w] is the pressure or tension of the pore water in psi, and H the relative vapour content, in decimals) it will be appreciated that at 30% relative humidity and 20 C temperature the tension in
the pore water may be as high as 130 atmospheres, so that much of the water adsorbed on the particle surfaces will be removed.
Figure 1. Force versus distance diagram
Drying has the following consequences in clay soils:
(i) Air-water interfaces develop in the three-phase soil, and surface tension acts on these. Owing to the small pore sizes and, in turn, to the short radii of curvature, the resulting capillary pressure is a very high one and tends to bring the particles together.
(ii) Evaporation removes some of the water enveloping the particles, which reduces the distance between them.
(iii) Water is evaporated, thus the electrolyte concentration of the remaining pore water is increased, which may neutralize the repulsive forces between the particles.
As a combined result of the foregoing three processes the clay particles may -depending on the degree of desiccation - be drawn together sufficiently for the van der Waals attractive forces to become predominant (see the potential versus distance diagram), resulting in flucculation and aggregation. As a consequence the grain size distribution becomes coarser (as illustrated in Figure 2), the cohesive soil becomes more pervious, the specific surface decreases and as a corrolary thereto the plastic properties are diminished. The resulting reduction of volume or shrinkage leads to cracking and the increased attractive forces give rise to considerable apparent strength.
If rewetting by pond filling or rain occurs, the cracks facilitate the entrance of water into the embankment body. The external parts of the individual blocks formed by the original slope and the crack faces are saturated, while the moisture penetrates toward their interior by capillary suction. The saturated parts become virtually impervious to air, so that the air enclosed in the pores is placed under pressure, the magnitude of which equals the sum of the highest capillary pressure and, over the underwater parts, the acting hydrostatic pressure. The pressure is increased also by the heat of hydration, which is prevented from dissipating and may raise considerably the pressure of the entrapped air. The pressure of the confined air leads to explosion-like soil failure and is the direct cause of spalling and subsequent liquefaction of unprotected slopes. If the cracks convey flowing water, then the suddenly liquefying soil will be scoured at a faster rate than if the cracks
are closed by swelling, leading to the development of gully or tunnel erosion, which has often been identified as the cause of failure in small embankments.
The mechanism described in the foregoing applies to soils containing clay minerals as the cohesive component. The presence of amorphous components tends to aggravate the situation, since these are capable of absorbing considerable amounts of water and thus may induce extremely high swelling rates.
The susceptibility of soils to such adverse changes in properties, as well as the need and extent of control measures can be identified on the basis of simple tests conducted parallel to those commonly performed at soil mechanics laboratories.
2. SITE EXPLORATIONS
Careful site explorations are essential to the soils engineer in the earliest possible stage of any fish farm project, because sometimes a proposed site will have to be abandoned and another one selected if early explorations indicate adverse soil conditions.
Site explorations enable the soils engineer to provide answers to the main problems of seepage and dike stability and to furnish information to the designer of the structures about the foundation conditions.
2.1 Pond Areas and Canal Traces
As mentioned in the introduction, the accuracy of seepage loss estimations will depend on how well we succeed in determining the areal pattern and stratification of any pervious soils in the pond area and along the trace of the filling canal, and the permeability coefficient 'k' of these soils.
Figure 2. Semi-logarithmic grain-size curve of soils
Efforts must therefore be made to check the surface layer in the area of the proposed pond(s) and along the trace of the canal for uniformity, to detect any singularities such as beds of rivulets and abandoned streams, which are always potentially present in alluvial lowland areas.
The plan of explorations should accordingly be prepared on the basis of a thorough field inspection including preliminary sampling with a manual sampling kit and classifying the samples visually.^1^/ Valuable information can be derived further from a careful study of detailed maps and aerial photographs, if such are, or can be made available at reasonable cost. The aim should be to locate any areas in which the soil consists of granular materials, such as loose silts, sands or even coarser gravels.
^1^/ U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation: 'Earth Manual'. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington
The points of exploration should be determined according to the results of this survey, rather than by adopting a fixed grid pattern, since a grid pattern will always involve the danger of two adjacent boreholes straddling a narrow strip of higher permeability.
The soils along the canal traces should be explored also for their hydraulic properties, to estimate slope inclinations and the allowable (non-scouring) velocity of flow in the canal.
The equipment and techniques of these explorations are those commonly used for shallow work in soil mechanics. It should be noted, however, that care should be exercised in determining as accurately as possible the sequence of soil strata down to the first impervious layer. If the first layer of topsoil is impervious and at least 0.6 to 1.0 m thick, no deeper exploration is needed. Disturbed samples taken with a hand auger are suited to determine the granulometry and index properties of the soil, but for permeability testing at the laboratory undisturbed samples are required, since any remoulding may cause drastic changes in the 'k' value and lead thus to false conclusions.
Since truly undisturbed samples are difficult to take, field permeability tests should be performed in the vicinity of each exploratory borehole or shaft by the infiltration method.^2^/^3^/
^2^/ U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation: "Earth Manual". U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, pp. 717-26.
^3^/ Szilágyi Gyula, Vágás I.: Field determination of seepage losses from earth irrigation canals (Hungarian). Vizügyi Közlemények, 1962. No. 1
2.2 Borrow Sites
2.1 Pond Areas and Canal Traces
2.2 Borrow Sites
2.3 Structure Sites
Within economical hauling distance all cohesive soils should be checked for their suitability as construction material for the dikes. In these potential borrow sites the explorations should be organized so as to provide information on the extent, depth and occasional stratification of the deposit.
Where the cohesive material for the dikes can be excavated from the pond area, care should be taken not to cut into any pervious sublayer, which may cause seepage losses, or underseepage.
It should be remembered that samples of fairly large volume are needed for laboratory analyses, since each compaction test should be performed on fresh samples. Around 12 kg are needed for classification and compaction (Proctor) testing. The compaction test can be made also by reprocessing the same sample, and increasing its water content gradually, but the result will be slightly higher than with fresh samples.
2.3 Structure Sites
The subsoil in the proposed structure sites should be explored to a depth equal to twice the larger dimension of the foundation slab in plan. The structures involved in fish-farm projects are normally small and so are the loads acting on them. For this reason the bearing capacity of the subsoil and if relevant, the position of the load bearing layer, can be determined with the accuracy required by a sounding method. The Swedish Weight Sounding Technique as described by the Swedish Geotechnical Society (1970), is simple and fast, and yields acceptable results for this purpose.
The Swedish weight penetrometer consists of a screw point, sounding rods, a rotating handle and weights of 5 kg, 10 kg (2), and 25 kg (3), making a total of 100 kg. During a test the penetrometer is gradually loaded until the point starts penetrating into the soil. This load is recorded, just as any further loads, required to continue penetration.
As soon as the rod refuses to penetrate under a load of 100 kg, the penetrometer is rotated by hand. The penetrometer should not be rotated if the load applied is less than 100 kg. The penetration resistance is recorded as the number of half-turns required for 20 cm penetration.
If a firm, or hard layer is situated close to the surface (from fill or a thick dry crust), the frictional resistance along the sounding rods may affect appreciably the penetration resistance measured. A small diameter borehole of 5 cm should then be drilled through this layer.
Penetration testing should be terminated when a certain penetration resistance or a certain depth has been reached. A firm bottom is reached when the penetrometer does not sink any more when rotated, or driven by at least 10 blows of a 3.0 kg sledge hammer. (The two top 25 kg weights can be used instead. These should be dropped from 20 cm height.). If this criterion has not been satisfied, the penetration test can be terminated when two adjacent 20 cm thick layers are encountered with increasing penetration resistance exceeding 40 half-turns per 20 cm, and penetration is less than 1 cm per blow after 5 blows with the top two 25 kg weights. If the penetration is larger than 5 cm per 5 blows, or if the penetration resistance decreases, the sounding rods should be rotated before driving is continued. The depth of penetration achieved by driving should be recorded on the plot. High resistance may be caused by a stone, or boulder. The noise and vibrations in the sounding rods
during a test can also be observed to identify the soil penetrated as clay, sand or stone.
A cohesionless soil is considered to be dense, when the weight sounding resistance is equal to, or higher than 15 half-turns per 20 cm penetration, and to be loose when it is less. The average permissible soil pressure r [m] for gravel, sand and silt is given by the formula:
where
r [m] = average permissible soil pressure, MPa
B = width of footing, m
L = length of footing, m
N = bearing capacity factor, MPa/m
Some examples are shown as follows:
Determination of Permissible Soil Pressure
Type of Soil
Half-turns/20 cm
H (m)
Factor D=0 m N MPa/m
D=0
1 m
2 m
r [m] , max (MPa) m
Gravel
1-15 ³ 2B
³ 2B
Sand
³ 2B
Fine sand and coarse silt^1^/
³ 2B
³ 2B
^1^/ For coarse silt the permissible soil pressure is limited to the values given for a loose state of compactness
Note:
H is the distance between the footing and the highest ground water level. When the ground water level is located above the foundation level, H is equal to zero. For values of H between 0 and 2B rectilinear interpolation is recommended.
D is the minimum depth of foundation. For values of D between 0, 1 and 2 m rectilinear interpolation is recommended.
For determining stratification, auger drilling and the retrieval of disturbed samples are acceptable and normally no undisturbed cores need be taken.
The samples taken during the foregoing explorations should be preserved, labelled as in standard practice and taken to the laboratory for testing.
3. LABORATORY TESTS
3.1 Additional Tests for Pike and Dam Materials
3.2 Interpretation of the Results
Permeability tests on the samples collected from the pond area and the canal trace, index tests on the samples from the structure sites and borrow areas, and compaction (Proctor) tests on the samples from the borrow areas should be performed following standard soil mechanics laboratory practice. The standard Proctor test is preferred, since this will more closely approximate the conditions in low dams and dikes. The shear strength of each compacted specimen should be determined by measuring the penetration resistance of the Proctor needle.
3.1 Additional Tests for Pike and Dam Materials
Natural moisture content should be determined on every sample, since this value will be needed in the subsequent tests.
Granulometry should be determined by sieve and hydrometer analysis depending on soil type. With granular soils the conventional procedure should be adopted. Cohesive soils, which contain coarser particles as well, such as sandy silts and clays, should be oven dried to constant weight at 60°C, since the cohesive fractions may undergo irreversible changes at higher temperatures. The dried samples should be crushed carefully and the particles larger than 0.1 mm removed by sieving.
The granulometry of the fine fractions should be determined by 'wet', i.e., hydrometer, analysis. Two analyses should be run on each sample, one in the water to which the earth structure will be exposed, the other in water to which the optimal amount of dispersing agent is added. Sodium carbonate is recommended as the dispersing agent. Sodium hexa-metaphasphate may produce higher degrees of dispersion, but sodium carbonate more closely reproduces conditions likely to occur in practice. The optimal amount should be used, since smaller amounts produce insufficient dispersion, while overdosage will cause the clay particles to coagulate.
To find the optimal amount, prepare a 5 percent solution of sodium carbonate in distilled water. Weigh specimens of 1 g dry weight each into 6 test tubes and add 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 and 1.0 ml of the dispersant solutions to the successive test tubes. No dispersant is added to the sixth test tube. Then add 4-5 ml of distilled water to each and work the sample to putty using a glass rod. Fill up to 10 ml, using the water to flush any material from the glass rod.
Boil the test tubes in a water bath for about 20 minutes and allow them to cool in a stand arranged in the sequence of increasing dispersant concentration. After 24 hours, the test tube showing the largest loose sediment volume will indicate the highest degree of dispersion attainable.
The amount of dispersing agent to be used for the hydrometer analysis is found from the following table:
Preliminary
test
Hydrometer analysis
5% solution of NA[2]CO[3]
to 25 g soil dry weight add from 25% sodium carbonate solution
Test tube 1
0.2 ml
1.0 ml
The hydrometer analyses should thereafter be performed in the conventional way and the two granulometry curves for each sample should be plotted on the same chart.
By comparing the two curves, conclusions can be reached on the actual condition of the soil, and on the condition which may result from repeated or extended exposure to water. The difference between the actual and dispersed granulometries will also indicate the width of the range within which changes in soil condition and thus in mechanical properties can be anticipated. If the actual granulometry is close to that in the dispersed condition, no further disaggregation is likely to occur and the soil is as watertight as can be expected. Conversely, a wide difference between the two curves implies coagulated, aggregated conditions. At a reduced specific surface larger void sizes predominate and, therefore, the soil will be pervious even if a highly cohesive soil could be inferred on the basis of the clay content or index of plasticity. Some coagulated clay soils may disperse spontaneously under prolonged exposure to water, which would mean a corresponding loss of stability of
the soil.
The CaCO[3] content will indicate the extent to which the individual particles are liable to be weathered, i.e., the crystalline structures are decomposed to amorphous, vitreous gels. This weathering results in the deterioration of the mechanical properties, such as stability and permeability, so it is one of the main causes of soil slumping and flowing after extended exposure to water.
The pH values indicate the water adsorption or hydrophyllic properties of the soil, and the occurrence and extent of the weathering process mentioned in the foregoing.
The specific surface, together with the surface index calculated therefrom, will provide information on the type of clay minerals predominating in the soil, or on the crystalline, or weathered surface of the discrete particles. A high specific surface area may be due to the presence of a high proportion of clay minerals (montmorillonite, illite), which resemble scales and have thus extremely large surfaces, or to the weathered condition of the individual particles. The extent of weathering is, however, known from the foregoing tests, so the high specific surface area can be attributed positively to one of the two causes mentioned.
Sediment volume is an indication of the volume stability of the soil. Boiling accelerates the soil-water interaction, so that changes in soil conditions can be determined in a shorter time.
Based on experiences gained with a number of low dikes, the critical void ratio has been introduced in Hungary, as an index of volume stability. This is determined by the following procedure:
First, the sample is air dried to constant weight and crushed for sieving on the 0.1 mm mesh sieve. From the material passing, a sample of 4 g mass is weighed to 0.1 g accuracy and filled loosely into a 25 cm^3 measuring cylinder, which is then filled up to 20 cm^3 with water of a composition similar to that to which the earth structure will be exposed. The sample is allowed to soak for 48 hours, shaking it vigorously several times during this period. Thereafter the sample is allowed to settle for approximately 24 hours and the volume of sediment is read on the scale of the cylinder.
The critical void ratio is found as:
where
V is the sediment volume read on the cylinder, in cm^3 units
W is the weight of the air-dry sample placed in the cylinder, in gram units
s is the specific gravity of the soil in g/cm^3 units. (This may be entered with the value 2.75 g/cm^3 for all practical purposes.)
Some soils will refuse to settle, so that no sediment volume can be determined and the critical void ratio will be very high.
Secondly, for earth structures, where leaching is liable to occur, the clear fluid is decanted carefully or syphoned off after the first reading and refilled to the original mark. The sample is shaken, allowed to rest and settle as before and the reading on the sediment volume is repeated. After three to four repetitions the growing or decreasing trend of the successive critical void ratios will indicate the final value, which will characterize the soil after leaching, or basic exchange processes, have taken place.
In terms of the critical void ratio, the soils are classified into the following groups:
Group A: e[c] =2.5-3.5 (V =5.7-8 cm^3)
Slightly cohesive, pervious under low heads, low swelling potential, high mineral and chemical stability under environmental exposure. The soil mechanics characteristics determined on the original sample are likely to remain constant over the service life of the structure.
Group B: e[c] = 3.5 - 6 (V = 8 - 13.5 cm^3)
Swelling soils, susceptible to weathering. Medium to highly cohesive, impervious under virtually all conditions, high swelling and shrinkage potential. Under atmospheric exposure liable to weathering, making them more cohesive.
Group C: e[c] > 6 (including soils which refuse to settle)
Highly swelling soils tending to become liquid spontaneously, flowing even on very flat slopes. Conventional testing by soil mechanical methods will produce irrelevant results.
Group D: e[c] < 2.5
Soils usually aggregated as a result of leaching or oxidation, or formed by weathering from acidic parent rock. Although cohesive, such soils display sand characteristics, high volume stability, and also permeability. Owing to aggregation, the original deposits are loose, and highly compressible. The surface roughness and strength of the aggregations lends them a high angle of internal friction, but cohesion is low. Conventional testing by soil mechanics methods will produce irrelevant results.
The properties of mixed fractions will be governed by the relative proportion and properties of the fines of less than 0.1 mm present.
In a sandy-silt soil, where the fraction less than 0.1 mm is over 15 percent by weight and belongs to Group A or B, the sand will display a rather low angle of internal friction and a susceptibility to liquefaction, but will be practically impervious. If however, the fines belong to Group D, then the sand will display higher strength characteristics, but will remain pervious regardless of the high fines content.
This simple test, together with the normal index tests, will often be found to provide sufficient information to the designer to enable him to predict the future performance of low dikes and to decide on the advisability of any protective measure.
The extent of mineral weathering is indicated by the chemical solubility. Of the crystalline silicate soil components the main SiO[2] and Al[2]O[3] compounds dissolve poorly (a few tenths of a percent) in acids of rather high concentration (e.g. HCl of 10% concentration) or in weak bases (e.g. NaOH of 27, concentration), whereas these main components of the weathered, vitreous-amorphous phase can be dissolved in quantities up to several percents, depending on the degree of weathering. This test will provide quantitative information on the amorphous content of the soil.
The surface index mentioned previously is defined as the ratio of the specific surface area, F[spec], to the percentage by weight of the minus 0.002 mm fraction, G[0.002], as follows: and has the following values:
Soil Component
I (m^2/g)
Quartz flour, glacial till
Feldspar
Aplite
Kaolinite
Illite
Montmorillonite
The index thus gives guidance as to the type of clay mineral present in the soil and, in combination with the result of the solubility analysis, to the extent to which the soil is weathered.
3.2 Interpretation of the Results
In terms of the foregoing tests and analyses a soil is considered susceptible to adverse changes under exposure to atmospheric factors and water if the following criteria are satisfied simultaneously:
(i) The two granulometric curves are situated close to each other and the minus 0.002 mm fraction is at least 15% by weight.
(ii) The pH in the 1% NaF solution is higher than 10.5.
(iii) The pH in water is higher than 8.3. The susceptibility to loss of stability by liquefaction increasing with the pH.
(iv) The specific surface area determined by methylene-blue adsorption is higher than 15 m^2/g. In this connection the results of the pH in NaF and the solubility analysis should also be taken into consideration, since the polialuminates, as products of weathering, carry a predominantly positive charge and do not adsorb the methylene blue, which is also positively charged.
(v) The solubility analysis indicates the presence of polisilicate and polisilicic acid gels.
The results of the tests described in the foregoing are entered in the granulometric chart shown in Figure 2.
The conclusions arrived at from these more elaborate tests will coincide in the vast majority of cases with those derived from the critical void ratio and will indicate whether and under what conditions a particular soil can be used as the material for dike construction
4. DESIGNING FISH-POND DIKES AND DAMS
Designing earth structures involves a process of successive approximation requiring several trials. The starting data available to the soils engineer are normally the height of the structure (depth of water plus the safety freeboard), the foundation conditions, available construction materials and occasionally the minimum crest width, if movement of some equipment on the crest is required. The problem is to design a dike cross section which will produce a safe and sufficiently watertight structure, and which will result in a project of minimum cost. The first step consists of finding the steepest slope inclinations which will ensure stability over the service life of the structure, so that the embankment will be the cheapest to construct. The resulting base width must then be checked for underseepage and for the danger of piping failure. The foundations of structures must also be checked for settlement behaviour. In cases where cohesive, impervious materials are available in
limited quantities only, the dike design providing the water tightness required must also be found.
The depth of water is given by the technological designer, the safety freeboard by the hydrologist and the designer of the spillway. Freeboard may also be governed by the wave action to which the dike is likely to be exposed. The wave height is found by taking the direction and force of the prevailing wind, the fetch length and the depth of water into consideration.
There are a number of formulae in use for estimating wave height. The following two are in the metric system:
where
h[w] is the wave height in metres
W is the wind speed in m/sec
B is the pond width in the wind direction (fetch length) in km
H is the water depth in metres
For comparison, a formula used in British units is:
where
h[w] is the wave height in feet
W is the wind speed in mph
B is the pond width in the wind direction (fetch length) in miles
The results of exploration and the soil properties determined by laboratory tests afford guidance to the soils engineer in design. It should, however, be emphasized that earth structures are already exposed to atmospheric influences in the course of construction, and also later during their whole service life. They must never be considered as static, but as dynamic structures, taking into account the changes in conditions and character of the factors to which they are exposed. This kind of philosophy will alone lead to a technically and economically sound solution, in which allowance can be made for the mutual interactions between the subsoil, the earth structure and the atmosphere. It should be remembered, moreover, that the number and variability of the various factors involved prevents us from predicting and estimating all possibilities and influences in advance.
Thus, in analysing the slopes for their stability, the shear strength determined by laboratory tests is used. Great care must, however, be exercised in choosing the design value. Reliable mean values can only be adopted if the soil and subsoil is uniform and, therefore, stability analysis will yield useful results in these cases alone. If this is not the case, then the results of the stability analyses should be accepted as rather rough estimates only. An evaluation of local experience gained with similar structures and a critical examination of the particular pedological and geological conditions are indispensable under such circumstances.
Another important consideration is that the low dikes and dams normally involved in aquaculture projects do not warrant expensive tests in a soils laboratory. It should be realized that design values of soil strength are costly to determine and yield information which must be accepted with circumspection by the engineer who must use sound engineering judgement in their application. For the foregoing reasons practical guidelines have been applied in Hungary for dimensioning dikes, levees and dams lower than 3.0 m in height and retaining less than 3 million m^3 of water.
The dikes are classified into homogeneous (a) and zoned (b) cross sections, the latter including those with an impervious core, with or without an impervious upstream blanket (Figure 3). The individual structural elements (zones) of the embankment are classified again as narrow or wide, depending also on the material used as shown in Table 1.
The degree of compaction required for the various structural elements of the dike is indicated in Table 2.
Low earth structures designed and constructed according to these guidelines have proven satisfactory in Hungary.
In connection with these guidelines it should be noted, however, that no cohesive soils classified according to the critical void ratio as Group C must be used as construction material for the dikes. The soils belonging by the same criterion to Group B can be used as impervious core material, if the core is protected on both upstream and downstream sides by shells (Figure 3) belonging to the size category wide of Table 1 and constructed of sand.
Under arid climates, where dry spells of extended duration are liable to occur, no material classified as Groups B and C by the critical void ratio must be used for dikes of uniform cross section. Soils belonging to Group B may be used for the core, but must be protected by shells of coarse to medium sand. A transition layer at least 0.5 m wide should be provided of sand, if gravelly sand or gravel is used for the shells.
Slopes built with the inclinations and of the materials shown in Table 1 and observing the foregoing limitations will normally be stable. The most important single factor causing deterioration is erosion on the upstream side by wave action, and on the downstream side by heavy rains. The slopes must be protected against these contingencies. A sound grass cover will offer adequate protection on the downstream side and the crest against rain erosion and normally even on the upstream side above the line of wave run up. Grass cover should be established as an organic part of the construction work, as soon as the slopes are finished to grade. The kind of grass to be seeded and the method of seeding will vary from region to region and the advice of an agronomist should be sought on this matter.
Over sections exposed to wave attack, the slope must usually be protected. Reed belts of about 4 m width will attenuate waves effectively and should be planted on berms with a horizontal, or mildly sloping surface. Where reed belts are unacceptable, or where reed refuses to grow, other means of slope protection should be envisaged. The material commonly used for such protection is riprap, which may be dumped in a thickness of 0.5 m, or hand placed, where labour is cheap, in a thickness of 0.25-0.30 m. Fifty percent of the stone by weight should be of a size about equal to the thickness of the riprap, the remaining half should be graded uniformly down to the largest diameter of the underlying filter bed.
Other alternatives of slope protection that may be considered where rock is unavailable are blocks of concrete, ceramic blocks, continuous concrete mattress, or lime stabilization, but brushwork mattresses have also been used on minor projects. These latter, however, require frequent maintenance and must be replaced at rather short intervals of time.
The soils classified as unsuited can be improved in their properties by lime treatment, which results in greatly reduced swelling and shrinking and makes the soils much easier to compact. The soils stabilized by such treatment will also offer higher resistance to erosive action. There is ample literature available on the theory and methods of lime treatment, the economic desirability of which depends on local conditions and must be evaluated separately for each particular project.
Figure 3. Types of dikes
Table 1 Classification of Component Elements of Dikes according to Size
Table 2 Densities related to Proctor Optimum in Embankments
The dike cross section determined in the foregoing manner must next be checked for underseepage and piping failure. Whereas underseepage is merely a problem of water loss from the pond, piping must be prevented since it presents a serious danger to the stability of the structure. Piping occurs when the force exerted by seeping water on the soil exceeds the resistive force offered by the soil. The potential energy represented as the differential head created by the dike is dissipated as frictional loss as the water flows past the soil particles. The seepage force S acting on the soil is the product of the unit weight of water g [w] and the hydraulic gradient i. The latter is found when the differential head is divided by the distance between the points of seepage entry and emergence. When upward flow exists in a cohesionless soil and the head loss per unit length of the flow path exceeds the submerged effective weight of the material, movement of the soil particles will take
place. For example, if the weight of a cubic metre of saturated cohesionless soil is equal to 2 000 kg, the submerged weight will be 1 000 kg. Hence, if there is an upward hydraulic gradient of 1, the seepage force will be equal to 1 000 kg and the material will be in a condition of unstable equilibrium, termed a 'quick' condition.
Whenever water flows from a less pervious material to a more pervious one, or out onto the ground surface, the possibility of migration of fines, or piping should be considered. Even a very minor washing away of fines at the downstream side of the dike is serious. As soon as some fines are washed away, the resistance to erosion along the path of seepage is reduced and this results in an increase of flow. Owing to the increased flow, the rate of washing away is further increased, and so forth, until failure occurs.
To analyse the subsoil of the dikes for potential piping and to estimate the factor of safety relative to piping failure, two cases of interest in designing fish pond dikes will be considered (Figure 4).
1. Case of a single pervious layer under the dike base
No detailed analysis of piping failure is necessary, if the condition
is satisfied.
Here
B is the base width of the dike, in metres,
H is the differential head, also in metres and
i[0] is the 'inherent failure gradient' of the soil material forming the layer, and has the following values:
gravel to coarse sand
i[o] =0.9
fine sand to silt
i[o] = 0.6
cohesive soil
i[o] = 0.85
The limit failure gradient is found as
where
a is the irregularity index of the soil material, given in terms of the uniformity coefficient U = D[60]/D[10]
U
a
Figure 4. Cross sections of dikes
The limit failure gradient must be smaller than the effective gradient I[eff] = H/B and the factor of safety is I[eff]/I[f]
2. Case of dike built on a single cohesive top layer
The subsoil may be considered impervious, so that no analysis of piping failure is necessary, if the thickness of the cohesive layer under the dike is
and on a sample taken from 1 m depth the liquid limit w[L] >45%, the index of plasticity I[p] = 15% and the critical void ratio e[M] > 3.
If the layer is thinner than 3 m, then it may burst under the gradient
Piping failure will occur, if the material of the pervious sublayer is eroded after the cohesive top cover has burst, thus if
It should be noted that to account for a concentration of flow lines in the vicinity of the break in the top layer, where the seepage flow emerges, a factor of 3 has been introduced. In the foregoing formula the inherent failure gradient of the pervious sublayer must be introduced. The factor of safety is again I[eff]/I[f].
In order to prevent piping, movement of soil particles under the action of seepage forces must be prevented. Where the soil subject to possible piping is exposed at the downstream side of the dike, piping can be prevented either by reducing the seepage gradient at the exit point so that the seepage force is too small to cause movement of particles, or by stabilizing the soil at the exit area mechanically.
Mechanical stabilization consists of covering the exit area with a filter blanket of coarser material, so graded that the pores of the coarser material are small enough to prevent the larger particles of the finer soil from passing through. The two layers must obey Terzaghi's filter rule which is to be found in all handbooks on soil mechanics.
Further methods of piping control consist of the construction of drainage trenches and relief wells, or of extending the path of seepage by an upstream blanket. These methods are, however, normally too expensive to be justified in fish-pond projects. On the other hand, the possibilities and alternatives of controlling underseepage and thus seepage losses from the pond must be considered.
The problem of underseepage and the desirability of control measures should be examined by a dynamic approach, i.e., by examining the potential decrease of seepage losses over time. At any particular instant the magnitude of the seepage loss from a given pond area is given by the product of permeability and the hydraulic gradient, obtained as the ratio of the water head to the thickness of the soil layer above the ground-water table. However, in this product both the permeability coefficient and the position of the groundwater table may be variable with time.
The permeability coefficient can be expected to decrease with time, as the sediment particles carried in suspension by the entering flow are washed into the pervious bottom layer and fill in the voids of the latter. This process, known as clogging, or 'colmatation' in French papers depends thus on the relative granulometries of the pervious layer and the silt, and on the sediment content of the feeding water. The mineralogical composition of the sediment (the presence of clay minerals) is also an important factor. Both laboratory experiments and field experience indicate that the permeability coefficient of a 10 cm thick surface layer may decrease by as much as two orders of magnitude within 10 to 14 days, and practically complete sealing may develop within six months. The rate of clogging will become faster if the granulometry of the sediment is comparable to the fine fraction of the pervious top layer, and for perfect sealing to develop the presence of clay particles is
essential.
Where the flow feeding the ponds carries no sediment in suspension, such as a supply from a reservoir, the process may be induced artificially. For this purpose a thin (2-3 cm thick) layer of fine, non-cohesive material, such as fine sand, is spread underwater. This can be done from a barge evenly on the pond bottom proceeding from the edges toward the centre. The largest size of this material should equal 0.6 to 0.75 times the effective diameter of the bottom material. The seepage loss should be observed by readings on a staff gauge during this treatment. The first, or at the most the second such treatment should already produce a marked decrease in the seepage losses. As the final step of treatment a clay (bentonite) slurry should be spread by similar methods on the bottom. The concentration of the slurry depends on the activity of the bentonite available. Thus if the bentonite displays a viscosity of 26 centipoise in a 6 percent suspension (60 g of bentonite suspended in
1 000 ml of water), an application rate of 2-3 litres of slurry per square metre of bottom area should suffice for complete sealing. The application rate should be increased if the bentonite is less active.
As pointed out in the foregoing, repeated cycles of desiccation and rewetting are most liable to cause adverse changes in the soil structure. The sealing just described should be maintained in a wet condition, therefore, and the pond should not be kept empty for extended periods of time, especially in the dry season.
Seepage losses from the feeder canal can also be controlled by this method, but to prevent the bentonite slurry from being washed away, it is usually necessary to impound the canal by reaches for a few days during which the slurry is placed and allowed to penetrate into the soil pores.
5. CONSTRUCTION SUPERVISION
During construction work on the dikes and canals, soil mechanics supervision is necessary to check whether the soils envisaged are used for the various parts of the dikes, whether these are placed at the moisture content specified and whether they are compacted to the density specified.
The soils from the borrow areas previously explored are classified visually to identify them with those tested at the laboratory.
The moisture content of the borrow material can be determined by burning if a major departure from the average is observed.
The conventional method of determining the density and moisture of the material placed and compacted in the dike consists of taking core samples, which are then taken to the laboratory for moisture determination by oven drying.
Where the dike material is moved and placed mechanically, even moderate-capacity equipment will produce fast progress, so that the point of sampling will usually become buried by the time that the result becomes available, leaving the soils engineer with no possibility of any remedial measure. To remedy this, devices have been developed by which the moist unit weight and the volumetric moisture content of the soil can be found instantly, on the spot, indicating whether the density attained is acceptable, or not. The unit weight of the compacted layer up to about 30 cm thickness is found by a gamma probe, based on the attenuation of the intensity of gamma radiation by the soil between the source and the detector. Moisture is determined by detecting the slow neutrons reaching the detector through the soil layer from the source of fast neutrons. Devices such as these available on the market have proven reliable and effective.
<section>7</section>
Chapter 6. Principles of Designing Inland Fish Farms
K. Elekes
Water Planning Institute
Budapest, Hungary
1. SITE SELECTION
2. PREPARATORY WORK
3. PURPOSE AND DIMENSIONING OF FISH FARM STRUCTURES
4. FISH POND ARRANGEMENTS
5. EARTH STRUCTURES
6. DIKE PROTECTION
7. STRUCTURES
8. REFERENCES
1. SITE SELECTION
1.1 Considerations in Site Selection
1.2 Basic Principles of Arrangement
The site for a fish farm should be selected with great circumspection and care, since the site and general arrangement will control the economics of operation.
1.1 Considerations in Site Selection
- Sites should be selected for fish farms only where water of the required volume and quality is available at the times needed for operating the farm.
- Preference should be given to sites where a gravity water supply to the farm is possible.
- The quality of the water available must be such that the desired fish can be raised, e.g. fresh, brackish or salt water.
- Gravity drainage of the ponds should be possible.
- The fish farm should be sited primarily in areas unsuited to other agricultural uses.
- The soil in the area selected should, if possible, be impervious.
- For low construction costs, plain areas with slope less than one percent should be selected.
- The site should be in the vicinity of transportation routes, or where the access road can be constructed economically.
- In the proximity of inhabited areas, considerations of public health and the necessity of guarding against poachers should be kept in mind.
- Fish farms need electrical power, so the possibility and cost of connection should be considered.
- Any existing electric power line must be excluded from the area envisaged for the fish farm.
- Skilled operators are essential for operating major fish farms efficiently. An important consideration in site selection is, therefore, to provide an attractive environment and facilities for both professionals and operators.
Factors to be considered in site selection are described in more detail in Chapter 1 "Considerations in the Selection of Sites for Aquaculture".
1.2 Basic Principles of Arrangement
Fish farms consist of many ponds performing different functions in fish production. Their relative positions, as well as their connection to the water supply and drainage facilities, power supply and transport roads, in fact the general arrangement of the fish farm, has a major influence on the operating costs. In deciding on the general arrangement, the following should be considered:
- The farm centre, consisting of operating buildings and living quarters, should have good road access.
- The facilities requiring frequent attendance, such as the hatchery, rearing and nursery ponds, holding ponds and pumping station, should be as near as possible to the centre.
- Separate filling and drainage possibilities should be provided, if possible, for each pond.
- Transport of feed from the grain storage to the ponds and of the fish harvested to the holding ponds should involve short hauling distances.
- The holding ponds should be close to the common external cropping pits serving several ponds.
The foregoing principles can be realized best by an arrangement in which the operating buildings, the holding ponds and the water control structures are in the vicinity of the geometrical centre of the area. Wherever the terrain conditions permit, this type of arrangement should be adopted.
2. PREPARATORY WORK
2.1 Technological Requirements
2.2 General Technical Data
2.3 Geodetical Data
2.4 Hydrological and Meteorological Data
2.5 Geotechnical Data
2.6 Water Quality Data
The layout of the site is governed by the combined requirements of operation and the particular site conditions. Prior to designing work, all information should be collected regarding technological requirements and the data particular to the site.
2.1 Technological Requirements
- Species of fish to be produced.
- Sequence of operations envisaged: production from hatching to market fish, or production of market fish alone.
- Method of fry production.
- Production quantities envisaged.
- Methods and possibilities of nutrient supply to the ponds, such as organic manure, duck farming, fertilizer application.
- Feed distribution (fish feed, grain feed, etc.).
- Transport management - method and means of in-farm and external transportation.
- Buildings required (operation, social-cultural amenities, grain store, equipment shed, repair shop, housing, etc.).
2.2 General Technical Data
- Data on existing water uses affected.
- Data affecting water supply and drainage.
- Future development plans for the area.
- Data on other facilities (roads, railways, etc.)
- Property conditions and data.
2.3 Geodetical Data
Topographic surveys to the scale 1:500 to 1:5000 and with contour lines of 20-25 cm (perhaps 1 ft) vertical spacing are needed for the entire fish farm area, in order to permit designing complete pond drainage and earthwork volume estimates of the required accuracy.
On any existing earth structures (embankments, canals, etc.) cross sections should be taken at 50-100 m spacing, with points spaced sufficiently close to each other to plot the actual terrain with ± 20 cm accuracy on the cross sections of 1:100 scale.
Cross sections should be plotted at the sites of major structures (intakes, road crossings, etc.)
Cross sections at not more than 500 m intervals and continuous profiles are needed on the connecting stream or canal extending for the distance affected by the fish farm (e.g. to the backwater limit).
The topographic survey should be connected, especially as regards elevations, to the national survey network.
2.4 Hydrological and Meteorological Data
Where water is obtained from a natural stream, data must be acquired on the stages and flow rates to be anticipated at the diversion point in the periods of pond filling and for compensation of water losses. Water supply should be designed for a flow rate of 80 percent probability.
In the case of ponds through which floods must be conveyed, or the dikes which are required to retain floods on the stream, the designer will require also data on design flood levels and discharges. The probability of occurrence of the design flood is normally specified by the competent water agency. In the absence of such specification, the flood of 1 percent probability of occurrence (once in a hundred years) should be adopted as the design flood. In the case of minor ponds, where a dam failure would cause no other losses, a flood of say 3 percent probability might be adopted as the design flood. The retention capacity of upstream ponds is taken into account in estimating the design flood.
Data on the peak values of monthly evaporation and rainfall are needed for estimating the water demand.
Data on the monthly average and extreme temperatures are needed for selecting the species of fish for farming, for planning the necessary feed supply rates and for designing the holding and storage facilities of live fish.
The annual volume of sediment entering the ponds should be estimated.
Data are needed on the direction and highest speed of wind prevailing in the area in order to design wave protection.
2.5 Geotechnical Data
The geotechnical explorations should be extended to the entire area of the fish farm, to provide data on the soil stratification in the pond area, under the dikes, along the canal traces and at the sites of structures.
The data obtained by soil explorations should be suited to estimate:
- seepage losses
- underseepage conditions and the hazard of piping failure
- stability of the dikes
- the required degree of compaction
- the allowable flow velocity in the supply canals, and
- the foundation of the structures.
The methods of exploration and laboratory testing, as well as the interpretation of the results are described in more detail in Chapter 5 on soil characteristics for aquaculture farms.
2.6 Water Quality Data
The water supplied to the fish ponds must not contain pollutants and toxic substances detrimental to fish life. The composition of the feed water should be subject to quality analysis, including the following:
- oxygen content
- pH value
- total salts content
- ammonia content
- free CO[2] content
- phenols, oil and tar content.
The water quality analyses should be such as to enable prediction of the interactions between the soil and the feed water.
3. PURPOSE AND DIMENSIONING OF FISH FARM STRUCTURES
3.1 Hatchery
3.2 Fry Rearing Ponds and Basins
3.3 Nursery Ponds
3.4 Production Ponds
3.5 Fish Holding Facilities
3.1 Hatchery
The most important structure in the technological process of artificial reproduction is the hatching house, where the following operations are carried out:
- Preparation of the breeders prior to stripping.
- Treatment of the breeders (hypothysis treatment, tranquilization, stripping, etc.).
- treatment, fertilization, spawning of the eggs.
- Treatment of the larvae.
- First feeding of the fry.
- Laboratory functions related to artificial reproduction (water analysis, egg analysis, detection of fish pests, chemical and medicament dosage, etc.).
- Packaging of fry.
The equipment needed in the hatchery includes breeder tanks, hypophizing and stripping table, hatching jars, fry holding vessels.
3.2 Fry Rearing Ponds and Basins
The small fry are reared from the age of 4-5 days to 3-4 weeks in the fry rearing ponds and basins. These should be arranged in places sheltered from wind, on impervious soil and close to the hatching house and road.
The preferable size of the fry rearing ponds ranges from 100 to 1 000 m^2 . Within this range the actual size of the fry rearing pond depends on the number of fry which can be introduced within 1-2 days. The pond size should therefore be adjusted to the capacity of the hatching house.
The water supplied to the fry rearing ponds should be rich in oxygen and must contain no chemical or biological pollution. Water containing much suspended sediment must be allowed to settle first. The supply system should be dimensioned to permit the water in the pond to be exchanged twice daily. In densely populated ponds, a distribution network of perforated pipes should be provided at the bottom for the uniform distribution of inflow water. The fry rearing ponds are lined with stone or concrete.
Circular basins are made with diameters from 4 to 6 m and about 1 m depth. The freshwater is introduced tangentially through nozzle pipes to maintain the water in permanent circulation. The effluent is withdrawn from the centre of the basin.
Rectangular basins should have a ratio of short to long sides from 1:2 to 1:4. The water is introduced to, and withdrawn from, these basins along the short sides. The drainage system of the fry rearing ponds should be dimensioned hydraulically to permit each basin or pond to be drained in four hours. Sluices equipped with box traps should be used to collect the fry. For a guideline to determine the total area of all fry rearing ponds, as a general rule 100 to 200 feeding larvae require 1 m^2 of water surface area.
3.3 Nursery Ponds
The fry reared in the fry ponds are transferred for further growing into the nursery ponds at the rate of about 100 000 per hectare. The optimal size of the nursery ponds ranges from 1 to 10 ha, but the maximum size should not surpass 30 ha. The water depth should be 1.0 to 1.5 m. The nursery ponds should be arranged in the vicinity of the fry ponds, preferably in a manner to permit direct transfer of the fry to the nursery pond, together with the water from the fry rearing ponds.
The water supplied to the nursery ponds should be both chemically and biologically clean. In general no flow through the ponds is necessary, but provision must be made to compensate for any water losses.
Complete and rapid pond drainage is an essential requirement. For this reason the bottom of the ponds should slope towards the outlet and should be so graded as part of the construction work on the ponds. The body weight of around 100 g is attained in these ponds during 160 to 220 days. Fishing should preferably be made possible from external cropping pits.
3.4 Production Ponds
These ponds serve to grow yearlings to full grown fish. The ponds are designed according to the following specifications:
The ponds vary from 20 to 100 ha in size, but the largest pond size should be determined by taking the total fish production envisaged into consideration, so that the total fish production in a single pond should not surpass 100 t. For example, for attaining a total unit yield of 2.5 t/ha, the ponds should not be larger than 40 ha.
The ponds should be from 1.2 to 1.8 m deep, with pond depth of 1.8 m especially in regions with elevated temperatures. Water depths less then 0.6 m will result in reduced production.
Filling the ponds should not take more than 2 to 10 days, depending on pond size. No continuous flow through the ponds is required, but the losses due to evaporation and seepage must be compensated for during the growing season. Wherever possible, the production ponds should have filling and drainage systems permitting them to fill and drain independently of the other ponds.
The ponds are stocked with fish of 100 g body weight at the rate of 3 000/3 500/ha and the weight gain to 1 500 g/unit is attained in about 300 days.
For advanced fishing, external cropping pits should be provided for the ponds. The feed, manure and fertilizers should be stored in the vicinity of the ponds. For transporting feed, as well as the fish, a sound road network is essential.
3.5 Fish Holding Facilities
The fish harvested from the ponds must be stored in holding ponds until they are marketed or processed. The capacity of the holding ponds is governed by the composition of the production according to species, the yield envisaged, the time schedule of fishing and marketing or processing. The breeding stock should be stored, if possible, in the production ponds, rather than in the holding ponds.
For holding purposes small 500 to 2 000 m^2 basins or ponds of 0.2 to 10 ha area should be provided. Under climatic conditions similar to those of Hungary, the basins are termed "wintering" ponds or basins. The average depth of the holding ponds should be from 1.8 to 2.2 m.
The most important requirement to be observed in connection with the holding ponds is that the dissolved oxygen content of the water in them should never sink below the 2.0 mg/l level. Oxygen can be supplied by introducing a feed water saturated with oxygen, by allowing water to flow through the pond, or by injecting oxygen or air into the holding ponds. Air injection must be accompanied by passing flow through the pond in order to remove the products of metabolism. At high rates of air injection, the rate of flow through can be reduced to around one-third of that without air injection.
To estimate the flow rate through, or air injection rate into the ponds, information is required on the oxygen consumption of the fish stored, the oxygen content of the feed water and the efficiency of the air injection system.
The oxygen consumption rate of fish depends on the water temperature, or on their body temperature which is identical. The rate of oxygen consumption increases with temperature. Conversely, cold water is capable of absorbing more oxygen than warm water. As an example, the hourly oxygen consumption of carp of 1 kg average body weight is;
10 cm^3
at 5°C
25 cm^3
at 10°C
50 cm^3
at 50°C
Each litre of saturated water contains the following amounts of oxygen:
8.91 cm^3
at 5°C
7.87 cm
at 10°C
7.04 cm^3
at 15°C
When estimating the necessary flow rate, it should be remembered that the fish do not consume the entire oxygen content of the water for breathing, so that the residual oxygen content of the effluent from the ponds is still around 1 cm^3/l.
In the absence of more accurate computations, the flow rate through the holding ponds can be estimated at 1.0 l/sec for each ton of fish stored.
The allowable fish density in the holding ponds ranges from 5 to 15 kg/m^2 pond area.
4. FISH POND ARRANGEMENTS
4.1 Barrage Ponds
4.2 Contour Ponds
4.3 Paddy Ponds
The arrangement of the fish ponds at any particular fish farm site is normally dictated by topographic conditions. The following types of pond arrangement are usual:
- Barrage ponds (Figure 1)
- Contour ponds (Figure 2)
- Paddy ponds (Figure 3).
The first two types of pond system are typical in rolling terrain, while paddy ponds are adopted in flat land. These types of arrangement differ from each other in their method of construction, structures and operation.
Figure 1. Barrage pond systems
Figure 2. Contour pond system
4.1 Barrage Ponds
Such ponds are established in a valley of flat to medium longitudinal slope, by closing the valley with a low dam at a suitable site. A site is considered suitable if the shortest possible dam will create the largest possible pond. Thus, dams can be constructed most economically at a narrow point in the valley situated at the downstream end of a flat, wide section.
The floods on the stream will pass through the ponds and must be released without causing damage to the dams, dikes and structures, and without allowing the fish to escape. For this purpose a spillway must be provided.
4.2 Contour Ponds
The ponds established behind a longitudinal dike in the valley will not be affected by floods, these being passed along one of the valley sides. In other words, fish ponds are created on one side of the valley alone. To create gravitational supply to the ponds, the stream is blocked by a weir, the water being diverted through a gated intake to the supply canal. From the latter, each pond can be filled separately, while separate drainage is possible to the original stream bed except during flood conditions. The relocated stream bed must be dimensioned to carry the design flood safely, while the crest of the longitudinal dike running parallel to the stream must be raised above the design flood level. This arrangement is only possible on wide valley floors.
4.3 Paddy Ponds
Each pond of fish farms in flat plain areas is surrounded by a dike. The flat terrain offers wider opportunities for the favourable arrangement of ponds, in which each pond can be filled and drained independently, thus creating the possibility of intensive fish farming.
5. EARTH STRUCTURES
5.1 Dams and Dikes
5.2 Feeder Canals
5.3 Drainage canals
5.4 Drain Ditch
5.5 Internal Pond Drains
5.6 Borrow Pits
5.7 Internal Harvesting Pits
Earth structures form an important part of any fish farm project. The dams and dikes are constructed of earth, while the supply and drainage canals, the seepage drain ditches, the pond drains and the harvesting pits are excavated in earth.
5.1 Dams and Dikes
The dams and dikes (Figure 4) are normally constructed of the soil material available at the site. The dimensions and cross sectional shape of the dikes are governed by the purpose they are intended to serve and the material available for construction. The main principles to be observed are:
- The crest width should not be less than 2 m.
- The dike crests serving as unpaved roadways for internal transportation should be at least 3 m wide.
- Paved roads on the dike crests should be made with at least 1 m wide unpaved shoulders.
- The centre line of the dike crest should be elevated by 15-20 cm relative to the shoulders.
- The crest elevation above the highest water level, the safety freeboard, is controlled by the maximum wave height anticipated. In the absence of calculations, a freeboard of 50 cm should be provided.
- The slope inclinations should be selected as outlined in the notes on soils engineering.
- Where a reed belt is envisaged for wave action control (Figure 5) either a horizontal 3 m wide reed berm should be envisaged with the surface not more than 0.5 m below the normal pond level, or a slope inclined at 1:4 to 1:8 should be formed starting 0.3 m below the normal water level.
Figure 3. Paddy pond systems
Figure 4. Typical dam and dike cross sections
5.2 Feeder Canals
The feeder, or supply canals (Figure 6), carry water from the intake to the individual ponds, and are used occasionally as waterways for barges.
The feeder canals should be dimensioned to allow the various types of ponds to be filled within the times mentioned. Moreover, they should enable all ponds of the fish farm to be filled in less than 50 days.
The longitudinal profile of the feeder canal should be designed to ensure a canal water level at least 0.1 m higher than the normal water level at the intakes to the individual ponds. In estimating the water level in the feeder canal, the backwater caused by the structures should normally be taken into consideration.
Depending on the seepage losses anticipated from the feeder canal, some kind of lining, or other method of seepage control, may be necessary.
The feeder canals are made with trapezoidal, or mixed, cross-sections. The bottom width and water depth are found from the hydraulic calculations. The dikes along the feeder canals should have at least 2.0 m wide crests. The slope inclinations depend, just as in the case of the pond dikes, on the quality of soils, but should not be steeper than 1:1.5. The safety freeboard along the feeder canals should normally be 0.5 m, but can be reduced sometimes to 0.3 m over the terminal sections.
Canals to be operated at freezing temperatures should be designed for water depths of more than 1.0 m.
5.3 Drainage canals
The drainage canals (Figure 6) serve to convey the water from the ponds to the recipient stream when the ponds are drained.
The lowest water level in the canal at the outlet of the drain sluices should be at least 20 cm deeper than the lowest bottom elevation in the pond, or than the bottom of the harvesting pit. Where this is impossible to achieve, pumps should be considered to ensure complete drainage of the pond.
The conveying capacity of the drainage canals should be estimated starting from the drainage times and periods mentioned for the various types of pond.
5.4 Drain Ditch
These ditches (Figure 6) serve to drain any seepage from the ponds and the feeder canals, and the external runoff that is prevented by the pond dikes from draining towards the recipient stream and, thus, to protect the surrounding areas against the potential damages caused by such waters.
The bottom of the ditch should nowhere be less than 0.3 m below the terrain level and the water should not be allowed to overflow, even when carrying the design discharge.
The drain ditch follows largely the trace of the extreme dike. The distance from the dike depends on the soil conditions and stratification (see notes on soils engineering, "piping control"). The distance between the outer toe of the dike slope and the edge of the drain ditch should not be less than 2.0 m.
Figure 5. Temporary wave protection
5.5 Internal Pond Drains
Figure 6. Canal cross sections
The water from undrained depressions within the pond area is conveyed to the outlet sluice, from where the fish are carried to the cropping pit. The slope of these drains should be steeper than 0.1 percent, while they should be cut deeper than 0.2 m. The minimal bottom width desirable is 3.0 m and the sides should be sloped at 1:3, or flatter. The earth excavated from these drains might possibly be used for constructing the dikes or for filling any depressions. Any material that cannot be used for such purposes should be deposited at a distance of not less than 5 m from the drain, so as not to interfere with draining the pond, and to prevent it from sliding back into the drains.
5.6 Borrow Pits
Where it is impossible to secure the earth needed for constructing the dikes from the cuts envisaged, separate borrow pits must be opened. Material may be obtained from areas outside the ponds, but also from within the pond as part of the bottom levelling work, or as special borrow pits. Attempts should be made to obtain the dike material from levelling the pond bottom, which should slope towards the outlet sluice. The bottom should be levelled to an accuracy of ± 15 cm. Any internal borrow pit should be designed by observing the principles outlined in connection with the pond drain network.
5.7 Internal Harvesting Pits
For harvesting, cropping pits should be placed in the vicinity of the outlet sluice, either within or outside the pond. An internal pit serves one pond only, while two or more ponds can be connected to an external pit.
Internal harvesting pits may be arranged parallel or perpendicular to the dike. The bottom area required for the cropping pit is around 40 m^2/ha. To accommodate the length of the nets in current use, the pits should be 10 to 25 m wide. The differential elevation between the two ends of the bottom of the pit should be 20 cm. The preferable depth of the pits ranges from 0.6 to 1.0 m. The internal borrow pits and pond drains should be connected to the harvesting pit, so that their bottom at the entrance should be at least 20 cm above the pit bottom.
External harvesting pits are connected to the pond outlet sluices over drainage canals of varying length. Fresh water should always be introduced into the external harvesting pits during the period of harvesting. External harvesting pits need not be dimensioned for the entire fish population in the ponds, since the fish are admitted intermittently to the pit. The preferable area in plan varies from 15×50 to 20×70 m. The bottom of the external harvesting pits should be at least 30 cm deeper than the deepest point within the pond and an additional differential elevation of 20 cm is necessary between the two ends of the harvesting pit. The crest of the dike around the external harvesting pit should be designed so as to have a pit depth of 0.8 to 1.0 m below it.
The slopes of the harvesting pit should not be steeper than 1:2, while over the section where the net is drawn out they should be inclined at 1:4.
6. DIKE PROTECTION
6.1 Wave Action
6.2 Biological Protection
6.3 Wave Control Linings
The dikes require effective protection against the destroying effects of waves. Even the surfaces of earth structures not exposed directly to pond water may often require protection against rain and wind erosion, depending on the prevailing climatic conditions.
6.1 Wave Action
The length and height of wind generated waves depend on wind speed, the fetch length and the depth of water. Of the large number of empirical wave height formulae, the one suggested by Dyakova is
h = 0.0186 W^0.71 B^0.24 H^0.54
where h is the wave height in metres, W the wind speed in m/sec, B the fetch length in km and H the water depth in metres.
6.2 Biological Protection
Biological protection consists of establishing a vegetation cover as a means of controlling both wave action and erosion, provided that such vegetation can be planted and grown under the particular conditions, and is compatible with the requirements of fish production.
Information on the plants potentially applicable and their biological requirements in any particular area should best be obtained at the site. Under the conditions prevailing in Europe, a reed belt has been found most effective for controlling wave action.
For effective wave action control, the reed belt should be 4 m wide for the first 1 000 m length of fetch, and should be increased by 2 m for every subsequent 1 000 m increment of fetch length. The density of the stand should be at least 70 reeds/m^2 and each reed should have a diameter of not less than 8 mm above the water level.
The wave control reed belt is planted on the reed berm of the dike (Figure 5). Over the surface on which the reed is to be planted a topsoil or humus cover of at least 20 cm thickness should be spread, in which the reed is planted either by seeding, as a soil root mixture or as root or shoot cuttings. Except for propagation as shoot cuttings, reed planting operations are confined to the winter hibernation interval. The shoots should be planted at the time when the fresh shoots have developed 7 to 8 leaves.
Whichever method of reed propagation is adopted, the water demand of the growing plants must be satisfied. Without the possibility of irrigation, the result of reed planting will be questionable. In the first period of growth, up to the appearance of 3 to 4 leaves, the soil should be saturated, but a permanent water cover is definitely undesirable.
On the slope surfaces and dike crests exposed to rain and wind erosion, a sound grass cover is often the most economical method of control. For grass planting the surfaces should be covered by at least 10 cm of topsoil, but this can occasionally be replaced by manure and fertilizers. The grass cover is established on properly prepared surfaces most expediently by seeding. The desirable seed mixture should be determined with due consideration to the soil type and climatic conditions. The grass cover must be mowed regularly and in dry climates provision must be made also for irrigation. Where irrigation is impracticable, the costs of grass seeding will be wasted.
6.3 Wave Control Linings
Where no biological protection is possible, the earth structures exposed to wave action must be protected by other types of lining. Guidance to designing such linings can be found in the notes on soils engineering.
7. STRUCTURES
7.1 Monk Sluices
7.2 Open Sluices
7.3 Spillways
7.4 Fish Control Structures
The structures normally used for supplying water to, and draining water from a fish farm are of types familiar in hydraulic engineering. Those particular to fish farm projects will be dealt with here.
7.1 Monk Sluices
Monk sluices (Figure 7) are the structures generally used for supplying water to, and draining water from, fish ponds. By means of stop-log closures and fish screens or racks, the operator is free to decide whether the lower or the upper water layer from a pond should be released.
Monk sluices consist of two main parts, namely the shaft and the horizontal pipe. Three pairs of slots are incorporated in the shaft, one for the fish screen, the other two for the stop-log closure. The shaft is normally on the upstream side, thus inlet monks for filling have their shaft on the side of the supply canal, while outlet monks are on the pond side. The pipe crosses under the dike and serves also to dissipate the energy of the water falling over the stop-logs. The pipe may be built with circular, horseshoe, or rectangular cross sections. For higher conveying capacity twin pipes may be provided.
Access to the shaft is made possible by a walkway at least 0.5 m wide. For working on top of the shaft, a platform is cantilevered therefrom. A handrail must be provided along the walkway and the platform to prevent accidents.
7.2 Open Sluices
Open sluices are built where the passage of barges is required, or where the discharges to be passed are higher than those which normal monk sluices are capable of carrying. Their application is also needed for the inlet sluices of external cropping pits, to facilitate the passage of fish. They are preferable also in the screen-box structure of nursery ponds where drainage or fishing of two nursery ponds can be handled by means of a single structure.
In the longitudinal section the structure follows the cross-sectional shape of the dike. The open cross section is U-shaped. To enable traffic to pass over the structure, the open U can be bridged by a slab.
With closing gates provided on both the upstream and the downstream ends, such open sluices can be designed as locks.
The closing mechanism in open sluices may be stop-logs or vertical-lift steel gates. Openings wider than 1.5 m are cumbersome to close by means of stop-logs and here steel gates with proper hoisting gear are the better solution. The hoisting gear of frequently operated gates should be driven by an electric motor where power connection is possible. The steel gates should be of the double-leaf type which can be released from either below or above the gate, as required by the operator.
7.3 Spillways
Spillways are essential components for the safe operation of fish ponds formed by valley closure. These serve to pass the floods arriving at the ponds without damage, while preventing the water level in the ponds from sinking below the normal operating elevation and the fish from escaping from the pond system.
The spillways should be dimensioned to pass the design flood without damage. The structure must be capable of passing at least the 10 percent probability flood without any human interference. At higher flood discharges human control may be necessary at the closing mechanisms of the structure.
A wide variety of spillway designs have been developed, of which a few simple types will be described.
Simple unlined spillways are earth canals arranged at the junction of the dam and the valley side and having a sill level corresponding to the normal operating water level in the pond (Figure 8). Normally, no fish screen is provided. For stabilizing the sill, a recessed beam of concrete or hand-placed rock may be advisable. The depth of flow over the spillway, or the highest allowable flow velocity must be determined with due regard to the local soil conditions so as to prevent scouring. The surface of the spillway may be protected against scouring by a grass cover, reinforced if necessary by rows of buried brushwork or hand-placed stone ribs.
Improved unlined spillways are similar in design to the foregoing but with fish screens between piers and lined for some distance upstream and downstream of the screen (Figure 9). The piers have cantilevers at the top, on which a service walkway is supported to permit cleaning the screen.
Reinforced concrete spillways with recessed sill have the sill elevation below the normal operating water level in the pond, which is maintained by means of stop-logs (Figure 10). The fish are prevented from escaping by a fish screen. To pass major floods, the stop-logs must be lifted clear of the water. For ease of handling the stop-logs, the spans between the piers should not be longer than 1.5 m. The sill should not be lower than 0.6 m below the normal pond level. The piers should carry a walkway or a footbridge.
Figure 7. Monk sluices
Figure 8. Simple unlined spillway
Figure 9. Improved unlined spillway
Figure 10. Reinforced concrete spillway with recessed sill
Drop shaft spillways are normally combined with the outlet sluice. Where the subsoil offers good foundation conditions, such structures are capable of passing safely minor flood discharges. Behind the shaft of the monk sluice a drop shaft having a crest elevation at the normal pond level is also provided. The flood discharge is carried by the pipe of the sluice, so that the pipe must be dimensioned for the design flood flow. At the downstream end of the pipe, an energy dissipator is needed. Cleaning of the fish screen around the crest of the drop shaft can be accomplished from the access bridge of the structure.
7.4 Fish Control Structures
At valley-dam fish ponds supplied by a perennial stream, measures must be taken to prevent fish from escaping from the upstream pond. A fish screen or an electrical fish deterrent are possible solutions.
The fish screen should extend at least up to the level if the 10 percent flood. The screen must be cleaned at the time of floods, so that a working platform must be provided for the operator. The mesh width of the screen or the spacing of the rack bars depend on the size of fish kept in the pond. In production ponds a bar spacing of 2 cm is sufficient.
8. REFERENCES
Elekes, K. and T. Selmeczy, 1975, Mezögazdaságj; vizhaszmositás. Vol. 2, Halászat, edited by Gy Fóris. Budapest, VIZDOK és Mezögazdasági Könykiadó Vállalat
Huet, M. and J.A. Timmermans, 1972 , Textbook of fish culture: breeding and cultivation of fish. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News Book Ltd., 436 p. 4th ed.
Pillay, T.V.R., 1979, The state of aquaculture. In Advances in aquaculture, edited by T.V.R. Pillay and W.A. Dill. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News Books Ltd., for FAO, pp. 1-10
Tang, Y.A., 1979, Physical problems in fish farm construction. In Advances in aquaculture edited by T.V.R. Pillay and W.A. Dill. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News Books Ltd., for FAO, pp. 99-107
Woynárovich, E. and L. Horváth, 1980, The artificial propagation of warm-water finfishes: a manual for extension. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (201):183 p. Issued also in French and Spanish
<section>8</section>
Chapter 7. Preparation of Plans and Cost Estimates and Tender Documents
J. Kövári
Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations
Rome, Italy
1. INTRODUCTION
2. OUTLINE OR FEASIBILITY PLAN
3. DETAILED PLAN
4. ESTIMATES
5. TENDER DOCUMENTS
6. REFERENCES
ANNEX 1 HYDROLOGICAL FORMULAS
ANNEX 2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
ANNEX 3 SPECIAL PROVISIONS
ANNEX 4 CONSTRUCTION OF CHIPATA FISH FARM IN ZAMBIA
ANNEX 5 Bill No........ Construction of Outlets
ANNEX 6 Bill of Quantities and Contract Cost
ANNEX 7 Bidding Schedule
1. INTRODUCTION
Engineering planning, design and construction of dams, barrages, pumping stations, etc., is normally carried out with a high degree of efficiency. Sometimes, however, the smaller structures, secondary channels, etc., used for aquaculture projects are badly made or omitted entirely from engineering plans. In developing countries engineers have frequently neglected these minor works, particularly those required at the farm level. To contractors they do not mean much profit and they are dispersed and difficult to supervise.
It has been increasingly recognized that one of the major difficulties encountered in the implementation of aquaculture development programmes in developing countries is proper project preparation. Inadequate and poor preparation of projects has often caused the final construction cost of the project to be much higher than estimated. The purpose of this lecture is to present in simple form the various steps required in preparation of plans, estimates and tender documents for projects and to describe some of the planning procedures that are used in these processes.
Project preparation is usually considered to include all those activities short of a final decision to implement. This process includes the following stages:
(i) Identification of the project. At this stage, the production target based on a marketing study, the species to be cultured and the systems of culture to be adopted, the availability of a large enough drainable and accessible land area free from flooding and having adequate soil conditions as well as adequate water source, must all be investigated and determined.
(ii) Preparation of outline or feasibility plan of the project.
(iii) Preparation of detailed plan of the project.
(iv) Preparation of estimates of the project.
(v) Preparation of tender documents of the project.
During each stage, a number of activities and analyses must be carried out and the findings used to meet the requirements of the subsequent phase, until the project is finally completed.
2. OUTLINE OR FEASIBILITY PLAN
2.1 Purpose of Outline Plan
2.2 Procedures for Preparation of Outline Plan
2.1 Purpose of Outline Plan
The purpose of an outline plan is to confirm that the proposed project can be economically developed on the selected site, and to investigate and provide all data, calculations and outline plans based on the different investigations required for the project approval and detailed planning.
2.2 Procedures for Preparation of Outline Plan
2.2.1 Site selection
2.2.2 Collection of maps and data
2.2.3 Outline plan
2.2.1 Site selection
In aquaculture project operations, site selection is of paramount importance. Success of the project depends to a large extent on the proper selection of the site. There are both ecological and technological as well as economic and social considerations involved in site selection. Factors to be considered in site selection are described in more detail in Chapter 1 on considerations in the selection of sites for aquaculture (Pillay, 1977).
2.2.2 Collection of maps and data
The following maps and data about the site should be gathered to facilitate the preliminary investigations and calculations:
(a) Maps
- contoured sheet of map at a scale of 1:25 000 to 1:50 000. This can be used for preparation of a project location map, to determine the water catchment area and to serve as a source of information on road connections, etc.;
- land map showing boundaries of properties with different ownerships according to the official register of owners;
- soil or geological map showing the topsoil or subsoil encountered at the site;
- water resources development map. This will help in determining the water source of the project by indicating the possibilities of water supply and drainage, as well as by showing the depth of the expected water tables and yield capacities of any aquifers; climatological map showing the meteorological stations nearest to the site and the monthly mean values of temperature and rainfall;
- other development map, if any, regarding the proposed site.
(b) Meteorological data
- mean monthly temperature;
- mean monthly rainfall;
- mean monthly evaporation;
- mean monthly humidity;
- mean monthly sunshine;
- mean monthly wind speed and direction.
(c) Hydrological data
- data for discharge, yield, floods and water elevations of existing water sources (rivers, irrigation channels, reservoirs, springs, etc.);
- restriction for water supply to the fish farm (for example, periods of the maintenance works in the irrigation channel).
2.2.3 Outline plan
An outline plan is generally used as a basis for approval and financing of a project. This should prove the technical feasibility of the project. The production calculations concerned as well as the design should be in sufficient detail so that a reliable cost estimate including both the annual operational and production cost can be established.
The principal parts of the outline plan consist of the following;
(i) Report
This should contain the most important information on the project proposal including a description of the site, soil characteristics determined by the reconnaissance soil survey, source of water and the results of the water analysis, meteorological features used for planning, operation plan with the necessary production calculations, planning considerations, arrangement of the layout plan for the ponds and the location of the hatchery and the other buildings with the approach road to the project, arrangement for water supply and drainage of the ponds and the hatchery, the pond facilities, abstract of costs for capital, operational and production costs, economic analysis for benefits, and the proposed construction programme. Additionally, all the statements obtained and required for approval and implementation of the project must be presented usually in a list of annexures to the report.
(ii) General location map
This is generally an unsealed map showing the location of the project.
(iii) Plane table map
This has a scale of 1:2000 to 1:5000 depending the size of the project, showing the boundary lines and the proposed size of the project, the locations of the soil test pits with their elevations, the rough contour lines and water source and drainage possibilities.
(iv) Outline layout plan
This plan to a scale of 1:1000 to 1:5000 should include the arrangements of the ponds, the water supply and drainage systems as well as the location of the hatchery and other buildings including the proposed approach road and the power and telephone lines.
(v) Outline cross-sections of dikes and channels
All the typical cross-sections of the dikes and channels showing their measurements and slopes required for the cost estimate must be provided.
(vi) List of proposed buildings and equipment
A list of the proposed buildings with their plinth areas and the equipment needed for running the project should be given for the cost estimate.
(vii) Soil and water test results
Soil test laboratory results of the samples taken from the test pits for engineering and production purposes should be provided in tables which are used for planning dikes, etc. (Buring, 1979).
(viii) Cost estimate
Estimates of base (civil works) cost must be calculated using unit rates judged to be applicable for the region of the project site and major quantities of each item shall be calculated from the drawings in just sufficient detail to serve the needs of proper estimating. Building costs should be estimated on plinth area. Earthwork costs are based as far as possible on a balance between cutting and filling. Estimates of cost are given for electricity supply, engineering (design of detailed plan and supervision of construction), equipment, land procurement and physical contingencies.
Lastly, the operational costs and the production cost are provided under separate heads.
(ix) Implementation schedule
Based on the results of the reconnaissance investigations and quantity calculations a bar-chart for the various activities required to complete the detailed plans and tender documents and procure the land for construction should be prepared.
3. DETAILED PLAN
3.1 Reviewing Outline Plan
3.2 Detailed Planning
3.1 Reviewing Outline Plan
3.1.1 Topographic survey
3.1.2 Soil survey
After having approved the outline plan of the project, a review should be made of all data available and, if this is insufficient, action should be taken to rectify the deficiency. Any modifications of the proposed operating schedule and related water management and water requirement calculations for both the fish ponds and the hatchery have to be completed prior to commencing detailed planning.
3.1.1 Topographic survey
The topographic survey which has to be carried out at the site selected for a project should be based on a convenient datum marked with a temporary bench mark (TBM) at the site. There are several methods used for topographic surveys. Depending upon the nature and size of the land required for the project, the following methods are the most commonly applied for topographic surveying:
(i) Gridding
(ii) Plane tabling
(iii) Cross-section method with traverse survey
(iv) Radiating lines method with traverse survey
(v) Tachiometry
Methods (i) and (ii) are ideal on relatively flat land, while methods (iii) and (iv) may also be used but are best suited to hilly terrain or use in a narrow, long valley. Tachiometry can be used in either case. The field work in tachiometry is rapid compared with the other methods and it is widely used, therefore, for contouring of any types of areas. With reasonable precautions, the results obtained can be of the same order of accuracy as, or better than, those obtainable by other methods. The following topographic maps and plans are generally needed for a project:
(i) Index or location map
(ii) Boundary map
(iii) Contour map
(iv) Cross and longitudinal sections
(v) Land map
3.1.1.1 Requirements of maps for engineering designs
(i) Index or location map
This map, which gives general information about the location of the project, the existing roads, railways, towns or other settlements, rivers, lakes, contours, etc., is the most commonly prepared from one of the map sheets scaled at 1:50 000, which may be obtained from the Survey Department Map Sales Depot, or the Survey Department. An example of a location map prepared for the Chipata Fish Farm is shown in Figure 1.
(ii) Boundary map
During topographic surveying the boundary lines of the selected area for the project should be fixed by stones or concrete blocks. The boundary lines are usually formed by a closed traverse. The points of the traverse lines are called stations or bearing points (PBR). These may also serve for control of levelling or contouring operations over the site, and for setting out the facilities of the project. The boundary map, as shown in Figure 2, must indicate the lengths of the traverse lines for the boundary of the project, locations of the PBRs, the coordinates of the reference meridian, the bearings of the lines, the actual area covered by the traverse lines, the existing roads, buildings, rivers and other property boundaries. The list of the coordinates of the PBRs, including the elevation as shown in Table 1, should be attached to the boundary map, and the data should be recorded in the construction site logbook before starting any construction works at the site. This is
essential as, if the PBRs are destroyed by any machines during the construction period, they can easily be re-established from the site logbook.
Figure 1. Chipata Fish Farm. Location map
Figure 2. Boundary map
Table 1 List of Coordinates and Elevation of PBRs
PBR
Coordinates (m)
Elevation (m)
Partial E
Partial N
Easting
Northing
(iii) Contour map
Contour maps used in design of the facilities of the project must show the contour lines and all the establishments found at the proposed site such as roads, electric and telephonic lines, rivers and drains or other channels, buildings, underground oil, gas or water supply pipelines, borrow pits, boundary lines, including the location of the PBRs and the TBMs, the north direction as well as the scale used for mapping. The contour map may also show the location of soil sampling stations with numbering. The contour maps, depending on the size of area proposed for the project, should be scaled in 1:1000 to 1:5000.
The contour lines should be plotted on the map at 10 cm intervals for flat land and 20 to 25 cm intervals for hilly or valley terrain.
(iv) Cross and longitudinal sections
If a project is established in an area where there are fish ponds, drains and other channels, etc., their cross and longitudinal sections are often required for designing of the new fish ponds or the renovation of the old ones, etc. In such a case, the cross-sections should have a scale of 1:100 and the longitudinal sections should be plotted to a scale of 1:100 vertical and 1:500 to 1:5000 horizontal.
(v) Land map
In order to procure the land needed for a project, the required area of the project should be marked by the selected boundary lines on the land map. For procurement of land, the cadastral data of the lands including their owner's names, the size and unit price, as well as total amount in local currency of lands, should be prepared as shown in Table 2.
Table 2 Land Cadastral Data
Item
Land owner's name
Land
Land price
Number
Area (ha)
Required area (ha)
Unit
(I. Rs)
Total amount
(I. Rs)
Shri M.B. Prasad
Shri A.K. Sing
Shri M.B. Beg
Total
3.1.2 Soil survey
A detailed investigation of soils is needed to design the facilities of a project. The first step in a detailed investigation is a review of the work already done in the previous project stage. This includes not only a review of the reconnaissance investigations, but also an examination of the reconnaissance design, if any is available, and a determination of whether the objective is still the same. Depending upon the results of the reconnaissance exploration and the size of the project, the requirements for the detailed soil survey must be predetermined. The number and spacing of borings including their exploration depth is dependent upon what is needed to get the data of the soils found in the bore holes at the site. By studying the exploration boring logs available general information on the expected conditions can be obtained. From this the additional number of borings including their spacing distance and exploration depths can be determined. In order to avoid loss of
time and money due to boring superfluous bore holes, the following is suggested for preparation of a detailed investigation (U.S.D.I., 1965).
(i) 1 or 2 sample stations to each 2 to 5 ha of the site, should generally be used under uniform soil conditions. More sample stations will be required in variable soil conditions. The Engineer conducting the field exploration work should decide upon the additional number of sample stations.
(ii) The depth of each bore hole should be a minimum of 2.0 m below the deepest intended excavation of the project area. The boring depth and the number of sample stations for a special structure, i.e. a large water tower, should be commensurate with the size of the structure.
A number of disturbed and undisturbed samples should be taken from every stratum encountered in the bore holes. The soil samples provide material for an investigation of the soil properties by means of laboratory tests. The results of the soil investigations should be detailed in a report (Terzaghi, 1967).
3.1.2.1 Requirements for soil survey report
The results of the soil survey should be presented in a report. A detailed soil survey report must contain the following:
(i) General report
In this part, the location of the investigations, methods of boring and samplings, in situ tests conducted at the site, the results of the laboratory tests, the allowable bearing capacity and settlement, the characteristics of the ground water, including whether the water table is perched or normal, its expected fluctuation at the site and quantity of soluble salts or other minerals present as well as foundation and dike construction considerations, should be described in detail.
The laboratory tests should provide the required data as listed below for the construction works:
(a) soil consistency
- liquid limit (LL)
- plastic limit (PL)
- plastic index (PI)
- relative consistency (Cr)
(b) soil components
- grain size analysis curves coefficient of uniformity (C[u])
- particle size analysis
(c) index properties
- water content (w)
- void ratio (e)
- porosity (n)
- dry density (g d)
- wet density (g wet)
- proctor maximum dry density (g Pr)
- absolute specific gravity (G[as])
- apparent specific gravity (G[s])
- cohesion (c)
- angle of internal friction (f)
- allowable bearing capacity (s a)
- modulus of elasticy (E)
- permeability coefficient (k)
(d) ground water analysis
- pH
- content of sulphate ion
(ii) Location map
Location map should show all the locations of sample stations with their ground elevation.
(iii) Logs of sample stations
A log is a written record of the data concerning soils and conditions encountered in individual bore holes. It also provides the results of the laboratory tests on which all subsequent conclusions are based, such as design of the facilities and method of construction. It may form an important part of contract documents and it may be required as basic evidence in court in case of dispute. Each log, therefore, should be factual, accurate, clear and complete. It should not be misleading. The headings on the log forms provide spaces for supplying identifying information as to project, hole number, elevation, dates started and completed, and the name of the person responsible. The body of the log form is divided into a series of columns covering the depth, thickness and description of strata, the presence or absence of water levels as well as the results of the laboratory tests.
(iv) Soil profiles
Sections to show the subsurface conditions are used in projects located on hilly terrain. Where soil profiles are provided in the soil report, the information shown in them is limited to factual data such as the ground surface line and logs of bore holes located in their actual position with respect to the ground surface line. Although the choice of sections is made to simplify interpretation, actual locations of features such as water table, etc., are not illustrated by continuous lines, but only where they are encountered in each hole.
3.2 Detailed Planning
3.2.1 Project report
3.2.2 Designs
3.2.3 Criteria for designing pond facilities
3.2.4 Preparation of detailed drawings
3.2.1 Project report
A complete report should be prepared covering the project proposal, investigation, the production including its proposed method, engineering features, execution of construction, summary of costs, etc. It should contain a general description of the design including the drawings. The following outline of the items which the report should cover is included as a guide. Obviously, all of the information listed in this outline is not necessary for any particular small project, but the greater part of it will be usually required for a larger project (Alien, 1981).
1. Introduction
This includes the background information and the notes of the proposal.
2. Purpose of project
This should contain the following particulars:
2.1 Type of project
- pilot fish farm
- research fish farm
- training fish farm
- production fish farm
(a) fish seed production fish farm
(b) commercial fish farm
2.2 Production of project
- proposed cultural method
(a) selection of fish species
(b) type of fish culture
- monoculture
- polyculture
- main characteristics of production
- production calculation considerations
(a) broodstock requirement
(b) survival rates
(c) fry requirement
(d) fingerling requirement
(e) stocking ratio
(f) feed conversion ratio
(g) pond fertilization
2.3 Marketing schedule
- methods
3. General information and data
This should include the following particulars:
3.1 The project site
- location
- accessibility
- communication
- power supply
- land status
- existing improvements
3.2 Hydrological data
- design flood
- runoff
- ground water potential
3.3 Meteorological data
- mean monthly temperature
- mean monthly rainfall
- mean monthly evaporation
- mean monthly humidity
- mean monthly sunshine
- mean monthly wind speed and prevailing direction
3.4 Water source and quality
- description of water source
- statement for water rights or water restrictions
- summary of water analysis
3.5 Topography
- summary of topographic survey
- list of the boundary points' coordinates
- list of the temporary bench marks
3.6 Soil characteristics
- summary of the soil report
- water table conditions
4. Planning considerations
Design criteria and specifications, description of the facilities, and schedule of execution should be stated in this section of the report.
4.1 Layout of the fish ponds size of ponds
- water depth in the ponds
4.2 Water requirement summary of the water demand calculations
4.3 Water supply and drainage systems
- for fish ponds
- for hatchery building
- for additional concrete tanks
- for raceways
- methods for water filtration or water treatments
4.4 Description of the facilities
(a) fish ponds
- dikes dike protection
- internal roads
- structures
(b) hatchery
(c) pumping station
(d) other buildings
4.5 Description of the construction works schedule of execution
5. Cost estimate and cost of production
(These will be presented in Chapter 4)
6. List of detailed drawings
It should contain all drawings required for the project to be executed. The following drawings are most commonly prepared and enclosed with the project report:
6.1 Location map
6.2 Layout plan
6.3 Setting out plan
6.4 Cross and longitudinal sections
6.5 Structural detailed drawings
6.6 Plans of hatchery and other buildings
6.7 Plan of pumping station
6.8 Installation plans
3.2.2 Designs
In order to ensure that the detailed plans should be both economical and suitable to the construction, their design must be properly performed. The following designs depending upon the nature and scale of the project usually have to be prepared for the detailed drawings.
3.2.2.1 Hydrological computations
To design a fish farm, located on hilly terrain and fed by water stored in a reservoir or supplied from runoff of the water catchment area, usually will require hydrological computations as follows:
(a) determination of design flood for the spillway of the reservoir to fish ponds or hatchery;
(b) runoff of the water catchment area of the project site should be calculated to determine the capacity of the reservoir or the possible area of the fish ponds.
All these calculations based on the local meteorological and soil conditions may be presented using the calculating formulas as shown in Annex 1.
3.2.2.2 Production calculations and pond facilities
Production calculations provided by an Aquaculturist are the most essential parts of the project documents. All statements of production calculations should be considered to prepare any detailed plans of the project. These contain usually the following particulars:
(a) fish farm
- production target
- proposed cultural method cultured fish species
- stocking rate
- initial weight
- proposed harvesting weight
- survival rate
- requirements of broodstock, fry and fingerling
- feed requirements
- feed conversion ratio
- pond fertilization
- pond management
- operational plan
- marketing plan
- pond specifications
- type of ponds
- size and number of ponds
- proposed water depth for each type of pond
- harvesting specifications
- harvesting method
- requirements of the harvesting facilities
- aeration requirements to the ponds if needed
(b) hatchery
- production target
- proposed hatchery technology
- operational plan
- specification of facilities
- aeration requirements.
3.2.3 Criteria for designing pond facilities
(i) Size and shape of ponds can be defined on the following criteria:
(a) Production purpose: based on the species to be cultured in the ponds, the size should be as follows:
Type of pond
Bottom area (ha)
Spawning (S)
Nursery (N)
Rearing and production (R)
Holding (H)
These ponds, except the rearing and production ones, should be square or rectangular in shape (Woynárovich, 1980).
(b) Intensification of production: the higher the production per unit area, the more important becomes the production factor in relation to pond size. Considering the possibility of a larger amount of fish loss during a longer period of harvesting it is advisable to complete harvesting as quickly as possible. It should take no more than one day per pond. The maximum amount of fish which can be handled by an experienced staff with equipment in one day depending on the water and air temperatures, is 10 to 40 tons. This can determine to a large extent the optimal size of the pond, as follows:
Level of production
Production
Bottom area
ton/ha/cycle
(ha)
Intensive
Semi-intensive
Extensive
(c) Risk
Losses due to epidemic diseases or algae bloom etc., in pond water are more in larger ponds with higher stocking density. It is not desirable to risk more than 10 tons in each pond if any such losses are anticipated.
(d) Marketing schedule
The demand of fish for market may be determined by the optimal size of each production pond.
(e) Harvesting method
To facilitate netting, it is desirable to limit the width of the ponds to about 75 m. However, using a separate harvesting pond or special harvesting box or structure, the width and the shape of the ponds are not limited.
(f) Construction cost
The larger the pond, the lower will be the construction cost per unit area. This is because, the smaller the ponds, the greater is the proportional area occupied by dikes and channels. The construction cost for larger ponds will be lower if their long sides can be oriented parallel to the contours. The steeper the ground gradient the more important it becomes to orient the ponds parallel to the contour. Ponds oriented parallel to the contours also require a shallower cut and a shorter earthmoving haul, which is very important when the ponds have to be constructed with manual labour. The larger the pond, the more difficult it becomes to locate ponds parallel to the contours.
(ii) Water depth in the pond is determined by the following factors:
(a) species to be cultured in the ponds (Chen, 1976; Edwards, 1978; Huet, 1972; Lee, 1973)
Species
Average water depth in m
S
N
R
H
Common carp (Cyprinus carpio)
Chinese carps:
Grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idellus)
Silver carp (Hypothalmichthys molitrix)
Big head (Aristichthys nobilis)
Mud carp (Cirrhina molitorella)
Snail carp (Mylopharungodon piceus)
Indian major carps:
Rohu (Labeo rohita)
Catla (Catla catla)
Mrigal (Cirrhinus mrigala)
Tilapia species
Grey mullet (Mugil cephalus)
Catfish species
Black bass species
Pejerrey (Basilichthys bonariensis)
Colossoma species
Rhamdia species
Eel species
Freshwater prawn (Macrobrachium rosenbergii)
Rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri)
(b) Meteorological features
Both air and water temperature as well as wind velocity must be considered in determining the water depth in the pond.
In the tropical region, the daily temperature fluctuations are smaller in deeper ponds than in shallow ponds because of the greater ratio between the water surface and volume. This is important because the optimal water temperature required for a higher fish production may be assured with a sufficient water depth. Whereas, in colder areas, such as Europe, where the problem is how to attain higher water temperatures in the ponds more rapidly, the shallower ponds are recommended to achieve a relatively high fish production (Hepher, 1981).
The direction and average velocity of the prevailing winds affect the natural circulation in the ponds which is very important for deeper ponds.
When the water source is solely runoff, sometimes it is necessary to increase pond volumes by increasing depth so as to accumulate enough water during the rainy season to suffice for the entire growing season.
(iii) Pond bottom
In order to drain water completely the bottom of the smaller ponds and the bottom of the internal channels in the larger ponds must be sloped towards their outlet points respectively. A minimum bottom slope of 0.1 to 0.2 % is sufficient
(iv) Dike
Measurements and slopes of the dikes should be determined according to the depth of water in the pond, the size of the pond, soil conditions, construction method and the requirements of transport as well as transit on the dike. The following figures represent good practice:
Water depth in the pond
Top width of dike
Free board
(m)
(m)
(m)
Top width for a road used by vehicles should be a minimum of 3.0 m. If there is a feeder channel on the top of the dike, its top width should be wide enough for both the feeder channel and a road or a passage way. The latter is needed for pond operations and maintenance of inlets and feeder channel (Tapiador, 1977).
The side slopes of the dikes depend upon the soil conditions, water depth and size of the pond, as well as the expected wave actions. The following slopes are recommended for dikes in various soils:
Type of soil
Inside slope
Outside slope
Sandy loam
Sandy clay
Firm clay
Inside brick lining
Inside concrete lining
The exposed parts of the dike (outside slope, crown, inside slope above the water level) should be protected by grass against erosion. In ponds with more than about 0,5 ha of water surface, wave protection made of branches, rip-rap, brick lining, bamboo matting, etc. is required at the water level (Stickney, 1979).
In order to have a stable dike, a berm with a width of 2.0 to 4.0 m must be left between the dike toe and the drainage channel (Khanna, 1981).
v) Inlet and outlet structures
A fish pond should have separate inlet and outlet structures for water supply and drainage as far as possible. The inlet may be anything from a simple pipe to a concrete sluice. It is very important that the inlet be screened to prevent predatory fish and other animals from entering the pond. The floor level of the inlet is usually higher by a minimum of 0.10 m than the water level in the pond partly to ensure water aeration and partly to avoid escape of stocked fish. Protection must be provided against erosion under and around the inlet. The inlet is better located in the centre of the short side of the pond, in order to provide better water circulation (Hora, 1962).
The outlet should be, generally, on the opposite side to the inlet in smaller ponds. A turndown pipe, open sluice or monk are used as outlet structures. The best type of outlet for controlling water level in the pond and draining the pond is the monk. The monk consists of a vertical tower with three pairs of grooves for housing screens and stoplogs and a horizontal conduit passing across the dike at the lowest level of the pond. It is advisable to provide a harvesting box at the downstream end of the conduit for harvesting the pond without netting. This harvesting box may also be used for breeding or for holding fish for marketing. The size of inlet and outlet should be calculated on the basis of the time needed for filling or draining the pond respectively (Wheaton, 1977).
For designing inlets of ponds the required filling times of different types of ponds can be considered as follows:
Type of ponds
Filling time in days
Spawning
Nursery
Rearing and production
Holding
For calculation of the discharge of the feeder channel including intake structure or pumping station the peak water demand has to be considered. The total filling time of all the ponds can be calculated as 6 to 30 days for 5 to 25 ha ponds. The drainage time for different types of ponds should be as follows:
Type of ponds
Drainage time in days
Spawning
Nursery
Rearing and production
Holding
The total drainage time of all the ponds can be calculated as 5 to 25 days for 5 to 25 ha ponds.
The structures used for fish ponds are made of various materials. For designing these structures the durability and maintenance cost of the materials used should be taken into account as follows:
Material
Durability
Maintenance cost
(years)
Reinforced concrete (1:2:4)
Stone rubble in 1:5 cement mortar
Brick masonry in 1:5 cement mortar
Wooden
3.2.3.1 Water requirement calculations
The annual water requirements of fish ponds will depend on the soil conditions found at the project site, environmental factors, cultured species and the chosen technology of fish culture. To avoid any difficulty during the operation period of fish ponds all the factors have to be considered in this calculation. The necessary amount of water for a pond in an average year can be calculated using the equation below:
Q[r] = V[f] + V[rf] + L[e] + L[s] + L[c]
V[ra ](m^3)
or
(l/sec)
where
Q[r] = annual water requirement (m^3 or l/sec)
V[f] = A×h = the pond volume to be filled (m^3)
A = average water surface area of pond (m^2)
h = average water depth of pond (m)
V[rf] ^= N[o]×V[f] = the pond volume to be refilled (m^3)
N[o] = number of refillings a year
L[e] = A×E = water loss from evaporation (m^3)
E = mean annual evaporation (m)
L[s] = A×T×S= seepage loss in the pond (m^3)
S = seepage coefficient (m/day)
L[c] = A[c]×1.2×E = transmission loss in earthen channel (m^3)
A[c] = water surface area of feeder channel (m^2)
V[ra] = A[eff]×R[a] = water inflow from rainfall to pond (m^3)
A[eff]= total area of pond including 70 dikes affected by rain (m^3)
R[a] = mean annual rainfall (m)
T = operational time in days.
For a hatchery, the peak water demand should be determined considering the production target and hatchery technology proposed (Piper, 1982).
For a raceway system, the maximum flow of water should be calculated. This can be determined from the number of daily water changes in the raceway and the cross sectional area of the raceway (Leitritz, 1980).
3.2.3.2 Hydraulic computations
To avoid overdesigned sizes of hydraulic structures for fish ponds or hatchery, and to assure that their sizes are adequate for smooth operation, hydraulic computations to determine their sizes should be performed, as follows:
(a) for water supply system
- design of the main and secondary feeder channels including intake, division boxes, pumping station or syphon, etc.
- design of inlets
(b) for drainage system design of outlets
- design of drainage channel including its structures, i.e. culvert, fall, etc.
(c) for hatchery
- design of the capacity of pump including its overhead tank design of the water supply pipeline
- design of the drain pipeline
- design of the filter system
To calculate the sizes of the above-mentioned or other hydraulic structures the hydraulic formulas given in Chapter 8 include all the formulas required to determine the sizes of the hydraulic structures. Obviously, the peak water demand based on the production calculations should be considered.
3.2.3.3 Structural calculations
In order to achieve sound hydraulic structures and buildings the structural calculations should be performed.
3.2.3.4 Stability analysis of dikes
The dikes of fish ponds must be safe and stable during all phases of construction and operation of fish ponds. To accomplish this, the following criteria should be met:
(a) the dike must be safe against sliding by water force
(b) the slopes of the dike must be stable during construction and under all conditions of pond operation including rapid drawdown of the pond (Creager, 1950)
(c) the dike must be designed so as not to impose excessive stresses upon the foundation
(d) seepage flow through the dike, foundation and structures must be controlled so that no internal erosion takes place and so there is no sloughing in the area where the seepage emerges. The amount of water lost through seepage must be controlled so that it does not interfere with planned project functions.
An earthfill dike designed to meet the above criteria will prove permanently safe provided proper construction methods and control are achieved (Capper, 1978)
3.2.4 Preparation of detailed drawings
To prepare drawings based on detailed investigations and designs, the following should be noted:
- to ensure the most economic solutions and to avoid any delay in construction as a result of shortage of materials, the structures and any buildings should be generally designed with available local materials (Tang, 1979);
- to ensure durability of structures and buildings, etc., the best quality materials and workmanship must be used;
- to maintain a high quality of construction, standard local construction techniques should be taken into account when the facilities are designed, and in particular when the measurements of earth works are determined.
3.2.4.1 Requirements of detailed drawings
(i) Location, boundary, contour and land maps
The requirements of the above maps have been discussed in point 3.1.1.1.
(ii) Layout plan
This plan, depending on the size of the project area, must be scaled in 1:1000 to 1:5000. The layout plan must show the contour lines if those are not provided on a separate contour map and all the establishments found at the site such as the existing roads, electric and telephonic lines, rivers and drains or other channels, buildings, underground pipelines, boundary lines, including the location of the PBRs and the TBMs with their elevations, the North line and the scale used for planning. In addition, the layout plan must show the designed establishments such as fish ponds with their measurements and area as well as the FSL in the ponds, the location of the feeder and drainage channels, all the structures with their mark and number, the hatchery and other buildings needed, the pumping station or other water sources, i.e. wells, etc., the approach road, etc. The characteristic data of the structures such as their mark, size and floor level must be given in a table on the
layout plan as shown in Figure 3.
A separate layout plan must usually be prepared for the buildings showing their locations including the internal roads, the measurements and the floor levels of the buildings, etc., their connections to the designed ponds, the North line as well as other facilities, i.e. electric and water supply pipelines, etc. This plan is generally scaled in 1:500 to 1:1000.
(iii) Setting out plan
In order to ensure the accurate marking-out of all the earthworks of the fish farm, a setting out plan must be prepared. The reference line including the TBMs, all the measurements of the fish ponds and drains, as well as feeder canals, including the location and numbering of the cross sections required to peg out the centre lines of the dikes and the channels must be illustrated on this plan as shown in Figure 4. The elevations of the TBMs and other data needed for setting out the facilities should also be given in this plan. The TBMs should be established in such positions that they cannot be destroyed by the machines during the construction period. The scale of this plan is the same, or less, than that used for the layout plan.
(iv) Cross-and longitudinal sections of earthworks
(a) Cross-sections
Cross-sections of dikes, feeder and drainage channels, inner channels and harvesting pits in the ponds should be given in the detailed plans scaled in 1:100. Two types of cross-sections should be noted as follows:
1) Typical cross-sections can be prepared for a smaller project located on flat land. In this case the cross-sections must show all the measurements including their slopes, etc., except their actual height.
2) Cross-sections prepared for a medium or larger project should be generally shown for every 50 m of their longitudinal sections including all the dimensions required for their marking out, as well as their actual height. In this case, the section number of cross-sections should be indicated on the drawing. Using these cross-sections, the earthwork calculations for the bill of quantities can be easily done.
In addition to the above, the necessary elevations for both the top of the dikes, the FSL in the ponds and the pond or drain bottoms must be indicated in all the cross-sections. A mark, number or section number must be given to each cross-section. The existing ground level including the instructions referring to the topsoil removal from the basement of the dikes, should be noted on the plan. It is very important that the axis of the dikes and drains, as well as their distances, be illustrated on the drawing.
Figure 3. Layout plan
Figure 4. Setting out plan
From time to time when the soil used for construction of dikes has a higher seepage coefficient than required for an impervious dike, a clay core should be designed into the dikes. In this case, the measurements of the proposed clay core including the specifications needed for the core materials must be shown in the cross-sections.
In the larger ponds, wave protection has to be provided. Therefore, a typical cross-section of the proposed wave protection in the ponds should be prepared in a scale of 1:50. All the materials, both in quantity and quality, with their specifications should be given in this cross-section.
(b) Longitudinal sections
In general the longitudinal sections are to be plotted in the scale of 1:100 in vertical and 1:500 to 1:5000 in horizontal. They should contain as shown in Figure 5, the length, bottom level in the ponds or in the drains, the location and mark of the structures and dikes, the ground level, the designed crest level of the dikes, as well as the FSL in the ponds. Longitudinal sections will have to be prepared in the following cases:
1) In a barrage pond system for the valley section occupied by:
- fish ponds
- each dam of the fish ponds
- the diversion channel
2) In a larger contour pond system for the water supply channel, i.e. irrigation channel to the fish farm:
- the main and secondary feeder channels to the fish ponds
- the main and secondary drains
- the inner drains in the ponds
- the dikes
The longitudinal sections including the cross-sections concerned can be used for the quantity calculations of the different earthworks.
(v) Structural detailed drawings
Based on the result of the hydraulical computations and the structural calculations, the detailed drawings of all the hydraulic structures including also the feeder channels as well as the pumping station if needed, must be prepared in the following detail:
1) Layout plan of the structure scaled at 1:50 to 1:200 must show the plan, the required sections and views as well as other details of the structure with all measurements and elevations required for formwork, its connection to the dike and the drain, etc., as well as the quality of the different materials designed for the structure as shown in Figure 6.
2) Reinforcement details of the structure as shown in Figure 7 scaled in 1:25 to 1:50 should show all the bars including their spacing and mark in detail sections needed for its construction.
3) Reinforcement plan should give the quality, mark, shape in cm, diameter in mm, number, unit length and total length as well as total weight of bars required for construction of the structure as shown in Figure 8.
The additional detailed plans of the screen, the stoplogs or the installation plans of the pumps for the pumping station, must be prepared in a similar format and detail.
Figure 5. Longitudinal sections - Chipata Fish Farm
Figure 6. Mwekera Fish Farm. Details of outlet
Figure 7. Mwekera Fish Farm. Reinforcement details of outlet
Figure 8. Mwekera Fish Farm
Figure 8. (Cont'd)
(vi) Hatchery building
Based on the production technology and other calculations, the detailed plans of the hatchery, depending on its output capacity must be prepared in the following detail:
1) Layout plan of the hatchery scaled at 1:50 should show facilities for egg incubation and fry of fingerling holding tanks of spawners, the necessary space for handling and treatment of spawners, storage facilities for feed, equipment as well as laboratory room in which the required chemical and other materials may be stored (Bardach, 1972; New, 1982).
2) Plumbing plan should include all the pipelines of both water and air supply to the incubation and rearing facilities showing the materials and size of each pipe including fittings as well as the designed drainage facilities.
3) Installation plans of the incubation and rearing facilities should be separately provided in detail with a scale of 1:10 to 1:50.
4) Reinforcement details of the different tanks and the building as well as other detailed plans needed for construction of the hatchery must be provided in a scale of 1:10 to 1:50.
4. ESTIMATES
4.1 Preparation of Detailed Estimates
Before approving a project, the cost of work required must be thoroughly investigated. It is necessary to prepare the cost estimate, for the intended work from the plans and specifications. Thus, an estimate for construction work can be defined as the process of calculating the quantities and costs of the various items needed in connection with the work (Chakraborti, 1922).
Quantity Estimate or Quantity Survey
This is a complete estimate of the quantities of materials or items that may be required to accomplish the project concerned. The quantity estimate is one of the most important ones in order to arrive at an accurate cost estimate for the detailed plan.
Detailed Estimate
Based on the results of the quantity estimate, this includes the cost estimate of everything required for satisfactory completion of work, and should be the best and most reliable estimate that can be made.
Complete Estimate
This is an estimated cost of all items, i.e. cost of main contract or material, labour and supervision, cost of land, engineering fees, miscellaneous, viz. removal costs of owner, contingency percentage, etc., which are related to the work in addition to the detailed estimate.
4.1 Preparation of Detailed Estimates
4.1.1 General abstract of cost
4.1.2 Abstract of cost
4.1.3 Analysis of rates
4.1.4 Quantity estimates
Based on the methods used for the preparation of detailed estimates in different countries, in general the principal parts of the detailed estimates consist of the following:
4.1.1 General abstract of cost
This includes the name of the project, the date of preparation and the cost of different main sub-headings, including engineering cost of civil works, cost of equipment and land, etc. as well as contingencies. The detailed cost of each sub-heading is not shown in the general abstract of cost.
4.1.2 Abstract of cost
The estimated cost of each and every individual item of work is calculated by multiplying the quantity by the specified rate in tabular form known as "Abstract form' as shown below, then adding all together to get the actual estimated cost of work. A percentage (1.5 to 2.5 percent) of the above estimate is usually added for a work charge along with an amount (usually 0.5 percent) for tools and plant, to calculate the grand total of the estimated cost.
S1.
No.
Description of item
Unit
Quantity
Rate
Amount
Total:
1 ½ % for work charge
½ % for tools and plant
GRAND TOTAL:
In order to ensure that the detailed estimates can be easily surveyed, sub-headings are usually required. In this case, each sub-heading of the estimate is grouped for similar items of work. For an aquaculture project, the sub-headings should be as follows:
(a) Site clearing and preparation
(b) Earthwork - this includes excavation, filling, dressing, dewatering, etc.
(c) Concrete work - this includes plain and reinforced concrete works, prefabricated concrete works, formwork for concrete structures, etc.
(d) Brickwork - this includes brickwork in foundation and plinth, brickwork in superstructures, etc.
(e) Stonework - this includes stone work for bed or wave protection and in structures, etc.
(f) Woodwork
(g) Steelwork
(h) Roofing
(i) Water supply and sanitary works
(j) Miscellaneous
(k) Finishing
The abstract of cost should contain the different sub-headings shown separately and added together to show the cost to complete the project.
4.1.3 Analysis of rates
In order to provide a correct and reasonable rate per unit for a particular item, a detailed surveyed called an "Analysis of rate" should be conducted on costs of materials, labour and equipment as required for the unit following its specification. The rate per unit of an item consists of the following:
(a) Quantity of materials and their cost
The quantities of various materials required per unit rate for an item are determined by the specifications. The cost of materials should be the cost on site. To calculate this, an analysis of rates of materials should be calculated separately. This includes the market cost of the materials, including loading and unloading costs, 10 percent profit, and transportation costs.
(b) Labour cost
This includes the number of labourers, skilled and unskilled, and their respective wages multiplied by the hours required to complete per unit.
(c) Cost of equipment, tools or plant
Wherever possible, the cost of equipment should be allocated to a specific item of rate, i.e. the cost of operating a concrete mixer should be spread over those items for which it is used. For certain tools and plant it is difficult to allocate their use to an individual item of rate, and it is therefore suggested that this expenditure be included in overheads, i.e. establishment charges.
(d) Overhead or establishment charges
These include such items as office rent and depreciation of equipment, salaries of office staff, postage, lighting, travel, telephone charges, plans and specifications, etc. They are usually 2 /2% of the net cost of a unit of rate, and may increase to 5 percent.
(e) Profit
In general, a profit of 10 percent is calculated for ordinary contracts after allocating all charges for equipment, establishment, etc. For small jobs 15 percent profit and for large jobs 8 percent profit should be considered as common figures.
For such items of work for which it is difficult to prepare an analysis of rate, a lump sum (L.S.) rate should be provided in the estimate.
4.1.3.1 Schedule of rates or data for costing
To facilitate the preparation of estimates and to enable them to be prepared in a uniform manner, a schedule of rates or data for costing each kind of work commonly executed is provided by different departments in each country. These usually include general conditions, general specifications, items of different works, data for transportation, materials and labour, method of rate analysis, plant rate analysis and basic unit rate analysis.
4.1.4 Quantity estimates
As mentioned previously, quantity estimates of items of various works should be prepared to provide an accurate cost estimate for the implementation of a project. Quantity estimates should be prepared separately for both the structures and the earthworks.
(i) Quantity estimates for structures and buildings
Measurement of all structures and buildings should be taken as per the standard specification, or as per the schedule of rate, or as per current practice.
(ii) Quantity estimates of earthworks
The quantity estimates of earthworks, using the plans of cross and longitudinal sections, as well as contour plans if needed, should be prepared. Measurements for earthwork shall be calculated from the relevant drawings.
Calculating formulas
(1) Sectional area having no transverse slope for diking or cutting with same side slopes
A = B×d +s×d^2, m^2
where
B = crest width of dike, m
d = height of diking or depth of cutting, m
s = ratio of side slope as horizontal: vertical
(2) Sectional area having no transverse slope for diking or cutting with different side slopes
m^2
where
b = base width of dike, m
(3) Irregular sectional area
Simpson's rule: divide the sectional area into an even number (n) of parallel strips by means of (n + 1) ordinates, spaced equal distances, d
(4) Volumes of earthwork
(a) Mid section formula
In this formula, the mean depth or height should be calculated first by averaging the depths of two consecutive sections. From the mean depth the area of mid section should be calculated and volume of earthwork computed by multiplying the area of mid section by the distance between the two original sections. To estimate the quantity of earthwork for a dike or a channel whose level sections are taken at a distance, D, which may be varied depending on the ground level in the longitudinal section of the dike or the channel, a tabular form can be used as shown below:
Station
Height or depth at station (m)
Mean height or depth (m)
Sectional area(m^2)
Distance between
Quantity
stations (m)
Dike (m^3)
Cutting (m^3)
(b) Trapezoidal or end areas formula
This method is based on the assumption that the mid area of a pyramid is half the average area of the ends and the end sections are in parallel planes. If A[1] and A[2] are areas of the ends the volume of the prismoid is given by
Quantity of earthwork may be calculated by trapezoidal formula in a tabular form as shown below
Station
Height or depth at station
Sectional area
Mean sectional area
Distance between stations
Quantity
(m)
(m^2)
(m^2)
(m)
Dike (m^3)
Cutting (m^3)
(c) Prismoidal formula
If the volume of earth between two successive cross-sections is considered a prismoid, then a more precise formula, the prismoidal formula, may be used. It is generally considered that end sections are in parallel planes.
There are a number of alternative ways in which the prismoidal formula may be used. For instance, it can be used to calculate the volume of excavation in a smaller nursery pond applying the prismoidal formula for a single strip
where
D = depth of excavation, m
A[1] = top area of excavation, m^2
A[2] = bottom area of excavation, m^2
Am = mid area of excavation, m^2
(d) Volumes from contour lines
This method may be conveniently used where accurate contours are available. The contour interval will determine the distance D in the trapezoidal or prismoidal formula, and for accuracy this should be as small as possible, preferably 0.1 to 0.5 m. The areas enclosed by individual contour lines are best taken off the map by means of a planimeter. In computing the volumes, the areas enclosed by two successive contour lines are used in the trapezoidal formula, whence:
where
V = volume of earth between contour lines A[1] and A[2]
D = vertical interval
This method can also be used to calculate the volume of water contained in a reservoir, corresponding to a given height. This is done by calculating the total volume contained below successive contours and then plotting volume against height to give a curve from which the volume at intermediate levels may be read.
(e) Volumes from spot levels
This is a method by means of which the earthwork for pond bottom, borrow pits, etc. and similar works with vertical sides may be calculated. Using this method, the area marked out on the contour map should be divided up into squares or rectangles. Elevations are taken at each of the corner points and by subtracting these from the corresponding formation levels, a series of heights is obtained from which the mean height of a series of vertical truncated prisms of earth can be found. The volume of each prism is given by the plan area multiplied by the mean height of the prism. The prisms may, of course, be considered as either rectangles or triangles.
5. TENDER DOCUMENTS
5.1 Advertisement for Bids (Notice to Contractors, or Invitation to Bid)
5.2 Draft Contract
5.3 Statements of Work, Services and Technical Specifications
5.4 Bill of Quantities
5.5 Schedule of Execution
5.6 Bidding Schedule
5.7 Approved Drawings
A tender is a written bid submitted by a Contractor in pursuance of the notification given, to execute certain work at calculated rates with the terms and conditions laid down in the tender documents.
5.1 Advertisement for Bids (Notice to Contractors, or Invitation to Bid)
For wide publicity of a major work, the sealed bids concerned are invited by advertising in a minimum of two daily local newspapers. All tender notices should be in the standard form established by the competent department. The advertisement should contain the following information: issuing office, brief description of work, location of project, estimated cost of work, office where plans and specifications can be obtained and charges for them, price of tender form and other tender documents, class of Contractors, earnest money to be deposited, time of completion, date for receipt of bids and time of opening of bids, accepting authority and rights reserved to the Owner. An example of a tender call notice is shown below.
ORISSA FISH SEED
DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION LIMITED.
VIVEKANANDA MARG, BHUBANESWAR-751002
TENDER CALL NOTICE
No. CAD-385K: - Managing Director, Orissa Fish Seed Development Corporation Limited. Vivekananda Marg, Bhubaneswar-2, Orissa invites sealed tenders for the following work from the registered contractors of State Public Works (R & B) and Irrigation Departments; Name of work:- Construction of 10 hectare fish seed hatchery project at Chiplima in the dist. of Sambalpur. Tender amount:- Rs. 12,25,191. Cost of tender paper:- Rs. 300 (Son refundable). E.M. 1% of cost of tender paper:- Rs. 12,250. Class of Contractor:- 'A' Class & above. Time of completion:-Twelve months. The tender paper will be sold during the office working days up to 9-12-82 and will be received on 10-12-82 at 2 p.m. and will be opened on the same day at 2.20 p.m. in the presence of the tenderer or their authorised representatives. The earnest money will be duly pledged to the Managing Director, Orissa Fish Seed Development Corporation Limited, Bhubaneswar in shape of N.D.C./N.P.S.C./N.S.C./Orissa Government
Loan Bond/ Postal Savings Pass Book/Demand Draft on any Indian nationalised banks at Bhubaneswar, without which tender will be liable for rejection. Certified copy of the Sales Tax and Income Tax clearance certificates are also to be attached and the original to be shown at the time of opening. The authority reserves the right to cancel any or all the tenders without assigning any reason thereof.
MANAGING DIRECTOR
For smaller projects, an invitation for bids is issued by the owner to a selected group of Contractors. It conveys much of the information that would be included in an advertisement. In this case, instructions to bidders should be provided in the letter of invitation to the Employer.
5.2 Draft Contract
5.2.1 Types of contracts
5.2.2 General provisions or general conditions
5.2.3 Special provisions or special conditions
For implementation of the construction works of a project, an agreement, commonly called a contract, between Owner and Contractor should be concluded which requires that certain legal formalities be observed by the parties. The nature and content of contracts vary from country to country and the terms of the contract should be precise and definite and there should be no room for ambiguity or misconstruction therein. To avoid this contingency, the government department and agencies as well as the Association of Consulting Engineers or the Institutions of Civil Engineers have established standard printed contract forms (Abrahamson, 1969).
5.2.1 Types of contracts
Unit-price contract
For unit-price contracts. Contractors are required to quote rates for various items of work on the basis of the corresponding unit price.
Advantages of unit-price contract:
(i) This form of contract ensures a more detailed analysis of cost by the Contractor. The authority concerned with accepting the tender can easily control the rates with reference to its own calculations and decide which of the tenders is favourable.
(ii) Since the Contractors are to write rates of individual items in figures as well as in words, it is not easy to form a ring during submission of tender and allot work to one of the Contractors without competition.
(iii) The Contractors work out the unit prices of all items of the Bill of Quantities in order to put them in the bid. Thus, an unworkable rated tender may be avoided, which leads to smooth progress and timely completion of the work.
Lump-sum contract
In this form of contract the Contractor is required to quote a fixed sum for execution of the work completed in all respects. For such a contract, it is very important that the drawings and specifications be comprehensive and show in complete detail all features and requirements of the work.
Advantages of lump-sum contract;
(i) The employer knows exactly what the work will cost.
(ii) Detailed measurements of the work executed are not required to be recorded except in respect of additions and alterations.
Contract with lump-sum and unit prices
In this form of contract the Contractor is required to quote partly a fixed sum for execution of an entire structure completely detailed on the drawings, and partly unit prices which may be required for features of variable quantities such as excavation of drains for ponds.
Negotiated contract
When work is awarded on contract by mutual negotiation between the parties without call of tenders, it is said to be a negotiated contract. It may be in any of the forms mentioned above. Advantages of this contract are that it brings some economy in expenditure. The parties selected being always reliable and financially sound, ensure interrupted work with less chance of dispute.
Draft contracts consist of general provisions or general conditions and special provisions or special conditions. The general provisions set forth the rights and responsibilities of the parties to the construction contract and the surety, the requirements governing their business and legal relationships. Particular requirements of the project are separately inserted in the special provisions.
5.2.2 General provisions or general conditions
Governments have their own standard general conditions of contract provided on the printed tender form. The conditions specify mainly the following articles:
1. Definitions and interpretation
2. Engineer's representative
3. Assignment and subletting
4. Extent of contract
5. Contract documents
6. General obligations
7. Labour
8. Work materials and plant
9. Commencement time and delays
10. Maintenance and defects
11. Alterations, additions and omissions
12. Property in materials and plant
13. Measurement
14. Provisional and prime cost sums
15. Certificates and payment
16. Remedies and powers
17. Special risks
18. Frustration
19. Settlement of disputes
20. Notices
21. Default of Employer
The general provisions used by FAO in the contract for an aquaculture project as shown in Annex 2 specify the following articles:
1. Nature and interpretation of contract
2. Delays and default
3. Acceptance
4. Copyrights and patents
5. Disputes and arbitration
6. Liability with respect to claims
7. Changes and amendments
8. Termination
9. Notices
5.2.3 Special provisions or special conditions
There are several articles or clauses in the special provisions of a contract to govern the character of the work to be carried out. Annex 3 shows the general form used by FAO for aquaculture projects which comprise mainly the following articles:
1. Work and services to be executed by the Contractor
2. Equipment, materials, supplies, services and personnel to be provided by the Contractor
3. Schedule of performance
4. Authorizations and permits
5. Levies, duties, taxes, etc.
6. Statement of accounts and/or invoices of Contractor
7. Overpayments
8. Remuneration and method of payment
9. Revision of prices
10. Bonus for early completion and penalties
11. Certificates of completion of works
12. Period of maintenance
13. Completion of period of maintenance
14. Supervision of works
15. Construction site logbook
16. Organization of the construction site
17. Particulars to be supplied
18. Presence of the Contractor on the construction site
19. Insurances at the cost of the Contractor
20. Clearance of site on completion
21. Patent rights and royalties
22. Inspection of site
23. Designation of the Organization's Resident Engineer
5.3 Statements of Work, Services and Technical Specifications
5.3.1 Types of specifications
5.3.2 Specification writing
Statements of work and services contain the scope of the work including description of the site for work, soil characteristics determined by the reconnaissance soil survey carried out at the site, meteorological features needed for the construction works and the operation of the project, description of the project in detail including the construction works and services required.
The technical specifications contain detailed descriptions of all workmanship, services and materials as well as testing methods which are required to complete a project in accordance with the drawings and specifications.
The specifications required for a project are as follows:
1) Specification of work is required to describe the quality and different materials needed for a construction work and is one of the essential contract documents. In this manner the Contractor can prepare a programme to procure the materials required for a project as well as enabling the Owner's representative (the Engineer) to check the quality of materials, confirming the specifications and thereby avoiding any dispute with the Contractor.
2) This also specifies the scope of work and services provided by the Contractor to the Engineer as well as the workmanship, including the method of performing the work. Thus specification of a work serves as a guide both to the Contractor and the Engineer in order to execute the work to their satisfaction.
3) As the rate of work is based on a specification, the Contractor can calculate the rates of various items of works in a tender with his procurement rates of materials and labour. Thus tender documents without specifications of works are baseless;
4) The necessity of specification is to test the quality of materials for the work involved in a project.
5) Specification is an essential contract document and is required for Arbitration or court cases.
5.3.1 Types of specifications
The specifications are divided into two types as follows:
Standard specifications
The governmental departments and other public agencies sponsoring public works publish "standard specifications", ensuring a uniformity of administrative procedure and of quality of constructed facilities, as evidenced by specific requirements of materials and workmanship (Merritt, 1968).
Master specifications
In order that the specifications for a particular contract may be completely adaptable to the work of a contract, the standard specifications almost always require modifications and additions. Therefore, master specifications are prepared by design organizations. A master specification covers a particular item of construction, such as excavation of drains, dikes and concrete structures of ponds, etc. It contains requirements for all possible conditions and construction that can be anticipated for that particular item.
5.3.2 Specification writing
Specifications usually are written in the traditional style of composition. They should be prepared with as much detail as necessary to convey that which is required and hence agreed to. Ambiguity and verbosity should be avoided. A good specification is clear, concise and easily understood. The courts have traditionally interpreted ambiguous requirements against the party who prepared them. Since specifications supplement the drawings, the special provisions and standard specifications together should not leave any doubt as to the quality of the required work.
An example of Technical Specifications prepared for the construction of Chipata Fish Farm is given in Annex 4.
5.4 Bill of Quantities
A bill of quantities or schedule of quantities consists of a complete list of all various items of works for a project, giving the item number and description of items with unit and quantity of work against each, thus enabling an estimated calculation of price of work. The bill of quantities is prepared from drawings and specifications and is arranged in a tabular form without completing columns of rate and amount. An example of a bill of quantities for construction of outlets is shown in Annex 5.
The work of a project is usually divided into separate elements for payment purposes with respect to the kind of work involved, each element as a separate bill designated as a payment item. The total price of a bid is obtained by summation of the amounts for all items scheduled in the tender, arrived at by multiplying the estimated number of units for each item by the corresponding unit-price bid. A sample summary used for bill of quantities and contract cost is shown in Annex 6.
5.5 Schedule of Execution
The Contractor shall complete the work and services of the project to be executed under the contract in accordance with the schedule of execution.
Schedules may be performed in either tabular or graphical form, although the graphical form is generally used because of ease in visualization.
The most widely used graphical presentation of schedule of execution is the rectangular bar chart (Figure 9). It shows starting and completion dates for each item of work. It indicates the items on which work must proceed concurrently, items that overlap others and by how much, and the items that must be completed before work on others can begin. It is a convenient way to advise the Contractor of necessary material delivery dates.
For comparing performance of work with that scheduled, a bar is usually placed above the schedule bar showing actual start and completion dates. The chart in Figure 9 indicates that clearing and preparing of site started on the date programmed and was completed ahead of time whereas construction of outlets began late. At the close of August, construction of outlets was 75% complete. This method has the advantage of being simple. It can be used for a small-scale project, however a more detailed schedule of execution is required for a large-scale project. In this case bar charts have to be separately prepared for performance of work items and others showing materials and different machinery needed for all items of works.
Figure 9. Rectangular-bar progress schedule
5.6 Bidding Schedule
The bidding schedule is a very important document on which the contractor summarises his bid including the total price of bid, the load bearing capacity of the soil at the site on which the bid is calculated and confirms as well as signs the terms and conditions of the contract. There are various forms of a bidding schedule. A sample form of this used by FAO for aquaculture projects is given in Annex 7.
5.7 Approved Drawings
One set of approved drawings prepared for the project should be provided with the tender, on which the bidders will be able to control the tender's bill of quantities and calculate their bids. The following drawings have been generally enclosed with the tender documents:
1. Location map of the project, scale 1:50 000
2. General layout of the project, scale 1:2 000
3. Setting out plan, scale 1:2 000
4. Cross-section plan, scale 1:100
5. Longitudinal section of drains, dikes, etc., scale 1:2 000/1:100
6. Structural drawings, including reinforced concrete, scale 1:50
7. Details, scale 1:20
8. Plans of the hatchery and other buildings, scale 1:100
9. Plans of the pumping station, scale 1:500/1:50
10. Electrical installations, scale 1:50
11. Sanitary and other, if necessary, installations, scale 1:50
Further drawings may be issued from time to time at the discretion of the Engineer, as need arises.
6. REFERENCES
Abrahamson, M.W., 1969, Engineering law and the I.C.E. Contracts. London, MacLaren & Sons, Ltd.
Alien, L.J. and E.C. Kinney (eds), 1981, Proceedings of the Bio-Engineering Symposium for fish culture, Bethesda, Maryland, Fish Culture Section of the American Fisheries Society, FCS Publication, 1:307 p.
Bardach, J.E., J.H. Ryther and W.O. McLarney, 1972, Aquaculture: the farming and husbandry of freshwater and marine organisms. New York, Wiley-Interscience, 868 p.
Buringh, P., 1979, Introduction to the study of soils in tropical and subtropical regions. Wayennigen, Centre for Agricultural Publishing and Documentation
Capper, P.-L., W.F. Cassie and J.D. Geddes, 1980, Problems in engineering soils. London, Spon Ltd., 276 p. 3rd ed.
Chakraborti, M., 1982, Estimating costing and specifications in civil engineering. New Delhi (privately published)
Chen, T.P., 1976, Aquaculture practices in Taiwan. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News Book Ltd., 176 p.
Creager, W.P., J.D. 1950, Justin and J. Hinds, Engineering for dams. New York, John Wiley and Sons
Edwards, D.J., 1978, Salmon and trout farming in Norway. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News Book Ltd., 208 p.
Hepher, B. and Y. Pruginin, 1981, Commercial fish farming with special reference to fish culture in Israel. New York, Wiley Interscience, 261 p.
Hora, S.L. and T.V.R. Pillay, 1962, Handbook on fish culture in the Indo-Pacific region. FAO fish. Tech. Pap., (14):204p.
Huet, M. and J.A. Timmermans, 1972, Textbook of fish culture: breeding and cultivation of fish. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News Books Ltd., 436 p. 4th ed.
Kafuku, T., and H. Ikeneone, 1983, Modern methods of aquaculture in Japan. Tokyo, Kodansha Ltd., and Amsterdam, Elsevier, Developments in aquaculture and fisheries science, 11:216 p.
Khanna, P.N., 1981, Indian practical civil engineers' handbook. New Delhi, Engineers Publishers
Lee, J.S., 1973, Commercial catfish farming. Danville, Illinois, Interstate Printers and Publishers, Inc., 263 p.
Leitritz, E. and R.C. Lewis, 1980, Trout and salmon culture (hatchery methods). Calif. Fish. Bull., (164):197 p.
Linsley, R.K., M.A. Kohler and J.L.H. Paulhus, 1979, Applied hydrology. New Delhi, Tata, McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., 689 p.
Merritt, F.S., 1968 ,Standard handbook for civil engineers. New York, McGraw-Hill Book Co., pag. var. 2nd ed.
New, M.B. and S. Singholka, 1982, Freshwater prawn farming. A manual for the culture of Macrobrachium rosenbergii. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (225):116 p. Issued also in French and Spanish
Pillay, T.V.R., 1977, Planning of aquaculture development - an introductory guide, Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News Books Ltd., for FAO, 72 p.
Piper, R.G. et al., 1982, Fish hatchery management. Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, 517 p.
Stickney, R.R., 1979, Principles of warmwater aquaculture. New York, John Wiley & Sons Inc., 375 p.
Tang, Y.A., 1979, Physical problems in fish farm construction. In Advances in aquaculture edited by T.V.R. Pillay and W.A. Dill. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News Books Ltd., for FAO, pp. 99-104
Tapiador, D.D. et al., 1977, Freshwater fisheries and aquaculture in China. A report of the FAO Fisheries (aquaculture) Mission to China, 21 April-12 May 1976. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap.,(168):84 p. Issued also in French and Spanish
Terzaghi, K. and R.B. Peck, 1967, Soil mechanics in engineering practice. New York, John Wiley and Sons Inc.
US Department of Interior, 1965, Bureau of Reclamation, Earth manual. A guide to the use of soil as foundations and as construction materials for hydraulic structures. New Delhi, Oxford & IBH. Publishing Co., 783 p.
US Department of Interior, 1965, IBH Publishing Co., 816 p. 2nd ed.
Wheaton, F.E., 1977, Aquacultural engineering. New York, Wiley-Interscience, 708 p.
Woynárovich, E. and L. Horváth, 1980 , The artificial propagation of warm-water finfishes: a manual for extension. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap., (201):183 p. Issued also in French and Spanish
ANNEX 1 HYDROLOGICAL FORMULAS
1. METHOD FOR DETERMINING PEAK FLOOD FOR MINOR STRUCTURES
2 To design small dams with small water catchment areas (< 100 km) for aquaculture projects, the peak flood estimate required for the spillway calculations can be determined by the rational formula (Linsley, 1979)
where
Qp = peak rate of flow, m^3/sec
C = coefficient of runoff
i = rainfall intensity in cm per hour for a given frequency and a duration equal to the time of concentration of the basin
A = water catchment area, ha Values for the coefficient of runoff are given in Table 1.
Table 1 Values of Coefficient of Runoff, C
Soil type
Water catchment area cover
Cultivated
Pasture
Woodlands
Sandy or gravelly soils
Loams
Heavy clay soils or soils with a clay pan near the surface; shallow soils above impervious rock
The time of concentration, T[c], is the time it takes for water to flow from the most distant point in the water catchment area to the outlet point. An equation for estimating this characteristic follows.
where
T[c] = time of concentration in hours
L = length of the water catchment area along the main stream from the outlet to the most distant ridge in km
H = the difference in elevation between the outlet and the most distant ridge in km.
In areas where rainfall records are lacking, the time of concentration can be calculated to arrive at the duration of the design storm.
2. METHOD OF ESTIMATING ANNUAL UNIT WATER YIELD FOR UNGAUGED WATER CATCHMENT AREAS
In order to determine the annual water yield estimated from a catchment area where there is not enough data to make an accurate calculation, the following formulas proposed by Brenken can be used:
Region
Formula
Arid
q[A] = 0.0555 R - 55
Subtropical
q[A] = 0.373 R - 47
Tropical
q[A] = 0.336 R - 179
Monsoon
q[A] - 0.963 R - 630
where
q[A] = estimated annual unit water yield in mm
R = mean annual rainfall in mm
ANNEX 2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Contract No.
Article 1 - Nature and Interpretation of Contract
(a) The Contractor shall, for the purposes of this Contract, have the status of an independent contractor and shall be fully responsible, in particular, for acts or omissions of his employees. The Contractor and his employees shall conform to all applicable laws and regulations; he shall promptly correct any violations thereof and shall keep the Organization informed of any conflicts or problems arising in relation to the authorities of the country concerned.
(b) The Contractor shall have the sole and full responsibility for the performance of his obligations under this Contract; except as may be provided for in this Contract or in a written authorization by the Organization, the Contractor shall not enter into any subcontracts or otherwise assign, transfer or charge to any third party any of his rights or obligations under this Contract.
(c) Nothing in this Contract or relating thereto shall be construed as constituting a waiver or privileges or immunities of the Organization, nor as conferring any privileges or immunities on the Contractor or his employees.
(d) No official, employee, or other representative of the Organization shall have any share in this Contract, or receive any benefit therefrom.
(e) In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of Section I and Section II of this Contract, the former shall prevail.
Article 2 - Delays and Defaults
(a) If there should be any delay in the performance of this Contract or any part thereof, the Contractor shall notify the Organization in writing giving the cause, such notification to reach the Organization no later than ten days after the date on which the delay is known by the Contractor.
(b) If the Contractor is unable to obtain any materials or services necessary for the performance of the Contract from his normal sources of supply, he shall remain liable for any delays when equivalent material or services can be obtained from other sources in good time.
(c) In any event, if the Contractor fails to make delivery of the material or to complete items or services required within the time specified in the Contract, or within any extension that may be granted, the Organization may, without prejudice to any further rights it may have under this Contract and in particular under Article 8 of this Section:
(i) Suspend or cancel the right of the Contractor to proceed further with any items or services - or part thereof - in which there has been a delay;
(ii) Obtain elsewhere upon such terms and conditions as may be deemed appropriate, replacement items or services similar to those which the Contractor failed to provide; and
(iii) Make a corresponding adjustment to the consideration payable to the Contractor;
provided, however, that the Contractor shall continue performance of the Contract to the extent not suspended or cancelled under the provisions of this paragraph.
(d) The Contractor shall be liable for any excess costs or damage caused to the Organization by a failure or delay on the part of the Contractor in the performance of his obligations under the Contract, except where such failure or delay is due to:
(i) causes which are attributable to the Organization;
(ii) any unforeseen cause beyond the control of and without the fault or negligence of the Contractor, including but not limited to acts of God, acts of Governments, fires, floods, epidemics, quarantine restrictions, strikes, lock-outs, and freight embargoes.
(e) If, in the event of a default by the Contractor or a delay attributable to him, the Organization is of the opinion that the determination of actual excess costs or damages, or any part thereof, incurred by the Organization is not practicable, the Organization may require the Contractor to pay, in lieu of or in addition to actual damages, as the case may be, the amount specified in, or to be calculated in accordance with, the relevant provision of Section 1 of this Contract, as fixed, agreed and liquidated damages for the duration of the delay or default.
(f) The Organization shall determine the effects of any delay or default particularly in regard to an adjustment of the consideration due to the Contractor and to excess cost or damages caused to the Organization and its findings shall be binding, provided always that the Contractor shall have the right to avail himself of the provisions of Article 5 of the section.
Article 3 - Acceptance
(a) The Organization may examine any item, equipment, materials, supplies and/or services to be provided under this Contract, at any time prior to expiry of this contract.
(b) The Organization may reject any item, equipment, materials, supplies or services or may require alterations thereto or replacements thereof as a condition for acceptance, and its findings shall be conclusive except in regard to defects or fraud which may appear later.
(c) Should the Contractor be unwilling to accept any decisions made under (b) of this Article, he shall have the right to avail himself of the provisions of Article 5 of this section.
(d) If this Contract specifically requires the Contractor to procure equipment, materials or supplies on behalf of the Organization, such procurement shall be of new equipment, materials or supplies unless procurement of used equipment, materials or supplies is approved in advance in writing by the Organization.
Article 4 - Copyrights and Patents
(a) The copyrights of each and any related part of the work to be performed under this contract shall be vested in the Organization including, without any limitation, the rights to use, publish, sell, or distribute, privately or publicly, any item or part thereof.
(b) The Contractor shall defend and hold the Organization, its employees and agents free from any liability whatsoever, for or on account of the use or infringement of any copyright, patterns, trade mark, personal or private right, or the right of any Corporation or Association in connection with this Contract.
(c) The Contractor hereby warrants that he has the right to grant the copyright and other rights referred to in this Contract to the Organization and that the materials shall be free from unlawful matters.
(d) Should any claim arise out of an infringement of any third party right whatsoever the Contractor shall be responsible for settlement and he shall indemnify the Organization against all loss, injury or damage, including any legal costs or expenses, properly incurred by or occasioned to the Organization as a result of any break of the warranty mentioned in paragraph (b) above.
(e) Any copyright or other rights, patent or other protection which is to be excepted from the operation of this Article shall be specifically stated in Section I.
(f) The covenants and warranties specified in this Article shall not apply to material which the Organization has furnished to the Contractor.
Article 5 - Disputes and Arbitration
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this contract, any dispute between the Contractor and the Organization arising out of this Contract shall be settled by mutual agreement between the contracting parties.
(b) If the contracting parties are unable to reach an agreement on any question in dispute or on a mode of settlement other than arbitration, either party shall have right to request arbitration in accordance with the rules set forth for this purpose, by the International Chamber of Commerce.
(c) The parties agree to be bound by any arbitration award rendered in accordance with the above paragraph, as the final adjudication of any such dispute.
Article 6 - Liability with respect to Claims
(a) The Contractor hereby indemnifies and holds the Organization harmless from and against any and all responsibilities, claims, demands, suits, judgements, damages and losses, including the costs, fees and expenses in connection therewith or incident thereto for:
(i) any injury to his employees and third parties
(ii) any loss of, damage to, or destruction of any property of third parties; arising out of, or in any way connected with the performance of the work and services of the Contractor under this Contract.
(b) The Organization may, where in its opinion, the successful implementation of the contract or the reputation of the Organization, might be prejudiced, withhold or deduct from the payments due to the Contractor under Section I of this Contract such amounts as may be required to honor third party claims brought against the Contractor if these claims are connected with the supplies or services to be provided under this Contract and if, after consultation with the Contractor, the Organization is satisfied that such claims have been or may become the subject of a judgement, injunction or similar court order.
(c) The Contractor shall make provision for adequate insurance to cover such risks as damage to property and injuries to persons, as well as third party liability claims.
(d) For the purposes of this Article, the term "third party" shall be deemed to include inter alia officials, employees and other representatives of the United Nations, the Organization, and other Specialized Agencies participating in the implementation of this contract as well as any person or entity employed by the Contractor or otherwise performing services for, or supplying goods to, the Contractor.
Article 7 - Changes and Amendments
(a) The Organization may, at any time, by written notification:
(i) make changes in the specifications and/or delivery schedules, provided always that such changes do not increase the work of the Contractor, involve additional expense, or reduce the time within which the work must be performed;
(ii) increase or decrease the number of items or the amount of services and adjust the consideration accordingly, provided always that such adjustment can be established on the basis of the existing provisions of this Contract.
Any claim by the Contractor relating to adjustments under this paragraph shall be asserted by the Contractor within 60 days of receipt by him of the notification of change, it being understood that the exact determination of the adjustment may, by agreement between the parties, be postponed until the actual cost difference can be ascertained, provided, however, that no claims for adjustment shall be receivable after the date of final payment under this Contract.
(b) Any modifications to this Contract other than the changes provided for under para. (a) above shall be effected by amendment to the Contract to be mutually agreed between the parties hereto.
Article 8 - Termination
(a) The Organization shall have the right to terminate this Contract if it considers that the continued implementation of the Contract is impossible or impractical:
(i) for unforeseen causes beyond the control of the Organization;
(ii) in the event of a default or delay on the part of the Contractor.
(b) If this Contract should be terminated, the following shall apply:
(i) the Organization shall complete all payments which may be due up to the effective date of termination;
(ii) the Contractor shall deliver all work in process and in any event shall take all reasonable measures to avoid any loss or deterioration of goods or equipment or any other damage;
(iii) the Organization shall pay to the Contractor any sum which is determined by the Organization as equitable for any work in process.
(c) Adjustments to consideration and any claims arising from or connected with the termination of the Contract shall be dealt with in accordance with the pertinent provisions of this Contract, and in particular Article 2 of this Section.
(d) Notices of Termination shall specify the reasons for termination and take effect at the earliest 10 (ten) days after receipt thereof by the addressee, it being understood that the provisions of the Contract applicable to the winding up of the Contract, the liquidation of claims and the settlement of disputes shall remain in force for such additional period as may be necessary.
Article 9 - Notices
(a) Any notice affecting the rights or obligations of either party to this contract shall be given in writing and delivered in person or by telegram or by registered mail to the addresses given below:
(i) To the Organization:
Director, Administrative Services Division,
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00153 - Rome, Italy
(ii) To the Contractor:
At the Contractor's address shown in the Preamble to this Contract.
(b) Notice shall be considered as effected as on the date of delivery to the addressee.
Signed on behalf of
THE FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION
OF THE UNITED NATIONS
Name and Title:
Date:
Signed on behalf of
Name and Title:
Date:
ANNEX 3 SPECIAL PROVISIONS
Contract No.
Article 1 - Work and Services to be executed by the Contractor
The Contractor shall execute the work and services set out in the "Statement of Work, Services and Specifications" attached hereto as Annex..., it being understood that such work and services shall include those which, while not specifically provided for in the said Annex... are implied by generally accepted usages and standards of the trade and industry.
Article 2 - Equipment, Materials, Supplies, Services and Personnel to be provided by the Contractor
For the purpose of executing the work and services as set out in Article 1 above, the Contractor shall be responsible for providing, at his cost, all personnel, equipment, materials, supplies and all other services as required.
Article 3 - Schedule of Performance
(a) The Contractor shall commence performance of the present contract immediately upon its signature by both parties and receipt of the relevant authorizations, permits, etc. to build as may be required in accordance with the laws, decrees and/or regulations of the authorities concerned.
(b) The Contractor shall complete the work and services to be executed under this contract in accordance with the "Schedule of Execution" attached hereto as Annex ...
Article 4 - Authorizations and Permits
The Contractor is responsible for obtaining all such authorizations and permits as may be required for the execution of this contract, it being understood that the Organization will use its good offices to ensure that the Government will provide the said authorizations and permits and will put the construction sites at the disposal of the Contractor, free of all encumbrances, in good time.
Article 5 - Levies, Duties, Taxes, etc.
The present contract is not subject to payment of any levies, taxes, registration duties or any other duties or charges whatsoever.
Article 6 - Statement of Accounts and/or Invoices of Contractor
The Contractor shall address all statements of accounts and/or invoices for sums due for payment in accordance with the terms of the present contract to the Office of the Resident Representative of the United Nations Development Programme, hereinafter referred to as the "UNDP", after their certification by the Organization's Resident Engineer.
Article 7 - Overpayments
The Contractor shall pay or reimburse to the Organization in the currency of original payment, or in a currency to be mutually agreed upon:
(i) Overpayments made by the Organization;
(ii) Costs incurred by the Organization for the procurement of alternative work, services or supplies due to the Contractor's default.
Article 8 - Remuneration and Method of Payment
(a) In full consideration of the work and services to be executed by the Contractor and subject to the terms and conditions set out below, the Organization shall pay to the Contractor upon receipt at the Office of the Resident Representative of the UNDP of invoices in triplicate, duly certified by the Organization's Resident Engineer a total amount not to exceed ............................ calculated in accordance with the "Bill of Quantities and Contract Costs", as shown in Annex ...
(b) The total amount specified in paragraph (a) above shall be paid in accordance with the following schedule:
(i) Upon receipt at the Office of the Resident Representative of the UNDP of six copies of the present contract signed in due form by the Contractor, and the insurance policies effected in accordance with Article 19 below, the Contractor shall be entitled to a payment on account of 25% of the total amount of the contract. This payment is further subject to the Contractor arranging, at his own cost, for a Bank Guarantee issued by a Bank acceptable to the Resident Representative of the UNDP, which guarantee shall warrant the unconditional refund to the Organization by the Bank, upon receipt of a notification from the Organization, of the amount of the first payment made to the Contractor in accordance with this paragraph. This guarantee shall follow the outline of the "Draft Bank Guarantee" attached hereto as Annex... and shall remain valid until the Organization's Engineer has issued certificates of completion for all the construction works covered by the present contract.
(ii) Upon receipt at the Office of the Resident Representative of the UNDP of monthly invoices in triplicate, duly certified by the Organization's Resident Engineer or other designated representative at the site, and stating the quantity of work and services completed, the Contractor is entitled to the payment of the amount certified after deduction on a pro rata basis of the 25% referred to in sub-paragraph (i) above, it being understood that the total amount thus paid shall not exceed 85% of the total amount of the contract.
(iii) Upon receipt at the Office of the Resident Representative of the UNDP of a certificate of satisfactory completion of all work and services referred to in the present contract, duly certified by the Organization's Resident Engineer or other designated representative at the site and an invoice in triplicate, the Contractor is entitled to a final payment of 15% of the total amount of the contract, reduced if necessary, by the amount of penalties enforceable in accordance with the provisions of Article 10, paragraph (b) below. Such final payment shall be further subject to receipt of a bank guarantee, arranged at the expense of the Contractor, for an amount not to exceed 5% of the total amount of the contract, issued by a Bank acceptable to the Resident Representative of the UNDP, and which shall follow the outline of the "Draft Bank Guarantee" attached hereto as Annex ... and shall remain valid until the completion of the maintenance period in accordance with the
provisions of Article 12 below.
Article 9 - Revision of Prices
It is understood between the Organization and the Contractor that the prices as specified in Annex... of the present contract are firm and shall not be revised under any circumstances.
Article 10 - Bonus for early Completion and Penalties
(a) No bonus shall be due to the Contractor for early completion of the whole or part of the contract.
(b) The Contractor and the Organization agree that the Organization may withold from any payments due to the Contractor an amount equal to 1/1000 of the total contract amount indicated in Article 8, paragraph (a), above for each week of delay in the satisfactory completion of part or all of the construction works beyond the dates specified in Annex ... , it being understood that the witholding by the Organization of the said amount does not in any way constitute a waiver by the Organization of its rights under Section II, Article 2 of the present contract.
Article 11 - Certificates of Completion of Works
(a) When the whole or part of the works have been completed in accordance with the terms of the present contract, the Organization's Resident Engineer shall issue Certificates of Completion stating the dates on which the works or parts thereof, were completed in accordance with the terms of the present contract. Such Certificates of Completion may be issued, if necessary, subject to any tests as may be prescribed by the Resident Engineer being satisfactorily concluded.
(b) The date or dates specified in the Certificates of Completion issued in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph shall be the operative date(s) for the computation of delays and penalties where necessary.
Article 12 - Period of Maintenance
For the purposes of the present contract "Period of Maintenance" shall mean a period of one year calculated from the date of completion of part or all of the works certified by the Organization's Resident Engineer in accordance with the provisions of Article 11 paragraph (a) above.
Article 13 - Completion of Period of Maintenance
Upon completion of the period of maintenance, the Organization's Resident Engineer shall issue a Maintenance Certificate stating that the works, except for fair wear and tear, have been completed and maintained to his satisfaction. If the Organization's Resident Engineer is of the opinion that he is unable to issue the Maintenance Certificate, the Contractor shall complete, as soon as possible at his own cost all such works of repair as may be required of the Contractor in writing by the Organization's Resident Engineer. If the repairs are carried out by the Contractor during the period of maintenance, commencement of a new period of maintenance of one year shall be effective as from the date of completion of such repairs as certified by the Organization's Resident Engineer.
Article 14 - Supervision of Works
(a) Supervision of the execution of the works under the present contract shall be the responsibility of the Organization's Resident Engineer or his duly authorized Representative. The Resident Engineer or his Representative shall generally carry out such duties in issuing decisions, certificates and orders as are required by the Contractor for the satisfactory execution of the contract. It is understood, however, that the Contractor shall promptly request the Resident Engineer to provide such instructions or guidance as may be necessary or lacking, and it is further understood that failure to seek such instructions or guidance shall not constitute a valid reason for delays in the execution of the works or for an execution which is not in accordance with the relevant specifications of the contract and/or the standards of the industry.
(b) In particular, the Resident Engineer is empowered to:
(i) Carry out tests of samples of materials and supplies and verify workmanship, as he may consider necessary at the cost of the Contractor in order to ensure their compliance with the relevant specifications and standards of Annex ...
(ii) Approve in writing reasonable extensions of the times for completion of the works as set out in Annex ...
(iii) Explain, adjust and modify in case of ambiguities or discrepancies the specifications of Annex...and the relevant drawings of the civil works, provided always that this shall not result in any additional costs to the Organization beyond the total contract amount;
(iv) Approve and certify invoices submitted by the Contractor for works completed;
(v) Issue in writing certificates of completion and maintenance of the works or parts thereof.
(c) Any modification of the specifications or approved final designs or drawings or plans related thereto, or any modifications of the terms of this contract which may result in additional costs, shall not be binding on the Organization without the prior written approval of the Director Administrative Services Division of the Organization.
Article 15 - Construction Site Logbook
(a) On each site, the Contractor shall maintain a logbook for the entry or recording upon each visit to the site and, at least, on a weekly basis, of the following:
(i) Supplies of constructional plant, equipment, building materials and supplies;
(ii) Quantities of work executed and quantities of materials employed therefor;
(iii) Observations and recommendations of the Organization's Resident Engineer;
(iv) Important facts or events which are likely to influence the progress of works.
(b) The Organization's Resident Engineer shall provide the Contractor with the necessary guidance for maintaining the logbook which should have two detachable copies for each original page.
(c) The site logbook shall be made available to the Organization's Resident Engineer upon his request and should, therefore, be kept permanently on the site. Upon completion of the works the logbook shall be handed over to the Organization's Resident Engineer.
Article 16 - Organization of the Construction Site
(a) Save for the provision of the construction site(s), all measures necessary for the organization of such site(s) shall be the responsibility of the Contractor. In particular, the Contractor shall be responsible for the following at his own cost:
(i) The establishment of footpaths and builders' roads. Such footpaths and roads may be freely used by the Organization's Engineer and his authorised agents or assistants and such other enterprises or firms as may be called upon to assist in construction works on the same site;
(ii) The layout of the buildings which entails the use of alignments and levelling;
(iii) The availability of water for construction works, drinking water, and electricity for the construction works;
(iv) The provision of fencing, lighting, signposts, cleaning, night-watchman services and maintenance of the construction site;
(v) The renting of additional space for the storage of building equipment, materials and related implements for the works if the construction site is inadequate for such purposes.
(b) The Contractor shall take all such measures as are necessary to prevent the occurrence of accidents caused or occasioned by the execution of the works. The Contractor shall be responsible for any accident or damage caused to persons, property, public highways and constructional work arising from the transport of constructional plant or equipment, materials and supplies.
(c)
(i) For the duration of the construction works, the Contractor shall ensure that no unnecessary interference with traffic is caused by operations necessary for the execution of the works;
(ii) The construction site shall be adequately provided with signposts and warning signals, both by day and by night. The plan of signs and signals envisaged for the site shall require the prior approval of the Organization's Resident Engineer before their installation;
(iii) Such costs as may be incurred by the Contractor in implementing the provisions of this Article shall be the responsibility of the Contractor.
(d)
(i) The Contractor shall permanently keep on each site, all such instruments, tools and equipment as may be required by the Organization's Resident Engineer for the testing of materials and samples;
(ii) Failure by the Contractor to observe the requirements of the provisions of this paragraph shall entitle the Organization's Engineer to purchase such instruments or equipment as may be necessary and the cost thereof shall be deducted from sums due to the Contractor.
Article 17 - Particulars to be supplied
Within fifteen days of signature of the contract by both parties hereto, the Contractor shall supply the Organization's Resident Engineer with the following:
(a) a detailed list of the Contractor's employees participating in the execution of the works;
(b) a list of the materials, equipment and supplies assigned for the works under the present contract.
Article 18 - Presence of the Contractor on the Construction Site(s)
(a) Within fifteen days of signature of the contract by both parties, the Contractor shall submit to the Organization's Resident Engineer, for approval, the designation of his representative who shall be empowered to supervise the execution of the works and represent the Contractor in relations with the Organization's Resident Engineer. The designation of a representative by the Contractor shall not relieve the Contractor of his obligations under the present Contract;
(b) The Contractor or his representative shall attend all meetings convened by the Organization's Resident Engineer on the construction site. The Contractor's representative shall be empowered to provide the necessary instructions forthwith to the employees of the Contractor.
Article 19 - Insurances at the cost of the Contractor
(a) Without prejudice to the relevant provisions of Section II of the present contract, the Contractor shall be insured in such a manner against all material or physical damage, loss or injury from whatever cause arising from the execution of the contract as would be required to hold the Organization and the Government harmless from any responsibility therefor.
(b) The Contractor shall be responsible in particular for any loss, damage, or injury resulting from any act or omission of his employees. The Contractor shall also be responsible for any direct or indirect loss or damage caused by his servants or agents to any property of third parties, including the Government, Government officials and the Organization and its officials. The Contractor shall be required to submit the policies of such insurances to the Resident Representative of the UNDP;
(c) The Contractor shall be insured against theft and the fire hazards and shall submit the relevant policies to the Resident Representative of the UNDP;
(d) The Contractor shall immediately notify the Resident Representative of the UNDP and the Organization's Resident Engineer of any accident arising from the execution of the contract and shall provide full particulars thereof.
Article 20 - Clearance of Site on Completion
Within a month of the completion of the works, the Contractor shall clear away and remove from the site all surplus materials, rubbish and temporary works of every kind and leave the whole of the site and works clean and in a workmanlike condition to the satisfaction of the Organization's Resident Engineer. Failure by the Contractor to clean the site will cause the Government to do so at the expense of the Contractor.
Article 21 - Patent Rights and Royalties
The Contractor shall hold harmless the Organization and the Government from and against all claims and proceedings for and on account of infringement of any patent, trademark or other protected rights used by him for the execution of the works.
Article 22 - Inspection of Site
(a) The Contractor's bid shall be deemed to have been formulated after inspection of the site and obtaining all necessary information as to risks, contingencies and other circumstances which may influence or affect the execution of the contract.
(b) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the Contractor shall be deemed to have taken full account of the following;
(i) existing buildings, construction works, cables, pipes, etc.;
(ii) surface and sub-surface conditions and the existence of rocks, etc.;
(iii) the presence and nature of surface and sub-surface water and modification of such hydrological conditions which might result from construction works;
(iv) drops or gradients and slopes;
(v) meteorological and climatic conditions;
(vi) means of access to the site;
(vii) availability of necessary water and electricity.
Article 23 - Designation of the Organization's Resident Engineer
For the purposes of the present contract, the Organization's Resident Engineer is:
Mr. .............................
(title)...........................
(address).....................
ANNEX 4 CONSTRUCTION OF CHIPATA FISH FARM IN ZAMBIA
1. GENERAL
1.1 Scope of Work
The work contemplated under this contract includes general civil engineering works for the construction of the fish farm with a water surface of 4.5 ha, at Chipata, all as detailed in the bill of quantities specifications and drawings.
The particular specifications for the work are as detailed herein after. These specifications shall be read in conjunction with relevant Zambian Standard specifications. Where Zambian specifications are not available, the specifications provided by the Resident Engineer (the Engineer) or his Representative will be final and the work shall be executed accordingly. Where the specifications in the Zambian Standard specifications are in variance with specifications detailed herein, the specifications herein shall govern.
1.2 Laboratories for Resident Engineer
The Contractor shall provide, maintain and remove, if required, on completion of the works, any testing laboratories required in accordance with the contract for the use of the Resident Engineer and his staff. Testing equipment shall be located in testing laboratories as required by the Engineer.
All laboratories shall be regularly and properly cleaned and maintained by the Contractor for as long as they are used by the Engineer.
1.3 Survey Equipment
The Contractor shall supply and maintain in good working order for the duration of the Contract the survey equipment scheduled for use by the Engineer.
1.4 Attendance on the Engineer
The Contractor shall provide casual labour required by the Engineer when checking the setting out and measuring up of the work.
1.5 Existing ground levels
The Contractor shall satisfy himself that the existing ground levels as indicated on the Drawings or schedules of cross section levels are correct. To control the existing ground levels the elevations of the Temporary Bench Marks (DRG. No. 2) shall be used.
Should the Contractor wish to dispute any levels, the ground in the area under dispute shall not be disturbed before the Engineer has given his decision as to the levels to be used.
1.6 Programme of Works
The programme to be provided by the Contractor shall set out all the operations required to complete the works plotted against a time scale in weeks and shall indicate the requirements for plant, labour and materials plotted against the same time scale, including the periods necessary to mobilize labour and deliver equipment and materials to site. The total periods of completion shall not exceed those indicated in Annex ..... of this contract.
2. MATERIALS
2.1 Aggregates for Concrete
Aggregates shall be obtained from a source known to produce aggregates satisfactory for concrete and shall be chemically inert, strong, hard, durable, of limited porosity, and free from adhering coatings, clay lumps, coal and coal residues, and organic or other impurities that may cause corrosion of the reinforcement or may impair the strength or durability of the concrete. Aggregates for concrete shall be natural gravels or crushed stone complying with BS 882/1201.
Flakiness index when determined by the sieve method described in BS 812 shall not exceed 35 for any size of coarse aggregates.
For structural concrete of specified compressive strength of Newtons per square millimetre or more at 28 days, the ten percent fines value of the coarse aggregate determined in accordance with BS 812 shall not be less than 10 tonnes and for other structural concrete not less than 5 tonnes.
2.2 Bolts, Nuts and Washers
Mild steel bolts, nuts and washers for the hooks of stoplogs (DRG. No. 12) shall comply with the requirements of BS 153: Part 1 and either BS 916 or BS 2708.
2.3 Cement
Normal Portland cement and High Early Strength Portland cement shall comply with the requirements of Zambian Standard ZS 001.
Each consignment of cement shall be kept separate, identified and used in order of delivery.
It is to be stored with proper protection from the weather.
The cement bags shall be stored in such a manner as to permit easy access for proper inspection. Stacks shall not be more than 10 bags in height and also should be 70 cm away from the walls.
The cement, if stored more than 120 days, shall be tested for soundness before use on all important works. If it is found defective in any way it shall be condemned for use.
2.4 Paint and Other Protective Coatings for Steelwork
All paints etc. except where otherwise described are to be first quality priming, undercoating and finishing paints. They are to be obtained only from suppliers approved by the Engineer. Paint supplied in sealed containers of not more than five litres capacity shall be submitted for testing to the Engineer or his Representative.
2.5 Pipes for Water Supply and Drainage Works
Asbestos cement pipes shall comply with the requirements of BS 3656.
Concrete pipes for general drainage use shall comply with the requirements of BS 556 except that they may be supplied with flexible joints as supplied by manufacturer. The Spigot R.C.C. pipes shall be Class S pipes.
2.6 Sand
The sand shall consist of natural sand, crushed stone or crushed gravel or a combination of any of these. It shall be hard durable clean and free of adherent coating and organic matter and shall not contain any appreciable amount of clay, balls or pellets. It shall not contain any harmful impurities such as iron pyrites, alkalies, salts, coal, shale or similar laminated or other material in such form or such quantities as to affect adversely the hardening, the strength and durability.
The maximum quantity of clay, fine salt, fine dust or organic impurities in sand shall not exceed the following limits:
Clay, fine salt and fine dust:
(i) Not more than 4 percent by weight in natural sand.
(ii) Not more than 10 percent by weight in case of crushed stone sand.
2.7 Steel Reinforcement
Mild steel and hot rolled high yield bars shall comply with the requirements of BS 785. Cold worked steel bars shall comply with the requirements of BS 1144.
In the case of deformed bars, as defined in BS 785: Part 1 and BS 1144, the results of bond tests shall be furnished to the Engineer as required by him.
2.8 Structural Steel
Structural steels shall comply with the requirements of BS 153: Part 1 and BS 4360. In addition, structural steel hot-rolled sections shall comply with the requirements of BS 4: Part 1.
2.9 Timber
Timbers' for stoplogs (DRG. No. 12) shall be of the best quality, well seasoned and free from cracks, loose knots, cross grain, sapwood, shakes and other defects and except where otherwise approved, wrought on all faces.
2.10 Water
Water used for both mixing and curing concrete as well as making mortar shall be clean and fresh and free from organic or inorganic matter in solution or suspension in such amounts that may impair the strength or durability of the concrete. Water for making concrete shall be tested in accordance with BS 3148.
3. CLEARING AND PREPARING OF SITE
3.1 Site Clearing
The Contractor shall demolish, break up and remove superficial obstructions on the site of the fish farm in the way or otherwise affected by the Works. He shall clear each part of the site at times and to extent required and approved by the Engineer.
Before starting earth work, the area demarcated for excavation of drains construction of dikes shall be cleared of bushes, vegetation and trees. Stumps and tree roots shall, unless otherwise directed by the Engineer, be grubbed up, and deposited off the site in dumps to be provided by the Contractor.
3.2 Stripping Top Soil
Unless otherwise directed, 10 cm topsoil shall be removed from all construction areas and for re-use in the surface dressing of the dikes for grassing shall be stockpiled at the area located between the dikes of the ponds P[3], P[6], P[9 ]and Masupe River.
4. EARTHWORKS
4.1 General
4.1.1 Description of work
The dikes, bottoms, drains and feeder canals shall be constructed according to the dimensions and slopes as per typical cross sections and longitudinal sections enclosed or as per cross sections approved by the Engineer.
4.1.2 Definitions, classifications and general use of earthworks materials
'Formation level' shall mean the surface level of the ground obtained after completion of the earthworks.
'Suitable material' shall comprise all material which is acceptable for use in the construction of dikes and which is capable of being compacted in the manner specified in Clause 4.3 to form a stable fill having side slopes as indicated on the Drawings.
'Unsuitable Material' shall mean other than 'Suitable Material' and shall include:
(i) Material from swamps, marshes, dambos or bogs;
(ii) Peat, logs, stumps and perishable material;
(iii) Material susceptible to spontaneous combustion;
(iv) Clay of liquid limit exceeding 80 and/or plasticity index exceeding 55;
(v) Materials having moisture content greater than the maximum permitted for such materials in the Contract, unless otherwise permitted by the Engineer;
(vi) Anthill materials.
'Rock' shall mean boulders exceeding 0.2 m^3 and masses of hard material which necessitates the use of blasting or approved pneumatic tools for their removal.
The Engineer shall decide under which one of the above classes any material shall be classified and his decision shall be final.
No excavated suitable material other than surplus to requirements shall be removed from the site except where directed or permitted. Should the Contractor be permitted to remove suitable material from the site to suit his operational procedure then he shall make good at his own expense any consequent deficit of filling arising therefrom.
Unless the Engineer permits otherwise suitable material and topsoil, both surplus to the total requirements of the Works and all unsuitable material shall be run to spoil in separate tips provided by the Contractor.
4.1.3 Reduced level
Pegs at bed, bottom level in the ponds and tops of dikes at the correct reduced levels determinated from the existing TBM's will be fixed by the Contractor at his own expense.
The two TBM's shall be properly protected by the Contractor during the period of the construction works.
4.1.4 Dagbelling
The Contractor shall be required to dagbell lines needed for fixing the correct profile of the dike section at his own expense.
4.1.5 Profiles
Before starting earth work in any dike, profiles shall be made and maintained by the Contractor at suitable intervals. Profiles shall be made by actually excavating or filling and making the correct finished section as per cross section and shall be maintained till the final completion of the Work if so required by the Engineer. Ballies and strings shall be fixed and tied to indicate correct levels, finished slopes and dimensions. The level as shown by namoonas will include the provision of settlement allowance (5 percent for mechanical compaction and 10 percent for manual compaction).
4.2 Forming Of Dikes and Pond Bottoms
Dikes and pond bottoms filled shall be formed of material excavated from the pond site as defined as 'Suitable Material' in Clause 4.1.2. Additionally, when permitted by the Engineer, material wetter than the appropriate limit as specified under inclusion (v) of Clause 4.1.2 may be incorporated.
All earthworks materials placed in dikes or below pond bottom shall be deposited and compacted as soon as practicable after excavation in layers of thickness appropriate to the compaction plant used as permitted in Clause 4.3 or as directed by the Engineer. Dikes shall be built up evenly over their full width and during the construction of dikes the Contractor shall control and direct constructional traffic uniformly over their full width.
The dike materials shall be placed only when the weather conditions permit. If rain is apprehended, the surface shall be graded and rolled with a smooth road roller to facilitate run off. After rains the surface shall be scarified and moistened before resuming work.
Special care shall be taken in joining new dike with old one or with existing ground. If the work in a portion remains suspended for some time due to any reason and its exposed surface becomes hard, then the same shall be properly roughened before another layer of earth is placed over it. Benching shall also be done as per directions of the Engineer, wherever ordered. Cost of this work shall also be included in the rates for earthwork, as specified in Annex ...., Bill No. 2.
Any damage to the dikes or the pond sections by any cause including rain, wind, cattle movement, etc., shall be suitably repaired by the Contractor as per directions of the Engineer at his own cost and nothing extra shall be payable to him on this account.
If the work remains suspended for some time and during the intervening period there is growth of vegetation on the dikes or gets damaged due to any other cause, the top of the dikes shall be cleared, dressed and made good up to the proper section by the Contractor at his own cost and no claim shall be entertained on this account.
The berms of ponds and drains should slope towards the inner edge to prevent rain water from flowing over the outer edge and down the slope of dikes and drains. A slope of 1 in 50 shall be provided for this purpose.
After dressing the slopes, berms and tops of the dikes, the outside slopes, berms, tops and the inside slopes above the water surface shall be slightly roughened and covered with a 10 cm layer of topsoil for grassing. The layer shall then be raked even and lightly rolled with a hand roller.
4.3 Compaction Of Earthfills
The material to be compacted be thoroughly broken down over the full width and to a depth of at least 15 cm by means of scarifiers disc harrows, hand tools or other suitable equipment. Any oversize material which in the opinion of the Engineer cannot be suitably broken down to the required size shall be removed from the Works.
Any water required before the material is compacted shall be added to the material in successive applications by means of water tankers fitted with sprinkler bars, or by means of pressure distributors all capable of applying the water evenly and uniformly over the area concerned.
The material shall be compacted at the optimum moisture content for Higher Compactive Effort density with an allowable tolerance of plus one (1) percent or minus two (2) percent of moisture by weight of dry material.
Compaction shall be carried put by sheep foot rollers or other suitable equipment in a series of continuous operations over the full width of the layer concerned and the length of any section of a layer compacted shall not be less than three hundred metres, unless otherwise permitted by the Engineer. The thickness of any one layer after compaction shall not exceed 15 cm.
The quality of material in any layer shall be equal to or better than the material in the layer immediately below.
During the compaction the layer shall be maintained to required shape and cross section.
The compacted density (Field Dry Density) at any point in the fill shall not be less than ninety percent (90%) of the Higher Compactive Effort density.
4.3.1 Compaction trials
Compaction trials as described herein shall be held to determine the type of compaction plant and number of passes to be used but results obtained shall be considered as a guide only.
At the commencement of construction, compaction trials shall be carried out by the Contractor in selected fill areas using the actual items of compaction plant which he proposes to use in the Works.
The Contractor shall test one item of each different class and/or weight of compaction plant to be used on the fill selected.
The method of conducting the compaction trials shall be as described hereunder:
(i) A layer of material to be used in the fill construction shall be laid in the fill area to a depth which gives a compacted thickness of 15 cm and its moisture content adjusted to within + 1 percent and - 2 percent of the Higher Compactive Effort optimum moisture content.
(ii) The layer shall then be given an agreed number of passes of the compaction plant after which ten number in situ density tests shall be carried out at locations chosen by the Engineer. This process shall be repeated with additional passes until the required degree of compaction is reached.
(iii) The procedure shall be carried out for all different materials used in fills as and when they are encountered during construction.
The Contractor shall be responsible for carrying out all necessary tests in connection with the trials, to the Engineer's approval, and shall present the test results to the Engineer.
4.4 Excavation of Foundation Pits, Drains arid Trenches
The bottom of all excavations and drains shall be carefully levelled. Any pockets of unsuitable material or loose rock shall be removed and the resulting cavities filled with Class A granular material as directed.
In cases where it is required the sides of pits shall be adequately supported at all times.
All excavated materials from such excavations not required for building dikes or refilling shall be disposed of as directed by the Engineer.
Trenches for pipes shall be excavated to a sufficient depth and width to enable the pipe and the specified or other approved joint and surround to be accomodated.
4.5 Refilling of Foundation Pits and Trenches
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer, all filling for this purpose shall consist of suitable material compacted in accordance with Clause 4.3.
Backfilling shall wherever practicable be undertaken immediately after the specified operations preceding it have been completed.
The surface shall be restored by replacing the materials in their proper order and form, and by compacting them to such a level as will ensure that after settlement is complete the surface level or refilled trenches shall be within 30 mm of that of the adjacent undisturbed ground.
4.6 Tolerances
The tolerance allowable for dikes and excavations shall be as follows:
Side slopes
level
30 mm
4.7 Measurement of work
After the clearance of land, removal of topsoil and benching operations, cross section shall be taken at every 10 m interval and at obligatory points longitudinally and transversally with reference to the TBM's established at the site of work. The cross section shall be entered direct in measurement book and signed by both the Contractor and the Engineer in token of acceptance. The Contractor shall only start the work after the completion of the above formalities.
Final measurements shall be recorded by observing the finished levels of excavation and dike on each line of cross section. These measurements shall be recorded in the measurement book and also plotted on the graph sheet showing the initial ground levels.
Where no earth has been taken from outside borrow pits, the quantity of earthwork shall be worked out on the basis of internal section excavated.
Where earthwork has been done by earth obtained from internal excavation as well as outside borrow pits, the quantities of digging and filling shall be worked out from the cross sections and the greater of the two shall be paid. In cases where the payment is based on the quantity of the fill, the quantity to be paid shall be arrived at after deducting 10 percent settlement allowance from the total quantity of the fill in case of manual compaction and 5 percent in case of mechanical compaction. No payment shall be made to the Contractor for earth borrowed by him in excess of that required to complete the banks, taking into account the earth available from internal excavation. Payment shall be based on the rates of Annex ....., Bill No. 2 and Bill No. 3, as appropriate.
4.8 Payment
The earthwork for final payment shall be measured only when the work is completed to the final levels and cross section as shown in the drawings, in the entire reach of the agreement. For running payments, earth uniformly excavated and evenly laid shall be measured. Final measurements and running measurements for payment shall always be taken by cross sections.
Full rates shall be payable only when the work has been completed as per specifications to the full satisfaction of the Engineer. Payment shall be based on the rates of Annex ..., Bill No. 2 and Bill No. 3, as appropriate.
5. CONCRETE WORK
5.1 Proportioning and Mixing
Unless otherwise specified by the Engineer, the concrete mix shall consist of the material in the proportions given in drawings. In proportioning concrete, the quantity of both cement and aggregate should be determined by weight. However, the quantities of aggregate may be determined by volume, if allowed by the Engineer.
Concrete shall be mixed in mechanical concrete mixers until a dense concrete of uniform colour and consistency is obtained.
Only sufficient water shall be added to the cement and aggregate during mixing to produce a concrete having sufficient workability to enable it to be well consolidated, to be worked into the corners of the formwork and around the reinforcement, to give the specified surface finish, and to have the specified strength. When a suitable amount of water has been determined, the resulting consistency shall be maintained throughout the corresponding parts of the work, and approved tests such as the slump test shall be conducted from time to time to ensure that this consistency is maintained.
The type of concrete as generally intended for various situations is indicated below:
Item
Type of concrete
Compressive Strength at 28 days
Use
(M100)
100 kg/cm^2
Sub concrete in foundations
(M150)
150 kg/cm^2
Structure in R.C.C. or precast slabs and bed protections in C.C.
The mix proportions given above are normally adopted mixes, where it is not considered practicable to use controlled concrete.
Mixing and distributing equipments shall be clean before commencing and distribution of the concrete and such equipment shall be kept free from set concrete.
The mixing shall be done by mechanical mixer but in case mixing is to be done by hand due to any practical reason, the prior approval is to be obtained from the Engineer. In case of hand mixing, material measured and mixed shall be on clean and water tight platform of steel sheet or wood of sufficient size to provide ample mixing area. The measuring shall be done as directed by the Engineer. Before adding water, aggregate (fine and coarse) shall be turned over at least three times dry. Water shall only be added in measured quantities by means of watering cans. Only sufficient water shall be added to ensure a thick plastic material of even colour and a thin sloppy mix must be avoided. The consistency of concrete shall not tend to separate mortar from coarse aggregate.
No more concrete than can be used within half hours (in case of C.C.) or in the same day shall be mixed; should any be left over at the end of day's work, it shall be rejected and removed from the site immediately.
5.2 Placing
Before proceeding to place the concrete, the formwork shall be realigned if necessary and water and the rubbish therein shall be removed by approved means. Immediately prior to placing the concrete, the formwork shall be well wetted and inspection openings shall be closed.
The interval between mixing and placing of concrete shall not exceed 20 minutes so that initial setting process is not interferred with.
Except where otherwise approved, concrete shall be placed in the forms by shovels or other approved implements and shall not be dropped from a height or handled in a manner which will cause separation. Accumulation of set concrete on the reinforcement shall be avoided. Concrete shall be placed directly in its permanent position and shall not be worked along the forms to that position.
Each layer of concrete while being placed shall be consolidated by approved methods of ramming, tamping, or mechanical vibration to form a dense material with all surfaces free from honeycombing and tolerably free from water and air holes or other blemishes. Any water accumulating on the surface of newly-placed concrete shall be removed by approved means, and no further concrete shall be placed thereon until such water be removed.
Unless otherwise approved, concrete shall be placed in a single operation to the full thickness of slabs and walls, and shall be placed in horizontal layers not exceeding 1 m deep in walls. Concrete shall be placed continuously until completion of the part of the work between construction joints as specified herein after or of a part of approved extent, At the completion of a specified or approved part a construction joint of the form and in the position hereinafter specified shall be made. If stopping of concrete placing he unavoidable elsewhere, a construction joint shall be made where the work is stopped.
Construction joints shall be provided as follows:
A joint shall be formed horizontally at the top of the foundation slab of the outlet structure.
A joint shall be formed at the distance of each four metres for the foundation slabs of the feeder canals.
Before placing new concrete against concrete that has already hardened, the face of the old concrete shall be cleaned and roughened and scum and loose aggregate removed therefrom, and immediately before placing the new concrete the face shall be thoroughly wetted and a coating of neat cement grout applied thereto. The new concrete shall be well rammed against the prepared face before the grout sets.
Concrete placed below the ground shall be protected from falling earth during and after placing.
The concrete in one precast piece shall be placed in one operation. No piece shall be removed from the mould or erected until sufficiently matured to ensure that no damage shall be done to the piece. Pieces shall be bedded or otherwise fixed in their permanent positions as shown in the drawings.
5.3 Compaction
Concrete shall be compacted into a dense mass immediately after placing by means of mechanical vibrators. The vibration shall continue during the entire period of placing concrete; compaction shall be completed before initial setting starts, i.e. within 30 minutes of addition of water to the dry mixture.
Concrete of low quantity may, however, be permitted by the Engineer to be consolidated by hand.
5.4 Finishing
The surface of concrete shall be finished all as directed by the Engineer. In case of precast slabs the top surface shall be finished even and smooth with wooden trowel before the concrete begins to set.
5.5 Curing
Newly placed concrete shall be protected by approved means from rain, sun and drying winds. Exposed faces of concrete shall be kept moist by approved means for seven days after placing or for three days if rapid-hardening Portland cement is used.
No masonry shall be started over the foundation until at least seven days after laying.
5.6 Testing
The compressive strength of the concrete at twenty-eight days shall be not less than the strength as is described on the drawings.
The compressive strength shall be ascertained by crushing 150 mm cubes of concrete, the cubes being made on the works and cured and tested as instructed. The Contractor shall pay all costs incurred in supplying the material for, and in making, maturing, delivering and testing the cubes and shall be reinbursed for the cost of cubes that attain the required strength, as approved by the Engineer.
5.7 Formwork
Formwork for concrete shall be rigidly constructed of approved material and shall be true to the shape and dimensions described on the drawings. Timber shall be well seasoned, free from loose knots and except where otherwise approved, wrought on all faces. Faces in contact with concrete shall be free from adhering, grout, projecting nails, splits, or other defects. Joints shall be sufficiently tight to prevent the leakage of cement grout and to avoid the formation of fine or other blemishes. Faulty joints shall be caulked.
Openings for inspection of the inside of the formwork and for the escape of water used for washing out shall be formed so that they can be conveniently closed before placing the concrete.
Connections shall be constructed to permit easy removal of the formwork and shall be either nailed, screwed, bolted, clamped, wired, or otherwise secured so as to be strong enough to retain the correct shape during consolidation of the concrete.
Formwork shall be true to line and braced and strutted to prevent deformation under the weight and pressure of the unset concrete, constructional loads, wind and other forces. The deflection shall not exceed 3 mm.
An approved mould oil or other material shall be applied to faces of formwork in contact with unset concrete to prevent adherence of the concrete. Mud oil, retarding liquid and similar coatings shall be kept free from contact with the reinforcement.
Formwork shall be removed by gradual easing without jarring. Before removal of the formwork the concrete shall be examined and removal shall proceed only in the presence of a competent supervisor and if the concrete has attained sufficient strength to support its own weight and any load likely to be imposed upon it. The period that shall elapse after the concrete has been laid before easing and removal of formwork is undertaken, shall be as follows:
Part of structure
Period after which formwork
can be eased and removed
for ordinary Portland cement
Sides of foundations and walls
3 days
Under-sides of slabs
10 days
In case of cantilever slabs and beams, the formwork shall remain till structures for counteracting or anchoring down have been erected and have attained sufficient strength.
5.8 Reinforcing
Reinforcement bars shall be bent by machine or other approved means producing a gradual and even motion. Bars shall be bent cold.
Bends shall comply with the dimensions given in the DRG No. 19.
Reinforcement shall be accurately fixed and by approved means maintained in the position described on the drawings. Bars intended to be in contact at passing points shall be securely wired together at all such points with No. 16 gauge annealed soft iron tyring wire. Links and the like shall tightly embrace the bars with which they are intended to be in contact and shall be securely wired, or if approved, welded thereto.
Immediately before concreting, the reinforcement shall be examined for accuracy of placing and cleanliness and corrected if necessary.
The cover of concrete to the reinforcement shall be as described on the drawings and shall be provided and maintained within a tolerance 3 mm under and over by means of distance pieces of cement mortar or other approved material.
5.9 Facework
Honeycombed surfaces shall be made good immediately on removal of the formwork, and superficial water and air holes shall be filled out. Unless instructed to the contrary, the face of exposed concrete placed against formwork shall be rubbed down immediately on removal of the formwork to remove fins or other irregularities.
The face of concrete for which formwork is not provided, other than slabs, shall be smoothed with a wooden float to give a finish equal to that of the rubbed-down face where formwork is provided.
The top face of a slab which it is not intended to cover with other materials shall be levelled and floated while unset to a smooth finish at the levels or falls shown on the drawings. The floating shall be done so as not to bring an excess of mortar to the surface of the concrete.
6. PIPEWORK
Before a pipe is lowered into the trench, it shall be thoroughly examined to ensure that it is undamaged. Any damaged parts of the pipe shall, before a pipe is used, be made good as directed by the Engineer.
Joints shall be made strictly in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
Before making any joints, all jointing surfaces shall be thoroughly cleaned and dried and maintained in such condition until the joints have been completely assembled.
The space between the end of the spigot and the shoulder of the socket of flexibly jointed pipes when jointed shall be as recommended by the manufacturer or ordered by the Engineer.
After the pipes have been laid and tested, the bedding shall be completed by carefully placing selected excavated material from which stones over 25 mm in size and lumps of clay over 75 mm in size have been removed, into the spaces between the pipe and the sides of the trench to the level of the crown of the pipe. The material shall be thoroughly packed and rammed by careful hand tamping in layers 150 mm thick before compaction. Placing and tamping shall proceed equally on both sides of the pipe. A further layer of the same material at least 300 mm thick after compaction and the full width of the trench shall be placed over the crown of the pipe in two equal layers, each layer being lightly tamped by hand.
7. BLOCKWORK
The cement is to be the best Portland cement as before described in Clause 2.3. The sand is to comply with the requirements of Clause 2.6.
The cement blocks are to be hard, square and uncracked and approved by the Engineer. All blocks when delivered to site are to be properly stacked and not tipped and any defective or broken blocks are to be thrown out and carted away.
The cement mortar is to be well worked and prepared in small quantities sufficient only for immediate use and used fresh. No mortar which has commenced to set may be mixed with any other mortar.
The blocks in 1:3 cement sand mortar shall be properly placed in position such that the horizontal and vertical joints are completely filled with mortar. The thickness of joints shall not be more than 10 mm.
8. STRUCTURAL STEELWORK
The welding of the screens (DRG. No. 11) is to be carried out in accordance with the recommendations set out in the British Code of Practice CP 113/102 Arc Welded Construction.
9. PAINTING
Remove all scale from unprimed steelwork by flame cleaning, wire brushing chipping or scraping, degrease with white spirit and immediately prime.
All coats of paint are to be thoroughly dry before the application of any subsequent coat and no paint is to be applied to external work during inclement weather nor on any moist surface. The appropriate time as indicated by the paint manufacturer is to elapse between the application of each coat.
Steelwork is to be primed on the same day that it is cleaned and all coats of priming are to be maintained in good condition until the undercoating is applied by touching up all damage during the progress of work.
Each coat of paint is to be a tint distinguishable from the previous coat. In no case is the last coat to be applied until the Engineer's permission has been obtained.
ANNEX 5 Bill No........ Construction of Outlets
Item
Description of items
Unit
Quantity
Rate
Zam. K.
Amount
Zam. K.
Earthwork in excavation in foundation as per specification
m^3
C.C. M-100 (1:3:6) in foundation
m^3
Supplying and laying SPIGOT
R.C.C. pipe f 300 mm
Class S each L = 2.44 m
pc
R.C.C. M-150 (1:2:4) in monk structures and harvesting box
m^3
Formwork
m^2
Steel reinforcement bars in outlets, harvesting box and precast foot planks
kg
4 in thick cement block lining in 1:3 CT mortar in harvesting box
m^2
C.C. M-150 (1:2:4) in bed protection
m^2
Precast R.C. M-150 (1:2:4) foot planks
a) 2.50×0.25×0.10
pc
b) 1.00×0.25×0.10
pc
Prefab concrete M-150
(1:2:4) slabs (40×50×8 cm)
to harvesting box
pc
Stop logs measuring 59×25 cm
pc
Screens measuring 590×500 mm
pc
Refilling foundation pits as per specification
m^3
TOTAL
ANNEX 6 Bill of Quantities and Contract Cost
Summary
Bill No.
Description
Amount Zam. K.
Clearing and preparing of site
Construction of dikes and forming pond bottoms
Excavation of drains
Construction of culvert under access road
Construction of feeder canals
Construction of outlets
Construction of inlets
Dressing of dikes
A. Total cost of Work
B. Provisional Sum at 15%
C. GRAND TOTAL including Provisional Sum
ANNEX 7 Bidding Schedule
Contract No. .........
Instructions:
Please complete the blank spaces below. Prices should be quoted in the currency of the bidder.
PART I:
The total price of this bid, as broken down in detail in the attached Annex III is:
PART II:
I certify that the load bearing capacity of the soil at the site is not less than______ kg per cm^2 and that my bid has been calculated on such basis.
PART III:
I certify that nothing in the provisions and specifications of the contract and the drawings and plans, etc. as enclosed with the letter of invitation is contrary to the provisions of applicable local laws, rules and building regulations, except as explicitly stated elsewhere in this bid.
PART IV:
I confirm having obtained all necessary data and information as to risks, contingencies and other circumstances which may influence or affect my bid or the performance of the contract.
PART V:
My bid is valid for a period of 6 (six) months as from the deadline for the receipt of bids, as indicated in paragraph 9 of the letter of invitation.
PART VI:
I am in agreement with the terms and conditions of the contract as enclosed with the letter of invitation except as explicitly stated elsewhere in this bid.
Name of Bidder: _______________________
Telephone: ______________________
Mailing Address: _______________________
Cable: __________________________
Telex: __________________________
Person(s) to contact: ___________________________________________________________
Signature: ____________________________
Date: ___________________________
Name and Title: _______________________
<section>9</section>
Chapter 8. Hydraulic Formulas Used in Designing Fish Farms
J. Kövári
Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations
Rome, Italy
1. LIST OF SYMBOLS, DIMENSIONS AND UNITS
2. DESIGN FORMULAS FOR CHANNEL FLOW
3. DESIGN FORMULAS FOR HYDRAULIC STRUCTURES
4. DISCHARGE OF WELLS
5. DESIGN FORMULA FOR SCREEN
6. DESIGN FORMULA FOR FILTER
7. DESIGN FORMULAS FOR FLOW IN PIPES
8. DESIGN FORMULAS FOR PUMPING
1. LIST OF SYMBOLS, DIMENSIONS AND UNITS
A list of symbols with their dimensions and units used in the formulas is given in Table 1.
Table 1. Symbols, Dimensions and Units used
Symbol
Description
Dimensions
Units
A
Area
L^2
m^2
B
Surface width of a channel
L
m
b
Bottom width of a channel
L
m
D
Diameter
L
m
d
depth
L
m
g
Acceleration due to the force of gravity
L/T^2
m/sec^2
H
Total head; head over a crest
L
m
h
Head or water depth
L
m
h[l]
Head loss
L
m
k
Permeability coefficient
L/T
m/sec
L
Length
L
m
l
Length
L
m
n
Manning's roughness coefficient
T/L^1/3
sec/m^1/3
P[w]
Wetted perimeter
L
m
Allowable pressure head for siphon
L
m
Pressure
L
m
Q
Discharge
L^3/T
m^3/sec
q
Unit discharge
L^3/T
m^3/sec
R
Hydraulic radius
L
m
r
Radius
L
m
s
Drawdown
L
m
V
Volume
L^3
m^3
v
Average velocity
L/T
m/sec
W
Weight
F
kg
w
Unit weight of water; width of a structure
F/L^3; L
kg/m^3; m
g
Density of water
F/L^3
kg/m^3
Symbols for Dimensionless Quantities
Symbol
Quantity
C
Discharge coefficient
K[s]
Screen loss coefficient
S
Bottom slope
z
Ratio of the side slope for a channel cross-section (horizontal to vertical)
h
Efficiency
l
Friction factor
p
f
Velocity coefficient
y
Contraction coefficient
2. DESIGN FORMULAS FOR CHANNEL FLOW
Manning's formula (Chow, 1959)
where
v = average velocity, m/sec
A = cross-sectional area of the channel, m^2
P[w] = wetted perimeter of the channel, m
S = slope of the channel
n = roughness coefficient
The values of n for various channel conditions are illustrated in Table 2.
Discharge formula
m^3/sec
Normal water depth formula
, m
Slope formula
where
b = bottom width of the channel, m
z = ratio of the side slope
Table 2 Values of the Roughness Coefficient n (Simon, 1976)
Channel condition
Value of n
Exceptionally smooth, straight surfaces: enamelled or glazed coating; glass; lucite; brass
Very well planed and fitted boards; smooth metal; pure cement plaster; smooth tar or paint coating
Planed lumber; smoothed mortar (1/3 sand) without projections, in straight alignment
Carefully fitted but unplaned boards, steel trowelled concrete in straight alignment
Reasonably straight, clean, smooth surfaces without projections; good boards; carefully built brick wall; wood trowelled concrete; smooth, dressed ashlar
Good wood, metal, or concrete surfaces with some curvature, very small projections, slight moss or algae growth or gravel deposition. Shot concrete surfaced with trowelled mortar
Rough brick; medium quality cut stone surface; wood with algae or moss growth; rough concrete; riveted steel
Very smooth and straight earth channels, free from growth; stone rubble set in cement; shot, untrowelled concrete deteriorated brick wall; exceptionally well excavated and surfaced channel cut in natural rock
Well-built earth channels covered with thick, uniform silt deposits; metal flumes with excessive curvature, large projections, accumulated debris
Smooth, well-packed earth; rough stone walls; channels excavated in solid, soft rock; little curving channels in solid loess, gravel or clay, with silt deposits, free from growth, in average condition; deteriorating uneven metal flume with curvatures and debris; very large canals in good condition
Small, manmade earth channels in well-kept condition; straight natural streams with rather clean, uniform bottom without pools and flow barriers, cavings and scours of the banks
Ditches; below average manmade channels with scattered cobbles in bed
Well-maintained large floodway; unkempt artificial channels with scours, slides, considerable aquatic growth; natural stream with good alignment and fairly constant cross-section
Permanent alluvial rivers with moderate changes in cross-section, average stage; slightly curving intermittent streams in very good condition
Small, deteriorated artificial channels, half choked with aquatic growth, winding river with clean bed, but with pools and shallows
Irregularly curving permanent alluvial stream with smooth bed; straight natural channels with uneven bottom, sand bars, dunes, few rocks and underwater ditches; lower section of mountainous streams with well-developed channel with sediment deposits; intermittent streams in good condition; rather deteriorated artificial channels, with moss and reeds, rocks, scours and slides
Artificial earth channels partially obstructed with debris, roots, and weeds; irregularly meandering rivers with partly grown-in or rocky bed; developed flood plains with high grass and bushes
Mountain ravines; fully ingrown small artificial channels; flat flood plains crossed by deep ditches (slow flow)
Mountain creeks with waterfalls and steep ravines; very irregular flood plains; weedy and sluggish natural channels obstructed with trees
Very rough mountain creeks, swampy, heavily vegetated rivers with logs and driftwood on the bottom; flood plain forest with pools
Mudflows; very dense flood plain forests; watershed slopes
Table 3 Allowable Mean Velocities against Erosion or Scour in Channels of various Soils and Materials
Description
v, m/sec
Soft clay or very fine clay
Very fine or very light pure sand
Very light loose sand or silt
Coarse sand or light sandy soil
Average sandy soil and good loam
Sandy loam
Average loam or alluvial soil
Firm loam, clay loam
Firm gravel or clay
Stiff clay soil; ordinary gravel soil, or clay and gravel
Broken stone and clay
Grass
Coarse gravel, cobbles, shale
Conglomerates, cemented gravel, soft slate, tough hardpan, soft sedimentary rock
Soft rock
Hard rock
Very hard rock or cement concrete (1:2:4 minimum)
Table 4 Allowable Side Slopes for Trapezoidal Channels in various Soils (Davis, 1952)
Type of soil
z
Light sand, wet clay
Wet sand
Loose earth, loose sandy loam
Ordinary earth, soft clay, sandy loam, gravelly loam or loam
Ordinary gravel
Stiff earth or clay, soft moorum
Tough hard pan, alluvial soil, firm gravel, hard compact earth, hard moorum
Soft rock
Table 5 Characteristic Dimensions of Optimum Trapezoidal Channel for given Gross-sectional Area and Side Slope
Side slope
where:
h = water depth, m
b = bottom width, m
B = surface width, m
P = wetted perimeter, m
R = hydraulic radius, m
A = cross-sectional area, m^2
Example 1
A trapezoidal earth channel of 1.5:1 side slopes is to be built on a slope of S = 0.001 to carry Q = 1.0 m^3/sec. Design the channel cross-section such that the hydraulic radius is optimal.
Solution;
Using Figure 1 first we mark off the length of the 1.0 m^3 /sec discharge on the edge of a sheet of paper. Next, keeping the line horizontal we place the paper's edge on the upper graphs, moving it upward along the corresponding slope S = 0.001 and shape (1.5:1) lines. Where the distance between the lines equals the discharge length we note the magnitude of the hydraulic radius R.
R = 0.40 m
The corresponding velocity in the channel is
v = 0.70 m/sec
obtained from the slope graph. The cross-sectional area is:
A = 1.43 m^2
from the shape graph.
Entering the left bottom graph along the R = 0.40 curve, we find the intercept with the radial line indicating optimum conditions. In this case for
R = R[opt ]= 0.40 m
we get
b = 0.50 m
and
h = 0.82 m
Example 2
Design a channel in firm loam, for a discharge of 1 500 l/sec, at maximum permissible velocity.
Solution
From Table 3, the maximum allowable velocity in firm loam is v = 1,0 m/sec. From Table 4 assume side slopes of 1.5:1. From Table 2 the roughness coefficient is defined as n = 0.025.
Canal properties
From Table 5
Figure 1. Lenkei's channel design graphs
Table 6 Channel section geometry
The slope of the channel is obtained from the Equation 2.4 as
3. DESIGN FORMULAS FOR HYDRAULIC STRUCTURES
3.1 Design Formulas for Intakes
3.2 Design Formulas for Inlets
3.3 Design Formulas for Outlets
3.4 Design Formulas for Culvert
3.5 Design Formulas for Vertical Falls
3.6 Design Formulas for Spillways
3.7 Design Formulas for Siphon
3.1 Design Formulas for Intakes
3.1.1 Open intake (sluice)
3.1.2 Pipe intake
3.1.1 Open intake (sluice)
Figure 2. Open intake
(A) Free discharge formula
m^3/sec
where
f = velocity coefficient
H[l]= contracted water depth, m
b = width of the gate, m
H = upstream water depth, m
v[0] = approach velocity, m/sec
g = 9.81 = acceleration due to gravity, m/sec^2
Table 7 Values of Velocity Coefficient f
Types of gate
f
Broad crested gate
Uncrested gate
Contracted water depth:
H[1] = y ×a
where f = contraction coefficient.
Table 8 Values of Contraction Coefficient y
y
y
y
y
(B) Submerged discharge formula
, m^3/sec
where
C = f.y = discharge coefficient
a = opening height of the gate, m
b = width of the gate, m
h = H[o] - H[2] = head, m
H[o]= upstream energy level, m
H[2]= downstream water depth, m
g = 9.81, m/sec^2
The subcritical conjugate depth:
, m
where
H[1] = contracted water depth
(C) Discharge formula influenced by downstream
Q[retarded ]= k.Q, m^3/sec
where
k = coefficient (Figure 3)
Q = free discharge, m^3/sec (see Equation (3.1))
Figure 3. Values of coefficient k
Figure 4. The range of downstream influence on flow under gates
(D) Apron and floor length formulas
Total length of the apron:
where
d[s] = depth of the sill from the downstream floor, m
4 h[2] = length of the hydraulic jump, m
h[2] = subcritical conjugate depth, m
Bligh's method
Total length of the floor:
L[f] ^= C × H[FS-b], m
where
C = Bligh's coefficient
H[FS-b] = difference between the full upstream supply level and the downstream bed level of the channel
Table 9 Values of Bligh's Coefficient C
Type of soil
C
Soft clay and silt
Medium clay
Loam
Light sand and mud
Peat
Coarse grained sand
Fine micaceous sand
Example 3
A 3.0 m wide vertical uncrested gate discharges into a feeder channel in which the water level is 1.2 m. The upstream water level is 2.0 m and the gate opening is 0.70 m. The approach velocity is 0.75 m/sec. Determine the discharge through the structure and the length of the required apron.
By Figure 4 we find the type of flow condition existing
Observing the location of the point described, we note that the outflow is free. Therefore the free discharge is obtained using Equation (3.1)
where from Table 7
f = 0.97 and
from Table 8
y = 0.628
then
H[1] = y ×a = 0.628×0.70 = 0.44 m
therefore
Total length of the apron is defined from Equation (3.8)
where
H[0] = 2.03 m
d[s] = 0
H[1] = 0.44 m
then
therefore
3.1.2 Pipe intake
Figure 5. Pipe intake
Calculating formulas
m^3/sec
where
C = discharge coefficient
A = pipe cross-sectional area, m^2
h = head, difference in upstream and downstream water surface levels, m
Value of the discharge coefficient C is obtained by the formula
where
k[e] =0.5 ^= entrance friction coefficient
l = 0.03 = friction factor for concrete pipe
l = pipe length, m
D = pipe diameter
Protection length on the downstream side is determined from the following formula:
where
v[p] = velocity in pipe, m/sec
v[s] = scouring velocity, m/sec (Table 3)
Example 1
Determine the discharge of the intake and the required protection length on its downstream side with the data below
D = 45 cm
l = 12.5 m
H[o] = 2.0 m
H[2] - 1.6 m
Bed soil = sandy loam
Solution
Determine discharge from the formula (3.9)
where
h = H[0]-H[2] = 2.0-1.6 = 0.4 m
From Table 3 the allowable velocity is defined as v[s ]= 0.8 for sandy loam.
Then
therefore
3.2 Design Formulas for Inlets
3.2.1 Free fall pipe inlet
3.2.2 Submerged pipe inlet
3.2.3 Open flume inlet
3.2.1 Free fall pipe inlet
Figure 6. Free fall pipe inlet
where
Q = discharge of the inlet, m^3/sec
m = discharge coefficient
A ^= internal cross-sectional area of the pipe, m^2
g = 9.81 = acceleration due to gravity, m/sec^2
H = head of the upstream water surface over the centre of the pipe, m
Figure 7. Discharge coefficient m for flow through free fall pipe inlet
Example 2
Determine the discharge of the free fall inlet with a diameter of 15 cm if its length is 4.0 m and the water depth in the feeder channel is 50 cm.
Solution
Determine the discharge from Equation (3.12)
The discharge coefficient is defined as m = 0.7 from Figure 7
then
3.2.2 Submerged pipe inlet
Calculating formulas given for pipe intake may be used.
3.2.3 Open flume inlet
Figure 8. Open flume inlet l/sec
where
Q = design discharge of the inlet, l/sec
B = width of the throat, cm
H = height of the designed full supply level in the feeder channel above the sill level of the inlet
C = discharge coefficient
Table 10 Values of Discharge Coefficient C for open Flume Inlet
B in cm
C
6 to 10
10 to 15
over 15
Figure 9. Relationships of discharge to B and H
Length of the cistern:
l[c] = 0.82 H[2], m
Depth of the cistern:
d[c] = 0.1 H[2], m
where
H[2] = water depth in the pond, m
Depth of the glacis
d[g] = 0.5 H, m
where
H = maximum water depth above the sill level of the inlet, m
Example 3
Design an open flume inlet for a discharge of 150 l/sec if the water depth in the feeder canal is 45 cm and 1.50 m in the pond.
Solution
The corresponding width of the throat to the water depth of 150 l/sec is defined from Figure 9.
then
B = 30 cm
d[g] = 0.5×H = 0.5×0.45 = 0.23 m
l[c] = 0.8×H[2] = 0.8×1.50 = 1.20 m
d[c] = 0.1×H[2] = 0.1×1.50 = 0.15 m
3.3 Design Formulas for Outlets
3.3.1 Types of outlets
3.3.1 Types of outlets
1. Open outlet (sluice)
2. Pipe outlet
Formulas given for intakes can be used.
The insertion of the stoplogs into the outlet creates over-shot flow conditions. The discharge formula (neglecting the approach velocity), for over-shot flow is:
where
B = internal width of the outlet monk, m
H = head, the difference between the pond water level and the stoplog crest, m
Time for emptying ponds or tanks:
where
T = emptying time in seconds
A[1] = average cross-sectional area of the pond or tank, m^2
A[2] = cross-sectional area of the outlet, m^2
H[1] = water depth in the pond at the beginning, m
H[2] = water depth in the pond at the end, m
If the pond is completely emptied H[2] will be = 0
Example 4
Determine the emptying time of 2 ha pond having its water depth of 1.5 m if the diameter of the outlet is 45 cm.
Solution
To obtain the required emptying time we use Equation (3.13)
where
A[1] = 2 ha = 20 000 m^2
H[1] = 1.5 m
H[0] = 0
then
3.4 Design Formulas for Culvert
3.4.1 Discharge formulas
Figure 10. Culvert
3.4.1 Discharge formulas
A) Submerged discharge formula
The formulas given for pipe intake can be used, but the following entrance friction coefficients should be used to calculate the discharge coefficient C.
Table 11 Values of Entrance Friction Coefficients for Culverts Flowing Full
Entrance condition
k[e]
Sharp-edged projecting entrance
Flush entrance, square edge
Well rounded entrance
B) Unsubmerged discharge formula
where
Q = design discharge of the culvert, m^3/sec
A^2 = actual flow area of the culvert, m^2
n = roughness coefficient for concrete pipe = 0.012 for corrugated metal pipe = 0.024
P[w] = wetted perimeter of the culvert
S = slope of the culvert
Entrance head:
where
H = head on entrance above the bottom of the culvert, m
d[c] = water depth in the culvert, m
To solve Equation (3.15), it is necessary to try different values of d[c] and corresponding values of R until a value is found that satisfies the equation. If the head on a culvert is high, a value of d[c] less than the culvert diameter will not satisfy Equation (3.15). This means the flow is under pressure and discharge can be calculated by submerged discharge formula.
3.5 Design Formulas for Vertical Falls
3.5.1 Discharge formulas
Figure 11. Vertical fall
3.5.1 Discharge formulas
A) Free discharge for vertical fall with a trapezoidal cross-sectional area
where
Q[1]= design discharge of the vertical fall, m/sec
A[1]= contracted cross-sectional area of the flow, m v
H = upstream water depth in the channel, m
v = approach velocity, m/sec
H[1] = contracted depth = 0.92 h[c], m
h[2] = critical depth, m
The critical depth can be obtained from the formulas (3.5) and (3.6).
B) Submerged discharge
where
A = cross-sectional area of the flow, m^2
h[s] = H[2] - p, m
H[2] = downstream water depth, m
p[s] = height of sill over-downstream bed level, m
h[2] = subcritical conjugate level = 1.14 h[c]
C) Length and depth of the basin
The length of the basin is given by empirical formula
L[b] = 5 (H×h)^1/2 , m
where
H = upstream water depth, m
h = head, difference in upstream and downstream water surface levels, m
The depth of the basin is
d[b] = 0.17 (H×h)^1/2, m
3.6 Design Formulas for Spillways
3.6.1 Recommended design floods for the spillways
3.6.2 Types of spillways
3.6.3 Discharge formulas
3.6.1 Recommended design floods for the spillways
Reservoir
Design flood
Volume
Height of dam
(m/sec)
(m^3)
(m)
or max. 2.5
Q[2%]
Q[1%]
Q[0.5%] - Q[0.1%]^ ^1^/
^1^/ In case the failure of the dam would create danger to human life or would cause great property damage, Q[0,1%] has to be used to design the spillway
3.6.2 Types of spillways
1. Side channel spillways
1.1 Side earthen channel spillway
1.2 Side lined channel spillway
2. Overfall spillway
3. Shaft spillways
3.1 Circular crest
3.2 Standard crest
3.3 Flat crest
4. Siphon spillway
3.6.3 Discharge formulas
3.6.3.1 Side earthen channel spillway
Figure 12. Side earthen channel spillway
A) Discharge over the crest
where
L = overflow crest length, m
h = water depth above the crest, m
Q = designed discharge, m^3/sec
B) Velocity in the earthen channel
Using Manning's formula (2.1):
To prevent erosion in the earthen channel the calculated velocity should be less than the scouring velocity of the material concerned as shown in Table 3.
C) Length of the crest protection
where
v = velocity of the designed discharge, m/sec
v[s] = scouring velocity, m/sec
h = water depth above the crest, m
3.6.3.2 Side lined channel spillway
The side channel has to be lined when the valley side has such great gradient that the calculated velocity in the side channel is higher than the scouring velocity concerned.
Example 5
Design a side earthen channel spillway for a discharge of 12 m^3/sec in stiff clay soil if the gradient of the valley side along the axis of the channel is 4 percent.
Solution
The scouring velocity of stiff clay soil is defined as v[s] =1.4 m/sec from Table 3.
Considering the channel as an unkempt artificial channel with considerable aquatic growth the value of n equals to 0.030 from Table 2. The next step is to determine the measurements of the spillway.
Assuming that the water depth over the crest is h = 0.30 m the length of the crest is determined by the use of Equation (3.20).
For the length of the crest protection using Equation (3.21)
where
v[s] = 1.4 m/sec
h = 0.30 m
Entering these values into Equation (3.21)
To check the velocity in the channel first the measurements of the channel are defined as follows:
The cross-sectional area of the channel is:
Assume that the channel has a bottom width of 30 m and its side slope of 1:1 then the normal water depth can be calculated by the following formula:
where
z = ratio of the side slope (horizontal to one vertical)
with
b = 30 m
z = 1
A = 8.6 m^2
then
The wetted perimeter is:
The hydraulic radius is
The velocity in the channel is then equal to
Since this velocity is higher than the scouring velocity, therefore, the channel should be lined or its gradient can be lowered by some falls. The slope of the bottom in the channel is obtained from Equation (2.1)
3.6.3.3 Overfall spillway
Figure 13. Overfall spillway
A) Discharge over the crest
Q = 1.7×L×h^3/2, m^3/sec
where
L = overflow crest length, m
h = water depth above the crest, m
Q = designed discharge, m
B) Design formulas for the glacis and the stilling basin
Critical depth is from Equation (3.5)
where
The velocity of the flow at the toe of the spillway may be computed by
where
e = g×q
P = the crest height above the stilling basin
and
The head loss along the glacis can be determined by the formula
where
n = roughness coefficient, sec/m^1/3
1 = length of the glacis, m
The subcritical conjugate depth is defined by the formula
The depth of the stilling basin is:
d[s] = h[2] - h[3], m
The length of the stilling basin can be calculated by the formula:
Example 3.6
Design an overfall spillway with the following data
Q = 30 m^3/sec
h = 1.0 m
P = 5.0 m
gradient of the glacis = 2:1
n = 0.012
h[3] = 1.20 m
Solution
From Equation (3.23) the length of the crest is:
Discharge per unit width is
The critical depth is then
The length of the glacis is defined as
The head loss along the glacis is obtained from Equation (3.25)
where
Q = 30 m^3/sec
n = 0.012
l = 11.18 m
A = h[c]×L = 0.66×18.0 = 11.88 m^2
P[w] = L + 2 h[c] = 18.0 + 2×0.66 = 19.32 m
then
The velocity of the flow at the toe of the spillway is defined from Equation (3.24)
where
P = 5.0 m
h[c] = 0.66 m
h[0] = 1.63 m
then
e = g×q = 9.81×1.67 = 16.38
now
then
The water depth at the toe of the spillway is
The subcritical conjugate depth in the stilling basin is defined from Equation (3.26)
The depth of the stilling basin is
d[s] = h[2] - h[3] = 1.65 - 1.20 = 0.45 m
The length of the stilling basin is obtained from Equation (3.27)
where
then
3.6.3.4 Shaft spillways
Figure 14. Types of the shaft spillways
(A) Discharge over the crest
1. Circular crest
where
C[1] = discharge coefficient (Table 12)
r = radius of the circular
h = water depth above the crest, m
Table 12 Values of the Discharge Coefficient C[1],
h/r
C[1]
2. Standard crest
Q = 2×C[2]×r×p ×h^1/3, m^3/sec
Table 13 Values of the Discharge Coefficient C[2]
h/r
C[2]
3. Flat crest
Q = 3.2×r×p ×h^3/2, m^3/sec
3.6.3.5 Siphon spillway
Figure 25. Siphon spillway
where
C = discharge coefficient
A = cross-sectional area of the throat, m
h = head, m
Value of the discharge coefficient is determined by the formula
where
l = friction factor = 0.03 (concrete pipe)
1 = length of the siphon, m
d = diameter of the siphon, m
S k = all local loss coefficients (Table 19)
In order to determine the approximate size of the siphon the value of C can be considered as follows:
Types of siphons
Diameter (mm)
C
medium
large
3.7 Design Formulas for Siphons
3.7.1 Types of siphons
3.7.2 Discharge of siphon
3.7.1 Types of siphons
Diameter (mm)
Length (m)
Discharge (m^3/sec)
a) Small, mobile
b) Medium, movable
c) Large, stabile
Table 14 Recommended Minimum Velocities in Pipes for Siphons
Pipe diameter (mm)
Velocity (m/sec)
3.7.2 Discharge of siphon
Figure 16. Details of the siphon
Calculating formulas
where
C = discharge coefficient
A = cross-sectional area of the pipe, m^2
H = head, m
The discharge coefficient C can be calculated by the formula
where
l = friction factor = 0.02 (steel pipe)
1 = length of the siphon, m
d = diameter of the siphon, m
S k = all local loss coefficients along the siphon
Table 19 lists local loss coefficients for a variety of the fixtures.
The allowable pressure head for siphon
where
Altitude in m
Water temperature °C
The allowable suction head of the siphon is:
where
v = velocity in the pipe, m/sec
The maximum allowable downstream head of the siphon is:
where
Depth of water above the entrance of the siphon
(a) Entrance with vertical axis
v
D
h
(m/sec)
(m)
(m)
2 D, but min.
1 D
1.7 D
(b) Entrance with horizontal axis
where
k[e] = entrance loss coefficient
(c) Entrance with inclined axis
where a = angle of the tilt in degree
Example 7
Design the siphon shown in Figure 17 for a discharge of 350 l/sec if water temperature is 30°C.
Figure 17. Details of the siphon
Solution
3 Considering the designed discharge Q = 0.35 m^3/sec the siphon is a large one. The velocity is calculated by the following formula assuming that its diameter is 400 mm.
As this velocity is higher than the recommended minimum one in Table 14 hence, the selected diameter is satisfactory.
The next step is to determine the water depth above the entrance of the siphon by using Equation (3.38)
v = 2.79 m
k[e] = 0.1
then
The discharge coefficient of the siphon is defined from Equation (3.34)
l = 0.02
l = l[1] + l[2] + l[3] + l[4] + l[5] + l[6] = 1.80 + 14.0 + 8.70 + 13.0 + 5.0 + 1.50 = 44 m
d = 0.40 m
Computation of the local loss coefficient using Table 19
Diffusor inlet
Fraction bends (30°)
Fraction bends (90°)
Valve
Outlet diffusor
S k = 1.37
Substitution of the above values into the equation gives:
The allowable suction head of the siphon is obtained if we use Equation (3.35)
where
then
The suction head of the siphon is defined from Equation (3.36)
where
then
H[s] = 7.35 - 1.03 = 6.32 m
H[effs] = 550 - 545 - 5.0 m
The allowable downstream head of the siphon is determined from Equation (3.37)
where
then
H[T] = 7.35 + 0.88 = 8.23 m
H[effT] = 550 - 543 = 7.00 m
The design of the siphon is satisfactory because both H[effs] and H[effT] are below their allowable values.
The discharge of the siphon is defined by the formula (3.33)
where
C = 0.47
A = 0.126 m^2
H = 545 - 543 = 2.0 m
then
This is acceptable, since the designed Q = 0.35 m^3/sec.
4. DISCHARGE OF WELLS
4.1 Well Types
4.2 Well Discharge in a Confined Aquifer
4.3 Well Discharge in an Unconfined Aquifer
4.4 Radius of Influence
4.5 Screen Entrance Velocity
4.6 Recommended Well Diameter
4.1 Well Types
Figure 18. Generalized cross section defining well types
4.2 Well Discharge in a Confined Aquifer
Figure 19. Radial flow in a confined aquifer
Thiem's method
where
k = permeability coefficient, m/sec
b = thickness of the aquifer, m
h[0] = original piezometric head at the well
h[w] = piezometric head at the well, m
r[0] radius of the influence, m
r[w] = radius of the well, m
4.3 Well Discharge in an Unconfined Aquifer
Figure 20. Radial flow in an unconfined aquifer
Dupuit's method
4.4 Radius of Influence
where
s = drawdown = h[0] - h[w], m, m
4.5 Screen Entrance Velocity
To ensure a long service life of the well, movement of the finer fractions of the aquifer material, resulting in subsequent clogging of the screen openings, has to be minimised. Therefore, the screen entrance velocities have to be kept below the values recommended in Table 15.
Table 15 Permissible Screen Entrance Velocities (Walton, 1962)
Permeability coefficient (m/day)
Screen velocity (cm/sec)
4.6 Recommended Well Diameter
In order to install the required pumping equipment properly in the well, the diameter of the well should be determined on the basis of the well discharge as recommended in Table 16.
Table 16 Recommended Well Diameter (Smith, 1961)
Pumping rate (m^3/hour)
Well diameter (m)
Example 1
Determine the discharge of a well with the diameter of 20 cm and the length of the screen of 30 m if k equals 10 m/day, the thickness of the unconfined aquifer is 40 m and the water table is at the depth of 6 m below the ground level.
In order to determine the well discharge the approximate value of drawdown is chosen as 4.0 m.
From Equation (4.3) we get
where
s = 4.0 m
k = 10 m/day = 1.2×10^-4 m/sec
hence
From Equation (4.2) we get
where
h[0] = 34 m
h[w] = 30 m
r[w] = 0.10 m
Substitution of these values into Equation (4.2) gives
Determination of the entrance velocity of the screen:
The open area of the screen is assumed as 15 per cent of the total surface area of the screen. Then the screen entrance area is obtained by
A[s] = 0.15×2r[w]×p ×L[s]
where
L[s] = 30 m
now
A[s] = 0.15×2×0.10×3.14×30 = 2.82 m^2
The effective open area accounting for blockage by grains is estimated to be 50 per cent of the actual open area i.e. 1.41 m . Hence the entrance velocity for a discharge of 0.015 m/sec is defined as
Since v[e] is equal to the optimum screen velocity, the selected screen is adequate.
Diameter of well:
Checking the well discharge per hour
q = 3 600×Q = 3 600×0.014 = 51 m^3/sec
As this value is almost equal to the pumping rate of 60 m^3/sec, hence, the selected diameter of 20 cm is adequate.
Example 2
Design a well for an indoor hatchery with a peak discharge of 700 1/min in an unconfined aquifer of 20 m. The fluctuation of the water table level is 4.0 m with a maximum level of 3.0 m below the ground level. Assume the value of k as 100 m/day.
(i) Selection of well diameter
Q = 700 l/min = 42 m^3/hour = 0.012 m^3/sec
For this discharge the recommended well diameter is 2r[w] = 0.15 m from Table 16.
(ii) Screen length
For k = 100 m/day = 1.16×10^-3 m/sec the permissible screen entrance velocity is obtained from Table 15 as v[e] =3.5 cm/sec = 0.035 m/sec. The screen length is calculated from the formula below (Garg, 1978).
Q = v[e]×A[sef]
where
A[sef] = effective open area of the screen = 0.5×0.15×A[s] m^2
Assuming that the screen's open area of 15 per cent is blocked by 50 per cent due to obstruction by aquifer grains
then
Substituting the values into the formula gives
(iii) Radius of influence
From Equation (4.3) we get
Assuming s = 1.5 m then
(iv) Discharge of the well
From Equation (4.2) we get
where
k = 1.16×10^-3 m/sec
h[0] =13 m, considering the minimum water table level
h[w] =11.5 m
r[0] =153 m
r[w] 0.075 m
Substitution of these values into Equation (4.2) gives
Since the calculated discharge is larger than the required one, the above calculations have to be repeated with a lowered value of the drawdown.
Assume s = 1,0 m
then
This is equal to the peak water demand of the hatchery, hence the tube well with a diameter of 15 cm and a screen length of 10 m as well as a drawdown of 1.0 m yields the required 700 1/min for the hatchery.
5. DESIGN FORMULA FOR SCREEN
Figure 21. Head loss in screens, values of screen loss coefficient K[s] for various bar shapes) Mosonyi, 1963)
Kirschmer's formula
where
h[s] = loss of head, m
K[s] = screen loss coefficient
t = thickness of bars, m
b = clear spacing between bars, m
v = velocity of approach, m/sec
a = angle of bar inclination, degree
Example 1
Design a Screen chamber for a pumping station with the following data
Q
= 0.50 m^3/sec
a = 70°
h
= 0.80 m
v
= 0.70 m/sec
t
= f 10 mm
b
= 2 cm
Procedure:
(i) Head loss of screen
Head loss of screens is obtained from Equation (5.1) with
K[s]
t
= 0.01 m
b
= 0.02 m
v
= 0.70 m/sec
sin a
= sin 70° = 0.9397
Substituting these values into Equation (5.1) gives
(ii) Width of the pumping chamber
The width of the pumping chamber is calculated first without any screens as below
the number of spacing
now
t + b = 0.01 + 0.02 = 0.03 m
Hence, the total width of the screen chamber is obtained as
w[ef] = n[s]×(t +b) = 45×0.03 = 1.35 m
6. DESIGN FORMULA FOR FILTER
Figure 22. Flow through filter
Darcy's Formula (Morris, 1963)
where
Q = discharge of the filter, m^3/sec
k = permeability coefficient, m/sec
h = head, m
L = thickness of the filter media, m
A = surface of the filter, m^2
Table 17 Permeability Coefficient k
Soil type
Average grain size (mm)
Range of k (m/sec)
Medium gravel
Fine gravel
Coarse sand
Medium sand
Fine sand
Example 1
Design a filter box of a feeder channel against trash fish for a discharge of 200 l/sec. The thickness of the filter gravel with average grain size of 7 mm is 35 cm and the head is 30 cm.
Solution
Assuming that the length of the filter box is l = 3.0 m
From Equation (6.1)
where
A = l×w = 3.0m
L = 0.35 m
Q = 0.2 m^3/sec
From Table 17 for average grain size of 7 mm we obtain k = 4.0×10^-2
h = 0.30 m
then
so
Therefore, the required width of the filter box with the selected length of 3.0 m shall be 2.0 m.
7. DESIGN FORMULAS FOR FLOW IN PIPES
7.1 Conveyance Method
7.2 Minor Losses
7.3 Local Losses
7.1 Conveyance Method
Calculating Formulas
where
Q = design discharge of the pipe, l/sec
S = H/L = slope of the energy line, m
H = head, m
L = length of the pipe, m
V = velocity in the pipe, m/sec
M = velocity modulus, m/sec
K = conveyance factor of the pipe, l/sec
Table 18 Velocity Moduli and Conveyance Factors of the Pipes
7.2 Minor Losses
Minor losses along the pipe may be expressed in the equivalent length of pipe that has the same head loss for the same discharge. The chart in Fig. 23 shows a convenient method of estimating these losses
Example 1
Determine the discharge of a 200 mm diameter galvanized pipe if the length of the pipe is 1 000 m and the head loss is 5.0 m.
Solution
The above given conditions imply that:
L = 1 000 m
D = 200 mm
H = 5.0 m
Figure 23. Minor losses of valves and fittings to flow of water (Coronel, 1978)
From Equation (7.1)
from which
From Table 18 K for the galvanized pipe of 200 mm in diameter is 476.9 l/sec.
Example 2
Determine the required head loss for a discharge of 50 l/sec in the pipe described in Example 1.
Solution
Using Equation (7.2) modified below
where
L = 1.0 km
From Table 18
Then
H = 50^2×1.0×0.0044 = 11.0 m
7.3 Local Losses
In the hydraulic design of pipelines the energy loss through friction along the pipe is dominant for pipes of 50 m or longer. For shorter pipe lengths the aggregate of local energy losses at elbows, valves, inlet devices etc., may be equal or more than the frictional losses along the pipe. Local losses in piping fixtures were found to be proportional to the amount of kinetic energy entering the fixture. The configuration of the fixture determines the constant of proportionality. Accordingly, local loss in a pipe fixture is computed by
in which k is the so-called local loss coefficient and v is the velocity in the pipe before the fixture, unless otherwise specified. Table 19 lists local loss coefficients for a variety of fixtures.
Table 19 Local loss coefficients
Table 20 Recommended Velocities in Pipes for Water Supply
Pipe diameter (mm)
Velocity (m/sec)
Pipe diameter (mm)
Velocity (m/sec)
8. DESIGN FORMULAS FOR PUMPING
8.1 Types of Pumps Used in Aquaculture
8.2 Total Dynamic Heads
8.3 Specific Speed
8.4 Net Positive Suction Head (NPSH)
8.5 Power Requirement
8.6 Determination of the Most Economical Pipe Diameter
8.1 Types of Pumps Used in Aquaculture
1. Propeller pumps
2. Centrifugal pumps
3. Turbine pumps
8.2 Total Dynamic Heads
Figure 24. Details of a pump station
Calculating formulas (Hicks, 1957)
H[T] = H[ST] + H[DT] = total dynamic head, m
where
H[ST] = H[e] + H[SS] +H[SV] + H[Sf] = tota1 suction head, m
H[DT = ]H[DS] + H[DV] + H[Df] = total discharge head, m
k[e] = local loss coefficient of the mouthpiece (Table 19)
v[s] = suction velocity in the suction pipe, m/sec s
H[SS] = suction static head is the vertical distance in metre between the downstream water surface and the centreline of the pump. It may be either positive or negative, depending upon the location of the pump centreline with respect to the water surface
l = 0.02 = friction factor (steel pipe)
l[s] = length of the straight suction pipe, m
D[s] = inside diameter of the suction pipe, m
S k[s] = local losses of the suction pipe, m
Q = discharge of the pump, m^3/sec
A = pipe cross-sectional area, m^2
H[DS] = discharge static head is the vertical distance in metre between the centerline of the pump and the point of discharge
v[d] = velocity of flow in the discharge, m/sec
v[s] = velocity of flow in the suction, m/sec
If the suction and discharge openings are of equal diameter, the discharge velocity head will be zero.
l[d]= length of the straight discharge pipe, m
D[d] = inside diameter of the discharge pipe, m
S k[d] = local losses of the discharge pipe, m
8.3 Specific Speed
where
n = impeller speed, rpm
Q = discharge, m^3/sec
H = head, m
Specific speed n is a widely used criterion for pump selection. It is the impeller speed corresponding t §a discharge of 1.0 m^3/sec at 1.0 m of head for the most efficient design. The recommended design range of n[s] is shown in Table 24.
Table 24 Recommended Design Range of n[s]
Type of pump
n[s]
Centrifugal pumps radial flow with
narrow impeller
medium impeller
wide impeller
Centrifugal pumps mixed flow
Propeller pumps
8.4 Net Positive Suction Head (NPSH)
where
To prevent cavitation, the pump should be placed such that the total suction head H[ST] is less than the head available, based on the local atmospheric pressure minus the vapour pressure of the water.
8.5 Power Requirement
Power required by a pump motor is commonly expressed in terms of brake horsepower and may be computed as follows:
where
g = 1 000 kg = unit weight of water in m
Q = discharge of the pump, m^3/sec
H[T] = total dynamic head, m
h [p] = efficiency of the pump
h [m] = efficiency of the motor
Efficiency of a pump varies with Q and H. The value is included in the manufacturer's characteristic curves of the pumps available in pump catalogues, an example of which is shown in Figure 25.
Figure 25. Characteristic curves for pump AGROFIL 500-D
The electric motor's power requirement must be expressed in kilowatts
1 horsepower = 0.7457 kW
Therefore, if Equation (8.4) is expressed in kilowatt we obtain:
Efficiency of the motor depends upon the type of the driven motors as follows:
Types of the driven motors
h [m]
Direct-coupled electric motor
Diesel engine
8.6 Determination of the Most Economical Pipe Diameter
To ensure the minimum operation cost and the amortization of a pump station having a longer pipeline, its most economical pipe diameter can be defined by the following function as Agroszkin (1952) recommended.
where
g = 1 000 kg = unit weight of water in m
Q = discharge of Q the pump, m^3/sec
T = yearly pumping hours
R[c] = unit cost of a horsepower-hour
h = h [p]×h [m] = total efficiency
pa = percentage of the amortization
C[p] = unit cost of one metre diameter pipe per metre
The values of function F[D] are shown in Table 22.
Table 22 Values of Function F[D]
Diameter
Types of pipes
(inches)
(mm)
Plastic, G.I. new cast iron
Concrete
Example 1
A pump with the designed arrangement as shown in Figure 24 delivers 175 l/sec. Determine the total dynamic head and the required brake horsepower.
Solution:
The total dynamic head is obtained by Equation (8.1)
H[T] = H[ST] + H[DT]
where
H[ST] = H[e] + H[SS] + H[SV] + H[Sf],
and
H[DT] = H[DS] + H[DV] ^+ H[Df]
The first step is to determine the various heads which are computed as follows:
From Table 19 for strainer bucket without foot valve
ke = 5.5
From Figure 24
D = 300 mm
then
hence
H[SS] = 4.0m
l[s] = 2.5 + 4.0 = 6.5 m
l = 0.02
D = 0.30 m
kb = 0.17 (45° bend. Table 19)
Substituting these values in Equation H[Sf] we get
The total suction head is, therefore
H[ST] = 1.68 + 4.00 + 0.305 + 0.184 = 6.169 m
From Figure 24
H[DS] = 3.0 m
As the discharge and suction pipes have the same diameter, hence
H[DV] = 0
l[D]= 3.0 + 28.0 + 1.0 = 32.0 m
From Table 19 for gate valve with e/D = 1/3
kv = 0.07
for two 90° bends with R/d = 1
kb = 2×0.53 = 1.06
then
The total discharge head is, hence
H[DT] = 3.0 + 0 + 0.995 = 3.995 m
Then the total dynamic head is
H[T] = 6.169 + 3.995 = 10.164 m say 10.20 m
The brake HP is determined by the use of Equation (8.4)
where
g = 1 000 kg
Q = 0.175 m^3/sec
H[T] = 10.20 m
Assuming
h [p] =0.75 and h [m] =0.90
then
Example 2
Determine the most economical pipe diameter for the pump station described in Example 1 with the following data
T= 20.365 = 7 300 hours a year
Rc = US$ 0.07
pa = 10%
Cp = US$ 175
Using Equation (8.6) with the above data we obtain
From Table 22, the corresponding diameter is defined as
D = 500 mm
<section>a</section>
Chapter 9. Problems on Pond Construction and Maintenance on Cat Clay Soils
Ricardo G. Hechanova
Manila, Philippines
1. INTRODUCTION
2. FORMATION OF ACID SULPHATE SOILS
3. FIELD IDENTIFICATION
4. PROBLEMS OF POND CONSTRUCTION AND PLANNING
5. REMEDIES FOR PONDS BUILT ON ACID SULPHATE SOILS
6. MANAGEMENT MEASURES
7. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
8. REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
With the increased demands for freshwater and brackishwater aquaculture, areas with potential acid sulphate conditions are increasingly being placed under cultivation. Aqua-culture is probably the most suitable use for areas with actual acidity.
The distribution of acid sulphate soils is world-wide with large areas found in the tropical deltaic and coastal zones. Tang (1979) estimated that at least 60 percent of the fishponds in the Philippines are affected by acid sulphate conditions. The low production of milkfish ponds in the Philippines for instance, could be attributable at least in part to the occurrence of acid sulphate soils.
Of the estimated 500 million ha of fine-textured soils in coastal areas, 11.4 million ha are highly pyritic, which will acidify upon aeration. The extent of actual and potential acid sulphate soils in West Africa may be about 3.7 million ha (FAO/Unesco, 1974) and smaller areas are also found in the coastal zones of the Netherlands, Sweden and Finland (Bloomfield and Coulter, 1973) .
About 6 million ha are found in Southeast and East Asia, with Indonesia having 2 million (Driessen and Suproptohardjo, 1974) and Vietnam having 1 million (Tram and Lieu, 1975), the largest share.
Improved technology in reclamation of these soils has been developed at the Brackish-water Aquaculture Centre (BAC) of the University of the Philippines in Leganes, Iloilo in the Philippines. Improved methods of construction and maintenance have been developed in Southeast Asia and elsewhere where acid sulphate soils have been reported.
The use of the prefix 'cat' in the cat-clay soil name comes from the Dutch vernacular 'kattekleigronden'. 'Cat-clay soils', the English derived from this, was connotative of harmful, mysterious influences or qualities. Traditionally, the expression 'acid sulphate soils' is used to denote soils with cat clay phenomena, those which have a very low pH and yellow jarositic mottles after drainage and aeration of the originally waterlogged parent material.
A potential acid sulphate soil or material is a soil or a reduced parent material which is expected by the person identifying it to become acid sulphate soil upon drainage and oxidation.
2. FORMATION OF ACID SULPHATE SOILS
The genesis of acid sulphate soils is mainly in the formation of pyrite. Pyrite formation involves the bacterial reduction of sulphate to sulphide, partial oxidation of the sulphide to elemental sulphur, and the interaction between ferrous and feric iron with the sulphide and elemental sulphur. The basic factors therefore required for the formation of acid sulphate soils are a sufficient supply of sulphate, iron, high organic matter, presence of the sulphate reducing bacteria Desulfovibric desulfuricans and Desulfomacultom and an aerobic environment alternated with limited aeration.
Fine-grained iron oxide is found in sufficient quantities in the clayey sediments of tidal swamps, though iron could be limited in sandy and peaty soils. Dense mangrove vegetation supplies abundant organic matter. Fine-grained iron oxide and metabolizable organic matter are the essential ingredients required for pyrite formation (Singh, 1980).
In the zone between mean high water and mean low water, pyrite formation is most favourable due to aeration during periods of tide changes. Less pyrite is accumulated in the zone below low tide level. In the better drained zone above the high water level which is aerobic most of the time, there is less occurrence of pyrite.
Potential acidity develops gradually due to the removal from the system by tidal action of a part of the alkalinity in the form of bicarbonates (HCO[3]) formed during sulphate reduction.
The reaction of sulphur reducing bacteria involved in pyrite formation can be described as follows:
2CH[2]O + SO[4]
H[2]S + 2HCO[3]
and with HCO[3] removed by tidal flushing
Fe(OH)[2] + H[2]S
FeS + 2H[2]O
and,
FeS + S
FeS[2 ](pyrite)
The final pH of the soil after drainage and drying depends on the amount of pyrite oxidized and the acid neutralizing component in the soil, as silicates, carbonates and exchangeable bases. In the humid tropics carbonates are practically absent in coastal sediments. Volcanic areas provide sediments rich in weatherable silicate minerals and the presence of such minerals provides a high amount of acid neutralizing agent. This prevents development of potential acidity in the coastal tidal flats.
3. FIELD IDENTIFICATION
There is no single commonly accepted method for the identification and for the prediction of acid sulphate soils. Actual acid sulphate soils are not common; far more abundant are potential acid sulphate soils for which recognition in undrained or waterlogged areas is generally difficult.
Evaluation of a technique for determining potential acidity was conducted in BAC fishponds in 1972 (IFP Technical Report 10). It was found that incubation of the moist soil samples in thin plastic bags for a period of 30 days appears to be an effective technique for the identification of potential acid sulphate soils.
The rate of oxidation is regulated by the iron oxidizing bacteria. If a soil is dried rapidly, the bacteria is inactivated, oxidation is slow, and it may take many months for the soil to reach its maximum acidity. If the soil is kept in a moist aerobic condition, the iron oxide bacteria thrive and the development of soil acidity is attained within a few weeks. The plastic bags allow pyrite oxidation to proceed while maintaining the soil moisture. The pH of the samples with potential acidity dropped to 4.0 or less in this time period. Yellow, jarositic mottles appeared on the sample. This technique of soil survey has been accepted due to ease of use.
The detection of actual acid sulphate soils presents no difficulty as these soils are characterized by pale yellow, jarositic mottles.
Black stained and odorous mud due to ferrous and hydrogen sulphides that turn brown upon exposure is also an indication of soil that may contain pyrite.
The occurrence of mounds of the mud lobster, Thalassina anomala in brackishwater tidal swamps indicate the occurrence of acid sulphate soils.
Acid sulphate in pond soil can be recognized by the very low pH values (below 4) measured in the pond water when it is flooded for the first time after a drying period, by the reddish iron oxides that form on the pond bottom shortly after flooding, and by the poor growth or absence of algae(Brinkman and Singh, 1982).
Association of Rhizophora, Nypa fruticans and Meleuca stands found in tidal brackish-water swamps is usually a strong indication of potential acid sulphate soils, whereas those of Avicenia are less acidic .
Surface efflorescence of water soluble aluminium sulphate, formed under strongly evaporative conditions when pyrite oxidizes at shallow depth, are commonly found in ponds which are newly constructed on potential acid sulphate soils.
Fish kills and the bitter taste of river water that drains sulphidic materials are indicative of a potential acid sulphate area.
Acid sulphate in the dikes can be recognized by the poor and spotty growth of vegetation on them several years after construction.
The sharp sour-bitter taste (like alum) of pale yellow coloured salts generally found near the base of the dikes is also a clear indication of acid sulphate salts.
A potential acid sulphate soil may have a pH near normal, but when oxidized by drying or with 30 percent hydrogen peroxide, the pH drops by about two or three units, generally below 4 (Singh, 1980).
The red lead pole test can be conducted during a field survey. Stakes coated with red lead paint are driven into the soil hydrogen sulphide generated in sulphate reduction turns the red lead marking to black within one week.
These field characteristics are often not well-defined indications. A number of complementary tests are required to determine the physical and chemical properties so as to be able to assess the degree of acidity quantitatively and to design improvement schemes and measures.
Acid sulphate conditions are not permanent although they may cause tremendous problems while they exist. The problems faced by farmers in fishponds built on acid sulphate soil include low fish yields (Rabanal and Tang, 1974), slow growth of fish, slow rate of natural fish food production, fish kills due to acidity, erosion of the pond dikes, and soft shell prawns (IFP, 1974; Potter, 1976; Camacho, 1977; Singh, 1980, 1982, and Cook, 1978).
In acidic ponds, the growth of algae is discouraged by the low pH of the water, by the dark brown of the water, and the high aluminium and low phosphate concentrations.
Poor response to phosphorous fertilizer is another indication in fishponds with acid sulphate soils.
Active iron and aluminium in acid sulphate soils are capable of precipitating phosphate as compounds at low pH and oxidizing conditions. Phosphate already bound with aluminium generally does not become available (Singh, 1982).
4. PROBLEMS OF POND CONSTRUCTION AND PLANNING
When fishponds are constructed, blocks of silty clay are dug and built into earth dikes. On exposure, the surface of these clay blocks becomes grey-coloured due to the oxidation of the ferric sulphide, FeS[2]. Pond systems which have been excavated from this typical clay present an uneconomical development in the utilization of the land for aqua-culture.
Where dikes are constructed from acid soil excavated from the pond bottom area, it is best to place the 'bad' soil at the dike bottom and make the outer dike shell of pond top soil. The poor subsoil can be used for the dike core and the outer surface can be covered with the top soil, as generally soil with low potential acidity overlies soil with high potential acidity. It was found during research studies at the BAG that the top soil (0-30 cm in depth) was less acidic than the subsoil (30-100 cm in depth) upon oxidation.
Another method of fishpond construction is to build the dikes of soil taken from alternate borrow trenches paralleling the dike. The remaining alternate trenches are levelled to the desired pond bottom elevation. This method is a sort of compromise with the dike built of half the bad and half the good soil.
A ratio of dike soil mass to pond soil mass to 0.15 m depth has been determined from recent experimental studies and research at the Brackishwater Aquaculture Centre (BAG) in the Philippines. Reduction of the amount of rainwater runoff from the dikes to the ponds is better accomplished when the size of the pond is increased with a relative decrease in dike size. A minimum ratio, for soil improvement in the least period of time, is when the mass of soil in the pond, to a depth of 0.15 m, is equal to the mass of dike soil.
If the pond bottom is low and the earth excavated is put into large dikes the effective pond area is reduced, with consequent increase in the acid runoff into the ponds. A better approach would be to build the ponds with higher bottoms and have the tidal water supplemented by pumping water into the ponds. Pumping increases operating costs, but this may be offset by reduced construction cost and by increases in production.
5. REMEDIES FOR PONDS BUILT ON ACID SULPHATE SOILS
Experiments in unreclaimed ponds of the BAC were conducted by Poernomo in 1982 using a rapid reclamation scheme. Earlier experiments were also conducted by Camacho in 1977 at BAC and at different locations in Panay Island by Singh in 1980. The basic concept in all these studies was to remove the source of acidity by oxidizing the pyrite from the pond bottom and flushing it out. At the same time the acid materials and other toxic elements from the big dikes were also leached and removed. The details of the workplan adopted by Poernomo (1982) from Brinkman and Singh (1982) are quoted below:
'The procedure involves a precisely planned sequence of filling, draining and drying the ponds, cultivation by tooth harrow and finally broadcasting a small amount of lime in the pond soil. In the same period, the top of the surrounding dikes should be made into a series of long narrow paddies by small levees along their edges, and seawater pumped or carried into them.
A pH meter or a roll or strips of pH indicator paper should be available. A tooth harrow and draft animal are needed for the cultivation of the pond bottom. A small diesel-powered pump mounted in a small boat or on a raft of bamboo or oil drums makes it possible to rapidly inundate the tops of the dikes. About 1 ton of powdered agricultural lime per ha is also required.
The workplan can be completed in about 3 months. All the work should be done in the dry season. Treatment of the pond bottom and of the dikes should proceed at the same time. During the first heavy rains after the pond is again in operation, some further work should be done, as described below.
Treatment of the pond bottom
In the early part of the dry season, the pond has to be prepared for removal of the acid. This is done by drying the pond thoroughly. Small drains should be dug to let all remaining patches of standing water run dry. The pond bottom should be tilled after one week by tooth harrow in two directions. It should be harrowed after thorough drying (cracks to appear in the soil to about 10 cm depth) so that the surface layer is broken into small pieces. If there is no rain, the total drying period will probably take 2 to 3 weeks.
The acid in the dry layer is ready to be removed. Brackishwater or salt water is brought in to fill the pond. Measure the pH of the water immediately after filling and every few hours thereafter. The pH is expected to drop rapidly from that of seawater (7 to 9) to a value lower than 4, often 3.
At the first opportunity after the pH has become constant, drain the pond and make sure that this water goes to the sea and not to any other pond. This treatment removes part of the acid.
Refill the pond and again check the pH. Again drain the water as soon as possible after it has a constant pH. Repeat the refilling and the draining process as long as constant pH is about 4 or below. This may take less than a week (4-6 refills) to about 2 weeks. When the water remains at a higher pH, drain it and thoroughly dry the pond bottom again as described above.
After thorough drying, cultivate the pond bottom and again refill as described above. This time, the pH probably will not drop as low as in the first series of filling and drying. When the pH remains above 5 after 1 to 3 drying cycles, drain and broadcast 500 kg agricultural lime per ha (not calcium oxide or calcium hydroxide) well-distributed over the pond bottom. Do not incorporate the lime into the soil. The pond is then ready to start normal operations if the dikes have also been treated.
Treatment of the dikes
At the same time as the acids are removed out of the pond bottom, the acids in and on the dikes should also be removed. Because the dikes are normally dry, the acid can be washed out without first drying as is needed for the pond bottom. Small levees, similar to the levees between wetland rice fields, should be constructed on the top of the dikes along both sides and the surface between them should be levelled. At the same time, any holes in the top surface should be filled.
To avoid excessive amounts of earth removal, this bunding and levelling can be done separately for each section of dike depending on its elevation. The work should be completed by the time the pond bottom has dried out and is ready for the first filling with water.
At that time, seawater or brackishwater should be pumped or brought into the levelled paddies on top of the dikes, enough to keep them flooded to more than 10 cm depth. At first it will be necessary to check the whole top surface and the length of the small levees for leaks. Acid water will soon seep out toward the pond or the canal. Pumping of seawater from the intake canal should be continued as necessary to keep all the tops of the dikes flooded. -When the pond bottom is ready to be dried thoroughly again, stop pumping and allow the top of the dikes to dry out. If there is still some water standing after two days, drain this, to the canal if possible, otherwise through the pond. When the pond bottom has thoroughly dried and has been cultivated, the top of the dike should be flooded again during the next series of filling and draining the pond. When the pH of the water in the pond remains 5, stop flooding the top of the dike and remove the standing water.
On dikes between two ponds, remove both levees and bring this soil toward the centre. Make the top of the dikes smooth and slightly sloping from the centre to both sides. Do not leave loose soil lying about. On dikes along a canal remove only the levee along the side of the canal and bring the soil toward the other levee. Make the top of these dikes smooth and slightly sloping toward the canal.
Then broadcast 1 kg of agricultural lime per 10 m^2 on the slope of the dike along each pond and 1 kg per 20 m^2 on the top of the dikes between the ponds.
The same problem of acidic rainwater runoff from the dikes to the ponds was encountered at the Brackishwater Aquaculture Centre in Gelang Patah, Johore Bahru in peninsular Malaysia, causing fish kills and retarded growth of the fish. The acidic runoff was found to be potentially due to acid sulphate condition Of the soil material of the dikes which are massive and with flat side slopes.
6. MANAGEMENT MEASURES
The usual amount of chicken manure of 2 t/ha is distributed over the pond bottom. To increase the rate of phosphate fixation, rice hulls, ash of rice hulls or filterpress mud from the sugar mills can be spread over the pond bottom before spreading the chicken manure. A few days later, initial amounts of nitrogen fertilizer are broadcast in the pond water. In contrast to the usual practice in non-acid fishponds of broadcasting the recommended phosphate amounts once every 2 or 3 weeks, the phosphate should be divided into portions and broadcast every 2 days, or weekly portions should be placed in jute bags on floating platforms at two platforms per hectare, to dissolve slowly. By these methods the Phosphate concentration in the pond water can be kept high enough for good growth of algae, without excessive amounts of fixation on the material of the pond bottom.
Experimental and research work was conducted at BAC by D.J. Hechanova from January to August 1981 on the effects of various organic materials on the changes in the chemical properties of soil and water systems of submerged acid sulphate soils. Seven treatments were used including the application of burnt rice hulls, partly decomposed rice hulls, chicken manure at 2 t/ha, and Fertilex, an organic commercial fertilizer, all in combination with mono ammonium phosphate (16-20-0), and mono ammonium phosphate alone. Marfon, a fertilizer/soil conditioner produced from fermented rice hulls was also used at 5 t/ha.
The findings showed that the Marfon and chicken manure applications showed the lowest concentration of sulphates resulting in the soil and the supernatant The decrease was due to the reduction of sulphate or sulphides under anaerobic conditions and also due to the high organic matter content of these materials.
7. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Low rates of liming give more favourable results than large-scale liming. Regular application at 500 kg/ha of powdered lime on the pond bottom before the first flooding of the pond speeds up the reduction and lowers peak concentrations of toxins. Toxins may be released into the pond water following the application of organic material. The lime is not incorporated into the soil.
Phosphate should be made available by a slow release or in frequent and small doses. Slow release is attained by the construction of a fertilizer platform inside the pond at such elevation so that the water surface is above the platform to wet half of the fertilizer mass, usually contained in a sack. The fertilizer on the platform is released in small doses as it is partly wetted.
Prior to pond development, a detailed soil survey should be conducted and when the area is identified to be potential acid sulphate soil, appropriate designs and construction methods should be adopted.
If no growth of algae is observed within a week, the water should be inoculated with algae collected from normal fishponds.
The pond water pH should be monitored regularly and if it becomes acidic and below the tolerable limit, a small quantity of agricultural lime should be broadcast in the water, but when the pond water becomes turbid it should be replaced by new brackishwater before fertilization. The new pond water is left to stay for a week after fertilizer and lime application.
Fish culture is started in the first year after reclamation, with stocking of older and heavier fingerlings than is usual for non-acidic ponds.
8. REFERENCES
Bloomfield, C. and J.K. Coulter, 1973, Genesis and management of acid sulfate soils. Adv. Agron., 25:265-326
Brinkman, R. and L.J. Pons, 1973, Recognition and prediction of acid sulfate soil conditions. In Proceedings of an International Symposium. Publ. Inst. Land Reclam. Improv., Wageningen, (18) Vol. 2
Brinkman, R. and V.P. Singh, 1982, Rapid reclamation of brackishwater fishponds in acid sulfate soils. Publ. Inst. Land Reclam. Improv., Wageningen, (31):318-30
Camacho, A.S., 1977, Implications of acid sulfate soils in tropical fish culture. Manila, South China Sea Fisheries Development and Coordinating Programme, SCS/GEN/77/5:97-102
Cook, H.L., 1978, Problems in shrimp culture in the South China Sea Region, SCS/76/WP/40, SCP, Manila, Philippines
Driessen, P.M. and Suproptohardjo, 1974, Soils for agricultural expansion in Indonesia. Bull. Soil Res. Inst., Bogor,(l):63 p.
FAO/Unesco, Soil map of the world, 1:5 000 000. Paris, Unesco, 59 p.
Hechanova, D.J., 1983, Chemical changes in sumberged acid sulfate soils-water system treated with some organic materials. Masters thesis. University of the Philippines, Iloilo City, (Unpubl.)
Inland Fisheries Project, Causes of bangus kills in ponds at the Brackishwater Aqua- culture Centre following a heavy rain. 1974, Tech. Rep. Inland Fish. Proj. Philipp., (5):21-43
Institute for Land Reclamation and Improvement, Proceedings of the International Symposium on acid sulphate soils. 1973, Publ. Inst. Land Reclam. Improv., Wageningen, (18) 2 vols.
Poernomo, A.T. and V.P. Singh, 1982, Problems, field identification and practical solutions of acid sulfate soils for brackishwater fishponds. In Report of Consultation/Seminar on coastal fishpond engineering. 4-12 August 1982, Surabaya. Manila, South China Sea Fisheries Development and Coordinating Programme, SCS/GEN/82/ 42:49-62
Pons, L.J., 1973, Outline of genesis, characteristics, classification and improvement of acid sulfate soils. Publ. Inst. Land Reclam. Improv., Wageningen, (18) Vol. 2:3-27
Potter, T., 1976, The problems to fish culture associated with acid sulfate soils and methods for their improvement. In Report on the ASEAN Seminar/Workshop on Shrimp Culture, 15-23 Nov. 1976,^ - Iloilo, Philippines. Manila, ASEAN National Coordinating Agency of the Philippines
Rabanal, H.R. and Y. Tang, 1974, Comprehensive fishfarm development training course (4th session). Field Extension Unit II. Report No. 1
Singh, V.P., 1980, The management of fishponds with acid sulfate soils. Asian Aquacult., 3(4):4-6
Singh, V.P., 1982, Kinetics of acidification during drying and inundation of acid sulfate soil material: implications for the management of brackishwater fishponds. Publ. Inst. Land Reclam. Improv., Wageningen, (31):331-53
Singh, V.P., 1982, Management of acid sulfate soils for brackishwater fishponds: experience in the Philippines. Publ. Inst. Land Reclam. Improv., Wageningen, (31):354-66
Tang, Y.A., 1979, Physical problems in fishfarm construction. In Advances in aquaculture, edited by T.V.R. Pillay and W.A. Dill. Farnham, Surrey, Fishing News Books Ltd., for FAO, pp. 99-104
Tram, H.V. and L. Pham Ng, 1975, Problem soils in the Mekong delta of Vietnam: a general description and implication of rice cultivation. Paper presented at the International Rice Research Conference, Los Banos, Philippines, 9 p. (mimeo)
<section>b</section>
Chapter 10. The Organization and Supervision of Fish Farm Construction
J. Kövári
Food and Agriculture of
the United Nations
Rome, Italy
1. INTRODUCTION
2. PREPARATIONS FOR FISH FARM CONSTRUCTION
3. EXECUTION OF CONSTRUCTION WORKS
4. SUPERVISION OF CONSTRUCTION BY THE ENGINEER
1. INTRODUCTION
In order to complete a project in the proposed time at the estimated cost, the work has to be well organized. To ensure that all the work being performed is in accordance with the plans and specifications, adequate and continuous supervision must be provided by the Owner of the project during the construction period. The Engineer in charge, or the Resident Engineer, as the representative of the Owner, is responsible for the proper execution of the construction work, and he should control, supervise and help the Contractor to provide the best quality of work and complete the construction in accordance with the deadline given in the contract.
2. PREPARATIONS FOR FISH FARM CONSTRUCTION
2.1 Preparatory Process
Any construction, including fish farm construction, is an economical and technical activity with a common aim, in that the proposed work, based on plans and specifications, should be carried out systematically, economically and continuously within the time frame indicated in the contract. Construction must be organized in the time and space needed for completion of the project. The time should be defined by the existing labour, materials and machinery, as well as prevailing local and environmental conditions. Generally, the shorter the time allotted for job completion, the cheaper the construction will be. The space required for construction should be organized by an areal arrangement of the job site, including the allocation of the different provisional buildings and workshops, etc., prior to the beginning of any construction work. All provisional facilities and plant should be utilized in the most economical manner. For the most economical implementation of a project, full
utilization should be made of all materials, time and equipment.
The size of a project will define the scope and depth of the organization. For construction of a small-scale rural fish farm, fewer organizational activities are required than for a large-scale fish farm. However, utilizing the basic methods for construction generally used in a large-scale project, the time and expense of the construction may also be reduced in a small-scale project (Pillay, 1974).
2.1 Preparatory Process
2.1.1 Methods used in organization of construction work
2.1.2 Detailed plans required of the contractor
2.1.3 Choosing and operating the equipment
For the implementation of a project, small or large, good preparation compatible with the dimensions of the project, is needed. Adequate coordination between the Contractor and the Engineer in project preparation ensures that the work will be properly executed both in time and quality (Abrahamson, 1969).
The Contractor's duties are as follows:
- Review and study all the detailed plans thoroughly.
- Report all questions and comments to the Engineer, particularly those which have a bearing on timely execution of the project.
- Request any additional drawings, calculations or other clarifications from the Engineer.
- Make application for any and all permits required for the construction work from the public authorities.
- Arrange for all necessary sub-contracts.
- Prepare a detailed schedule of requirements for all items of work, materials and equipment.
- Order all equipment required for the construction, e.g., pumps, generators, etc. The Engineer's duties are as follows:
- Provide to the Contractor all permits required before and during the construction work.
- Arrange, if necessary, for provision of adequate water source for construction work.
- Supply any additional drawings, calculations or modifications to the work plan which may be required by the Contractor.
2.1.1 Methods used in organization of construction work
Several methods can be used in the organization of the construction work. Continuous organization of production can be applied when the existing equipment and labourers are to be utilized constantly and continuously. Scheduling of succession can be used when several similar or identical projects are to be executed in the same region, to ensure continuous and equal progress for the different working groups and to reduce the total period of construction (Atkinson, 1971).
2.1.1.1 Network scheduling
To meet the basic aim of the organization of construction work, i.e., to ensure execution of the project, as far as possible, within the minimum time, the use of network scheduling may be the most suitable solution. A simple network may be sufficient, or in larger projects a complex network requiring the use of a computer might be needed. There are several different kinds of network in use, such as the Critical Path Method (CPM), Programme Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT), and Least Cost Estimating and Scheduling (LESS). We will limit our discussion here to the Critical Path Method which is the most commonly used in construction work. In large-scale projects, it has been found that approximately 20 percent of construction time can be saved by using this method (O'Brien, 1967).
In applying the CPM method, each of the activities that are needed to construct the project are listed, and a diagram is prepared showing how these activities are interrelated. Each of the activities is represented in the diagram by arrows, and proceed in the direction of the arrow until they culminate in an event, represented by a circle.
For example, in Figure 1, the arrow from 1 to 8 represents the activity of 'Purchase and Delivery of Pumps'. The arrow from 3 to 8 represents the activity of 'Construction of Pump House'. Event 8 is the completion of the pump house and delivery of the pumps. The critical path is through events 1-3-4-5-6-8-9-10 and requires 41 weeks for project completion.
The basic procedures in preparing a CPM diagram for a project consist of the following:
Planning: the project is broken down into activities and each activity is listed separately.
Analyzing and scheduling: this involves establishment of the relationship between activities in order to determine their interdependency. In this way it can be determined which works can be independently carried out and which depend on some other activity being completed first, thereby allowing for scheduling the flow path of activities. Time duration for each activity is arrived at with reference to general availability of labourers, materials, equipment, etc. The total project time is the summation of the duration times of all activities to be undertaken from the initial start of work to the finishing point through the longest time-consuming route. The longest duration is defined as the critical path, and the activities on this path are called critical activities. If a project must be completed within the time scheduled by the critical path, there must not be any delay of the critical activities.
Controlling: this consists of assessing the progress of work, including comparing the actual performance with the planned performance of each activity. Precise evaluation of actual performance time against that scheduled can provide useful data which may be adopted for another project. The CPM must be revised pach time an assessment is made.
The advantages of the CPM system can be summarised as follows:
(i) It is applicable to a wide range of projects.
(ii) Various alternative procedures can be considered when time and resource schedules are laid out. In the operational phase it can be used as a control device to measure actual versus planned progress.
(iii) The Engineer or the Contractor may quickly realize from the CPM diagram how a portion of the project is affected by other parts of the project work.
(iv) Action can be focused on exceptional problems contributing to more effective control.
(v) When combined with schedules of equipment, materials and manpower, total costs by established completion dates can be reasonably estimated (see 2.1.2).
Figure I. Simple CPM network for construction of a fish farm
Event No.
Description of Activity
Activity Time (weeks)
Purchase and delivery of pumps
Site preparation
Construction of pump house
Construction of drains
Diking
Construction of outlets
Bed and wave protection
Construction of inlets
Construction of internal roads
Construction of feeder canals
Turfing of dikes
Installation of pumps
Final checking and testing
2.1.2 Detailed plans required of the contractor
The Contractor must complete the work and services of the project in accordance with the schedule of execution provided in the tender documents. To do this he must prepare detailed plans for scheduling of the project. These plans may be in either tabular or graphical form, although the graphical form is generally used for ease of visualization. The most commonly used graphical presentation for scheduling is the rectangular bar chart. The following examples are given in tabular form, from which a bar chart can be prepared.
2.1.2.1 Details of labour requirements
This is prepared by the Contractor, based on the type and amount of work, and the timing of each work item, based on past experience. A detailed schedule of labour requirements should include the following basic data in columns as shown:
Item No.
Description
Unit
Amount
Working hours
Type of skilled worker
Number of
Timing days weeks
unskilled
skilled
unskilled
skilled
2.1.2.2 Detailed schedule of materials
The construction cost can be reduced by a good organization of unloading, storage and handling of materials required. It is therefore important that a detailed schedule of materials needed be carefully prepared by the Contractor, taking into consideration local prevailing conditions. This must be based on calculation of the quantity of materials to be used for the different items of work. The transport and storage requirements of each material can be determined from this detailed schedule. The following tabular form is generally used for scheduling of materials.
Item No.
Material
Unit
Amount
Timing in weeks
2.1.2.3 Detailed schedule of equipment
In order to utilize the equipment needed for the construction work most effectively, a detailed schedule should be prepared by the Contractor. This should also be based on the CPM schedule and is interrelated with the other detailed schedules. The following tabular form is usually used for scheduling equipment.
Item No.
Equipment
Unit
Equipment
Total amount
Equipment No.
Timing in weeks
Hourly capacity
Job efficiency
2.1.3 Choosing and operating the equipment
In many cases a fish farm will be constructed by equipment and manpower available to the Engineer, instead of letting a formal contract for the work. In such a case the Engineer would be in charge of the actual construction. For this reason, the following sections are included to give help in selecting and operating the equipment.
Because of the wide variety of soils encountered and earth-moving jobs to be done in connection with construction of a fish farm, a broad variety of equipment has been developed for this purpose. The most commonly used equipment in construction of fish farms is described below (Hammond, 1964).
1. Bulldozer
The bulldozer is the most useful and versatile of earthmoving equipment, because it can accomplish various tasks like clearing, grubbing, stripping, excavating and diking as well as levelling. Bulldozers are limited by length of push or haul. The economical length of haul is between 20 and 50 m. Hourly production in cubic metres can be calculated by using the following equation:
where
fixed time
=0.15 min when only forward and reverse lever is required to shift
= 0.30 min when both forward and reverse lever and gear selector are required to shift
haul time = actual time needed to cover the designed haul
return time = actual time needed to return with empty blade
l[f] = load factor obtained from Tables 1 and 2 (Merritt, 1968)
h [j] = job efficiency obtained from Table 3.
Table 1 Load Factors for Earthmoving
Swell %
Voids %
Load factor
Swell %
Voids %
Load factor
Table 2 Percentage Swell and Load Factors of Materials
Material
Swell %
Load factor
Clay
Loam
Gravel
Sand
2. Scraper
The scraper, whether tractor drawn or self-propelled, can be used for stripping, excavating and diking as well as compacting. The economical length of haul is between 100 and 1 000 m depending on the load capacity and type of scrapers. In heavy clay the scraper does not work efficiently, hence a tractor must be used to push along the cutting haul (Paxton, 1971).
Hourly production in cubic metres can be calculated using the following equation:
V[s] = load capacity × number of trips per hour number of trips per hour
3. Dragline
The dragline is suited primarily for excavating below water level, and at a long distance below the dragline for diking, loading trucks and sloping. It is used where swampy conditions prevent other equipment from being used (Singh, 1980).
Production of a dragline depends on the following factors:
1. Mechanical condition of the machine
2. Size and type of bucket
3. Length of boom
4. Type of soil
5. Depth of cut
6. Angle of swing
7. Method of disposal, casting or loading trucks
8. Capacity of hauling units
9. Efficiency of the operator
10. Job and management conditions.
The productivity of draglines with different bucket capacities is given in Table 3.
4. Hydraulic power shovel
The basic excavator can be equipped with various multipurpose tools, including hoe or shovel for any earthmoving job. Shovels are used primarily to excavate and load earth into hauling units where soil to be dug is firm and hard. Hoes can also be used for excavating and boring trenches. They can dig to considerable depths below the base of the machine. Accurate drainage trenches can be excavated with a skilled operator. Production depends on the type of material to be excavated; overall job efficiency; angle of swing; height of bank or face the shovel digs against; ability of the operator; swell of material; slope of ground the machine is working on; and whether hauling units are of optimum size and adequate in number. Table 3 gives estimated average hourly production of hydraulic power shovels.
Table 3 Estimated Average Hourly Production of Earthmoving Equipment
5. Wheel loader
The wheel loader is a very useful piece of equipment and is versatile inasmuch as it can dig, strip, load, push, grade and transport material. Its versatility can be enhanced by various attachments and accessories.
6. Grader
The grader can be used for stripping topsoil, dike forming and levelling the top of dikes or the pond bottom. Hourly production of graders is given in Table 3.
Table 4 Compaction Equipment
Compactor type
Soil best suited for
Optimal water content %
Maximum thickness cm
Density gained %
Sheepsfoot roller
Silts, clay silts
Clays, silty clay, clay gravels
Steel wheel roller
Sandy gravels, silty sand
Rubber-tyred roller
Sand, silty sand
Sandy loams, silts
Clays
Vibrators
Sandy gravels, sand, silty sand
Frogs
Sandy gravels, sand, silty sand, sandy loam, silts
Type of material to be excavated may determine the basic equipment to be used. However the following factors should also be considered in selecting equipment:
(i) Volume of excavation to be moved
(ii) Volume to be moved per unit of time
(iii) Length of haul
(iv) Type of haul road
(v) Types and size of hauling equipment to be used
(vi) Load-supporting ability of original ground
(vii) Load-supporting ability of material to be excavated
(viii) Climatic conditions
7. Compactors
Sheepsfoot roller
Steel wheel roller
Rubber-tyred roller
Platform vibrator
Vibratory compactor
Frog
A wide variety of equipment is used for compaction of earthwork. Table 4 lists recommended compaction equipment used for different kinds of soil.
In order to utilize the equipment properly and economically the most suitable type and the most economical size must be selected. With a wide variety of equipment all working phases can be mechanized as far as possible. The capacity of various pieces of equipment should be compatible, since a piece having a lower capacity than the other ones, or using manual labourers, will result in output capacity of all the equipment being reduced. To select the best mix of equipment for the project the following guidelines are offered:
(i) Equipment used should have the same operational safety.
(ii) A number of variations based on the equipment available should be prepared. The variation having the highest output should be selected.
(iii) Maintenance of equipment should be planned to ensure continuous production.
(iv) Considering the nature and volume of earthwork, the basic piece of equipment or 'head machine' must be decided on.
(v) The number of the other machines required must be defined by considering the output capacity of both the head machine and the other ones.
Table 3 gives the estimated hourly production of earthmoving equipment which can be used for planning.
The number of pieces of equipment can be calculated by the following equation:
where
n = number of pieces of equipment
V[T] = total volume of earthwork
P[a] = average production rate of the equipment
Having defined the head machine the number of additional machines must be checked with the equation below:
P[h] =P[a1]×n[1]×f[j1]×h [1] = P[a2]×n[2]×f[j2]×h [2] = P[ai]×n[i]×f[ji]×h [i]
where
P[h] = hourly production of the head machine
P[ai] = theoretical hourly production of equipment
n[i] = number of machines used in different working phases
f[ji] = job factors
h [i] = efficiency of equipment
If the above equation is approximately equal, the continuous working and utilization of equipment is guaranteed.
It is very important that each piece of equipment be operated for as long as possible, because the use of equipment for short periods raises costs.
3. EXECUTION OF CONSTRUCTION WORKS
3.1 Approach Road
3.2 Public Services
3.3 Temporary Buildings
3.4 Planning Material to be ordered
3.5 Ordering Equipment and Instruments
3.6 Organization and Transport of Plant and Equipment
3.7 Site Clearing
3.8 Setting Out of Buildings, Dikes, etc.
3.9 Earthworks
3.10 Structures
3.11 Buildings
3.12 Site Finishing
When the planning and scheduling is complete, the Engineer is obliged to hand over the job site to the Contractor. During this procedure he has to show the Contractor the site, including the locations of the TBMs and the PBRs available, as well as all the official permits obtained from the Authorities. The final list of drawings or other statements required for construction work should be noted in the construction site book (U.S.D.I., 197.
3.1 Approach Road
As the materials to be delivered, the equipment and different machines to be transported to the site, are generally large and heavy, the approach road, including the provisional internal roads, should be built first of all. These roads should be all-weather roads and suitable for heavy traffic. It is also very important that all the roads should be well maintained during the construction time.
3.2 Public Services
To avoid any delay in starting the construction work, it is desirable that a local water supply system be established from dug or deep wells or other water sources as soon as possible. The capacity of this system can be calculated from the water requirement needed for both the construction work and the labour, as well as the staff. Electricity may be provided from one of the public power lines, or a generator unit set up at the site.
3.3 Temporary Buildings
Depending on the scale of the project, the type, size and number of different buildings, stores and workshops vary considerably. These can be determined from the different schedules. For the sake of economy, the buildings designed for the project may be used as temporary buildings if they are built in advance.
To set up any temporary buildings at the job site, the following should be taken into consideration:
(i) These buildings should be as cheap and simple as possible. It is preferable if they are set up from prefabricated units. In this case, they can be pulled down easily and quickly after completing the construction job.
(ii) They should be located at the main points of the job site where they can provide services within short distances of each work phase.
(iii) They should be large enough to be used for storing the materials required.
(iv) Never select a site for such buildings which may be flooded during the rainy season.
3.4 Planning Material to be ordered
The main purpose of planning the material to be ordered and transport of it is to ensure continuity of supplies for the construction works. To reduce the construction cost, the following may be of help:
(i) Ordering and delivery of material should be based on the detailed schedule of materials.
(ii) To prevent a great loss of materials caused by several handlings at the job site, they must be deposited at the main points of use on the job site.
(iii) The possibility of obtaining materials from local sources should be investigated.
(iv) Materials delivered at the job site must be selected on the basis of their quality.
(v) Materials must be stored in accordance with the relevant specifications.
(vi) Storage places for all materials must be carefully selected.
(vii) A stock list of materials, including all the important data, i.e., date of arrival, amount or weight, etc., required for the proper control of materials, should be prepared and kept up to date.
3.5 Ordering Equipment and Instruments
In order to avoid any delay, and to ensure the smooth progress of the work, all the equipment, i.e., pumps, etc., and instruments required for both the construction work and the operation of the project should be ordered in good time.
3.6 Organization and Transport of Plant and Equipment
Based on the detailed schedule of equipment, the machines and other equipment must be transported to the job site in proper time and in good condition. The fuel depot should be ready before the machines arrive. The capacity of this fuel depot should be as large as is necessary to run all the machines continuously. The necessary spare parts must be kept in the store or workshop. If versatile equipment is chosen, the number and types of machines may be reduced, which will reduce the maintenance work and fewer spare parts will need to be stored.
3.7 Site Clearing
The first step that must be taken after the erection of the camp and plant buildings, is the clearing and stripping of the site. This work should, in fact, be done while the necessary temporary facilities are being erected. Trees and stumps should usually be removed from the job site. The requirements for clearing the site and stripping the top soil should be carried out according to the technical specifications, or the Engineer's directions. All the materials must be taken outside the site with the exception of the top soil used for covering the dikes which should be moved to a spoil area marked out by the Engineer.
3.8 Setting Out of Buildings, Dikes, etc.
Having cleared the site and before setting out any buildings, dikes, etc., the whole area of the site should be surveyed by the Engineer, with cross sections taken at every 5 to 10 m intervals. Cross sections should also be taken at longitudinal and transverse points with reference to the TBMs established at the job site. The Contractor or his representative shall be present and take part in this survey. The cross sections shall be entered in the measurement book and signed by the Contractor as a record of acceptance. All measurements of earthworks must be based on this survey. The Contractor can only start the work after the completion of the above formalities.
Based on the setting out plans, the Contractor^1^/ may be responsible for the true and proper setting out of buildings, dikes, channels, etc., and for the correctness of the position levels, dimensions and alignment of all parts of the works and for the provision of all necessary instruments, appliances and labour in connection therewith. The Contractor must carefully protect and preserve all the TBMs, pegs, templates and other things used in setting out the works.
^1^/ The Engineer may have this responsibility, depending on the terms of the contract
The setting out of earthwork can be done by profiles at suitable intervals as directed by the Engineer. Profiles may be made by actually excavating or filling and making the correct finished section as per cross section, and these sections can be maintained until the final completion of the work. The top level of these sections should include the provision of settlement allowance (5 percent for mechanical compaction and 10 percent for manual compaction). If preferred, profiles can be marked out using templates at a distance of 25 to 50 m, as shown in Figure 2.
The setting out of earthwork by machine should be done continuously because the fixed profiles used for manual work will be destroyed by machines. In this case, the setting out of earthwork can be done from an auxiliary base line established outside the operation radius of the machine.
Figure 2. Setting out a section of dike with templates
3.9 Earthworks
All the earthworks such as dikes, channels for supply and drainage of water, as well as bottom levelling in the ponds, should be carried out as per drawings and to the relevant technical specifications, or as per the Engineer's directions. The factors affecting the quality of earthwork are as follows:
1. Local soil conditions
2. Climatic conditions
3. Construction management
- type of equipment
- size of equipment
- craftsmanship of the operator
- craftsmanship of the Contractor's Engineer or foreman and the skilled labourers
4. Supervision of construction work
The procedures to be considered for earthwork in construction of a fish farm are set out below (Creager, 1950; U.S.D.I., 1965):
1. Site clearing
2. Topsoil removing
3. Preparation of the foundation for dikes: ploughing or ripping and watering
4. Excavation of pits for different structures to be built into the dikes
5. Excavation of drainage channels
6. Refilling and compacting of pits
7. Construction of dikes
8. Construction of feeder channels
9. Forming of dikes
10. Levelling of pond bottoms
11. Construction of wave protection
12. Turfing or grassing of dikes
In order to provide good quality dikes for a fish farm which may be used for a long period, it is advisable to follow the sequence of earthwork described before.
To prevent any flood problems during the period of construction, the drainage channels designed for the fish farm must first be excavated and completed, including all structures required for their proper utilization.
To avoid any seepage problems along the outlets during operation of the fish farm, all the outlets must be constructed before commencing construction of the dikes. The earth refilled around the outlet in the working pit should be thoroughly compacted.
Using earthwork machines for diking, the top of the conduit of outlets or other structures should be covered with a minimum of 60 cm of earth to avoid the collapse of the conduit. It is very difficult to construct a fish farm in marshland. In these circumstances the expenses of pond construction may generally be kept low by using cheap manual labour if possible. The dikes and channels can be built by using special equipment developed for working in marshy areas. The most suitable machines for construction of a fish farm in marshland are the swampy dragline and dozer. The swampy dragline is the most versatile one, because it can be used for excavating, trenching, diking, sloping and levelling. The swampy dozer can also be used for diking and levelling after closing the perimeter dikes of the fish farm. The bottom inside the perimeter dikes will then be dry enough to operate properly. As earth in any swampy area has a high content of water, all dikes using this type of soil
should be built with a bigger section and flatter slopes, because of the greater subsidence and shrinkage.
Sometimes it is difficult to build any dikes in marshland because of the instability of the marsh soils. Dikes built from unstable soils will crack and slide due to the extremely fluid nature of the soil.
Pond construction techniques vary in different marsh areas and there are no set rules which suffice for all situations. Not all marsh areas are conducive to pond construction as we know it today. Generally speaking, the initial cost of construction and maintenance of fish ponds established in marsh areas are much higher than in uplands.
The following procedures may be considered for pond construction in marsh areas:
1. Locally used pond construction techniques should be examined and adopted or developed by taking the available equipment and manpower into account.
2. To ensure a stable dike, the peaty surface from the entire foundation of the dike should be removed.
3. Trenching and coring the dikes with clay from outside the pond will strengthen the dike and reduce the seepage therefrom.
4. To ensure the necessary height of the dike it may be necessary to recap it two or three times. The first lift may be less than 1 metre due to the instability of the foundation. Having consolidated this part, the dike can be completed. The top level of the dike can be calculated from the results of the consolidation of the first layer.
5. To facilitate pond construction, the entire area selected for this purpose should be drained as soon as possible.
6. It is necessary to make a large berm between the toe of the dike and the drainage channel to offset the weight of the dike and prevent the foundation of the dike from slipping. Usually a berm should measure from 1 to 3 times the height of the dike, depending upon the type of soil encountered at the site.
7. The subsidence and shrinkage of dikes can be expected to be extremely high. Therefore, the structures used in such soils should be light and flexible and strong enough to avoid failure. In addition to this, the dikes in the vicinity of the outlet structure should be very carefully compacted.
8. To reduce the implementation period of pond construction, the perimeter dikes should first of all be completed. After drying the bottom soil inside the perimeter dikes, secondary dikes can be built by using a dozer or manpower.
The tolerances for pond construction vary in different countries. The tolerances allowable are as follows:
level
±25 mm
side slopes
centre lines
±75 mm
3.10 Structures
The structures should be built as per detailed drawings and technical specifications, or as directed by the Engineer. The points to be taken into consideration during their construction are as follows (U.S.D.I., 1981; White, 1977):
1. Having excavated the working pit, plain concrete should be placed immediately if needed.
2. The measurements, location and elevation of forms, etc., should be checked before putting concrete into them.
3. Before casting, the reinforcement should be shown to and checked by the Engineer.
4. All materials used for building and all structures should comply with the relevant specifications. Never use coarse cement (killed cement) for any structures. This may be used for plain concrete.
5. Concrete used for structures should be mixed in a mechanical concrete mixer if available. The mix proportions given in the detailed plans should be adhered to.
6. Before proceeding to place the concrete, the forms should be realigned if necessary and well wetted.
7. Unless otherwise approved, concrete must be placed in a single operation to the full thickness of slabs and walls, with proper compaction.
8. Placed concrete must be protected by approved means from rain, sun and drying winds. Exposed faces of concrete must be kept moist for seven days after placing.
9. The forms must be removed by gradual easing without jarring. The period which must elapse after placing concrete and before easing and removal of the forms may be undertaken, is as follows:
Part of Structure
Period for ordinary Portland cement
Sides of foundations and walls
3 days
Under-sides of sides
10 days
In the case of cantilever slabs and beams, the forms should remain until the structures for counteracting or anchoring down have been erected and have attained sufficient strength.
10. Honeycombed surfaces of concrete structures must be made good immediately on removal of the forms, and the superficial water and air holes must be filled out.
11. It is forbidden to load any parts of the structure during the strengthening period.
If there are a number of structures with the same measurements, it is advisable to use movable forms which might be applied several times.
3.11 Buildings
All the points shown for structures can also be adopted for construction of buildings. To reduce the construction cost the working phases and the installation works must be well organized.
3.12 Site Finishing
Having completed all the facilities of the project, the Contractor then hands it over to the Engineer for operation. All the materials, temporary buildings, equipment, etc., not necessary for the operation of the project should be removed, and the area which was occupied by them should be properly arranged by the Contractor.
4. SUPERVISION OF CONSTRUCTION BY THE ENGINEER
4.1 The Engineer's Tasks during Construction
Careful attention to the details of construction is equally as important as an adequate design. A safe and substantial design may be entirely ruined by careless or wrong execution, and the failure of the project may very possibly be the result. In order to ensure that the facilities of the project are constructed according to the plans and specifications, to certify to what extent the items of work are performed, and to determine the payment due to the Contractor, an Engineer, as the representative of the Owner, having wide knowledge and experience in such construction work, must be selected or employed by the Owner for the duration of the execution of the project.
4.1 The Engineer's Tasks during Construction
The Engineer's tasks can be divided into three parts:
(i) administration of the contract
(ii) supervision of the work
(iii) testing that materials and works are in compliance with the specifications concerned.
The duties to be performed by the Engineer at the construction stage of a project should be incorporated in the contract. These duties might include:
1. Preparing any further detailed drawings necessary for the information of the Contractor to enable him to carry out the works.
2. Issuing instructions to the Contractor and making such site visits as the Engineer considers necessary.
3. Handing over and showing the job site to the Contractor as well as supplying him with all official permits required for works to be started, etc.
4. Performing any duties which the Engineer may be required to carry out under any contract for the execution of the works.
5. Assisting in settling disputes or differences which may arise between the Owner and Contractor, except litigation and arbitration.
6. Supervising the execution of works which should include:
- Checking several times the setting out of any line and level related to the works. If at any time during the progress of the works any error shall be discovered by the Engineer in the position levels, dimensions or alignment of any part of the works, such errors shall be corrected in the construction site book (CSB) and shall be rectified by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Engineer as soon as possible.
- Testing all materials and workmanship as described in the contract and specifications .
- Checking the results of the tests and giving any instructions based on the results of the tests for modification or improvement of workmanship.
- Before covering any part of the works, the Engineer should check them and give instructions in the CSB for rectifying any mistakes.
- Measuring the works and determining the payment vouchers to be presented to the Contractor from time to time, as defined in the contract.
- During the progress of the works the Engineer checks from time to time, and in case of need, orders in writing the removal of any materials which in his opinion are not in accordance with the Contract. This should be done within the time specified on the order form for stated materials.
- Suspending the progress of the works if prevailing weather conditions affect the safety or quality of the work, or for any default on the part of the Contractor, or if necessary for the safety of the work.
- Approving in writing reasonable extensions of the time for completion of the work.
- Checking the rate of progress of the work based on the detailed schedule of execution prepared by the Contractor and if found too slow to ensure the completion of the work by the prescribed or extended time, notifying the Contractor in writing of his observations and opinions.
- Issuing in writing certificates of completion of the work or parts thereof.
<section>c</section>
Chapter 11. Technology for Fish Propagation
János Bakos
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. GENERAL TECHNOLOGY FOR FISH PROPAGATION
2. PRACTICAL TECHNOLOGIES OF THE ARTIFICIAL PROPAGATION OF CULTIVATED FISH SPECIES
1. GENERAL TECHNOLOGY FOR FISH PROPAGATION
1.1 Culture and Management of Brood Stock
1.2 Environmental Conditions for Culturing Breeders
One prerequisite of intensive fish culture technology is to have healthy fish seed in the required amount available. This can be realized only with preliminary propagation planning. Besides natural and semi-artificial propagation, artificial propagation carried out in a well-equipped hatchery is the up-to-date way in which the necessary quantity of fry can be produced.
1.1 Culture and Management of Brood Stock
A basic precondition of fish propagation is to have sexually mature male and female fish producing milt and eggs. Breeders of fish species which cannot be cultured or kept domestically, are collected before spawning from rivers or lakes, their milt or eggs are stripped and then they are released again. These species are sturgeons (mullets) mugils (Mugilidae), and salmonids (Salmonidae).
The brood stock of cultured fish species are sorted out with aimed selection and cultured in fish ponds up to sexual maturity. The males and females of breeders are cultured in the same fish pond while they are young. Then, when sexually mature they are selected and cultured in separate fish ponds.
1.2 Environmental Conditions for Culturing Breeders
When culturing breeders, the following environmental conditions should be ensured considering the specific demands of the respective species:
- suitable water and pond
- temperature
- oxygen
- feed light/photoperiod
During culturing of breeders, the water quality should meet the same requirement as during routine fish culture.
For species with preference for still water (e.g. cyprinids, catfish, tilapia) earthen or concrete-walled fish ponds should be constructed. For rheophyl species (e.g. trout) flow-through systems, canals, or tanks with circulating water should be provided.
The temperature, as an environmental factor, has an important role in fish culture. Fish are a polikilotherm animal, which means that their body temperature follows the surrounding temperature, but in case of increased muscular work and metabolism it can be somewhat higher.
Fish can be warmwater or coldwater species
Coldwater fish are salmonids and trout. Their optimal temperature range is 10-16°C and their oxygen demand is high.
Warmwater fish are the cyprinids like common carp, Chinese carp, Indian carps and from other families the tilapia, milkfish, mullet and the American catfish. Their optimal temperature range is 18-26°C.
There are some species "in-between", they reproduce in cold water, but later can live in warm waters too. Such are pike and pike-perch. The development can be greatly influenced by water temperature. Feeding at low temperature can be normal, but the conversion of the feed, and consequently the growth, especially sexual maturation can be considerably slower. The duration of sexual maturation also depends, first of all, on the environmental temperature, with most fish species, thus there is a characteristic total temperature value for each species which is necessary for gametogenesis.
In the case of carp, from hatching to the first reproduction, 10-12 000 degree days of heat is necessary. This quantity of heat under a tropical climate is ensured in l-l.5 years while in Middle Europe in 3.5-4 years.
1 600-2 000 degree days is necessary in the proper temperature range for the oogenesis of matured carps between two propagations. If the temperature is lower than that, considering the days with temperature higher than 17°C only, it is 2 500-2 700 degree days. The minimum temperature which is necessary for propagation of carps is 17°C, below this value the gametogenesis is very slow.
Optimal oxygen content of water is very important especially in active cytogenetic processes. Development of gametes and complete conversion of feed are all oxygen consuming processes. In case of oxygen deficiency the gematogenesis slows down, development is inhibited and if it is prolonged the resorption of gametes starts. Therefore, the proper oxygen supply is a crucial point of brood stock culture.
Feeding of breeders, especially in the nutriment accumulating phase of oogenesis requires feed of specific composition. Amino acids, carbohydrates, fats, vitamins, and minerals are available for the fish via natural feeding. But at high stocking density under controlled culturing conditions these must be provided through artificial feed. It is also important that the breeders can get the type of feed characteristic of their species, i.e. herbivorous fish should get nutriment of plant origin, and carnivorous should get nutriment of animal origin.
Light/photoperiod has a significant role in the reproductive processes of several fish species.
Stress factors, and the sensitivity of the cultured breeders to these factors also should be kept in mind. Handling, transportation, enclosure which all differ from their normal lives, are stress inducing factors, and may affect their condition. This may hinder the last phase of maturation and ovulation. Therefore, conditions should be established for the breeders where all these stress factors can be minimized.
- Stocking density must be optimal, thus ensuring a supply of natural food;
- Water supply, flow rate, temperature and oxygen content should meet the requirements of the fish;
- Breeders during spawning are kept in smaller size fish ponds or concrete tanks. Their filling or draining should be efficient since the fish must be caught very often;
- Breeders can be transported in tanks only, maintaining the proper oxygen content by spraying liquid oxygen;
- case of timid fish (e.g. Chinese carps) sedatives can be added to the water;
- When handling is necessary, the seine can be applied. Manual transportation of fish needs skill, so well-trained fishermen should do it. If the breeder with eggs is dropped it may lose the eggs, the ovary inflames and in most cases the fish dies.
2. PRACTICAL TECHNOLOGIES OF THE ARTIFICIAL PROPAGATION OF CULTIVATED FISH SPECIES
2.1 Common carp
2.2 Chinese Herbivorous Fishes
2.3 European Catfish
2.4 Pike Perch
2.5 Pike
2.6 Semi-Artificial Propagation of Indian Carps
2.1 Common carp
2.1.1 Reproduction
2.1.2 Economic characterization
2.1.3 Artificial propagation
Species:
Common carp (Cyprinus carpio L.)
Origin:
China, South Asia, Europe
Natural habitat:
Rivers, lakes, fish ponds
Feeding and nutrition:
Zooplankton, water insects and their larvae, bottom inhabiting organisms, grains and granular and pellet foods
Weight, at age intervals: (Europe only)
Year
Grams
2.1.1 Reproduction
In a natural environment, the fish spawn in groups, in lakes and slow moving rivers, at a water temperature of 18 to 22°C. The egg attaches itself to vegetation and hatches within three days. In extensive cultivation they are spawned in small ponds. Methods of modern artificial propagation were developed by Woynárovich (Hungary).
2.1.2 Economic characterization
- Rapid growth
- High degree of fecundity
- High meat quality, though containing intermuscular bone
- Very suitable to warmwater polyculture Good sport fish.
2.1.3 Artificial propagation
Rearing and keeping of the brood stock: the young brood stock is selected from the offspring of parents of known quality.
The selection criteria are:
- Rapid growth
- Good viability
- High food conversion rate
- Low fat content
- Resistance to disease.
The brood stock is reared in individual ponds, segregating male and female. The stocking density of the rearing ponds is 500 to 1 000 adults per hectare.
Feed is an artificial pellet, containing 20 to 25 percent of protein, of which 15 to 18 percent is animal protein; fats 3 to 4 percent; vitamin premix 2 percent; mineral pre-mix 1 percent. Vitamins A and E are critical. For two months prior to propagation the daily feed should contain 5 to 10 percent of raw ground meat or hard boiled eggs. Feed quantity is 2 to 5 percent of body weight, per day.
Sexually mature fish measure 35 to 70 cm and weigh 2 500 to 10 000 g.
The fish achieve sexual maturity in Europe: female 3 to 4 years, male 2 to 3 years. In tropical climates: female 1 to 2 years, male 1 year.
The female has a large belly. The male, if lightly squeezed around the belly will emit white milt.
Handling of the spawners:
- The spawners should be moved into the hatchery one day prior to propagation;
- The spawners should be transported in containers made of inorganic, non metallic materials;
- The male and female spawners should continue to be segregated in the hatchery, in plastic or concrete tanks;
- Space requirement is 0.5 to 1m^2/adult;
- Tanks should be 5 to 10 m^2, 1 to 1.2 m deep;
- Water quantity required is 4 to 6 litres, per fish, per minute;
- Oxygen content of the water should be 6 to 8 mg/l;
- Water temperature should be 20 to 22°C;
- Prior to handling, the fish may be tranquilized;
- The tranquilizer recommended is MS 222 (Sandoz), in a 1:10 000 dilution;
- After 5 to 10 minutes in the above solution, the fish should be moved into fresh water of high oxygen content, otherwise they will perish.
Hypophysation:
- To induce ovulation in the female and milt production in the male, hormone of the carp's pituitary gland is used;
- The dosage used in the hypophysation of the female is 4 to 4.5 mg per kg of body weight;
- The dosage for the male is 3 mg per kg of body weight;
- The dried pituitary gland is pulverized and dissolved in a 0.65 percent solution of salt (NaCl);
- 2 ml salt solution per fish is used;
- The hypophysation of the female should be done in two stages;
- Ten percent of the dosage is given 24 hours before the removal of eggs;
- 90 percent of the dosage is given 12 to 14 hours prior to the removal of eggs, if the water temperature is 21 to 22°C (240-260 degree hours);
- The injection is done with a fine needle, into the muscle of the back;
- Prior to withdrawal of the needle, the locus of the injection is lightly massaged, in order to avoid leakage of the solution injected;
- Concurrent with the second injection, the opening of the oviduct is sewn up to prevent the loss of mature eggs during the period of ovulation;
- The suture is done with surgical implements;
- The male is to be injected 24 hours prior to the desired time of milt discharge;
- It is imperative that the fish in the hatchery have absolutely quiet surroundings.
The removal of eggs and milt, fertilization
- One hour prior to removal of the eggs, one or two males are placed among the females;
- At the onset of ovulation, the male and female fish will swim along side one another, flapping forcefully;
- One half hour should elapse to assure that the full quantity of eggs will have detached itself from the walls of the ovary;
- After this time, the female fish are tranquilized;
- The sutures are removed from the opening of the oviduct;
- The belly of the fish should be wiped dry with a cloth, to prevent wetting the eggs which will rapidly lose their fertility if mixed with water;
- The eggs are released into 2 litre plastic dishes; if necessary, light pressure may be applied to the belly to make the roe flow out;
- The milt is pressed out of the male with light pressure into test tubes;
- The eggs should be fertilized immediately upon their removal from the female;
- Ten to twenty ml milt is used to one litre of eggs;
- Each batch of eggs should be fertilized with milt from no less than three males, since the sperm of any male may occasionally be inactive;
- The eggs and milt are thoroughly mixed (without the addition of any water), so that all eggs are reached by the milt;
- The mixing should be done with a plastic spoon;
- Fertilization is promoted by the use of a fertilizing solution;
- The ingredients of the solution are:
water, 1 litre
salt, 4 grams
urea, 3 grams (CO/NH[2]/2)
- Temperature of the solution should be 20 to 22°C;
- The fertilizing solution has a two-fold effect, it prevents the adhesion of the eggs and it activates the sperm;
- 100 ml of the solution is added to 1 litre of roe and immediately mixed with it;
- The mixing action should be continuous;
- At two minute intervals, another 100 ml of the solution is added to the mixture;
- After ten minutes, the fertilizing solution is poured off;
- Fresh fertilizing solution is added, 2 litre solution to 1 litre of eggs;
- The eggs, together with the fertilizing solution, are then poured into a plastic container of 15 to 20 litre capacity;
- The eggs will swell to 4 to 5 times their original volume within one hour;
- For one hour, the fertilizing solution should be exchanged at ten minute intervals, in order to continue to dissolve and remove the adhesive of the eggs;
- Mixing should be done intermittently and gently whether manually or mechanically;
- After one hour of the above process the eggs should be treated with a tannic acid solution, in order to dissolve the adhesives coagulated during the previous treatment and still present on the surface of the eggs;
- The tannic solution consists of 1.5 gram tannin dissolved in 1 litre water;
- Treatment with the tannic solution is preceded by pouring off the fertilizing solution;
- One to two litres of tannic solution is added to the eggs and immediately mixed in;
- After ten seconds, water is added to dilute the tannic solution;
- The solution is then immediately poured off;
- The eggs should then be rinsed 3 or 4 times with ample quantities of water;
- After rinsing the eggs are placed in hatching jars.
Hatching:
- Water temperature during hatching should be 20 to 22°C;
- One litre of hatching jar volume is needed for each 20 000 eggs;
- The volume of 20 000 swollen eggs is 200 ml;
- The eggs are a risky process, since the segmentation of the ovum is already started and strong jolting will destroy it;
- The eggs are placed in the water-filled hatching jar with the aid of a funnel, which is equipped with a length of hose, to assure that they will exit from it under water;
- In the first ten hours, the hatching jar is to have a moderate flow of water: assuming a 10 litre jar, the rate would be 0.8 to 1 l/min;
- After ten hours, the flow should be increased, since the oxygen need of the ova is on the rise, to a rate of 1.5 to 2.5 l/min;
- The eggs will be drifting loosely on the bottom of the hatching jar;
- Four to five hours prior to hatching, the embryos' need of oxygen is considerable, therefore, the flow rate should be increased to 2.5 to 3 l/min.;
- On the second day of the hatching process, the eggs should be treated with malachite green to prevent the generation of fungus;
- Malachite green is added to the water in the hatching jar in a quantity to give a 1:200 000 solution;
- Let the solution stand for 5 minutes;
- After 5 minutes, the water flow is restored and the malachite solution will thereby be slowly washed out;
- Hatching of the larvae may be expected on the third day;
- After the first few larvae have hatched, the process should be artificially accelerated;
- This is accomplished by shutting off the flow of water for 10 minutes. The lack of oxygen agitates the embryos, and due to their movements the shell will split;
- After 10 minutes, the water flow is restored and hatching will start on a large scale;
- The hatched larvae are transferred, together with the water, into larvae containers.
Maintenance of the larvae:
- The implements used in the maintenance of larvae may be any one of the following:
1. Cylindrical containers, conical at the lower end, of 50 to 150 litre capacity, of glass, plastic or fibreglass,
2. Circular flow raceways of concrete or plastic,
3. Cages made of nylon cloth (screen).
1. Cylinders
- In the containers 2 000 larvae per litre of water can be maintained;
- Water should enter at the bottom and flow out at the top of the container;
- The area of the overflow screen should be 10 cm^2/litre of capacity;
- The flow rate should be such that the larvae are kept in suspension but not washed onto the overflow screen;
- The screen should be cleaned at intervals, as it will be stopped up with remains of shells;
- The larvae are kept in these containers only until their first intake of feed (3 to 4 days), after which they are transferred to rearing ponds;
- The above process is the most up-to-date and most hygienic method of keeping the larvae.
2. Raceways
- The raceways, of plastic or concrete, should be of 1 to 2 m^3 capacity, the depth being 60 to 80 cm;
- Water enters the raceway through perforated tubes placed vertically at two opposite sides, to assure a circular flow;
- The rate of flow should be such that it produces a constant slow motion of the water;
- The overflow tube is placed in the centre, vertically;
- The overflow screen, of nylon, should have 0.8 mm openings;
- Surface area of the screen should be 8 to 10 cm^2/litre of flow;
- The oxygen content of the water is increased by surface spraying;
- The raceway should be stocked at the rate of 1 000 hatchlings per litre of water;
- The advantage of this method is that the larvae can be kept for several days beyond the first feeding, if suitable nourishment can be assured.
3. Cages
- Size: 70×40×30 cm;
- Frame: aluminium or plastic tubing;
- Screening: of nylon, 0.8 mm opening;
- The cages are kept in plastic or concrete tanks;
- An upward flow of water through the cages is needed which keeps the larvae in motion;
- This is effected by laying tubing, perforated at the top, on the tank bottom;
- The bottom of the cage should be cleaned the day after hatching to remove shells and unhatched larvae, which will start to decompose thus causing oxygen deficiency;
- The bottom and sides of the cage should be cleaned with a brush from the outside at 6-hour intervals in order to assure free passage of water into the cage;
- The rate of flow in the tanks should be 4 to 5 l/min/cage;
- To increase the oxygen content of the water, a fine surface spraying should be used.
Feeding and transportation of the brood:
- The mouth and gills of the carp larva develop in 3 to 4 days;
- The carp's larval stage ends with the first intake of food, at this point it becomes fry;
- At this stage the yolk sac will have been largely absorbed;
- At this point the hatchlings will rise to the surface of the water, fill the swimming bladders with air and begin to swim horizontally;
- At this time the first feeding is given;
- The feed is yolk of hard boiled egg (hen's or duck's egg) mixed in a blender with water;
- 100 ml water per one yolk is used;
- One to two ml per 100 000 fish is given at 2-hour intervals;
- As soon as the hatchlings begin to feed, they should be transferred to ponds;
- The 4-day old feeding fry are transported in plastic bags containing water and oxygen;
- In 20 litres water plus 30 litres oxygen, at 20°C water temperature, 100 000 brood may be kept up to 5 hours; at 15°C, 200 000 brood may be kept up to 5 hours;
- If chilled for transport, the temperature of brood and water should be lowered gradually;
- The plastic bags, when filled, should be as firm as well filled balloons;
- The bags must be well tied, to prevent escape of the oxygen;
- To avoid rupture, the bags should be placed in cardboard boxes;
- The 4-day old larva measure 6 to 7 mm in length.
Biological and technical data:
- The sexually mature fish measure 35 to 70 cm, and weigh 2 500 to 10 000 g;
- The period of propagation in Europe is May through July;
- Optimum water temperature is 20 to 22°C;
- Optimum male to female sex ratio is 1:1;
- 70 to 80 percent of the females subjected to hypophysation may be expected to produce eggs;
- Quantity of eggs per female will vary from 200 000 to 1 500 000;
- Quantity of eggs by body weight of female is 100 000 to 200 000/kg;
- Quantity of eggs by weight is 500 to 1 000 g dry;
- Milt production is 10 to 20 ml per male;
- Fertilization of 1 000 g of eggs requires 10 to 15 ml milt;
- Dry size of the egg is 1.0 to 1.5 mm diameter, in the swollen state 2.0 to 2.5 mm;
- Count of dry eggs per kg is 700 000 to 1 000 000;
- Count of swollen eggs per litre is 80 000 to 120 000;
- Quantity of eggs to be placed in a 10 litre hatching jar: 150 to 250 g dry, or 1.5 to 2.5 litre swollen eggs;
- Fertility rate of the eggs is 80 to 95 percent;
- Time required for hatching in the hatching jar is 3.0 to 3.5 days (60 to 70 degree days);
- Successful hatching of 90 to 95 percent of the fertile eggs may be expected;
- Time span of the larval stage is 3 to 4 days (60 to 70 degree days);
- Survival rate of the hatched larvae to the first feeding is 90 to 95 percent;
- 1 kg of dry eggs will produce 600 000 to 800 000 four-day old brood:
- Larva containers are stocked at the rate of 2 000 larvae/litre;
- Four-day old fry measure 6 to 7 mm in length;
- First feeding will occur within 3 to 4 days of hatching;
- Size of the fish feed should be 50 to 150 micron;
- Area of the rearing pond is 500 to 10 000 m^2;
- Density of stocking should be 200 to 500 per m^2;
- Transportation of the four-day old fry: in 20 litres water plus 30 litres oxygen, at 20°C water temperature, 100 000 fry may be kept up to 5 hours; at 15°C 200 000 fry may be kept up to 5 hours.
2.2 Chinese Herbivorous Fishes
2.2.1 Reproduction
2.2.2 Economic characterization
2.2.3 Artificial propagation
2.2.4 Sexual differentiation
2.2.5 Handling of spawners
2.2.6 Hypophysation
2.2.7 Keeping injected fish in the hatchery
2.2.8 Procurement of eggs and milt
2.2.9 Fertilization of eggs
2.2.10 The ripening, attending and hatching of the eggs
2.2.11 Keeping the larvae
2.2.12 Biological and technological data spawning ages in years
Species:
Silver Carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix Val.)(SC)
Bighead Carp(Aristichthys nobilis)
Grass Carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella Val.) (GC)
Origin:
Southeast Asia
Natural habitat:
Large rivers, warm water, lakes, fish ponds
Feeding and nutrition:
Silver Carp (SC)
phytoplankton diet
Bighead Carp (BC)
zooplankton diet
Grass Carp (GC)
aquatic macrophyte diet
Size at ages in grams
Years
SC
BC
GC
2.2.1 Reproduction
- In slowly flowing warm rivers they spawn in groups;
- In cultured conditions, spawning occurs only artificially;
- Spawning temperature, 22-26°C;
- The eggs are pelagic.
2.2.2 Economic characterization
- Good quality of meat;
- Good sport fishing (GC)
- In polyculture they utilize the primary and secondary production of the water directly;
- GC controls the macrophytes in lakes and channels.
2.2.3 Artificial propagation
- Keep the stock material in a special pond;
- Stocking rate per hectare (ha)
SC
BC
GC
Cc
(common carp or any kind of bottom cultivator and artificially fed fish)
Age by spawning in years
Female
Male
SC
BC
GC
2.2.4 Sexual differentiation
The first hard rays of the pectoral fins of the male are sharp while those of the female are smooth.
2.2.5 Handling of spawners
- The following tranquilizers have been used successfully to prevent active moving and jumping.
MS 222 (Sandoz)^x
1 to 10 000 - 1 to 40 000
Quinaldine^xx
1 to 100 000
^x MS 222 can be obtained from: Sandoz Ltd. CH-4002 Basle, Switzerland
^xx Quinaldine (2-methyl-quinoline) in pharmacy.
- After 5 to 10 minutes of rest, put the fish into the fresh water to be refreshed;
- Move the spawning fish carefully by using plastic stretchers.
2.2.6 Hypophysation
- For the induced ovulation of the eggs and milt we use the pituitary gland of carp dissolved in 0.65% NaCl solution;
- Calculate the dose of dry hypophysis on the basis of a maximum outline of the body, by females, circumference:
below 50 cm
4 mg/kg
50 - 60 cm
4.5 mg/kg
over 60 cm
5 mg/kg
- The dose of the males is 2 mg/kg.
Time of injection
- Female dosage - the first dose, which is 10% of the total, is injected 24 hours before spawning. The second dose, which is 90% of the total, is injected 9 to 11 hours before spawning or 200-220 degree hours.
- Male dosage - the total doses are given 24 hours before spawning.
2.2.7 Keeping injected fish in the hatchery
- The injected females and males are together in a plastic or concrete raceway;
- The size of raceway: 20-50 square metres, 1 to 1.5 metres deep;
- Necessary surface: 1.5 square metres per fish;
- Running water: 4 to 6 litres per minute per fish;
- Water temperature: 22 to 26°C;
- Ovulation period: 9 to 11 hours after the second injection, or 200 to 220 degree hours.
Important: Room must be kept quiet.
2.2.8 Procurement of eggs and milt
- At spawning time, we narcotize the fish;
- Collect the eggs in a plastic dish and the milt in a glass test tube.
2.2.9 Fertilization of eggs
Important: After taking the eggs, fertilize immediately.
- 1 litre of eggs per 10 ml of milt;
- Mix the eggs and milt together carefully in dry conditions (not with water);
- Mix continuously, but carefully, 1 litre eggs and milt mixture and 0.1 litre pure pond water;
- Two minutes later, add an additional 0.1 litre water and mix;
- After 5 minutes rinse the eggs several times with water;
- Ten minutes later, after fertilization, put the eggs into a spawning jar.
2.2.10 The ripening, attending and hatching of the eggs
- For a 1-litre spawning jar, use 5 mls dry eggs;
- The measurement of hatching glasses are 8 to 10 litres or 50 litres, transparent plastic or glass;
- The water requirement of 10-litre size spawning jars during the first 10 hours is 0.2 to 0.3 litres per minute, after 10 hours - 0.5 to 0.8 litres per minute, and during the hatching period - 1 to 1.2 litres per minute;
- The swelling of the eggs will be complete after 1 to 2 hours;
- The diameter of the swelled eggs is 4 to 5 mm;
- If the eggs hatch out before the predicted time, and the fry are premature because of bacteria, we use formalin in the water, 1 to 5 000 or 1 to 10 000 every 5 hours;
- Hatching occurs 24 to 32 hours after fertilization if the water temperature is 22 to 26°C.
2.2.11 Keeping the larvae
- After hatching, the larvae leave the spawning jars and are collected;
- The collectors used most commonly are large Zuger glasses (50 - 200 litres glass or plastic) or raceways 1-2 cubic metres in size, plastic or concrete
- The screen of the overflow should have a 0.8 - 0.9 mm mesh nylon filter;
- Security filter surface - 10 square cm per litre;
- Stocking density in the larva rearing tanks should be 1 000 per litre;
- Keep continuously running water in the rearing tanks;
- Keep larvae in the tanks for four to five days;
- During this time, the mouth and gill are developed and the larva fills up swimming bladder with air;
- At this stage, the larvae can be fed boiled egg yolk suspended in the water Use a dose of 1 ml per 100 000 fish per two-hour period;
- If the larvae are able to eat, put them in the rearing pond.
2.2.12 Biological and technological data spawning ages in years
Female
Male
SC
BC
GC
- The size of mature fish
cm.
kg.
SC
BC
GC
- The reproduction season is May to July when temperatures are 20 - 26°C;
- The sex ratio by propagation is female:male = 1: 1;
- Expected percentage of spawners which produce eggs after hypophysation is 70-90%;
- Number of eggs produced is 60 000 - 80 000 per kg of body weight;
- Weight and number of eggs obtained from one female:
Weight in grams
No. of eggs
SC
BC
GC
- Quantity of sperm obtained from one male after hypophysation is 10 - 20 ml;
- The necessary ratio of milt to eggs is 10 ml milt per 1 000 g dry eggs;
- The diameter of eggs, mm
Dry
Swollen
SC
BC
GC
- The number of dry eggs per litre is:
SC
BC
GC
- The number of swelled eggs per litre is:
SC
BC
GC
- Stocking density of spawning jars:
dry eggs
5 g/l
swollen eggs
0.25 g/l
- Fecundity of eggs: 75 - 95 %;
- Development of eggs in spawning jar: 24-36 hours at 20-25°C;
- Hatching ratio of the fertilized eggs: 80-90%;
- The time span from hatching to first feeding of larvae: 3-4 days, 60-70 degree days;
- Expected production for four days: 400 000 - 600 000 larvae from 1 kg dry eggs;
- The larvae begin to eat when they reach a size of 6-7 mm;
- The measurement of first food: 50-300 m;
- The time of first feeding after hatching: 3-4 days.
2.3 European Catfish
2.3.1 Reproduction
2.3.2 Economic characterization
2.3.3 Artificial propagation
Species:
European catfish (Sheatfish, Silurus glanis L.)
Origin:
a typically European species
Natural habitat:
Rivers, lakes, artificial ponds
Feeding:
carnivorous predator, will also eat carrion. Well suited to artificial feeds
Weight, at age intervals:
Year
Grams
2.3.1 Reproduction
In natural circumstances the fish uncover the roots of aquatic vegetation, depositing the eggs among these roots. The eggs cohere into a lump. After hatching, the larvae remain hidden here. Six to eight days later, the fry emerge swimming and depart in search of food.
In rearing ponds, they spawn on "artificial nests", which are then removed to the hatchery. May be artificially propagated in hatcheries.
Required temperature for reproduction: 22 - 24°C.
2.3.2 Economic characterization
- Rapid growth;
- Good quality meat, with no intramuscular bone;
- Eats undesirable small fish;
- Good sport fish;
- Well suited to polyculture.
2.3.3 Artificial propagation
- The brood stock is kept in individual ponds of their own;
- Space requirement is 1-2 m^2/fish;
- The fish is small, inhabiting the same ponds;
- The ponds must always contain prey amounting to 20 to 30 percent of the brood stock in weight;
- The brood stock must be disinfected at six-month intervals as protection against parasites;
- Sexually mature fish weigh 3 000 to 15 000 g;
- Age at which sexual maturity is achieved: male 3 to 4 years, female 4 to 5 years;
- One month before propagation, the males and females should be separated and placed in segregated ponds.
Distinguishing sexual characteristics:
- The frontal portion of the head, about the mouth, is angular in the male, while rotund in the female;
- The genital papilla of the male is pointed, that of the female blunt and rounded.
Hypophysation:
- As a reaction to the hormone, the catfish become extremely irritable and will bite one another; to prevent this, the mouth is sewn shut with a single stitch, using a sturdy, straight needle;
- To induce ovulation of both egg and milt, hypophysation (with carp's pituitaty gland) is used;
- The dry, pulverized pituitary gland is dissolved in a 0.65 percent saline solution;
- 2 ml/fish is used of the solution;
- The hypophysis dosage required to induce ovulation is 4 to 5 mg/kg of body weight for the female, 3 to 4 mg/kg of body weight for the male;
- Hypophysation should be done 24 hours prior to the removal of eggs/milt, at water temperature of 22 to 24°C (200-220 degree hours);
- After the injection, the brood stock is kept in tanks in the hatchery, segregating males and females;
- Constant water flow and high oxygen content, with the addition of air or oxygen, should be maintained in the tanks;
- The tanks should be covered, since the fish will be calmer in the dark.
The removal of eggs and milt, fertilization:
- From hypophysation to ovulation 220 degree hours are required. Hourly temperature readings are taken in the tank housing the females, when 220 degree hours is achieved, ovulation can be expected;
- At this point both females and males are tranquilized;
- The tranquilizer used is MS222, in a 1:10 000 concentration;
- The belly of the female should be wiped dry using a cloth to avoid wetting the eggs;
- Using slight pressure, the eggs are easily expressed and collected into plastic dishes of 1 to 2 litre capacity;
- If hatching jars of 10 litre capacity are to be used, 100 to 200 g of eggs should be collected into each dish, this being the quantity to be placed into the hatching jars;
- 1 000 g of eggs (dry) require 10 to 20 ml of milt;
- The eggs and milt are mixed dry, then 20 to 30 ml of water is added;
- The eggs and water solution should be mixed for five minutes in the dish before placement into the hatching jars;
- The eggs should be poured into the hatching jar while the jar is being rotated in such a fashion that the eggs floating in the solution will deposit themselves in a fairly uniform layer onto the interior surface of the jar and adhere thereto;
- No more than one or two layers should be thus adhered, since deeper layering would cause oxygen deprivation, resulting in the demise of large quantities of eggs;
- The eggs are 4 to 5 mm in diameter;
- After placement of the eggs, the jars are put on their racks, and water flow is established.
Hatching:
- An uninterrupted water flow, of 1.5 to 2 litres/minute should be maintained in the hatching jars;
- To prevent the generation of fungus, the eggs are rinsed once or twice daily with a 1:200 000 solution of malachite green for five minutes;
- Hatching may be expected on the third day, if the water temperature is 22 to 24°C, 50 to 60 degree days being required for the complete development of the embryo;
- The hatched larvae should be drained from the hatching jars with the aid of a rubber tube and placed into holding cages;
- The larvae are yellow in colour and are 8 to 9 mm in length.
Keeping of the larvae:
- The larvae are kept in cages of 0.8 to 0.9 mm nylon mesh, the dimensions of the cage being 70 × 40 × 30 cm;
- The cages should be stocked at the rate of 300 to 400 larvae per litre;
- The cages are placed in tanks with flowing water;
- Water temperature should be 22 to 24°C;
- The larvae will begin feeding on the fourth day;
- The first pigmentation spots appear on them about this time;
- The first feed given the larvae is zooplankton or finely chopped tubifex (mud inhabiting worms).
Biological and technical data:
- Age at sexual maturity: male - 3 to 4 years, female - 4 to 5 years;
- Sexually mature fish measure 50 to 70 cm;
- The spawning season is May to June;
- Water temperature required for spawning: 22 to 24°C;
- Optimum male to female sex ratio is 2:1 for artificial propagation;
- The effectiveness of hypophysation of the female is 80 to 90 percent;
- Quantity of eggs per female: 40 000 to 120 000 or 200 to 600 g dry weight;
- Quantity of eggs by body weight of the female: 20 000-30 000/kg;
- Quantity of milt per male, with hypophysation: 5 to 10 ml;
- Fertilization of 1 000 g of eggs requires 10 to 20 ml of milt;
- Dry size of eggs: 1.5 to 2.0 mm, swollen: 4 to 5 mm;
- Count of dry eggs per kg: 180 000 to 220 000;
- Count of swollen eggs per litre: 30 000 to 50 000;
- Stocking density of hatching jars: dry eggs, 20 mg/l, swollen eggs, 100 ml/l;
- Fertility rate of the eggs is 70 to 90 percent;
- Time required for hatching in hatching jars: 2.5 to 3 days (50 to 60 degree days);
- Hatching ratio of fertile eggs is 70 to 80 percent;
- Time span of the larval stage is 4 to 5 days (70 to 100 degree days);
- Survival rate of the larvae (to the first feeding) is 60 to 80 percent;
- Size of fry at first feeding: 9 to 10 mm;
- Size of the first feed is 200 to 500 micron;
- First feeding will occur 4 to 5 days after hatching;
- Raceways used are of 100 to 200 litre capacity;
- Stocking density of the raceways is 50 to 100 fry/litre;
- Rearing period in the raceway: 15 to 20 days;
- Optimum rearing temperature: 24°C;
- Size of the 15 to 20 day old fry: 20 to 30 mm;
- Size of feed at 15 to 20 days: 1 to 2 mm;
- Survival rate of the fry through the rearing period: 90 to 95 percent;
- Number of fry surviving at 15 to 20 days, from 1 kg (dry) eggs is 70 000 to 80 000.
2.4 Pike Perch
2.4.1 Reproduction
2.4.2 Economic characterization
2.4.3 Propagation
2.4.4 Sexual differentiation
2.4.5 Spawning in fish ponds
2.4.6 Hypophysation
2.4.7 Hatching
2.4.8 Biological and technical data
Species:
Pike perch (Stizostedion lucioperca L.)
Habitat:
Prefers oxygen rich waters. It lives in rivers, lakes, reservoirs and fish ponds
Feeding:
It is a carnivorous predator, feeding mainly on small fish
Weight at age intervals:
Year
Grams
2.4.1 Reproduction
In its natural environment, it uncovers the roots of aquatic vegetation, depositing the ova among them. The male then fertilizes the eggs. It spawns in pairs, and guards the ova until they hatch. Temperature at spawning: 14°C.
2.4.2 Economic characterization
Its meat is outstanding, and contains no intramuscular bone.
- Good sport fish;
- In polyculture, it consumes small fish of no value;
- It does not withstand well the handling necessary in harvesting and transportation, thus requiring extraordinarily careful treatment.
2.4.3 Propagation
Care of the brood stock:
- In the autumn the brood stock is harvested from natural waters or fish ponds;
- The stock is placed in wintering ponds without segregation by sex;
- Wintering space requirement is 3 to 4 m^2 per fish;
- Small fish, at the rate of 20 to 30% of the brood stock by weight, are placed in the pond;
- Continuous water circulation must be ensured in the wintering ponds.
2.4.4 Sexual differentiation
- The female's belly is full, rounded and its general area is white in color;
- The male's belly is flatter, its area gray.
2.4.5 Spawning in fish ponds
The spawning pond should be small in area (500 to 1 000 m^2), and 1.5 to 1.8 m deep,
- The bottom must not be very muddy;
- Spawning nests are prepared for the fish, made either of willow roots (Salix), or of a special artificial fibre "spawning rug";
- The nest is square, of 50 cm dimension;
- The spawning nest is placed on the bottom and secured;
- Females and males are placed in the spawning pond in equal number;
- Each pair requires 30 to 50 m^2 area.
2.4.6 Hypophysation
- Hypophysation is carried out before placing the brood stock in the spawning ponds;
- The pulverized hypophysis of carp should be administered in 1 ml of a 0.65% salt solution;
- Hypophysis dosage by body weight is 2.5 mg/kg for the female, 2 mg/kg for the male;
- Three days after placing the spawners in the pond, the nests are examined, and those containing ova are transferred to the hatchery;
- During the transfer - if over a short distance - the nests are covered with wet rags to prevent their drying by wind.
2.4.7 Hatching
- The ova in their nests are ripened by sprinkling with water, the method developed by Woynárovich (Hungary);
- The nests are placed vertically on racks over troughs of concrete or fibreglass;
- Above the racks sprinklers are deployed, which produce a fine spray on the nests;
- Water temperature should be 12°C, ambient temperature 16-18°C thus the ova are ripened at 15-16°C;
- Incubation requires 110 degree days (6-7 days);
- To prevent the generation of fungus, malachite green should be used in a 1:100 000 solution;
- The nets are immersed in the solution for 6-8 minutes, rinsed and replaced on the rack;
- If required, the treatment is repeated each day;
- When the ova are assumed to be ready to hatch, a few of them are placed in a glass containing water of 15-16°C temperature. If these hatch readily, the nests are placed in hatching tanks;
- The hatched larvae have no pigmentation and are extremely sensitive to light;
- The hatching tanks are therefore covered to keep the larvae in the dark;
- The tanks must have a continuous flow through of oxygen rich water;
- Water temperature should be 12-14°C;
- First feeding will take place at 6 to 8 days;
- First feed is zooplankton, measuring 50 to 100 micron;
- The feeding fry are transferred to fish ponds, which contain ample food supplies.
2.4.8 Biological and technical data
- Age of sexual maturity, female: 3-4 years; male: 2-3 years
- Length of broodfish: 30-50 cm
- Weight of broodfish: 500-3 000 g
- Optimum water temperature: 10-14°C
- Sex ratio male to female: 1:1
- Quantity of ova produced by the female is 150 000 - 200 000 per kg of body weight;
- The diameter of dry eggs is 0.5 - 0.8 mm;
- The diameter of swollen eggs is 1 - 1.5 mm;
- Incubation period: 6-7 days, 110 degree days
- Hatching rate: 90-95%;
- Size of the larva: 4-5 mm;
- Size of first feeding fry: 6-8 mm.
2.5 Pike
2.5.1 Reproduction
2.5.2 Economic characterization
2.5.3 Artificial propagation
2.5.4 Sexual differentiation
2.5.5 Hypophysation
2.5.6 Hatching
2.5.7 Biological and technical data
Species:
Pike (Esox lucius L.)
Geographical distribution:
Europe, Asia, North America
Natural habitat:
Rivers, lakes, backwaters and artificial fish ponds. It prefers the edges, with vegetative growth of slow or stationary waters
Feeding:
The pike is a carnivorous predator, feeding on fish aquatic mammals, water fowl and vermin. It possesses a large appetite, if ample food is available it grows rapidly.
Weight at age intervals:
Year
Grams
2.5.1 Reproduction
In a natural environment, it spawns in the shallow waters near the shoreline of lakes, slow moving rivers, and dead waters. The ova adhere to the underwater vegetation and will hatch there in 15 to 18 days. The pike does not guard or tend its eggs. The larvae suspend themselves from the vegetation and stay thus until the resorption of the yolk sac in 8 to 15 days. The first feed consumed by the feeding fry is zooplankton.
In cultivation, the pike may be placed in fish ponds for spawning or propagated artificially in hatcheries. The spawning temperature is 5 to 12°C. Sexual maturity is attained at 3 to 4 years by the female, 2 to 3 years by the male.
2.5.2 Economic characterization
- The species is suited primarily to the stocking of natural waters;
- It is an excellent sport fish;
- It's meat is of good quality;
- In fish ponds it will eliminate undesirable small fish which may be brought in with the water supply.
2.5.3 Artificial propagation
- A proven method is the collection of the ripe fish in the spawning season from natural waters. The collection is done using fyke nets. The ripe ova is already flowing from the female. It is fertilized and then taken to the hatchery and placed in hatching jars. The mature fish kept in ponds or backwaters are collected in the autumn and placed in wintering ponds;
- Feeding is necessary in the wintering ponds. This consists of placing small fish in the pond, at the rate of 20 to 30 percent, by weight, of the pike. The space requirement of the brood stock in the wintering pond is 2 m^2 per fish;
- The pond should have a continuous flow-through of oxygen rich water;
- Size and weight at sexual maturity:
Female:
30 to 40 cm,
500 to 2 500 g
Male:
25 to 30 cm,
350 to 2 000 g
- Water temperatures required for propagation: in wintering ponds 6 to 8°C, in hatcheries 10 to 14°C.
2.5.4 Sexual differentiation
- The pike does not demonstrate a marked dimorphism. The female, in the spawning season, will have a fuller belly than the male. The male will emit white milt if pressed lightly. Occasionally the males have vivid yellow spots.
2.5.5 Hypophysation
- For the artificial induction of the production of ova and sperm in pike, hormone of the carp's hypophysis is employed;
- Prior to hypophysation, the brood stock is collected from the wintering ponds. After hypophysation, the fish are kept in tanks or small ponds until the removal of ova and sperm from them;
- Dosage;
for the female,
3 mg/kg of body weight
for the male,
2 mg/kg of body weight;
- The hypophysis is dissolved in a 0.65 percent salt solution. Two ml salt solution per fish is used. The hypophysis is injected 72 hours prior to the removal of ova and sperm. The water temperature is maintained at 10°C;
- After hypophysation, the males and females are placed in separate tanks;
- Each fish is provided with 0.5 m^3 of water in the tank. Water circulation required is 2 litres/min/fish. Saturation of the water with oxygen must be maintained;
- The fish should not be fed while in the tanks. Tranquilization is not employed.
The removal of ova and sperm, fertilization;
- 72 hours after hypophysation, the tanks' water level is lowered and the fish are picked up by hand, one by one. With slight pressure, the ripe ova are easily made to flow out;
- The ova are collected in plastic dishes;
- Sperm will emerge from the male with slight pressure on the belly. The sperm is collected with pipettes;
- Care must be taken that neither ova nor sperm come into contact with water;
- Ova and sperm are thoroughly mixed, without the addition of water, so that each ovum will be reached by the sperm. 8 to 10 ml sperm is used to each 1 000 g of eggs. Each batch of eggs is fertilized with sperm from no less than 3 males to assure successful fertilization;
- A fertilizing solution is used in the process of fertilization. The composition of the solution is:
Water:
1 litre
Salt:
7 grams
Urea:
15 grams
- To 1 000 g ova, 150 to 200 ml fertilizing solution is added, with continuous stirring, using a plastic spoon;
- After two minutes, a further 200 ml fertilizing solution is added and the stirring action continued;
- After five minutes, the solution is carefully poured off, then fresh solution added in a volume that is three times that of the ova;
- This is stirred for ten minutes, then the solution is poured off;
- Fresh water is poured on the ova, in which it will be soaked for 45 minutes;
- The water is exchanged at ten minute intervals, with a cautious stirring at five minute intervals;
- The rinsed ova may be transported without loss for two to three hours, in a 1:2 mixture of ova to water.
2.5.6 Hatching
- The ova are placed in hatching jars;
- In a 10 litre capacity hatching jar, 1.5 to 2.0 litre ova may be placed. The ova will become somewhat lumpy in the jar, but this is of no consequence;
- The ova are sensitive to water turbulence for the first 48 hours, therefore, the water flow in the hatching jar is held to 0.5 l/min;
- After 48 hours, the flow is increased to 2.0 to 2.5 litre/minute. At this time the lumps are separated to prevent adhesion with careful stirring;
- The water temperature in the jar should be 6 to 8°C during the first two days, then gradually increased to achieve 12 to 14°C on the fourth day. The water temperature should not be raised above 14°C, since this would incapacitate the hatching larvae;
- To prevent the generation of fungus, the ova must be disinfected each day, beginning with the third day after placement in the hatching jar. The disinfectant to be employed is malachite green, in a concentration of 5 ppm, the duration of the treatment is five minutes;
- The infertile ova, which are lighter in colour will rise to the top and may be siphoned off through a rubber tube;
- Incubation requires 130 to 150 degree days, depending on water temperature, the time required may vary from 8 to 15 days;
- Upon hatching of the first few larvae, the ova are transferred through rubber tubes, into large plastic dishes;
- The dishes contain warm water, of 15 to 17ºC, in which the larvae hatch within 10 to 15 minutes.
Maintenance and transportation of the larvae:
- The larvae are placed in pens;
- The larva pens are 70×40×30 cm in size, and are made of 1 mm nylon mesh;
- The pens are kept in concrete or fibreglass tanks with flow-through circulation;
- The pens are stocked at the rate of 150 to 200 larvae per litre;
- Soon after being placed in the pen, the larvae will suspend themselves from the walls of the pen and remain in place for 5 to 6 days. They should not be disturbed during this time, since they will have difficulty in repeatedly reattaching themselves. The bottom of the pen is carefully cleaned of shells, the detritus being siphoned off through a rubber tube;
- Water temperature is kept at 10 to 12°C;
- Time span of the larval stage is 8 to 10 days;
- The swim up fry is transferred to fish ponds. The fry is transported in polyethylene bags;
- At 10°C, 100 000 fry may be kept in 20 litre water plus 20 litre oxygen for 2 to 4 hours;
- The size of the swim up fry is 8 to 10 mm.
2.5.7 Biological and technical data
- Age of sexual maturity, female 3-4 years, male 2-3 years;
- Length of broodfish: 30-80 cm
- Weight of broodfish: 500-5 000 g
- Optimum water temperature: 6 - 12°C
- Sex ratio male to female: 2:1
- First hormone treatment of females: 2-3 mg/kg
- Second hormone treatment of females: 5-7 mg/kg
- Time between the two treatments: 24 hours
- Time between the second treatment and ovulation: 550-750 degree hours
- Hormone treatment of males; 3 mg/kg
- Effectiveness of hormone treatment of the females: 70-80%
- Quantity of eggs per female, dry weight: 200-800 g
- Quantity of milt per male; 2-5 ml
- Quantity of milt for fertilizing 1 kg of dry eggs; 4-8 ml
- Fertility rate of eggs: 40-60%
- Size of dry eggs: 2 mm
- Size of swollen eggs; 3 mm
- Count of dry eggs per kg: 180 000 - 200 000
- Count of swollen eggs per litre: 50 000 - 80 000
- Quantity of swollen eggs in 10 litre hatching jar: 1.5 - 2.5 1
- Water flow in hatching jar; 0.5 - 2.5 l/min
- Time required for hatching: 120 degree days
- Hatching rate: 80-90%
- Time of the larval stage: 100-120 degree days
- Stocking density of larvae container: 150 - 200 larva/litre
- Number of first-feeding fry from 1 kg of dry eggs: 50 000 - 100 000
- Size of fry at first feeding; 11 - 14 mm
2.6 Semi-Artificial Propagation of Indian Carps
2.6.1 Propagation
2.6.2 Economic features
2.6.3 Way of distinguishing male or female spawners
2.6.4 Age of fish at first propagation
2.6.5 Hypophysation
2.6.6 Keeping of spawners and spawning
2.6.7 Hatching of the seed
2.6.8 Rearing of larva
2.6.9 Biological and technical figures
Species:
Catla catla (Hamilton)
(Catla)
Labeo rohita (Hamilton)
(Rohu)
Cirrhinus mrigala (Hamilton)
(Mrigal)
Origin:
India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Burma
Natural habitat:
Rivers, lakes, fish ponds
Feeding:
Catla catla - zooplankton, phytoplankton in surface strata,
Labeo rohita - zooplankton, along the whole water column,
Cirrhinus mrigala - omnivorous bottom feeder.
Age dependent size of fish
Year
Catla
mm
Rohu
mm
Mrigal
mm
2.6.1 Propagation
- Spawning in rivers during monsoon rains;
- Spawning can be induced semi-artificially;
- Optimal temperature of spawning is 26-31°C;
- Eggs are floating, not sticky.
2.6.2 Economic features
- Applicable in intensive polyculture technologies;
- Meat is tasty, important food.
2.6.3 Way of distinguishing male or female spawners
- The belly of female is swollen, genital organ is red;
- Upon light pressure the male produces white milky drops;
- The hard ray of pectoral fin is rough with the male, and smooth with the female.
2.6.4 Age of fish at first propagation
2-3 years.
2.6.5 Hypophysation
- Carp pituitary gland is used dried in acetone
- Female spawners:
1st injection
2, 3 mg/kg,
10 - 12 hours before ovulation;
2nd injection
5, 8 mg/kg,
4 - 6 hours before ovulation;
- Hypophysation of males: 2-3 mg/kg, 4-6 hours before stripping the milt;
- Hypophysation is performed with powdered pituitary gland, injected in 0.65% NaCl solution, calculating 2 ml/fish.
2.6.6 Keeping of spawners and spawning
- The injected males and females are transferred to a breeding hapa in a fish pond or tank with slow water flowing;
- Spawning is generally 4-6 hours after the 2nd injection;
- After spawning the parents are taken out .
2.6.7 Hatching of the seed
- The fertile eggs in the hapa hatch 15-18 hours after spawning;
- 12-14 hours after spawning - when the embryo starts moving in the egg - the eggs are collected and transferred from the hapa to the hatching glass (Zuger glass);
- The hatched larva slips from the breeding hapa to the outer narrow-meshed rearing hapa.
2.6.8 Rearing of larva
- The larva starts feeding 4-5 days after hatching;
- The fry at this stage is stocked in nursery ponds.
2.6.9 Biological and technical figures
- Age of sexual maturity. Female: 2-3 years, male: 1-2 years
- Length of broodfish: 40-80 cm
- Weight of broodfish: 200-6 000 g
- Optimum water temperature: 24-31°C
- Sex ratio male to female: 1:2
- Effectiveness of hormone treatment of the female: 60-80%
- Quantity of eggs per female, dry weight: 200-2 000 g
- Fertility rate of the eggs: 30-40%
- Size of dry eggs: 1-1.5 mm
- Size of swollen eggs: 4-6 mm
- Count of dry eggs per kg: 700 000-1 000 000
- Count of swollen eggs per litre: 15 000-25 000
- Time required for hatching: 15-18 hours, 20-22 degree days
- Size of fry at first feeding: 6-7 mm.
Biological and Technical Data on Hatchery Propagation of Some Warm Hater Fishes
<section>d</section>
Chapter 12 Planning of Fish Hatcheries
János Kepenyes
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. BASIC DATA
2. PROCESSING OF BASIC DATA
3. CALCULATION OF WATER REQUIREMENT OF A FISH HATCHERY
4. TEMPERATURE REQUIREMENT OF HATCHING
5. TECHNOLOGICAL DESIGN
6. CONNECTED FACILITIES
1. BASIC DATA
In planning of fish hatcheries one has to start from the basic data of reproduction biology, propagation and nursing. Such data can be seen in Tables 1, 2 and 3 for the following fish species:
Common carp
Cyprinus carpio L.
Grass carp
Ctenopharyngodon idella (Val.)
Silver carp
Hypophthalmichthys molitrix (Val.)
Bighead carp
Aristichthys nobilis (Rich.)
Tench
Tinca tinca L.
Rapfen (Asp)
Aspius aspius L.
Pike
Esox lucius L.
Pike-perch
Stizostedion lucioperca L.
Sheatfish (Wels)
Silurus glanis L.
Sterlet
Acipenser ruthenus L.
2. PROCESSING OF BASIC DATA
2.1 Planning the Time
2.2 Determination of Main Parameters
2.1 Planning the Time
Fish hatchery operations for induced breeding are shown as a function of time in Figure 1, for the propagation of common carp.
The time (in days) is on the horizontal axis. The thick horizontal lines show the occupation of different basins and tanks. Points denoted with small letters refer to different processes and manipulation according to the following:
(a), (e)
transportation of breeders to the hatchery; in case of common carp this is carried out when the temperature of pond water reaches 18°C;
(f)
anaesthetizing of females (e.g. with 1:10 000 solution of MS 222), marking, hormone treatment, first injection (about 8...10 % of the total quantity of pituitary gland);
(g)
hormone treatment, second injection (90-92%), the total quantity is 3.5 to 4 mg of pituitary gland/kg of body weight;
(b)
hormone treatment of males (2 mg of pituitary gland/kg of body weight);
(c), (h)
anaesthetizing, stripping, mixing of sexual products (in dry condition),
(j)
adding the fertilizing solution (for activation of sperms and for eliminating the stickiness of eggs), swelling the eggs, tannin treatment (for the elimination of reversible stickiness), swelling, dilution with clear water, placing the eggs into the hatching jars (j);
(d), (i)
removal of breeders after coding;
(k), (l)
transfer of hatched larvae to the larval rearing tanks;
(m)
transportation of the larvae ready to feed.
The duration of different operational phases (e.g. "j-k" = larval rearing) can be seen in tables of reproduction biology. The durations (a-b) and (e-f) are needed for accustoming the breeders to the ripening temperature (24°C). The period defends on water temperature difference between the ponds and the breeder tanks, in the given case it is 24 hours. Duration of hatching processes (T[1 ]= 9 days) and the intervals between the periods (T = 4 days) can be seen in Figure 1. In case of hatching consisting of several periods the total duration of time can be calculated with the following equation:
T[n] = T[1] + T(n - 1)
(d)
T[n] = total duration of hatching, in case of n hatching periods (day)
T[1] = length of one hatching period (day)
T = time period, e.g. interval between two transportations of larvae (day)
n = number of hatching periods
Figure 1. Hatchery production schedule
In the given case (with common carp) T[n] = 9 days, T = 4 days; and three periods are represented (n = 3) in Figure 1, thus:
T[3] = 9+4 (3-1) = 17 days
If we have thirty days for hatching (T[n] = 30) the number of periods is:
If we choose n = 6 as a whole number,
T[6] = 9+4 (6-1) = 29 days, that means 29 days are needed for the hatching.
This method can be prepared for the other fish species as well, by utilization of tables of reproduction biology.
2.2 Determination of Main Parameters
2.2.1 After making the time-plan the next step is the determination of the most important parameters of the hatchery which are as follows:
- Number of larvae produced during one hatching period (T[1]) and during the total hatching period (T[n]). These numbers give the capacity of the hatchery;
- Number of necessary manipulation devices and tanks, and their volume (breeder tanks', hatching jars, larval rearing tanks);
- Number of necessary brooders; proportion of males and females.
The above mentioned data can be calculated from data of reproduction and fry production (Tables 1 and 2). The method shown in Figure 3 can be applied for this calculation, too.
2.2.2 First one has to determine volume and type of manipulation devices to apply
a) Hatching jars
Data given in Table 1 concern the 7 litre hatching jars, shown in Figure 2a. There are some other types in Figure 2. Figure 2b shows a 10 litre hatching jar; Figure 2c shows a 50 litre polyethelene hatching jar for hatching of Chinese carps (grass carp, bighead carp, silver carp). Practical data show that in one 10 litre jar one can place 200 000 eggs of common carp (calculated in dry weight). In the 50 litre polyethelene hatching jar 300 000 eggs of grass carp or silver carp or 250 000 eggs of bighead carp can be placed (also calculated in dry weight).
Table 1 Data on Hatchery Propagation
Table 2 Data on Reproduction Biology of Some Warm Water Fishes
Figure 2. Hatching jars
b) Larval rearing balloon (170 1)
Quantity of hatched larvae put into it
Common carp
Grass carp
Silver carp
Bighead carp
In our example we use 10 l hatching jars for hatching the common carp, 50 l polyethelene hatching balloons for hatching the Chinese carp (grass carp, bighead carp, silver carp) and 170 l larval rearing tanks for rearing the larvae.
c) In the given example tanks of 2 m^3 useful water volume are used for placing the breeders.
2.2.3 Basic quantities given in paragraph 2.2.1, can be calculated very simply from data of reproduction and nursing by the process shown in Figure 3.
As an example, we can calculate the necessary data for reproduction of common carp.
The characteristic quantities in the figure are written into rectangular fields denoted with "y", e.g. y[13] is the number of hatching jars (pc), y[9] is the quantity of stripped dry eggs (million pc = Mpc).
The value "x" drawn on the continuous line between two rectangulars express the relationship between the two quantities, (e.g. x[9;13] = 0.2 Mpc dry eggs) pc hatching jar. The arrow on the line shows the quantity of "y" unit, which is in the numerator of the related quantity "x".
According to the above, dimensioning is carried out as follows:
a) One draws the rectangulars denoting the quantities "y", and the place of quantities remains empty, only the name and the unit are written in.
e.g. "y[13]............ pc hatching jars"
b) Those "y" values for which the tables of reproduction biology give a relationship must be joined. The chosen "x" value must be written beside the joining lines taking care of the direction of the arrow.
e.g. Table 2 shows the quantity of dry eggs which can be stripped from 1 kg of a female in 100 000 ... 200 000 pc. If we choose value 160 000, then
x[7;9] = 0.16 Mpc/kg
c) Those "x" values with which closed loops can be drawn are denoted with broken line. These can be used for controlling the calculation if we know the following regularity. In a closed loop there can be several "x" values with different directions. If the "x" values are taken into account in rotation and where the direction is corresponding with the direction of rotation the "x" value is used as multiplier and where the direction is opposite the "x" value is used as divisor, the result should be 1.
e.g. If x[9;10] - x[9;12] - x[12;14] - x[14;16] - x[16;10] gives a closed sling, then
Figure 3. Process of reproduction and nursing of common carp
From it:
x[10;16] = x[9;10] . x[9;12] . x[12;14] . x[14;16] = 0.85 .0.85 . 0.94 . 0.96 = 0.65 Mpc/kg
The x[10;16] is the number of larvae at the age of feeding calculated from 1 kg of dry eggs. Its value is between 0.5 and 0.7 million according to Table 1, and the value calculated from it (0.65 million) is between the two end limits.
d) The next step is the calculation of "y" values that can be represented with the example as follows:
The capacity of the hatchery that has to be designed is 30 000 000 larvae, where 30 days are given for the incubation. On the basis of calculation in paragraph 2.1 six successive hatchings (n = 6) can be carried out during the given time. During one hatching the hatchery has to produce
y[16] = 5 Mpc feeding larvae
The quantity of hatched larvae:
The quantity of necessary larval rearing tanks:
Then we choose 16 pieces, etc.
Necessary size of breeder tanks is 0.56 m^3 for the males and 1.7 m^3 for the females. If choosing a 2 m^3 unit we obviously need 1 pc for the males and 1 pc for the females. If the breeder tanks are of 1 m^3 size we need one for the males and two for the females.
Further data can be read in Figure 3. As a summary we can say the following: for production of 5 000 000 feeding larvae (y[16]) 11...12 (y[4]) females with average body weight of 4.41 kg/fish (x[3;4]) 5 ....... 6 (y[5]) males with average body weight of 2.5 kg/fish (x[5;6]) are necessary. Quantity of stripped dry eggs is 6 510 000 pc (y[9]) quantity of stripped sperm is 85 ml (y[n]).
3 pc of 2 m^3 size or 3 pc of 1 m^3 size of breeder tanks are necessary for placing the breeders.
Quantity of hatching jars is 32 pc (y[13]), and that of larval rearing tanks is 16 pc (y[15]).
3. CALCULATION OF WATER REQUIREMENT OF A FISH HATCHERY
Guiding numbers of technological water requirement of hatching are the following:
7 l size hatching jar: see Figure 1
10 l size hatching jar:
for hatching common carp 0.7 ... 2.5 l/min pc jars
50 l size hatching jar:
for hatching grass carp, silver carp and bighead carp 0.4 ... 2.5 l/min pc jars
170 l size larval rearing tank:
both for larvae of common carp and for larvae of Chinese carps 3 ... 9 l/min pc tanks
Breeder tanks: 1 l/min . kg of breeder.
In the hatchery given in the above example the following water requirement is needed:
a) Requirement of water
For hatching
min. water 0.7 l/min . pc . 32 pc = 22.4 l/min
max. water 2.5 l/min . pc . 32 pc = 80.0 l/min
For larval rearing
min. water 3 l/min . pc . 16 pc = 48.0 l/min
max. water 9 l/min . pc . 16 pc = 96.0 l/min
For breeders
males 14.4 kg . 1 l/min . kg = 14.4 l/min
females 50.9 kg . 1 l/min . kg = 50.9 l/min
total 14.4 + 50.9 = 65.3 l/min
The highest simultaneous water need:
80.0 + 96.0 + 65.3 = 241.3 l/min 15 m /h
b) Requirement of water volume
Water requirement is calculated to the maximum requirement of water for safety reasons. Data concern 5 million larvae.
For hatching
Duration of hatching:
3.5 d = 84 h
Water needs:
8.0 l/min = 4.8 m^3 . h
Water requirement:
84 h . 4.8 m^3 . h = 403.2 m^3
For larval rearing
Duration of larval rearing:
3.5 d = 84 h
Water needs:
96 l/min = 5.76 m^3 . h
Water requirement:
84 h . 5.76 m^3 . h = 483.8 m^3
For keeping of breeders
Males
Duration in the hatchery
2.5 d = 60 h
Water needs:
50.9 l/min = 3.054 m^3 . h
Water requirement:
72 h . 8.054 m^3 . h = 219.9 m^3
Total: 403.2 m^3 + 483.8 m^3 + 51.9 m^3 + 219.9 m^3 = 1 158.8 m^3
As the calculations were made for the maximum water flow, the received number can be rounded to 1 000 m^3. Thus, for 1 million 3.5 days-old larvae of common carp one can calculate 200 m of water.
4. TEMPERATURE REQUIREMENT OF HATCHING
Optimum temperature of hatching can be seen in tables of reproduction biology. It is 20 ... 24°C in case of common carp. If the temperature of water is lower the water must be heated. During a given period of time the necessary quantity of heat for the heating of water is
Q = 1 000 V(i[2] - i[1]) + 4 187 . V (q [2] - q [1])
where
Q = necessary flow during the period of time (kJ)
V = total quantity of water utilized during the analyzed period of time (m^3)
In the given example: V = 1 000 m^3 .6=6 000 m^3
i[2] = necessary temperature of water (kJ/kg) used for ripening the breeders
i[1] = average temperature of available water during the period of time
q [2] = temperature of water used for ripening the breeders In the given example: 6 = 24°C
q [1] = average temperature of available water during the period of time say q [2] = 19°C in the example.
Temperature requirement of the hatchery producing 30 million common carp larvae is
Q = 4 187 . 6 000 . (24-19) = 125 610 000 kJ
for which
fuel is needed, if the efficiency of boiler is 95% (h [1] = 0.95) and the main waste is 80% (h [2] = 0.80).
If the density of the fuel is 0.85 kg/l
fuel must be used.
Taking into account that the above data are given for production of 30 million larvae with 5°C difference of water temperature, it can be calculated that for production of 1 million larvae with 1°C difference of water temperature, 30 litres of water are needed.
5. TECHNOLOGICAL DESIGN
A characteristic flow diagram is shown in Figure 4. Some parts of the installation shown in the flow diagram can be abandoned depending on local situation.
In principle the water source can be of three kinds, as follows:
- surface waters (rivers, lakes, natural beach, artificial beach);
- subsurface waters (ground water, deep-seated water, cavern water, spring water, filtered at the riverside water);
- other water sources, secondary utilization (mine waste water, secondary utilization of industrial effluents, cooling water).
Surface waters are for exploitation of a high quantity of water, but they always need purification. Subsurface waters are as clear as drinking water or close to it. Energy requirement of the water intake and costs of constructions of the water intake are specifically higher in case of subsurface waters. In case of a water source containing a large quantity of silt, construction of a separate gravitation settling pond is needed (a), and for intake of subsurface water a separate temperature control pond (b) is needed.
First phase of the water purification is a filtering wall (c) constructed into the settling pond or the temperature control pond. Quantity of water flowing through the unit area of filtering wall is generally 0.15 - 0.20 m^3/m^2 . h.
Sand or gravel can be used as filter media. After getting plugged the filter media can be replaced easily. The water supply of the hatchery can be ensured by gravity or by pumping. Figure 4 shows a water supply by pumping when the capacity of the pumps are calculated from the water requirement. The water needed for backflushing the filters and the social water requirement, have to be taken into account.
If it is necessary, a second filtering unit has to be installed for secondary treatment. This unit usually is a quick sand or gravel filter. The plugged filter media can be backflushed with compressed air and/or high pressure water.
A closed, pressurized quick filter can be seen in Figure 4, that is backflushed with water and compressed air. For the continuous operation two filters are available and only one operates simultaneously while the second is backflushed. The water needed for back-flushing is stored in a separate clear water tank denoted with "f" in the figure. The pumps denoted with "g" ensure the water supply for normal operation and for backflushing. A pressure chamber "h" is used in order to keep the pressure within a certain range. If the temperature of the supplying water is less than required the water has to be heated and its temperature has to be regulated. The heating and temperature control can be ensured with boiler (i), heat exchanger (j) and temperature control valve as is shown in Figure 4.
Oxygen concentration of purified and optimum temperature water generally must be at least 5 g/m^3. For this purpose an aeration device (k) must be constructed. If there is no heating, dilution of oxygen can be carried out in the filtering water tank as well (f).
Figure 4. A characteristic flow diagram of hatchery
Breeder tanks can be one of two shapes. The bigger ones (1-10 m^2 footing area, 1-1.5 m depth) can be constructed of concrete, and coated with plastic material or glazed tile, the smaller tanks (0.5-2 m^3 volume, 0.6-1.2 m depth) of plastic material or aluminium. The necessary constant water pressure needed for hatching jars (m) and for larval rearing tanks (n) is ensured by an elevated tank (p). The outflowing water from breeder tanks, hatching jars and larval rearing tanks is collected in a drainage pit, from which it is removed by a pump (r). Compressed air for aeration, or rather for backflushing of filters is ensured by a compressor (s) and a pressure tank (t).
For hypophysation and stripping at least one table of 3 × 1 m size is needed. General laboratory benches can be used for this purpose.
6. CONNECTED FACILITIES
Inside the hatchery besides the operational rooms the following compartments are needed:
- store-room
- laboratory
- office social activities (dressing-room, shower, toilet).
Outside the hatchery the following facilities must be situated beside the above-mentioned devices of water intake and water treatment (settling pond, filter-wall) units:
- facilities for keeping the breeders (breeder ponds, wintering ponds);
- technological devices of hatcheries ensure the keeping of larvae only till the beginning of breathing or beginning of food intake.
Further rearing of fry takes place in nursing ponds; the basic calculations are in Table 3.
Table 3 Data of Fry Rearing of Some Warmwater Fishes
<section>e</section>
Chapter 13 Deign and Construction of Raceways and Other Flow-Through Systems
L. Váradi
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. INTRODUCTION
2. WATER SUPPLY
3. THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE DESIGN OF FLOW-THROUGH SYSTEMS
REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
In development of fish culture an increasing importance is given to the full utilization of water resources. The first step was to increase the natural yield of existing waters, followed, as a second step, by the construction and use of ponds to fulfill the requirements of industrial-type fish culture. Then came the real breakthrough, with the construction of so called flow-through systems, where not the size of the water area but the quantity of water flowing through limited the yield.
The earlier principle then had to be revised, since the water area did not limit the amount of fish produced, but the volume of water supplied did.
Fish culture in flow-through systems is a type of intensive culture where the fish are stocked densely in a long and narrow pond or tank in which there is an abundant continuous water flow. The fish are stocked in these ponds or tanks on the basis of the volume of inflowing water. They are fed a formulated pelleted food and usually this is their only source of nutrition. A continuous water flow ensures the proper oxygen supply to the fish and flushes away the metabolic wastes.
The flow-through system is a typical and traditional facility for trout culture, but other species can also be cultivated in this type of system with good results.
2. WATER SUPPLY
2.1 Conventional Flow-Through Systems
2.2 Intensive Flow-Through Systems
Among all systems of fish culture, the flow-through system depends to the highest degree upon an abundant and continuous water supply.
In a conventional flow-through system the oxygen requirement of the fish is supplied by the inflow water. The water flow rate that is needed for proper oxygen supply of the fish usually is larger than is required for flushing the metabolic wastes. Thus, in a conventional flow-through system the water flow rate should be calculated on the basis of the oxygen requirement of the fish. Recently, intensive flow-through systems have been designed in order to increase the stocking density or to decrease the water flow. In these systems the oxygen requirement of the fish is met by oxygenation of the inflow water. When the water flow rate of an intensive flow-through system is calculated, the flow rate that is needed for the flushing of the metabolic wastes becomes the critical factor.
2.1 Conventional Flow-Through Systems
The specific flow rate (q)is one of the basic parameters of flow-through systems that can be expressed:^1^/
^1^/ In this formula and all subsequent formulas, the notation h^-1 denotes per hour, kg^-1 per kg, etc.
where
Q = actual water flow (m h)
W = actual mass of fish in the tank (kg)
In the conventional flow-through system the oxygen requirement of the fish stock is ensured by the inflow water as follows:
Q . (C[s] - C) = W . r
where
C[s] = dissolved oxygen concentration at saturation level (when the oxygen is dissolved from the atmosphere) (gm^-3)
C = allowable minimum dissolved oxygen concentration (gm^-3)
r = specific oxygen consumption of the fish (gh^-1kg^-1)
Assuming the following basic data
- temperature of inflow water is 15°C
- inflow water is saturated with oxygen (C = 10 gm^-3)
- specific oxygen consumption of the fish is 0.4 gh^-1kg^-1
the specific flow rate can be calculated as follows:
There is another important parameter that can be used for the design of flow-through systems, the specific volume (V) of water necessary for a 1 kg weight increase of fish. This can be expressed:
where
G = specific growth rate (kg kg^-1 day^-1)
G can be expressed by the known equation as follows:
where
R[p] = Food protein consumption of 1 kg of fish per day (kg kg day)
PER = Protein Efficiency Ratio (kg fish flesh/kg food protein)
h = daily fish mortality rate (kg kg^-1 day^-1)
assuming
R[p] =0.01 kg kg^-1day^-1
PER = 2kg kg^-1
h = 0.01kg kg^-1day^-1
Then G = R[p]PER - h = 0.01 . 2 - 0.01 = 0.01 kg kg^-1day^-1
The specific volume of water (V) can now be calculated as follows:
If the temperature of the inflow water is not 15°C but 20°C (C[s] = 9 gm), the specific values are as follows:
q[ (20)] = 2.4 m^3day^-1kg^-1
v[ (20)] = 240 m^3kg^-1
2.2 Intensive Flow-Through Systems
If the minimum allowable oxygen concentration is 5 gm^-3 ,1 m^3 of water contains 38.6 g dissolved oxygen available for fish at 20°C which is almost tenfold that contained by water with oxygen dissolved from the atmosphere:
The specific flow rate (q) at two different temperatures is the following:
q[ (15)] = 0.223 m^3 day^-1kg^-1
q[ (20)] = 0.248 m^3 day^-1kg^-1
The specific volume of water (V) is the following:
v[ (15)] = 22.3 m^3kg^-1
v[ (20)] = 24.8 m^3kg^-1
These data, however, should always be checked as to whether toxic metabolites accumulate at these flow rates.
Our assumption is that fish can incorporate some 30 percent of the feed protein (PPV = 0.3),the rest, 85 percent of which is ammonia, is excreted. Since 16 percent of the protein is nitrogen, fish excrete 95.2 g ammonia for each kg of feed protein consumed.
The calculation of the amount of ammonia-nitrogen excreted after feeding a unit of food protein (a) is as follows:
a = (1 - PPV) 0.85 . 0.16 (kg kg^-1)
where
PPV = Productive Protein Value (kg fish protein/kg feed protein)
a = (1 - 0.3) 0.85 . 0.16 = 0.0952
Ammonia, depending on the pH and temperature of water, is present in the water in two forms:
Figure
as ammonium ion (NH[4]^+) and as 'free' or 'un-ionized' ammonia (NH[3]) that is toxic to the fish. In our calculation the allowable maximum value of un-ionized ammonia concentration is 0.045 gm^-3.
Calculating the tolerable total ammonia-nitrogen concentration (C) at different pH and temperature values yields the following:
C[N]/20°C, pH 7.01/ = 10.71 gm^-3
C[N]/l5°C, pH 7.5/ = 4.75 gm^-3
C[N]/20°C, pH 7.5/ = 3.43 gm^-3
C[N]/25°C, pH 7.5/ = 2.40 gm^-3
C[N] = ammonia-nitrogen concentration (gm^-3)
(NH[3] - N) + (NH[4]^+ - N)
For the calculation of C[N], Figure 1 and Table 1 should be used.
In intensive flow-through systems an adequate water flow is needed in order to flush the metabolic wastes, first of all the ammonia.
The amount of ammonia + ammonium ion that is excreted by a certain mass of fish (W) during a day can be expressed as follows:
1000 . W . a . R[p] (g day^-1)
where
W = mass of fish in a tank (kg)
a = amount of ammonia-nitrogen excreted after feeding a unit of food protein (kg kg^-1)
R[p] = fish feed protein consumed by a unit mass of fish in one day (kg kg^-lday^-1)
The amount of ammonia-nitrogen that can be flushed by the water flow (Q) in a day, with a given maximum tolerable ammonia-nitrogen concentration (C[N]) can be expressed as follows:
24 . Q . C[N] (g day^-1)
where
Q = water flow (m^3 hour^-1)
C[N] = ammonia-nitrogen concentration (gm^-3)
thus,
1 000 . W . a . Rp = 24 . Q . C[N]
Dividing both sides of the equation by W and using the formula:
q = Q . W , we get an equation as follows,
In our calculation:
Thus, the specific flow rate (g) at different pH and temperature can be calculated as follows:
The specific volume of water can be calculated as follows:
Figure 1. Diagram of ammonia equilibrium pH and temperature
Table 1 Percent NH in Aqueous Ammonia Solutions for 0-30°C and pH 6-10
Source: Emerson et al., Ammonia equilibrium pH and temperature, J. Fish. Res. Board, Can., Vol. 32/12/1975
The values of the specific flow rate and the specific volume of water at different pH and water temperatures are shown in Table 2. It can be seen in the table that at 15°C the specific flow rate needed for the proper oxygen supply is higher than that needed for the flushing of the metabolic wastes. At higher temperatures the ammonia removal by flushing becomes the decisive factor. It also turns out from the table that the water requirement of the system is two times higher at 20°C than at 15°C.
3. THE FUNDAMENTALS OF THE DESIGN OF FLOW-THROUGH SYSTEMS
3.1 Water Pumping System
3.2 Tank Design
3.1 Water Pumping System
Since flow-through systems are dependent upon large quantities of water, the design of the pumping system is critical in their design. The required quantity of water can be determined according to the calculations given below.
3.2 Tank Design
3.2.1 Size
3.2.2 Material
3.2.3 Additional equipment
3.2.1 Size
In a raceway with an inflow at one end, the mean water velocity (v) can be expressed as follows:
where
b = tank breadth (m)
d = tank water depth (m)
L = tank length (m)
S = actual fish stocking density (kgm^-3)
q = actual specific flow rate (m^3kg^-1h^-1)
In this equation the 'q' can be calculated and it is desired to maintain a constant value.
The 'S' is increasing during the growing period from an initial stocking density up to a maximum one. Its value can be calculated based on the growth curve. The 'v' is desired to be kept in a certain range.
The water velocity should be kept below a certain value in order to avoid stress and energy waste of the fish and wash-away of the food particles. On the other hand a certain minimum water velocity should be exceeded in order to keep the waste materials in suspension.
Taking into account the above criteria the geometric dimensions of the raceway can be calculated, assuming constant water depth during the growing period. The water depth however might be varied and thus it is possible to maintain a more or less constant water velocity throughout the growing period.
3.2.2 Material
The tanks of a flow-through system usually are rectangular reinforced concrete raceways, but large size outdoor raceways can be made of earth with plastic covered inner surface. Smaller size indoor raceways can be built out of concrete, plastic, metal or wood.
Table 2 Water Requirement of the Flow-Through Systems
3.2.3 Additional equipment
The tanks should be equipped with properly designed water control structures and it is advisable to install a safety device as well that gives an alarm signal when the water flow (or the water level) decreases below a certain value.
Although the conventional flow-through system is based upon the oxygen supply from the inflow water, in extreme cases oxygen depletion can occur. Then aeration is needed. Therefore emergency aerators with high efficiency should be provided during the design of the farm equipment.
In flow-through systems, intensive feeding is based on complete pelleted food that should be given to the fish regularly and in proper doses. This can be ensured by different automatic feeders first of all, but self moving food dispensers or demand feeders can also be used.
Regular grading is an essential work in these intensive systems, because the divergence in the growth rate has a disadvantageous effect on the growth of the smaller fish. Special mechanized graders are available for this purpose that handle the fish gently; however, the frequency of the grading should be minimized.
Because of the special conditions of these systems (high stocking density, concrete tank, etc.) the harvest of the fish can be mechanized as well.
Different fish pumps have been developed for this purpose.
REFERENCES
Emerson, K et al., 1975, Aqueous ammonia equilibrium calculations: effect of pH and temperature. J. Fish. Res. Board Can., 32(12):2379-83
Kepenyes, J. and A. Ruttkay, 1983, Water requirement of fish production. In International Conference on Water management and production potential in agriculture. Szarvas, Hungary, pp. 90-100
Kerr, N.M., 1981, Design of equipment and selection of material - an engineer's assessment. Schr. Bundesforschungsanst. Fisch. Hamb.. (16/l7) vol. 2:515-21
Kramer, Chin and Mayo Inc., 1972, A study for development of fish hatchery water treatment systems. Prepared for Walla Walla District Corps of Engineers.
<section>f</section>
Chapter 14 Freshwater Cage for Fish
F. Müller
L. Váradi
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. INTRODUCTION
2. SITE SELECTION FOR CAGE CULTURE
3. THE MAIN PARTS OF A CAGE FARM
4. RESULTS OF THE CAGE FISH CULTURE EXPERIMENTS IN HUNGARY
1. INTRODUCTION
Different terms have been used for fish culture in an artificially enclosed area of a natural water body. The term 'Enclosure' is the general term applied to a culturing unit in such types of culture.
'Cage' refers to the type of culturing units consisting of a framed net open at the top and floating on the surface, or when completely enclosed, the cage is kept below the water surface by adjustable buoyancy or suspending from the surface.
'Pen' refers to that type of culturing unit where one part of the natural water body is enclosed by a fence-like wall resting on the bottom.
The increasing popularity of cage culture world-wide can be attributed to the following advantages:
- The applicability of cage culture is extremely varied. Rivers, backwaters, reservoirs, lakes, strip-mine lakes, irrigation canals etc., are all suitable for culture without any alteration in their state or function.
- The production in small units (cages) as well as their quick and simple harvest render the method capable both for flexible adaptation to the actual market demands and for continuous supply.
- Cages are a convenient means of wintering, thus they save the vast investments for separate wintering ponds.
- Due to the high stocking density of enclosures, the direct observation of fish and immediate intervention, if necessary, are possible.
- Harvest is simple and quick, and the technological steps can be mechanized.
- Investment necessary to produce a unit of fish meat is 30-40 percent of that invested in a conventional fish pond system.
- Production of carnivorous fish, first of all sheatfish (Silurus glanis) in monoculture is also feasible.
- By producing seed for stocking natural waters in cages, building nursery ponds can be avoided.
- An indirect advantage is that by utilizing existing natural waters, land areas for fish ponds can be used for other rural activities.
- Cage culture can be well associated with sport fishing.
- The in situ construction of cages is quick and simple, so both the location and dimension of cages are easy to change.
Naturally, as with every technology, it has certain disadvantages as well:
- Since in cage culture natural feed is partly or completely ruled out of the fish diet, complete feed of higher protein content is required which significantly increases the feeding expenses in the net cost of the fish meat produced.
- Due to high stocking density fish are more susceptible to bacterial and parasitic infection and are more sensitive to the decrease of DO (dissolved oxygen) content of water. This latter may result in lack of appetite and mortality in serious cases.
- From the viewpoint of environmental protection, the rules of applied technology should be kept in mind.
- When choosing the site, the foreseeable environmental stresses (pollution, oxygen depletion) should be considered.
2. SITE SELECTION FOR CAGE CULTURE
2.1 Characteristics of the Site
2.2 Environmental Considerations
2.1 Characteristics of the Site
2.1.1 Water quality
2.1.2 Water depth
2.1.3 Water current
Prior to the introduction of cage culture to a natural water body three major factors have to be taken into account as follows:
- water quality
- water depth
- water current
2.1.1 Water quality
First of all temperature, dissolved oxygen, pH and ammonia content have to meet the requirement of that species of fish desired to be cultured.
In addition to these parameters the total mineral content, different forms of N and P, free CO[2], fenol, oil and tar content should be measured as well.
The water should not contain poisonous materials for fish. The expected change in the water quality parameters during the growing season has to be taken into account.
2.1.2 Water depth
There should be a minimum of 1 m of clear water below the bottom of the cage in order to keep it away from the mud and sediment. Generally deeper water areas have to be used for siting of the cages.
When the water depth is considered, the expected minimum water level should be taken as a decisive value.
2.1.3 Water current
Although cage culture can be carried out successfully even in still water, some water current (10-20 cm/sec) has a good effect on the oxygen supply of fish, ensuring permanent water exchange between the water body inside and outside of the cage.
The water current helps to remove the solid wastes from the cage quickly. However a high water velocity is disadvantageous for cage fish culture for the following reasons:
- a large part of the food can be washed away
- the fish is forced to swim causing energy waste
- the regular shape of the cage is deformed (the useful water volume is decreased by the current)
According to some authors, water velocity in cage fish culture should not exceed 40 cm/sec.
The prevailing wind has to be taken into account during site selection as well. It may have a good effect on the water exchange by generating surface water current, however if it is too strong the cages should be placed in a sheltered water area or have to be protected by breakwaters.
2.2 Environmental Considerations
2.2.1 Effects of cage fish farming on the environment
2.2.2 Effects of the environment on cage fish farming
2.2.3 Service and operational considerations
When a cage fish farm is established, one has to consider the effect of the farm on the environment and on the other hand the effect of the environment on the farm activity.
2.2.1 Effects of cage fish farming on the environment
In flowing water (especially when large structures are placed in shallow water) the cages tend to act as a floating barrier causing differences in speed, direction and eddies as well.
However the most discussed question is the effect of cage fish farming on water quality. It is a fact that in those waters where cage fish farms are operating, deposition of bottom sediment can occur, including the undesirable build-up of waste materials (uneaten food, metabolic wastes).
Cage fish farming activity however, can be done in conformity with the requirements of the environment, taking into account the following considerations:
- The size of the cage culture plant and thus the volume of the production has to be adjusted to the conditions provided by the given water body.
- Proper feeding technology should be applied with special respect to the following:
feed quantity
feed quality
feeding method
The quantity of feed should be adjusted properly according to the water temperature and the condition of the fish. Overfeeding should be avoided.
The feed should be water stable and easily acceptable by the fish. First of all dry, pelleted food is recommended. In cage fish culture automatic feeders are recommended.
- Aeration can also be applied in order to improve the environmental conditions.
- The water body outside of the cages can be stocked with certain species of fish in order to control the growth of plankton and benthic organisms.
- The sediment accumulated under the cages can be removed by a submersible pump.
2.2.2 Effects of the environment on cage fish farming
Among the different effects of the environment on cage fish farming, two major factors have to be noted, namely the damage caused by predators and poaching.
The cage can be protected against birds with a top cover. A double net can be installed in order to protect the fish stock from predators like rats, otters, turtles, etc.
These animals can be kept away by a dog as well if there is a walkway for the dog along the cages.
The cage fish farm has to be protected against poachers by ensuring permanent guarding. Some electrical anti-poaching devices can also be used.
2.2.3 Service and operational considerations
The shore facilities of a cage fish culture plant should be accessible by a paved road. Electric energy supply and the market as well have to be taken into account. The required labour has to be available at the site.
3. THE MAIN PARTS OF A CAGE FARM
3.1 Netting
3.2 Floats
3.3 Frame
3.4 Mooring
3.5 Shore Facilities
Several types and sizes of cages have been designed and used widely, as shown in Figures 1 to 5. However there are general considerations that have to be taken into account during the design.
Figure 1. Cages with flexible nylon netting
Figure 2. Cages with rigid netting a)
Figure 2. Cages with rigid netting b)
Figure 3. Octagonal cage designed in Norway
Figure 4. Submersible cages
Figure 5. Rotating cages
One consideration is the fish species because of its general behaviour, feeding response, tolerance to high stocking density etc. Its age and size influence the design of the cage as well. On the other hand the cage must allow for easy feeding, grading treatment and harvesting of stocks.
3.1 Netting
The netting has three major functions as follows: keeping the fish stock together; protecting the stocks against harmful external influences; allowing free water exchange between the inside and outside water.
The most commonly used netting material is flexible nylon since it is relatively inexpensive and it can be treated with chemicals against anti-fouling (Figure 1). Rigid netting material (e.g., rigid plastic, galvanized or plastic coated steel) are also used in some cases (Figure 2).
The mesh size should be as large as possible, taking into account the fish size. The larger the mesh size the better the oxygen supply of the stocks and the fouling problems are less as well. The fouling of the net should be avoided by regular cleaning or by replacing it. Heavy fouling reduces the water exchange through the net wall and thus causes oxygen depletion inside the cage; increases the net drag requiring large and more expensive mooring; increases labour requirement in cleaning and replacing the net.
3.2 Floats
The floats should keep all the floating devices (netting with frame, feeder, walkway, etc.) safely on the water surface. Empty barrels, plastic containers or styrofoam bodies can be used for that purpose, but specially designed air or foam filled plastic floats are also readily available. In Figure 6 an inflatable plastic float can be seen. There are special floats with variable buoyancy so that the position of the cage can be changed in the water body.
3.3 Frame
The frame can be made of galvanized steel, aluminium, timber and different plastic materials. The frame should be mechanically strong, resistant against corrosion, and easily repairable or replaceable. For fixing the different frame elements together special joints have to be used. A special joint can be seen in Figure 7. The applied rubber and hemp hose ensure flexible connection between the adjoining cages. Although the feeder is not a real part of the frame structure, one has to provide for the mounting and easy operation of a feeder during the design.
3.4 Mooring
Although the criteria of the mooring system of fresh water cages are not as high as in the case of heavy sea conditions, the mooring system should be strong enough to hold the cages and the connected floating facilities in position in all weather conditions.
In shallow water the cages can be tied to a pile driven into the bottom. In deep waters the cages can be moored with various configurations of anchors, cables and floats as illustrated in Figure 8.
3.5 Shore Facilities
The shore facilities usually involve:
building or shed for feed storage and feed preparation
store for equipment and materials with a separate compartment for fuel storage
building for the staff with small size workshop
landing stage for boats
harvesting place
Figure 6. Inflatable plastic float
Figure 7
Figure 8. Mooring system
4. RESULTS OF THE CAGE FISH CULTURE EXPERIMENTS IN HUNGARY
4.1 Culture of Common Carp (Cyprinus Carpio) in Net Cages
4.2 Net Cage Culture of Sheatfish (Silurus Glanis)
4.3 Net Cage Culture of Bester (a hybrid of Huso huso × Acipenser ruthenus)
4.4 Biculture of Sheatfish (Silurus glanis) and Silver Carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix) in a Net Cage
4.5 Net Cage Polyculture of Carp and Herbivorous Fish
4.6 Fish Polyculture in an Enclosure
4.1 Culture of Common Carp (Cyprinus Carpio) in Net Cages
Experiments with cage culture of common carp showed that different Hungarian carp land races can adapt well to these new, crowded conditions.
In experiments with common carp fry performed in 1975 two cages were used. The production during the 172 day-long culturing period was 24.2 kg/m^3 and 42.5 kg/m^3 in the two cages placed in faster (50-60 cm/sec) and slower (3-4 cm/sec) water current respectively (Table 1).
Pelleted feed with identical composition (raw protein, 28.85 percent; starch value, 743 g/kg, 12.525 kJ) was applied in both cages.
Feed loss, however, was higher in the case of the first cage, due to the fast current which, at the same time unfavourably changed the shape of the net cage in the water, reducing its useful capacity. The fast current forced the fish to swim constantly which required increased energy, resulting in an energy consumption 20 percent higher for 1 g/kg weight increase. (20 cm/sec water current was found to be optimal by German researchers.)
During experiments to culture market-size common carp a stocking density of 1 200-1 500/cage was found optimal in the case of healthy, sturdy carp fry with 250-500 g body weight.
The fish adapt to the new conditions within 5-10 days. Feeding must be done regularly in the same hour of the day, avoiding any excess movement or activity which may irritate the fish (stepping on the plank, drawing of the feeding tray or net, bumping of the boat to the buoys etc.).
Feed can be given on feeding trays twice or three times a day, or with demand feeders. Application of demand feeders in our experiment performed in 1979, resulted in a 0.8 kg increase in feed conversion rate. In another experiment in 1982, a production of 576 kg could be achieved with automated feeder.
The initial value of daily food ration is expressed in percent of fish body weight. The daily food ration is 2-5 percent of the body weight of fish, which naturally depends on environmental factors too, first of all on the temperature and dissolved oxygen (DO) content of water.
4.2 Net Cage Culture of Sheatfish (Silurus Glanis)
Sheatfish fry can be adapted to the highly stocked enclosure in 10-12 days. Feeding was made twice a day with pelleted feed of 3 mm particle size, manufactured at the Feed Mill of the Institute (Szarvas). The pellet consisted of 10 percent trash fish, 40-50 percent slaughterhouse waste material (liver, spleen, lung, etc.), 40-50 percent concentrate (vitamins, mineral premix, cereals - wheat, rye, rice extracted soy and alfalfa meal - according to our own prescription). The slaughterhouse waste material not only ensured cheap animal protein, but increased the water stability of the pellet by 2-4 hours.
The daily food ration was 2-4 percent of the actual body weight of the fish. The polyethylene feeding trays (800 × 500 × 100 mm) were bordered with a 300 mm net, so that the fish could not sweep the pellet off the tray. The tray was fixed in the middle of the cage, 1-1.2 m in the water, so that the fish could swim freely under it.
The optimal feed consumption and weight gain was experienced at 20-24°C and 6-10 mg/l oxygen content.
In our experiment of 1974, sheatfish fry of 23 g reached 275 g body weight in a 165 day-long culturing period, while in 1975 sheatfish fry with 49 g initial body weight were 250 g at the end of a 175 day-long culturing period.
In another experiment in 1976 (Table 2) fish were cultured in two phases. Ninety sheatfish fry stocked in 1 m^3 on 10 May were transferred to another bigger cage on 31 June, where the density was 30 individuals/m^2 only.
The best weight gain, i.e., 20.1 kg/m^2 was experienced at a stocking density of 94 individuals/m^2.
The netting of the cages was cleaned of algae and bio-fouling with a strong brush once a fortnight. To prevent Ichthyophtirius multifillius infestation regular (monthly) flush was applied in a solution of malachite-green (1 mg/l) and formalin (0.2 ml/l). In our experiments performed in 1976 and 1977, Flexibacter columnaris caused disease, which, it was discovered, could be overcome with feeding medicated feed. The feed contained 1% Neo-Te-Sol (a Hungarian-made antibiotic complex of 18% oxytetracycline, hydrochlorocid, 12% neomycinum sulfuricum and 70% saccharose).
A 5-day-long feeding period with the medicated pellet was followed by a 5-day-break and feeding again proved to be a successful strategy, the mortality rate being 33% in the untreated cages, and 1-1.5% in the treated ones.
For the undisturbed growth and prevention of stress effects, reference may be made to the section on carp culture.
4.3 Net Cage Culture of Bester (a hybrid of Huso huso × Acipenser ruthenus)
One-year-old bester - having been reared in a net cage for 1 year - were stocked with an average individual weight of 80 g (58-113 g) into a floating net cage locally constructed from galvanized metal bars and synthetic netting of 5 mm mesh, with a frame of 2 × 2 and placed into the water 1.6 m deep.
Feed pellet with 3 mm particles was put on synthetic feeding trays, as described with sheatfish, twice a day. Feed ration was 2-5% of the actual body weight of the fish as a function of temperature and oxygen content of the water. The feed consumption was satisfactory and the growth can be fully attributed to artificial feed. The pellet contained trash fish paste, boiled slaughterhouse wastes (liver, spleen, lung, etc.) mineral and vitamin premix, extracted soy-meal, fish and meat-meal, with the following values: raw protein: 53,4%, fat: 8.22%, ash: 9.44%, moisture content: 10.7%.
The best weight gain of bester was at 18-23°C temperature and an oxygen content of water higher than 6 mg/l. There was a dramatic decrease in the appetite of fish, however, if DO content decreased below this value.
DO content of 3 mg/l or less resulted in considerable mortality. The best production in a culturing period was achieved with a stocking density of 44 individuals/m^2, where the weight was the highest (40 kg/m^2) as well. An extremely favourable feed conversion rate was obtained (2.78), together with good weight growth rate (9.42).
Bester fry adapted well to this intensive culturing system. No bacterial, parasitic or other type of diseases led to any losses. The average loss during the culturing period, i.e., 13%, was caused by a temporary oxygen depletion in two cages.
The bester with an average stocking weight of 86 g reached 583 g with an individual weight gain of 3.2 g/day/4% during a 5-month-long culturing period in net cages.
4.4 Biculture of Sheatfish (Silurus glanis) and Silver Carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix) in a Net Cage
Favourable experience was obtained in an experiment performed in 1978 with sheatfish fingerling and 2-summer-old silver carp in biculture. During the 160 days of the culturing period, the sheatfish and silver carp fingerlings grew from 62.5 to 297 g, and from 300 to 600 g, respectively. Stocking rate was 80% sheatfish and 20% silver carp, altogether 37 individuals.
Table 1 Results of the Cage Culture Experiments with Two-Summer-Old Carp in 1975
Cage in fast current 50-60 cm/sec
Cage in slow current 3-4 cm/sec
Date of stocking
7 May
7 May
Stocking rate (fish/m^2)
Stocking rate (fish/m^3)
Initial average weight (g)
Stocking weight (kg/m^2)
Stocking weight (kg/m^3)
Date of harvesting
22 October
22 October
Harvested number (fish/m^2)
Harvested number (fish/m^3)
Harvested weight (kg/m^2)
Harvested weight (kg/m^3)
Average weight (g)
Weight gain (kg/m^2)
Weight gain (kg/m^3)
Individual daily increment (g/day)
Number of feeding days
Feed conversion rate
Weight gain coefficient
Survival rate (%)
Number of cages: 2 floating cages, 3 × 4 × 1.6 m impregnated perlon netting
Table 2 Results of Cage Culture Experiments with Two-Suimner-Old Sheatfish Fingerlings in 1976
Phase I
Phase II
Total
of growing season
Date of stocking
10 May
1 August
Stocking rate (fish/m^2)
Stocking rate (fish/m^3)
Initial average weight (g)
Stocking weight (kg/m^2)
Stocking weight (kg/m^3)
Date of harvesting
31 July
4 September
Harvested number (fish/m^2)
Harvested number (fish/m^3)
Harvested weight (kg/m^2)
Harvested weight (kg/m^3)
Average weight (g)
Weight gain (kg/m^2)
Weight gain (kg/m^3)
Individual daily increment (g/day)
Number of feeding days
Feed conversion rate:
average
extremes
Weight gain coefficient
Survival rate (%)
Number and type of cages:
First phase - 5 floating cages, 2 × 2 × 1.6 m impregnated perlon netting
Second phase - 5 floating cages, 4 × 4 × 1.8 m impregnated perlon netting
Sheatfish fingerling in monoculture with the same density grew from 58 to 245 g. In biculture, i.e., sheatfish together with silver carp, there was a better survival rate (+ 5-10%). Moreover the biofouling was eliminated by silver carp.
4.5 Net Cage Polyculture of Carp and Herbivorous Fish
In this type of polyculture mostly young fish were cultured. Of the stocked fish, 33% was common carp (Cyprinus carpio), 17% bighead carp (Aristichthys nobilis), and 50% silver carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix), altogether 188 fish/m^2. Feeding was done twice daily as previously described.
During the 169 day-long culturing period the carp fry grew from 123 to 500 g, the bighead carp from 18 to 115 g and the silver carp from 17.3 to 126 g.
Growth of common carp was the same as experienced and described with monoculture.
The weight gain of herbivorous fish, however, was 50% behind the value obtained with fish cultured in a fish pond owing to the lack of natural food. The survival of carp was 98-100%, that of the silver carp and bighead carp, 83-97% (average 90%) and 88-99 (average 94%) respectively.
The production calculated for 1 m^2 ranged between 22.3.35.3 kg, 35-50% of which was herbivorous fish. Lower value than expected was obtained with silver carp because some of them escaped by jumping over the 40 cm high netting of the cage above the water surface. When culturing silver carp in an enclosure, the cage should either be made with a higher netting wall or it should be covered.
4.6 Fish Polyculture in an Enclosure
A 0.2 ha-sized part of the experimental oxbow lake of the Institute was surrounded by a solid wall on the long side and wire-mesh fences on the shorter sides. The water depth during the growing season was 1.2 to 1.3 m and about 1 m of water flowed through this enclosure per second.
As the flow rate depended on the needs of irrigated farming in the region, artificial aeration was also ensured in order to prevent damage caused by oxygen deficiencies. Two demand feeders with a volume of 100 1 each were provided for the distribution of the pellet feed. The feed contained 23.8% of crude protein, 5.6% of crude fibre, 4.9% of crude fat, its starch value was 668 and its calculated energy content was 2 354 kcal.
Polyculture was used for raising market fish in this enclosure. The stocking density was 46 870 fish/ha, 75% of which was common carp, 12.8% silver carp, 8.5% bighead, 3.2% grass carp and 0.5% tench, wels, and pike perch.
After a 152-day growing season the gross fish yield reached 40.45 tons/ha and the net yield reached 29.62 tons/ha. The feed conversion rate was 3.22 and the survival rate, 98.9 percent.
In previous years, hand feeding, and later, automatic feeders, were used in the same enclosure. The fish became accustomed to using the demand feeders in 10 days. Compared to the results achieved in previous years, it can be demonstrated that the introduction of demand feeders improved the feed conversion rate by 0.5 to 0.8.
<section>g</section>
Chapter 15 Recirculatig Systems and Re-use of Water in Aquaculture
J. Kepenyes
Fish Culture Research institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. INTRODUCTION
2. DESIGN OF RECIRCULATION SYSTEMS
3. THE PROPER UTILIZATION OF CAPACITY
4. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
5. REFERENCES
1. INTRODUCTION
The term "Recirculation system" or "recycling system" is used for that type of cultivation unit in which the outflow of the rearing tanks or ponds is partially or completely recirculated to them. Some other terms like "reconditioning system" and "reuse system" are also used to describe the same system.
There are two general types of water recirculation systems: the simple recirculation system and the complex recirculation system. These systems differ from the single-pass system that is shown in Figure la, where Q represents water flow rate required to ensure proper oxygen supply for the animals in the rearing unit, and where Q = 1.0 is the flow rate that is required for a given population (W) in the rearing unit.
Another single-pass system is shown in Figure 1b where pure oxygen is added directly to the rearing unit.
A simple recirculation system is one where the water supply that is needed to support a certain animal population is decreased by employing aeration and/or water treatment. Sometimes there is no treatment in this system at all.
Figure 1c shows a simple recirculation system with external aeration.
In the complex recirculation system a high reduction of water supply can be achieved by employing a water treatment unit, which besides employing re-aeration and mechanical filtration, at least one biological treatment is used. An example of a complex recirculation system is shown in Figure Id where the water supply needed to support a given fish population is reduced to one-tenth of that needed in a single-pass system. In recently developed complex recirculation systems more internal by-pass water cycles can be found, as is shown in Figure 2. These systems usually are semi-closed or quasi-closed systems. The term "closed system" is used when the water is supplied only for filling and to replace evaporation. A common aquarium with a bottom sand-filter may be described as a closed system.
2. DESIGN OF RECIRCULATION SYSTEMS
2.1 Design of Oxygen Supply
2.2 Design for Ammonia Removal
2.3 Design of Complex Recirculation Systems
2.4 Calculation of Water Requirement
2.5 Other Design Criteria
2.1 Design of Oxygen Supply
In designing the oxygen supply, maintenance of the required oxygen concentration in the fish tanks and replacement of the consumed oxygen in the system should be taken into account. The design of the oxygen supply is based on the material balance equation which derived from Figure 3.
Assuming stabilized conditions, the balanced equation on oxygen concentration is as follows:
QC[AO]-QC[A] ^+ K[L]a (C[s] - C[A]) V + (C[aout] + C[A]) Q[r] - m[A]W = 0
where
Q = supplemental water or make-up water (m[3]/d)
Q[r] = recycled water (m^3/d)
C[AO] = oxygen concentration of inflow water (g/m^3)
C[A] = concentration of the water in the fish tanks (g/m^3).
Presuming perfect mixing, this is equal to the oxygen concentration of the outflow water
C[Aout] = oxygen concentration of water outflowing from the aerator placed in the recycled water (g/m^3)
C[s] = saturation oxygen concentration (g/m^3)
K[L]a = oxygen transfer coefficient of the aerator placed in the fish tank (d)
V = useful water volume of the fish tanks (m^3)
W = mass of fish in the fish tank (kg)
m[A] = specific oxygen consumption, expressing the oxygen consumption of unit mass of fish per unit of time (g/kg/d).
Figure 1a. Single-pass system
Figure 1b. Simple recirculation system with aeration
Figure 1c. Simple recirculation system using direct injection of oxygen
Figure 1d. Complex recirculation system
Figure 2. Advanced quasi closed multiple cycle system
Figure 3. Aeration scheme in recirculation system
The following coefficients are introduced:
Recycling rate:
Fish density (kg/m^3):
Oxygen deficiency
In the fish tank (g/m^3):
D = C[s] - C[A]
In the inflow water (g/m):
D[0] = C[s] - C[A0]
Efficiency of aeration of the aerator placed in the recycled water:
Value, characterizing the oxygen content of the inflow water:
Specific water flow, which is the supplemental water per unit mass of fish (m^3/d/kg):
By rearranging equation (1) and introducing the above mentioned coefficients, the following equation for designing oxygen supply in the recirculation systems can be formulated:
The correlation between the aeration efficiency (X[A]) of the aerator placed in the recirculated water and the oxygen transfer coefficient applied to characterize aeration (K[L]a[r]) is shown below:
where:
K[L]a[r] = the daily oxygen transfer coefficient (d) of the aerator placed in the recycled water
V[A] = useful capacity (m) of the aerator placed in the recycled water.
Equation (9) can be applied not only for designing recirculation systems but for all the intensive systems as well. Special applications of this equation include the following:
i) Recirculation system, where there is no aeration in the fish tank (K[L]a = 0):
ii) The same situation as in case i) but where the inflow water is saturated with oxygen (K[L]a = 0):
iii) Flow-through system, where aeration is applied into the fish tank itself (Z = 0)
iv) Flow-through system without aeration (Z = 0; K[L]a = 0):
v) Flow-through system without aeration, but the inflow water is saturated with oxygen (Z = 0; K[L]a = 0; X[A0] = 1):
2.2 Design for Ammonia Removal
In designing ammonia removal, two main considerations should be taken into account:
1) the concentration of toxic nitrogen compounds should not exceed lethal levels, and
2) the toxic nitrogen compounds should be removed or transformed to non-toxic or less toxic materials. To accomplish these ends, a biological purification system which transforms the toxic nitrogen compounds to non-toxic forms should be installed into the recycling system.
Ammonia and organic nitrogen compounds are excreted by the fish in the process of metabolism. The nitrogen compounds are transformed into ammonia by heterotrophic microorganisms. Ammonia in turn is oxidized into nitrite and then to nitrate by nitrifying bacteria.
Ammonia in its un-ionized form is highly toxic to fish. The biological filter installed therefore would provide sufficient surface area to allow for attachment of adequate quantities of nitrifying bacteria needed to convert ammonia into non-toxic or less toxic nitrogen compounds.
A part of ammonia excreted through the gills of fish and originating from the decomposition of organic compounds in the water is transformed to ionized form as follows:
Figure
depends on the temperature (9) and the pH value.
The design for ammonia removal in recirculation systems is similar to that of oxygen supply as described in section 2.1. Theoretical scheme of the system is shown in Figure 4, in which, under stable conditions, the following equation can be derived:
C[B0] - C[B]Q - (C[bout] - C[B])Q[r] + m[A]W = 0
where:
C[B0] = total concentration of ammonia-nitrogen of the inflow water (g/m^3)
C[B] = total concentration of ammonia-nitrogen of the water in the fish tanks (g/m^3)
C[Bout] = total ammonia-nitrogen concentration outflowing from the biological filter (g/m^3)
m[B] = specific ammonia-nitrogen excretion of fish per unit of time (g/kg/d).
Coefficients (2) and (8) can also be applied here, and the following can be introduced:
i) Efficiency of biological purification system (X[B]):
ii) Figure characterizing the ammonia content of the inflow water (X[B0]):
Figure 4. Theoretical scheme of ammonia removal in recirculation system
Figure 5. (a & b) Flow-through system without aeration
Figure 5c. Flow-through system with aeration
Figure 5d. Flow-through system using pure oxygen
Figure 5e. Aeration scheme in recirculation system
Figure 6. Complex recirculation system with aeration and biofilter
By re-arranging/regrouping equation (17) and by applying coefficients (2), (8), (18) and (19) the following equation can be formulated:
where
q[B] = specific water flow.
It can be seen that this equation formally agrees with equation (11).
Special applications of equation (20)
i) Recirculation system, where the inflow water does not contain ammonia(X[B] = 1):
ii) Flow-through system (Z = 0):
iii) Flow-through system, where the inflow water does not contain ammonia (Z = 0; X[B0] = 1) or compounds easily transformable to ammonia:
2.3 Design of Complex Recirculation Systems
The term "complex recirculation system" is used for that type of cultivation unit, in which a biological filter and an aerator (Figure 6) are both installed. When the ammonia removal is desired equation (20) can be applied.
When oxygen is supplied the quantity of oxygen needed for oxidation of ammonia to nitrite, then to nitrate, in the biological purification system also must be provided.
The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biological filter can be determined, using the following equation:
aQ[r]C[B]X[B] = (C[Aout] - C[A])Q[r]
where
a = the quantity of oxygen needed for oxidation of a unit quantity of NH[3] - N to NO[3] - N. Its value is 4.0 .... 4.6.
While biological filters can be considered as aerators the efficiency of aeration can be calculated using the following equation:
Their efficiency, however, is negative, thus the negative sign showing oxygen consumption. Positive efficiency on the other hand is provided by aerators.
The resultant efficiency (X.) of these aerators can be calculated by the following formula:
X[A] = X[A1] - X[A2]X[A2] + X[A2]
where:
X[A1] = efficiency of the biological filter as an aerator
X[A2] = efficiency of aerator placed in the recirculation unit
To illustrate the above, determination of the different values are given below:
Basic data:
Temperature of inflow and rearing water 9 = 20°C
Concentration of hydrogen ions pH = 8
Saturation O[2] concentration at 9 = 20°C (from a table)
C =9.0 g/m^3 s
Ratio of nitrogen forms at q = 20°C and at pH = 8 (from a table)
f = 0.04
Required oxygen concentration in the fish tanks
C[A] = 4.0 g/m^3
Oxygen concentration in the inflow water C[A0] = 8 g/m^3
Allowable free ammonia concentration in the fish tank in ammonia-nitrogen
Free ammonia concentration in the inflow water
Specific ammonia excretion of fish m[B] = 1.125 g/kg/d
Specific oxygen consumption of fish m[A] = 12 g/kg/d
Example 1
Flow-through system without aeration, where the inflow water is saturated with oxygen and does not contain ammonia (Figure 5a).
a) Design of oxygen supply
Oxygen deficiency in the fish tank (equation (4):
D = C[s]- C[A] = 9.0 - 4.0 = 5.0 g/m^3
Specific water flow (equation (15):
b) Design of ammonia removal
Allowable total ammonia nitrogen concentration (equation (16):
Specific water flow (equation (23):
As q[A] > q[B] requirements should be fulfilled thus
q = q[A] = 2.4 m^3/d/kg
Example 2
a) Design of oxygen supply (equations (5), (7) and (14))
b) Design of ammonia removal (equations (16), (19) and (22):
Example 3
Where the specific flow-through water is to be kept at a lower value determined for ammonia q[A] = q[B] = 1.0 m^3/d/kg, in which case aeration is needed the process can be carried out by three different methods:
a) Aeration in the fish tanks (equation (13)) where fish density:
S = 35 kg/m^3 (Figure 5c)
For necessary oxygen transfer coefficient of aerator (equation (9)):
b) Increase of oxygen content of inflow water (formula 14)) when
Supply is needed where
D[0] = D (1 - X[A0]) = 5 (1 - 2.4) = 7.0 g/m^3
and
C[A0] = C[s] - D[0] = 9.0 + 7.0 = 16.0 g/m^3
which means that inflow water is to be oversaturated by 16.0/9.0 = 1.78 = 178% oxygen. This, however can be carried out only by addition of pure oxygen (Figure 5d).
c) Aeration in the recycled water (Figure 5e) where efficiency of the aerator (X[A]) equals 0.75:
circulation rate can be achieved (equation (11)) if water flow through the fish tanks is:
q[A total] = q[A] (1 +Z) = 1 (2.13 +1) = 3.13 m^3/h/kg
In sequentially constructed systems, if we take X[A] equal to X[A0] and Z a whole number, then in the present example X[A] = X[A0] = 0.8 and Z = 2.
Then
This is the specific water flow of the system, as also
q = qA = qB = 1.0 m^3 . d . kg (see 2.3, example 2b)
As described in the system shown in Figure 7a, dividing the fish tank into parts Z + 1 (in this case into three parts) parallel to the direction of the water flow, and the aerator into Z parts (in this case into two parts) and supplying water according to Figure 7b it is obvious that Figure 7b can be laid out according to Figure 7c, and a sequentially constructed system results.
Example 4
Complex recirculation systems where a biological filter and an aerator are installed into the recirculated water (see Figure 6).
If in this example the circulation rate Z = 15 and the efficiency of biological filter X[B] = 0.7, specific supplemental water for ammonia (formula 20)) is:
Water flow in the fish tank is:
q[B] (Z + 1) = 1.28 m^3/d/kg
Water flow through the recirculation unit is:
q[B]Z = 1.2 m^3/d/kg
Figure 7. Sequentially constructed systems
Required efficiency (q[B] = q[A]) of aeration (aerator + biological filter) is:
The biological filter needs oxygen, the quantity of which is:
Efficiency of aeration: (see formula (24))
Required efficiency of aerator (formula (25)) is:
Oxygen concentration of the water outflowing from the aerator is:
Cs - (1 - X[A]) D = 9 - (1 - 1.95) 5 = 13.75 g/m^3, which is equal to 13.75/9.00 = 1.53 = 153% oversaturation
2.4 Calculation of Water Requirement
Water requirement of different fish culture systems, termed specific water requirement (v), is the amount of water needed for production of a unit mass of fish flesh:
To calculate this figure, a value for specific growth rate (G) is needed. This can be determined as follows:
where
G = specific growth rate (g/kg/d)
W = mass of fish (kg)
If value G is not constant during the growing season, its average can be calculated by the following formula:
where
W[0]= initial weight of fish (kg)
W[T] = mass of fish at the end of growing season (kg)
T = growing season (d)
The specific water requirement (m^3/g) can be calculated when the specific water flow (q) and the specific growth rate (G) are known, as follows:
or
where
q = specific water flow (m^3/kg/d) according to calculation in the previous chapter
Specific water requirement calculated for the systems shown in example 2.3 can be seen in Table 1 where it is presumed that G = 20 g/kg/d.
Table 1 Water Requirement of Different Fish Culture Systems Assuming that G (Specific Growth Rate) = 20 g/kg/d
Denomination
Reference section
m^3/d/kg
m^3/kg
Flow-through system supplied with oxygen saturated supplemental water free of ammonia
2.3 ex. 1
Flow-through system (when the supplying water is not oxygen saturated and contains some ammonia)
2.3 ex. 2
Flow-through system with aeration of the fish tank or with application of pure oxygen
2.3 ex. 3 a & b
Recirculation system with aerator
2.3 ex. 3c
Complex recirculation system
2.3 ex. 4
2.5 Other Design Criteria
When the circulation rate is chosen (Z), the following facts must be taken into account:
a) The supplemental water of the recirculation system (Q) must make up for all water losses in the system, such as seepage water, evaporation, back washing of the filters, etc.
b) Other products of metabolism must not reach toxic concentration for the fish. Nitrate concentration in the fish tanks can be calculated by the following equation:
where:
Example: If the nitrate concentration of the inflow water in the system described in 2.3, example 4 is:
then
3. THE PROPER UTILIZATION OF CAPACITY
In a fish production system the initial fish mass (W[0]) reaches W[t] value during the culture period (T) (see Figure 8).
It is presumed that the specific growth rate (G) and the specific water requirement (q) are constant during the growing season, in which case the specific water requirement on the basis of equation (26) is:
where
V = the theoretically needed water volume (m^3) for growing the fish mass (W[T] - W[0])
On the basis of equation (30) and equation (32) the volume of water theoretically provided during the growing season is:
(m^3)
The water volume flowing through the system is:
Q = qW
(m^3/d)
and theoretically must increase in relation to the increasing mass of fish. It reaches the highest value at the end of the growing season, when W = W[T].
(m^3/d)
The water supply system (water intake, pumps, pipelines) must be designed for the maximum water flow. In most of the fish production systems the flow-through water is not modified during the growing season, it is constantly at a value determined by equation (34). In this case the amount of water utilized during the growing season is:
V¢ = qW[T]T
(m^3)
Figure 8. Diagrams of fish production and water requirements
The ratio of amounts of water determined by equations (33) and (34) shows the relationship between the theoretically needed and the actually utilized amount of water. This ratio is called utilization coefficient.
By using this correlation and after simplification, the following equation can be derived:
or
In the above cases, there is only one stocking and one harvest in a rearing unit. The utilization coefficient is arrived at assuming that fish reached the mass upon complete utilization of the system at the end of the culture period (T). Utilization can be increased by raising the fish through a number of stages (n).
Where stocking of fish is done in T/n = 2 stages, the first batch W[0] is put in the first tank group and is reared there for T/n time. After this period the first group is transferred into the second tank while a second stock material W[0] replaces the first lot in the first tank, etc.
Figure 9 gives an example when n = 3.
Utilization coefficient of an n value can be calculated by substituting T of the previous equation with T/n value.
Example:
For different n values and assuming G = 20 g/kg/d and T = 150 d, the utilization coefficient is:
Figure 9. Diagrams of fish production and water requirement in complex recirculation system
The specific water requirement of the complex recirculation system described in example 4, section 2.3 is:
v = 4 m^3/kg
The practical specific water requirement at constant water flow is:
and
4. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
The following factors should be noted when designing a system in a given location:
1) Availability of supplemental water
The quality and temperature of water should be constant (i.e. the well should be founded either on subsoil - or bank filtered water).
2) Disposal of effluent water
Effluent water is made up of:
rinsing water (from the purification units), washing water (containing disinfecting chemicals) and sewage water.
Sewage and washing water can be connected into the sewage system or collected and then disposed of. Washing water should be neutralized before disposal.
Energy supply, thermal and electric
To provide thermal energy it is advised to use cheap natural hydrothermal or industrial waste heat energy from effluent water of power stations where possible. If the quality of the natural thermal water is not suitable for fish culture, it should be utilized with a heat-exchange or heat pump system. A two-directional electric energy supply or motor generator back-up unit will ensure continuous operation of the system.
Other facilities
1. Road
A paved single lane road will be needed for easy transportation, servicing, etc.
2. Building
The building houses the following:
culturing unit, including tanks and troughs; control room for water control; purification, energy supply, aeration; service rooms (changing room, office, laboratory, food-preparation, store-room, aggregate room).
3. Technological parts
- Fish tanks of 100 l to 2 m^3 volume for proper stocking of different species, preferably of polyethylene with adjustable water level;
- concrete pipe lines with gravity system to collect waste water;
- sedimentation tank possibly with direct disposal of the water (without extra water lifting);
- biological filter;
- water purifying unit to rinse the filter system and to keep the reserve water;
- ventilation, aeration - preferably with liquid oxygen. Facilities using atmospheric oxygen should be designed so that oxygen-saturated water enters the system. In the tanks the possibility of local aeration should be ensured as well;
- water disinfecting facilities (ozonization, ultra-violet sterilizer, chlorination); pumps, air filters, compressors;
- pipes (polyethylene), profiles, mountings.
4. Other provisions
- heating
- ventilation;
- illumination;
- lightning protection.
5. REFERENCES
Berka, R., B. Kujal and K. Lavicky, 1980, Recirculation systems in Eastern Europe. Paper presented to EIFAC Symposium. New developments in the utilization of heated effluents and recirculation systems for intensive aquaculture. Stavanger, Norway, 28 May - 3 June 1980. Rome, FAO, EIFAC/80/Symp. R./l4.2:22 p. (mimeo)
Colt, J.E. and D.A. Armstrong, 1981, Nitrogen toxicity to crustaceans, fish and molluscs. In Proceedings of the Bio-Engineering Symposium for fish culture, edited by L.J. Alien and E.C. Kinney. Bethesda, Maryland, Fish Culture Section of the American Fisheries Society, pp. 34-47
Kepenyes, J. and A. Ruttkay, 1983, Water requirement of fish production. In International Conference on water management and production potential in agriculture. Szarvas Hungary, pp. 90-100
Mayo, R.D., 1981, Recirculation systems in northern America. Schr. Bundesforschungsanst. Fisch., Hamb., (16/l7) Vol. 2 :329-42
Rosenthal, H., 1981, Recirculation systems in western Europe. Schr. Bundesforschungsanst. Fisch., Hamb.. (16/l7) Vol. 2:305-16
Spotte, S., 1979, Fish and invertebrate culture; water management in closed systems. New York Wiley-Interscience, 145 p. 2nd ed.
<section>h</section>
Chapter 16 Design of Pumping Stations
J. Kepenyes
Fish Culture Research Institute
Szarvas, Hungary
1. GROUPING OF PUMPING STATIONS
2. PUMP WELL
3. SETTING OF PUMPS
4. CHARACTERS OF PUMP SETTING
5. CAPACITY OF THE PUMP STATION
6. CALCULATION OF HEAD
7. PIPE SYSTEM IN THE PUMP HOUSE
8. VALVES
9. PUMPS
10. AUXILIARY FACILITIES
1. GROUPING OF PUMPING STATIONS
Pumping stations can be grouped as follows:
- pumping water from a water source such as a river;
- for lifting water (high quantity, low pressure) from a well;
- for pumping water into a supply system, elevated water tank or water tower;
- to increase pressure.
Pumping stations for the first two functions are generally of 2-20 m lifting capacity. Pumping stations for obtaining water from a water source have two types depending on the source:
- pumping from surface water (river, canal, lake, reservoir, etc.);
- pumping from subsurface water (soil water, deep seated spring, cavern water, spring water, marginal water, etc.) as shown on Figure 2.
For the water supply to fish ponds the first two types are the most commonly used. The construction of these two types are largely the same. The general arrangement of these two types are shown in Figures 1 and 3.
For the water supply to hatcheries, recirculation systems and central pumping stations of fish farms, pumps to catch subsurface water are used as shown in Figure 4.
A pressure intensifier device inserted into the water supply system compensates for lack of pressure, which can be done by:
- discharge air chamber (Figure 7 b)
- revolution control of the pumps (Figure 7 a).
2. PUMP WELL
Obstacles to the operation of the pump should be removed, such as branches, sand, pebbles, etc. The pump well for the inlet pipe should be furnished with a grid of 20 mm mesh in case of smaller pumps, and with a grid of 20-50 mm mesh in case of pumps with capacity higher than 1 000 l/sec. The inlet pipe of smaller pumps can be furnished with an inlet rose head for protection.
The size of the pump well should be ten times the water discharge/min. A pump well of bigger size may promote swirling of water.
The difference between the lowest possible water level in the pump well and the inlet part of the suction pipe, can be calculated as follows:
(m)
where
v = is velocity of water in the suction pipe (m/s)
g = 9.81 m/sec^2 gravitational acceleration.
Generally
h = 0.5 d[t] (m)
where
d[t] is the maximum diameter of the bell mouth entry but at least h = 0.3 m.
Figure 1. Pump houses
Figure 2. Pump wells
Figure 3. Pump houses
Figure 4. Deep tubewell
Pumps or suction pipes with a vertical shaft should not be arranged in series, since swirling of water at the first bell mouth entry may disturb the function of the others, An arrangement, where the water flows perpendicular to the centre line of the bell mouth entry is more favourable. The centre line of the bell mouth entry should be fairly close to the opposite wall of the inlet chamber (the optimal distance is 0.75 d[t]). Examples for optimal arrangement of pump wells are shown in Figures 5 and 6.
In cases of pumps with large delivery a guide cone should be inserted under the bell mouth entry on the bottom of the pump well so as to control the water stream. Thus the distance between the bell mouth entry and the bottom of the pump well is 0.8 to 1.0 d[t] (which is 0.35 to 0.5 d[t] without the guide cone).
3. SETTING OF PUMPS
There are three ways of setting, considering the type of pump and the inlet chamber.
(a) Pumps of vertical shaft sunk in the water of the pump well;
(b) pumps with vertical or horizontal shafts set in a dry chamber located beside the pump well;
(c) pump of generally horizontal shaft located above the water level.
Within the arrangement mentioned in (a) three further cases are possible:
- Pump is under water and the driving motor is above the water level
In this case the electric motor is directly joined to the vertical shaft of the pump and is located in a water-free, dry place. The advantage of this solution is the relatively small space-requirement (there is no suction pipe and foot valve) and the easy start and operation (priming is not needed because air can not penetrate into the suction pipe). Its shortcomings are, especially in case of a large level difference between the motor and the pump, the difficulties in fitting the bearings in the vertical shaft, loss in efficiency (due to the several guide bearings), increased corrosion, and difficulty of checking, maintenance and repair (the pump should be drained first). This setting is illustrated in Figure 1. In cases of small delivery sometimes flexible shaft-driven pumps can be used.
- Driving motor and main pump are above the water and the first stage under the water level
By applying a first stage submerged part, the pump gets inflow water. No priming is necessary before starting. The level of water delivery is controlled by the upper part, thus the pump in fact, has a double stage made up of a low-pressure (.submerged stage) and a higher-pressure stage. This solution partly eliminates the above-mentioned shortcomings, by having several advantages (power take-off shaft with lower capacity, main part of the pump is easy to maintain).
This solution is applied mostly to pumps of high pressure.
- Pump and driving motor under the water level
To these belong the submerged and deep-well pumps. Characteristic settings of these types of pumps are shown in Figure 4, where a submerged pump is set in a driven well, and in Figure 3, where a lifting submerged pump of high delivery is illustrated.
Installing and setting expenses of a pump placed separately in a dry chamber (cf. (b)) are high. Its mechanical construction, operation and maintenance, however, are more economical. The advantage of this arrangement is that no priming or foot valve is necessary. For automatic operation this is the most suitable solution.
Figure 5. Arrangements of pump wells
Figure 6. Arrangements of pump wells
Figure 7 a. Revolution control of pumps
Figure 7 b. Discharge air chamber
Pumps working above the inlet level (cf. also (c) above) are of mostly horizontal arrangement, with lower building and installation cost. Its disadvantage, beside suction difficulties (e.g. leakage, air - or gas development - caused water break, vacuum, cavitation), is that foot-valve and priming is necessary before starting - and all the extra costs coming from these difficulties, and in automatic starting. There are many pumps of this type working well with a suction head of 5-7 m, nevertheless, suction head higher than 3-4 m should be avoided.
4. CHARACTERS OF PUMP SETTING
The pump stations can be:
- permanently set or
- mobile (Figure 8).
A permanently set pump station should be used if:
(a) the pumping delivery is extremely high;
(b) the annual utilization of the pump station is high (close to 600 hrs);
(c) high operational safety is needed.
A mobile pump station should be used if:
(a) the use of the pump is occasional only, and the utilization is less than 200 hrs annually;
(b) the location of pumping is not permanent.
There is an in-between solution, a temporary set pump station, where the structural parts (tubes, mountings) are built, and the driving motor and pump are mobile.
5. CAPACITY OF THE PUMP STATION
The water delivering capacity, and thus the number of pumps, is defined by the amount of water to be pumped and its actual fluctuation in time and quantity (daily average, minimum or maximum).
The total capacity of a pump station should be established in such a way that the minimum water discharge is ensured even if several pumps are broken down.
The following Table gives data on the number of pump units and spares making up the total installation.
Table 1
Pump units
Total number
Delivery of spare pumps as a % of the total number
necessary for maximum delivery
for reserve
Figure 8. Mobile pump
The reserve pump is the so-called operational reserve ready to work. In small pump stations, where there is a proper staff, half of the spares are ready to work and the other half in store.
If no significant fluctuation can be expected in consumption, there are generally three pump units of the same delivery, two of them are operating and the third one is the reserve.
6. CALCULATION OF HEAD
6.1 Entrance Loss:
6.2 Resistance of Suction Screen
6.3 Resistance of Foot Valve
6.4 Pressure Loss Coming from Pipe Friction (h3)
6.5 Valves Built in the Pipeline (Gate Valve, Check Valve, etc.)
6.6 Pressure Loss from Inversion (h7)
To determine the total head of a pump, the geodetic level difference between the inlet-side and delivery-side water levels and the pressure affecting them (e.g. in a discharge air chamber) should be known as well as the various hydraulic losses during lifting.
(m)
where
H = total head (m)
h[g] = geodetic lifting level (m)
h[0] = entrance loss (m)
h[1] = resistance of the filter (m)
h[2] = resistance of the foot valve (m)
h[3] = loss by pipe friction (m)
h[4] = loss from increase in cross section (m)
h[5] = loss from reduction in cross section (m)
h[6] = loss from valves (m)
h[7] = loss from inversion (m)
P[s] = external pressure on the inlet-side water (Pa)
P[d] = external pressure on the delivery-side water (Pa)
r = density of water 1 000 kg/m^3
g = 9.81 m/sec^2 gravitational acceleration
If atmospheric pressure affects the water levels of both inlet and delivery sides the last item is:
6.1 Entrance Loss:
(m)
where
v = velocity of water on entering the inlet of the pump (m/sec)
x [0] = value in case of not rounded inlet part: 0.8 - 1.0; in case of properly rounded inlet 0.04, i.e. the entrance loss is practically equal to the value which is necessary to accelerate the water.
6.2 Resistance of Suction Screen
(m)
where
x [1] = value depends on the suction screen; according to preliminary calculation can be 2-3.
In case of a suction screen of proper size and shape with free surface this loss can be markedly reduced.
6.3 Resistance of Foot Valve
(m)
which is equal to the specific valve-loading, and the loss-factor is gradually decreasing along with the increasing velocity if the valve is automatic
if v = 1
then
x [2] = 6.9
6.4 Pressure Loss Coming from Pipe Friction (h3)
where
l = pipe friction constant
l = length of the pipe-line (m)
v = water velocity in the pipe (m/s)
d = inner diameter (m)
l = kinematic viscosity (m^3/sec) as a function of water temperature.
It is 1.3 . 10^6 at 10°C and 1 . 10^6 at 20°C
Pipe friction constant according to the latest research data should be calculated with consideration of R[e] and wall roughness of pipe. The International Congress on Water Supply held in Paris in 1952 accepted the formula of Colebrook for calculating the pipe-friction constant.
Which is
where
k= the absolute roughness of the pipe which can be selected from Table 2.
Values of pressure loss by pipe friction are determined with approximate equations, nomograms or tables. Figure 9 shows the resistance values in cases of steel and polyethylene pipes, while in Table 3 different approximate equations are collected.
Figure 9. Pipe flow diagrams
Table 2 Absolute values of pipe friction
Type of pipe
Condition of the pipe
k absolute roughness (mm)
drawn glass-, brass-, lead-, copper-, aluminium-, polyethylene pipes
new, with smooth wall
0 (glazed)
drawn steel pipe
new, with different smoothness
welded steel pipe
new
corroded
heavily corroded
up to 3.0
galvanized steel pipe
new
asbestos cement pipe
new
concrete pipe, tube from concrete
new concrete, with smoothing, prestressed
new, without smoothing
0.2-0.3 or
reinforced concrete mains with smoothing after few years operating
0.2-0.3 or above
In case of gradual (increasing) of cross-section (diffusor), the pressure loss is;
(m)
where the length of diffusor piece is at least six times the difference in diameters
x [4] = 0.15 - 0.24
v = the velocity value of the smaller cross-section
If the increase in cross-section is very sudden, i.e. Bordas's loss:
(m)
where
x [4] = 1.2 - 1.3
v[1] and v[2] are the velocity values belonging to the larger and smaller cross-sections, respectively.
In case of a reduction in cross-section (confusor) the pressure loss is:
(m)
where
x [5] = 0.02 - 0.05
v = the velocity measured at the narrowest section.
6.5 Valves Built in the Pipeline (Gate Valve, Check Valve, etc.)
(m)
the value of x [6], for a gate valve depends on A/A[0] where A is the whole, and A[0] is the gate-valve reduced cross section of the pipe.
If A/A[0] =
then
x [6] =
If a flap valve or regulating flap is used,x [6], values depending on the construction o installation of the flap valve or regulating flap are 1.0-10.0, where the higher values correspond to pipe diameter of 80-300 mm and the lower ones to the diameter of 400 mm or more. As an average, a value of 2-3 can be approximated, but the exact number can be give experimentally only.
For the x [6] value of a butterfly valve, denoting the angle between the plate of the valve and the axis of the pipe
If CT =
then
x [6 ]=
6.6 Pressure Loss from Inversion (h7)
In case of a bend in the pipe
(m)
where
x [7] depends on the relation of pipe diameter and radius r of the pipe bend midline, and on the central angle of the bent pipe, that is the degree of inversion.
Using a standard bend of 90° (r = d mm + 100 mm) x [7] = 0.2 if the angle of bending is
s = 22½°
then
x [7] = 0.045
If there is a direction-break (r = 0), the pressure loss in the pipe-line 2
(m)
where
x [7] = 0.7 - 1
s = the vectoral difference between the velocity values before (v[1]) and after (v[2]) the breaking point.
Practically speaking v[1] ^= v[2] = v, that is the cross-section of the pipe is constant, thus there is no change in the velocity.
If a = 22½°
then
s = 0.37 v
0.5 v
0.75 v
1.41 v
With T-profile - the pressure loss corresponds to a 90 direction-break
with Y-profile - the pressure loss is ¾ of the 90 direction-break.
Values given for pressure loss are related to clean water. With sandy or muddy water these values have to be increased according to the extent of pollution.
Table 3 Approximate calculation of pipe friction factor for different types of pipes
l A . d^a . R[e]^b
where
d = inner diameter of the pipe (m)
Type of pipe
Fault
A
a
b
Limit of application
Steel
New cast-iron
R[e] < 10^6 e
Concrete
0.0156 ha k = 0.4
0.0180 ha k = 0.7
0.218 ha k = 1.5
0.29 ha k = 4.0
Asbestos-cement
10^4 < R[e] <10°
k = 0.05
Due to the incidental cavitation, the total suction head (H) is very important, and can be calculated with the following formula:
(m)
where
h[sman] = pressure measured in the suction piece of the pump with manometer (m)
P[0] = atmospheric pressure (P[a])
v = velocity in the suction pipe (m/sec)
The static pressure (head) of the delivered water significantly changes while passing through the pump from the inlet to the outlet. The minimum overpressure is around the entrance of the impeller. Steam bubbles arise here, if the pressure of the delivered water decreases below the pressure value of saturated steam with the same temperature (cf. Table 4). In the course of energy conversion in the pump, the pressure increases again along the stream when the water is passing through the pump and when it exceeds the pressure of the steam the bubbles are crushed (cavitation) thus starting to destruct the impeller mechanically. To prevent cavitation at the inlet of the pump the minimum inflow pressure should be maintained.
Each pump has a minimum suction head value, at which it can still work. This value is always smaller than the atmospheric pressure value expressed in pressure head of the liquid to be delivered. This value is known in the Anglo-American literature as the necessary "net positive suction head" - that is the NPSH of a pump.
This value can be considered as a loss factor and must be always subtracted from the theoretical suction head. Manufacturing companies always indicate these values for different deliveries and revolutions, since along with the increase of delivery these values increase as well. To apply properly these values, the NPSH[a] value of the pump under the actual conditions should be calculated with the following formula:
(m)
where
h[s geod] = geodetic suction head (m)
h[s] = head loss on the inlet side (m)
P[d] = steam pressure of the liquid (P[a])
Checking of NPSH of a working system should be performed as follows:
(NPSH)[a] = H[s] - P[d]
(m)
NPSH[a] ³ NPSH is necessary for cavitation prevention and vibrationless operation.
The actual value of (NPSH)[a] necessary depends on the characteristics of the liquid, the total height of delivery, the rpm, the delivery and on the shape of the impeller.
7. PIPE SYSTEM IN THE PUMP HOUSE
A suction screen with as small resistance as possible should be used on the suction pipe. With suction pipes, especially if the pump is not of inflow system, it is very important to reduce the losses to achieve the lowest possible suction head and perfect sealing. Resistance of suction pipe can be reduced with an ample cross-section and short-suction piece, and with the avoidance of sharp curves and directional changes. Velocity on entrance should be 0.8-1.0 m/sec and 1-2 m/sec in the suction pipe so as to decrease entrance loss. The suction pipe should be connected to the inlet of the pump with the shortest possible reducing piece so as to avoid the decrease of velocity below 0.8 m/sec, and to prevent air segregation and corrosion. With the application of the shortest possible vertically or slightly (1-2%) declining suction pipe, the formation of air locks can be prevented.
If air segregation occurs at any part of the pipeline, it should be solved with de-aeration of the actual part by properly connecting it to a deaerator. Reducing pieces built in a horizontal suction pipe should be asymmetric to the upper, horizontal mounting. Suction pipe after connecting should be checked with hydrostatic tests to prevent leakage. Subsurface suction pipes and syphons should always be made of welded steel.
In the case of delivery pipes in the pump house, a velocity of 2 m/sec is the most economic. Connection to an external pipeline of bigger cross-section should be done outside of the pump house. Velocity higher than 2 m/sec is admissible for temporary fluctuations of water amount only, and for as short time as possible.
In ease of marked fluctuation of the water amount, two delivery pipes should be applied, which besides ensuring an even velocity, results in a safer operation. In this case all the pumps should be attached to a common collecting main to both ends of which delivery pipes are connected. With the help of a gate valve in the middle of the collecting main, the two delivery pipes and the pump units can be operated separately.
A suitable gate valve or other cut off device should be inserted in the delivery pipe of each pump possibly close to the outlet of the pump or in case of an inflow system before the inlet of the pump as well, in order to cut off the pump. To prevent reflux of water in the delivery pipe, in case of a sudden stop of the pump, especially if several pumps are operated on a common delivery pipe, a flap valve or regulating flap should be inserted between the pump and the gate valve on the delivery side.
Pipes in the pump house should be made of flange joint cast iron or welded steel. Use of flanges meaning extra cost and source of operational faults should be restricted to connections to pumps and pipe fitting.
To render dewatering of the common delivery pipe possible, a gate valve regulated branch pipe should be inserted at the deepest part of the common delivery pipe depending upon its size and the quantity of the water to be drained.
8. VALVES
To cut off the pipeline as well as to control the amount of water passing through different valves such as gate valves, ring valves or flap/butterfly valves are applied. They are manually operated. If the gate valve is bigger than 800 mm and fast and frequent operation is expected, or automatic or distant-control is needed, the device can be run by hydraulic or electric control.
In case of distant operation, a jam proof wedge gate valve should be applied or a parallel slide valve, cup valve or flap valve. If the space is limited, a butterfly valve or flap valve can be used with manual, electric or hydraulic operation. To ensure smooth operation and safety shut off of pipelines with high pressure and cross-section of 400 mm or more ring or cup valves can be inserted.
If the pump stops, efflux can be prevented with a flap valve, or regulating flap. Automatic butterfly valves or a ring valve cause less pressure loss or resistance than flap valve does.
With intake pipes of pools and wells, with a pressure of 0-2 m water column, a catch mounted on the end of the tube should be applied, with automatic cut off.
To take unilateral pressure or to cut off intake pipes of wells, sluices moving between the walls of the well or sliding sluice-valves are used. They are operated with spindle-drive up to 3-4 m water pressure. At higher water pressure, diameter rack-drive or sliding sluices, or sluice valves provide the best solution. The sluices are generally controlled manually. Electric or hydraulic drive is only occasionally used (e.g. at very quick cut off, or open, in case of automatic operation).
9. PUMPS
9.1 Choice of the Proper Type of Pump
9.2 Control of Delivering Capacity
9.1 Choice of the Proper Type of Pump
For water delivery rotary pumps are used almost exclusively. For water catchment, for primary lifting of a small amount of water at little heights (2-12 m), and for amounts higher than 200 l/sec, by providing the proper possibilities as to inflow, the propeller pump is the most suitable in one or two-step operation. The same type can be applied in case the delivery requirements are higher than 500 l/sec at changing lifting heights, with adjustable blades.
Water level fluctuation can be as high as 8-11 m at plants for water catchment. In such places, a pump with a steep characteristic is favourable, but if a pump of proper type and capacity cannot be mounted, separate pumps should be installed for the lower or higher lifting levels. At a lifting level higher than 30 m up to approximately 150 l/sec capacity multi-stage pumps should be applied. For higher lifting levels, up to 150 m, one stage pumps are optimal especially for delivery of water amounts more than 150-200 l/sec. Pumps at such lifting levels should be set under the water level, so as to prevent vacuum formation, and to ensure the inflow prescribed by the manufacturer. To pump water of a driven well, a submerged pump should be used.
9.2 Control of Delivering Capacity
Capacity of a pump station can be controlled with the simultaneous application of pumps of different delivery capacity. For one delivery pipe a maximum of three pumps, with intermittent running, with revolution control throttling, and bypass can be used. The most simple is throttling in the delivery pipe (Q, H), and thus the amount of water delivered can be reduced according to the throttling curve. It should be kept in mind, however, that this type of control results in a loss of efficiency, therefore it can only be temporarily applied. Control with throttling is not feasible with pumps of propeller or wing blade, due to the overloading of the motor. Control is made with adjustable blades with high capacity pumps with wind blades.
Permanent pumps usually are driven by directly connected electric motors with constant speed. Mobile pumps are generally driven by Otto or Diesel engines.
10. AUXILIARY FACILITIES
10.1 Priming
10.2 Cranes
10.1 Priming
For centrifugal pumps, where the suction level is under the pump, i.e. there is no inflow, and a foot valve cannot be used because of the high delivering capacity or other reasons, priming is necessary before starting. For priming, electric motor driven watering vacuum pumps are the most suitable. With the pumps of smaller stations, starter tanks, or extra-resistance forming, self-priming pumps are applied.
10.2 Cranes
To make installation and mounting easier, above the machines in the pump house of smaller stations a crane with suspended pulley block should be mounted above the pumps. In pump stations of several pumps of high capacity an overhead electric traveller should be installed.
Table 4
Temperature of water
Steam pressure
Density of water
t
°C
T
K
P[d]
bar
r
kg/dm^3
